President Clinton, facing one of his most trying weeks in office, must send 10 administration officials before a federal grand jury and find a replacement for the Whitewater affair's first casualty, White House counsel Bernard Nussbaum.
Moreover, Republicans plan to call witnesses before congressional committees to testify about the tangled Whitewater affair.
Prominent House and Senate Democrats privately predicted that the hearings they once opposed are all but inevitable.
Mr. Nussbaum agreed to resign in the face of mounting criticism over his contacts with federal officials who are investigating the Clintons' Whitewater Development Co. partnership with the owner of a failed Arkansas savings and loan.
Mr. Nussbaum's departure came after Special Counsel Robert Fiske greatly expanded the scope of his independent Whitewater investigation to include the meetings between White House aides and Treasury Department officials.
With the officials subpoenaed to appear Thursday before a grand jury, the focus of Mr. Fiske's inquiry shifts from the first couple's past dealings with their Whitewater partner, James McDougal, to the conduct of senior administration officials seemingly bent on Whitewater-related damage control.
For the White House to restore an aura of normality, a successor to Mr. Nussbaum, who leaves April 5, must be found quickly.
White House officials have begun sounding out candidates in search of a savvy, politically seasoned Washington lawyer, ideally in the mold of Lloyd Cutler, President Carter's counsel.
They want somebody who would defend the president's interests aggressively, without overlooking political and ethical appearances.
White House insiders are furious with Mr. Nussbaum for failing to keep such considerations in mind -- in his zeal to protect the Clintons from Whitewater's undertow.
Leading candidates include Harry McPherson, a leading light in Washington's Democratic legal establishment who served as counsel to President Lyndon Johnson; Charles Ruff, another prominent Washington lawyer who was considered for the deputy attorney general post; and Charles Renfrew, a former federal judge who served in the Carter Justice Department.
Vice President Al Gore, appearing on NBC News' "Meet the Press," gave no indication of who the next White House counsel would be.
He dismissed suggestions that the Clinton presidency is imperiled by Whitewater, asserting, "There's a difference in the way the controversy is viewed in Washington and the way it's viewed in the country."
Moreover, Mr. Gore said he sees no "credible" evidence of any wrongdoing on the part of Mr. Nussbaum and others.
"I don't think it was handled in the best way," he said, but "I believe very strongly nothing wrong was done."
Republican lawmakers, nevertheless, are certain to dig deeper into the Whitewater controversy at their first opportunity.
House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.) has privately advised Democratic committee chairmen that under House rules, they must let the Republicans call their own witnesses.
The Democratic leadership expects the Whitewater matter to be raised at future hearings before the House Banking Committee, and possibly the Small Business Committee.
Rep. James Leach of Iowa, the ranking Republican on the House banking panel, said in an interview that he and his GOP colleagues plan to call "quite a number of witnesses" for a full day this month.
The committee will hold oversight hearings on the performance of Resolution Trust Corp., the thrift cleanup agency that conducted the initial inquiry into Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan, a failed thrift once owned by Mr. McDougal.
A similar hearing was held recently by the Senate banking panel.
It's quite conceivable that some of the subpoenaed officials also will be summoned to Capitol Hill.
Besides Mr. Nussbaum, those receiving subpoeanas to testify before the grand jury were Deputy Chief of Staff Harold Ickes; Hillary Rodham Clinton's chief of staff, Margaret Williams; White House Communications Director Mark Gearan; senior adviser Bruce Lindsey; Lisa Caputo, Mrs. Clinton's press secretary; Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman, and three of his current or former senior aides.
Another subpoena requires the White House to produce all documents or memos on any meetings, conversations or contacts between any White House staff members and officials of the Treasury or of the Resolution Trust Corp.
White House staff members were reminded by memo that they could be charged with obstruction of justice if they destroyed any pertinent material.
In his resignation letter, Mr. Nussbaum staunchly defended his performance and derided his critics as "those who do not understand, nor wish to understand, the role and obligations of a lawyer."
But several prominent lawyers, including former White House counsels, said Mr. Nussbaum appears to have misunderstood a fundamental aspect of his job -- that his client wasn't Bill Clinton, but the presidency.
"It is an institutional representation," said Arthur Culvahouse, White House counsel during the Reagan years.
"You do not represent the president in his individual capacity.
You represent the office of the presidency."
Mr. Nussbaum was present at three White House meetings with Treasury officials.
At sessions last Sept. 29 and Oct. 14, Treasury General Counsel Jean Hanson and other Treasury officials briefed White House officials on possible RTC criminal referrals against Madison.
The RTC's eventual request for a Justice Department investigation referred to the Clintons as possible beneficiaries of suspected wrongdoing at the thrift.
The matter is now part of the investigation of Mr. Fiske, the special counsel.
Mr. Nussbaum's critics said the meetings created the appearance of improper White House meddling in law enforcement and regulatory matters, and President Clinton disavowed them.
Over the weekend, New York Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, the ranking Republican on the Senate Banking Committee, wrote to Mr. Altman, asking why Ms. Hanson didn't disclose her participation in the two meetings last fall, when the subject of such meetings came up at a Feb. 24 Senate hearing.
Ms. Hanson was present at that hearing.
But when Mr. Altman was asked about any meetings with the White House involving Madison, he cited only a meeting early in February, at which Ms. Hanson was also present.
A Treasury spokesman yesterday said that Mr. Altman "replied honestly" during the hearing, and that he hadn't then known of last fall's meetings.
Ms. Hanson couldn't be reached for comment.
Mr. Nussbaum never seemed to understand that the legal tactics that won him so many admirers during his career as a New York litigator didn't play well in the political arena.
Except for a brief stint investigating Watergate for the House Judiciary Committee -- where he forged a close friendship with Hillary Rodham Clinton, Mr. Nussbaum spent his entire career at the Manhattan law firm of Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz, where he is expected to return next month, and where he commanded a salary of $1.8 million.
In some of his controversial actions -- including limiting Park Police access to Mr. Foster's office; removing a Whitewater file in Mr. Foster's office and giving it to the Clintons' private attorney; opposing the appointment of a special counsel to investigate Whitewater; and participating in the three meetings -- Mr. Nussbaum said he was simply doing the job of a zealous lawyer.
In New York, lawyers agreed and reacted angrily to his ouster.
"He's being sacrificed here and it's really wrong," said Elkan Abramowitz, a well-known criminal lawyer who recently represented Woody Allen.
"I haven't talked to a lawyer who thinks they would have done anything differently."
But in Washington, where one duty of the counsel is to protect the White House from political embarrassment, Mr. Nussbaum's actions contributed to an appearance that the Clinton White House was covering up, or stonewalling.
In a related matter, RTC billing records show that Webster Hubbell, a high-ranking Justice Department official, had billed the government more than $37,000 on a case involving Madison Guaranty, while he was a partner in the Rose Law Firm in Little Rock.
The case is the focus of conflict-of-interest investigations by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. and the RTC.
Mr. Hubbell headed the FDIC-RTC case, which involves an FDIC lawsuit against Frost & Co., Madison's former accounting firm, for a "defective" audit that failed to detect that Madison was insolvent.
The suit was later taken over by the RTC, which was formed in August 1989.
Mr. Hubbell was among a number of Rose lawyers working on the case.
A recent RTC report said that Rose didn't disclose that in previously representing Madison, it had used the Frost audit to support a bid for Arkansas Securities Department approval for issuing stock and acting as a broker.
The RTC has asked its inspector general to investigate the Rose firm's dealings with the government, including billings.
The Hubbell billings shown by the RTC documents cover periods in 1989-1991, including $22,525 for 180 hours during August 1990.
That included a 20-day stretch when Mr. Hubbell billed the FDIC for every day, including weekends.
Other billings included $7,972 in early 1991 and $3,019 in late 1990.
Albert R. Karr contributed to this article.
