The Supreme Court rejected an airline-industry challenge to what carriers consider excessive fees imposed by U.S. airports.
The 7-1 ruling stressed that the justices would prefer that the Transportation Department settle disputes over fees for using runways and passenger terminals.
But since the department traditionally hasn't intervened in such clashes, the high court went ahead and analyzed the fees charged by Kent County International Airport in Grand Rapids, Mich., and found them "reasonable."
Fights over fees have broken out all over the country.
Los Angeles International Airport, the nation's third largest, was nearly shut down late last year before carriers reached a compromise with the facility.
After the battle in Los Angeles, Transportation Secretary Federico Pena said his agency would get more involved in settling such clashes.
U.S. airline companies, many of which have struggled in recent years, paid a total of $3.4 billion in airport fees in 1991, roughly 4.5% of their total operating costs, according to the industry's figures.
Carriers complain that some airport fees are out of proportion to actual use of landing and terminal facilities.
Kent County's fees were challenged by seven commercial carriers, including Northwest Airlines, a unit of Northwest Airlines Corp.; American Airlines, a unit of AMR Corp.; and United Airlines, a unit of UAL Corp.
The cumulative annual fees at issue in the case amounted to nearly $2 million for 1988.
The airlines contended that Kent County's fees were unreasonable and "discriminatory" because they were based on cost allocations that favored airport concessions and private-plane owners over the carriers.
But the Supreme Court said the airlines hadn't provided sufficient evidence to prove any unfairness.
The court concluded that Kent County's fees violated neither a federal statute requiring "reasonable" levies, nor the Constitution's protection of interstate commerce.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the majority opinion.
Justice Clarence Thomas dissented; Justice Harry Blackmun didn't participate in the case.
(Northwest Airlines Inc. vs. Kent County)
Separately, the high court handed unions and workers a victory in a unanimous labor-law ruling.
The justices said that fired employees who lie during administrative hearings shouldn't automatically be denied reinstatement or back pay.
While expressing strong disapproval of such dishonesty, the court declined to reverse a ruling by the National Labor Relations Board that reinstated an Albuquerque, N.M., trucking-terminal worker who the agency determined had been fired primarily because of his union activities.
The NLRB favored the worker and awarded him back pay, even though he had lied to an administrative judge about being late to work as a result of car trouble.
The Clinton administration defended the NLRB's ruling, which was affirmed by the federal appeals court in Denver.
Writing for the high court, Justice John Paul Stevens said the NLRB could have adopted a rule precluding reinstatement, but he said the agency wasn't obliged to do so.
He said that the judiciary should rarely second-guess the judgment of executive-branch agencies given authority by Congress to make such policy decisions.
Concurring in the court's conclusion, Justice Antonin Scalia added a separate opinion, scolding the NLRB for "an unseemly toleration of perjury."
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor joined the Scalia opinion.
(ABF Freight System Inc. vs. NLRB)
In another decision, states escaped a sizable tax headache when the Supreme Court rejected a railroad-industry challenge to Oregon's property-tax law.
The case concerned the application of a 1976 federal law designed to boost the struggling interstate-railroad industry by banning states from imposing discriminatory taxes on railroad property.
In the Oregon case, the federal appeals court in San Francisco had interpreted the law as forbidding states from granting any property-tax exemptions to commercial or industrial property if they don't similarly exempt railroad property.
If the appellate-court ruling had been upheld, it would have required almost every state to eliminate certain exemptions or to grant railroads broad immunity from ordinary property taxes.
The latter course could have cost states $100 million annually in lost revenue, according to state tax officials.
But the Supreme Court ruled 8-1 that the appellate-court ruling was wrong.
The high court said that as long as railroad property isn't singled out for discriminatory treatment, states may continue to grant traditional exemptions to other types of property.
Oregon's tax system had been challenged by railroad-car leasing companies, which complained that the state gave exemptions to business inventory and standing timber, among other categories of property, but not to railroad cars.
(Oregon vs. ACF Industries Inc.)
-- Declined to hear a patent-law appeal by Intel Corp. in a closely watched dispute over computer chips.
Intel claimed that a small competitor, Ulsi System Technology Inc., relied on information patented by Intel to make a "clone" version of an Intel math coprocessor, which speeds up calculations in personal computers.
A federal appeals court in Washington said that because the clone was fabricated for Ulsi by Hewlett-Packard Co., which held a license to the Intel patent, Ulsi's marketing of the clone was legitimate.
Intel warned that under the lower court's theory, high-tech companies will be able to "launder" patented products merely by having them fabricated by third companies that have legitimate licensing agreements with the patent owners.
(Intel Corp. vs. Ulsi System Technology Inc.)
-- Let stand a $210 million antitrust award against USX Corp.'s former Bessemer & Lake Erie Railroad Co. unit.
The award, which includes interest, stems from suits filed by a group of steel companies in the early 1980s.
The steel companies accused several railroads, including B&LE, of conspiring to prop up prices for transporting iron ore to steel mills from the mid-1950s through the early 1980s.
B&LE is now owned by closely held Transtar Inc. of Monroeville, Pa.
USX owns a minority interest in Transtar.
After a number of settlements, B&LE was the only defendant against whom claims were still pending.
USX said that last year it set aside $506 million in reserves to cover the payment of damages.
(Bessemer & Lake Erie Railroad Co. vs. Wheeling-Pittsburg Corp.)
