Independent Counsel Robert Fiske is a distinguished member of the New York bar, and he is only doing what any good lawyer would do.
But when this approach is applied to broad public policy concerns, as distinguished New York attorney Bernard Nussbaum found, it can produce preposterous results.
So in preparation for Mr. Fiske's meeting this morning to urge Senator D'Amato and the rest of Congress to shut up and get out of the way, we'd like to offer an update on Dow Jones v.
Department of Justice.
As most readers know, we've filed suit under the Freedom of Information Act for the release of reports on the death of Vincent Foster.
The Justice Department's reply consists of a letter from Mr. Fiske saying the reports should not be released because it would compromise his investigation.
At the time Mr. Fiske was appointed, we'd already been waiting for these reports for five months.
We filed our original FOIA request back in August, because we thought that's what the Justice Department was asking us to do.
"As soon as the FOIA section processes the report, it'll be available to you.
That has already started before this meeting even took place," spokesman Carl Stern told the press.
So we filed the request and let the process proceed.
As it proceeded, Mr. Foster's death was widely blamed on us, because prior to his death we were the only people suggesting there might be an issue concerning ethics among former members of the Rose Law Firm.
Michael Kinsley cast the first stone, as is his wont, and the blame-laying reached a crescendo with the headline on Jonathan Alter's Newsweek column: "Journalism as a Blood Sport."
We never viewed this theme as an accident.
John Hanchette, national correspondent for the Gannett News Service, recently confirmed our suspicions, telling Peter Bronson of the Cincinnati Inquirer, "Reporters got unsolicited calls from the White House saying that they were at fault, that the press was vultures picking over his bones."
And of course, we were designated as chief vultures, on the basis of the note found six days after Mr. Foster's death, torn up at the bottom of his briefcase but supposedly missed in previous searches.
In one of the copious leaks from the report that Justice and Mr. Fiske say we can't have, we learn that a Park Police investigator says he had earlier watched Mr. Nussbaum examine the briefcase.
This account appeared in the New York Times the week after our suit was filed.
Most people, having learned about Whitewater files in and mysterious visits to Mr. Foster's office, no longer attach much credence to the theme of blaming the press.
Leaks from the reports we're suing for, however, continue to press the original White House theme.
In its Feb. 11 report based on "secret police files reviewed yesterday," the New York Daily News reports that Mr. Foster's widow said he suffered from "humiliation."
The paper's Karen Ball added, "Foster and the Rose firm were the targets of acerbic Wall Street Journal editorials."
And New York magazine quotes this comment on our lawsuit, "`They didn't even have the grace to say they're sorry,' says a White House official.
`And they've picked up right where they left off.'"
In replying to our suit, the Justice Department concedes nearly all of our FOIA contentions, but claims an exemption for information on investigations.
Mr. Fiske's supporting letter says, "The public disclosure of all or any part of the Park Police or FBI report at this time would substantially prejudice the ability of the Office of the Independent Counsel to conduct its investigation.
For example, if a witness has access to what another person has said about a particular fact or to conclusions reached in a report, that witness's testimony or statements in an interview could be tainted by that knowledge."
Sounds lawyerly.
What in blazes is he talking about?
His witnesses are the same people who'd been sitting on this report for five months before he took office.
Which of the following hasn't had access to it: Mr. Nussbaum, Bruce Lindsey, Harold Ickes, Mark Gearan, Maggie Williams, Lisa Caputo?
These people or those who work for or with them, we feel entitled to suspect, are also behind the spin on the secret report intended to blacken our name.
They and compatriots like Webster Hubbell at Justice also understand that Mr. Fiske will do what every good lawyer would, and that this will continue their coverup beyond the Congressional election and with luck beyond the Presidential one.
There's more.
When we filed suit we also filed a separate request for a photocophy of the Foster note.
The text had been released, and a photocopy has been available for inspection in Mr. Stern's office.
The Justice Department has replied to this request with a letter saying "the handwritten note will be treated as part of your earlier request," throwing it under Mr. Fiske's "all or any part" umbrella.
In other words, the distinguished lawyer is arguing that his investigation will be jeopardized by release of a letter the text of which has already been printed in every newspaper in the land, and the copy of which has been available for those willing to visit Mr. Stern's office.
Perhaps some of the members of Congress would like to explore this logic in their meeting with Mr. Fiske this morning.
It is a taste of what they can expect if they defer to what any good lawyer would do, and shirk their own responsibility to air important concerns in public.
They should tell Mr. Fiske that they ultimately don't care whether someone goes to jail; for our own part we hope no one does.
The more important responsibility is to give the public the facts it needs to judge the performance of its government; deciding whether to indict is less important than deciding whether to throw the rascals out.
