A jury in federal district court sent a warning to hospitals seeking to expand into the home-medical-supply business: Such moves could violate antitrust laws.
The jury in Parkersburg, W.Va., found that an area hospital had gained monopoly power in the local market for wheelchairs and other home medical equipment because of its special access to patients.
In this particular case, though, the jury found no antitrust violation because the hospital hadn't intended to stifle competition.
Nevertheless, the case carries important implications for the nation's hospitals, which increasingly are venturing into other businesses such as home health care, nursing homes and equipment leasing.
Many hospitals' officials have been nervous that courts might view these activities as illegal attempts to gain monopoly power in the health-care market.
"The industry has viewed antitrust suits as a potential trap anytime you get into a business of this sort," said Tom Campbell, a lawyer with the Chicago firm Gardner, Carton & Douglas who advises hospitals on antitrust issues.
"Everyone's scared to death."
Lawyers say the verdict in West Virginia won't allay those worries, despite the fact that the hospital, Pleasant Valley Hospital Inc., won the case.
M&M Medical Supply & Service Inc., a competing equipment dealer that isn't owned by a hospital, alleged that Pleasant Valley illegally coerced its hospital patients into buying from its own equipment subsidiary rather than from its competitors.
M&M also said its gross revenue fell by more than 75% after Pleasant Valley entered the equipment business in 1985.
If the jury had determined that Pleasant Valley intended to shut out its competitors, the hospital would have been found in violation of antitrust law.
The case shows that juries are willing to find that hospital-owned medical businesses can possess monopoly power, said William Kopit, a Washington lawyer with the firm Epstein Becker & Green who represented Pleasant Valley.
That presents "an enormous legal risk" for hospitals that diversify, because other juries might be less sympathetic to hospitals' claims that they didn't intentionally force out their competitors, Mr. Kopit said.
"It's a risk that probably exceeds the value of going into the business," he added.
James Burt, a Springfield, Mo., lawyer for M&M, agreed that despite Pleasant Valley's win, the verdict could be a bad omen for hospitals.
"A jury somewhere else could find the same conduct . . . to have crossed the line," he said.
Mr. Burt said M&M won't appeal the decision.
Some antitrust lawyers were more inclined to emphasize Pleasant Valley's victory, however.
The decision is a "security blanket that shows hospitals that these cases are winnable," said Jeff Miles, an antitrust lawyer at Ober, Kaler, Grimes & Shriver in Washington.
But, he added, "whether hospitals want to pay the price to win these battles is another question, because the litigation is very expensive."
(M&M Medical Supply & Service vs. Pleasant Valley Hospital, U.S. District Court, Southern District of W.Va., No. 6:881099)
Families of children injured by vaccines can sue for damages even after the child is compensated through a special fund for vaccine victims, a federal appeals court ruled.
People who receive vaccines run a very small risk of becoming ill or experiencing dangerous side effects.
American Cyanamid Co., the defendant in the case, had argued that once an injured child is compensated through the special claims procedure, no related claims can be sought in court.
The company maintained that allowing family members to pursue additional claims-seeking damages for loss of companionship, for instance -- would undermine the special claims process.
The claims process, known as the vaccine court, was set up in 1985 to speed up the compensation of vaccine victims while reducing the cost of litigation to drug companies.
The First U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Boston rejected the company's argument.
The court said the law setting up the vaccine victims' fund bars only additional lawsuits brought on behalf of the actual victim.
The decision last week is apparently the first on the matter by a federal appeals court, although the court said similar rulings have been made by the vaccine court.
The appeals court noted that the vaccine-claims procedure makes no provision for compensating family members.
"To accept Cyanamid's argument would require us to conclude that Congress, without anyone saying a word about it, intended to deprive family members of all compensatory remedies," the three-judge panel said.
The case involved a child who developed polio after receiving a polio vaccine distributed by American Cyanamid in 1988.
A spokeswoman for the Wayne, N.J., company said it is considering a further appeal.
She said the company believes the decision "destroys the intent of a program that was designed to be fair to the alleged victims and fair to the manufacturer."
The child received a $750,000 award from the vaccine court.
The court said the legislative history of the 1985 law gave no indication that such claims are barred by family members.
The court also questioned whether allowing such lawsuits will actually lead to a significant increase in vaccine-related litigation.
(Schafer vs. American Cyanamid Co., First U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, No. 93-1422)
Journalists working in Hungary who want a front-page scoop had better watch their Ps and Qs -- and check their quotes -- if they want to avoid a costly libel suit or even a year in jail.
That's what lawyers are advising journalists and editors amid a rash of libel cases that are flooding the Hungarian courts and forcing media professionals to re-examine their ethical conduct codes.
The surge of libel suits parallels the change of system four years ago.
Under communism, libel laws existed but were rarely used, because all newspapers and the broadcast media were under strict state control.
There was little chance of winning a case against the obedient mouthpiece of the party.
Today, democracy and a market economy have fostered a private print media that is critical and which considers itself a watchdog of public morals.
At the same time, politicians, businesspeople and others in the public eye have become acutely aware of the consequences of a damaged reputation.
The result: more defamation suits.
And libel law in Hungary has both civil and criminal aspects.
"It has become a kind of fashion -- people do it just for fun to show that they have courage," said Miklos Breitner, publisher of Nepszabadsag, the former Communist Party newspaper that is now private and is Hungary's largest independent daily.
Mr. Breitner recently hired an in-house libel lawyer for the first time to handle about 30 cases annually, up from just a handful a few years ago.
Erzsebet Orosz, a libel lawyer retained by Hungary's largest journalist trade union, also reports an upswing in cases.
She had 80 in 1993 -- 30 more than the year before.
The Budapest city court tried 600 such cases in 1993, 200 more than in 1992.
Wade Lambert in New York and Ernest Beck in Budapest contributed to this article.
