Bernadine Healy's Dec. 28 editorial-page article "Mammograms -- Your Breasts, Your Choice" brings to mind a quote from Mark Twain: "A half-educated physician is not valuable.
He thinks he can cure everything."
It is important to consider the other half of the facts.
Dr. Healy cites eight trials that failed to show any benefit of mammography for younger women.
Despite this lack of evidence she states that the test should remain "part of the catechism of women's health" because it does no harm.
She failed to mention that over 10 years' time a woman will have three-out-of-every-10 mammograms and examinations incorrectly interpreted as a possible cancer -- known as the false positive rate -- and that nearly every women who gets this report must undergo surgery to eliminate the diagnosis of cancer.
Regrettably, the data she quotes confirms that there is no evidence that early detection by mammography saves lives for women under the age of 50 years.
The 17% difference in survival quoted by Dr. Healy is "not statistically significant," which means that those differences are probably due to chance alone.
Dr. Healy would not have allowed one of her scientists at the National Institutes of Health to make a conclusion based on such weak evidence.
In fact, the Sweden trial showed that younger women screened with mammography had a higher death rate from breast cancer than those women who were not screened.
Dr. Healy relies heavily on endorsements by the American Cancer Society and other organizations -- they are not the equivalent of scientific evidence.
Dr. Healy also accused the administration of creating a new method of rationing by eliminating coverage for a test that has not been proven to be effective.
Is failure to provide worthless or unproven tests rationing or simply responsible policy?
I cannot understand supporting ineffective therapies and tests when the federal government cannot find enough money to pay for treatments that have proven value.
She is absolutely correct that a definitive study is necessary.
It is curious that she failed to sponsor such a study during her tenure as director of the National Institutes of Health.
Allowing patients and physicians to be "half-educated" on this issue and to continue sponsoring a detection program that probably doesn't work is the wrong public and medical policy.
Lee N. Newcomer, M.D.
United HealthCare Corp.
Dr. Healy has exposed the major problem with the Clintons' proposal for health care reform: lack of choice.
What Dr. Healy did not mention in her opinion was that in spite of what the National Institutes of Health says, if I lose my wife to the ravages of breast cancer, she is not a statistic, she was my wife and the mother of my children.
It would be a loss that could not be measured or appreciated by any bureaucrat.
So, as a family we have made a choice: every year since the age of 40 my wife has had a mammogram to ease her mind about the legitimate fear of every woman in regard to breast cancer.
We have made a choice that the Clintons' health care plan will exclude.
1) We purchase our medical insurance as we purchase our auto insurance, i.e., large deductibles.
We keep our premium costs down by paying for routine medical costs out of pocket.
2) We maintain a healthy way of life to keep our claims and costs down.
Under the Clinton plan we will be lumped with drug addicts, motorcyclists who don't wear helmets and smokers who ruin their lungs and their blood vessels (I could go on and on).
All responsibility for a healthy lifestyle have been taken out of the Clinton proposals.
What of the family or individual who opposes abortion on moral and/or religious grounds?
Will they have a choice in their health care plan?
They will be forced to pay premiums into the only plan available, a health alliance that will pay for abortion on demand.
What of the young, healthy 25-year-olds, off their parents' health insurance, who decide not to carry health insurance for a few years while they struggle making their way in the tough economic climate of today?
Will they have a choice?
They will be forced into a premium arrangement with a local alliance.
Under the Clinton plan will you have a choice of doctors?
You will be able to choose from a panel of doctors associated with your alliance.
If your personal physician is not on that panel, sorry, you will have to change.
The stealth issue of choice in the Clinton plan will be the lack of the choice your doctor will have in making the best decisions for your problems.
Your doctor will be working for a health alliance and will be economically credentialed.
She or he will no longer be able to be your advocate.
She will be told what drugs can be ordered (only generic drugs please and not the latest treatment for Alzheimers), what tests can be done (no mammography under 50), what treatments can be applied (no bone marrow transplants for the established breast cancer that was not detected by mammography because you were under 50).
The Clintons will see to it that your doctor is no longer your advocate.
When costs escalate out of control, as they do in almost every government-controlled program, your doctors' choices will be even further limited.
John A. McCulloch, M.D.
