The grain market staged its biggest rally since January as analysts trimmed their forecasts of both the South American soybean harvest and U.S. corn acreage.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the corn contract for May delivery jumped five cents a bushel to settle at $2.87 a bushel.
The soybean contract for May delivery jumped 15 cents a bushel to settle at $6.9025 a bushel.
Some traders said yesterday's move, which followed several weeks of slumping prices, could signal the start of a widely forecast spring rally.
Despite tight stockpiles in the wake of last year's Midwest crop disaster, grain prices have drifted mostly lower since January amid weak U.S. exports and projections for a record soybean crop in South America.
Wet weather in northern Brazil is now slowing the harvest there while dry weather in Argentina is reducing the crop's potential size.
As a result, AgResource Co., Chicago, is trimming its forecast of the South American soybean crop to about 1.38 billion bushels from its earlier forecast of 1.43 billion bushels.
South America is a major competitor of the U.S. in the world soybean market.
Because of the disruptions in South America, European processors are already shifting some purchases to the U.S., traders said.
Corn prices climbed because Sparks Cos., a widely watched forecasting firm in Memphis, Tenn., reportedly told clients on Friday it expects U.S. corn farmers to plant about 78.8 million acres this spring.
The forecast is lower than the consensus for farmers to plant between 80 million acres and 81 million acres.
Sparks is also forecasting that U.S. soybean farmers will plant 59.6 million acres, up about 200,000 acres from last year.
Although the Midwest planting season won't start for another month, traders are particularly sensitive to planting forecasts this year.
Stockpiles are so tight that prospects for anything less than a bumper corn crop year would force grain prices higher.
The Agriculture Department is slated to release its forecast of prospective plantings on March 31.
Traders have been expecting grain prices to rally this spring.
The U.S. might have to import corn if something doesn't happen soon to cool the strong demand for the crop.
Another government report slated for release at the end of the month is expected to show the U.S. supply has already fallen to the lowest level for this time of year since the 1983 drought.
Corn consumption is strong in part because last year's record rainfall in the Midwest reduced the quality of the crop, as well as quantity.
The lower starch content of the crop is forcing processors to use more corn to produce ethanol fuel and sweetener.
The harsh winter across the Midwest also forced livestock to consume grain at a faster-than-normal pace.
Joe Victor, director of marketing at Allendale Inc., Crystal Lake, Ill., said he expects the corn contract for July delivery to hit $3.18 a bushel by early June.
Yesterday, that contract rose 5.5 cents to $2.9050.
Wheat prices settled mixed.
ENERGY: April crude oil futures prices gained a nickel a barrel in trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange to end at $14.49.
With little in the way of news developments to influence them, traders were disinclined to make any rash moves ahead of next week's meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
That group is widely expected to leave its current output ceiling in place for the second quarter.
But that expectation may well already be reflected in crude oil futures prices, some analysts say.
Yesterday's slight gain may have been a byproduct of strong North Sea Brent crude prices, which were higher on perceptions of tight supplies.
Trading was equally ho-hum in petroleum products with April heating oil losing 0.34 cent to settle at 43.36 cents a gallon and April gasoline drifting 0.01 cent lower to settle at 44.88 cents a gallon.
PRECIOUS METALS: Silver futures prices climbed 6.8 cents to $5.473 an ounce on the active May contract, the highest level achieved since Feb. 4 in trading on New York's Commodity Exchange.
Analysts said that silver continues to attract strong speculative demand.
Silver futures are also being supported, they said, by perceptions of growing industrial demand.
"The market got a boost from the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's monthly survey of southeastern manufacturing companies which showed a jump in production," said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist at Merrill Lynch in New York.
The Merrill strategist said the silver market has been unquestionably the strongest performer among the gold, silver and platinum triumvirate of precious metals over the last six months.
The active April gold futures contract climbed $1.10 to close at $387.20 an ounce on the Comdex.
