Nothing's perfect.
Investing in East Asia is often a wonderful way to put corporate cash to work, but doing so could be made a lot easier.
That's because many Pacific Rim states sharply limit what foreigners can do on their turf, with strict rules that can distort or even prevent sound investments.
These practices may shield local interests from unwanted competition but over time can harm whole economies as well as the outsiders concerned.
Something is finally being done about it.
The fledgling Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation group has begun drafting an investment code -- a set of common rules to be applied uniformly by 18 nations around the Pacific Rim, attracting investors who may now feel discouraged.
And since trade follows investment, overall commerce should grow in the process.
Abolishing protective laws "is a necessary evil," says a South Korean diplomat, whose government promises to reform its own bad habits.
"Without expanding our trade, there is no way we can prosper."
The political impetus came last November when President Clinton hosted APEC leaders on a wet, windy island near Seattle.
These leaders then told bureaucrats to have new guidelines ready for next November when the summiteers gather again in Jakarta.
They want a code -- voluntary rather than mandatory -- as a tangible accomplishment by APEC, which is sometimes criticized for having more form than substance.
The process has begun.
The APEC secretariat in Singapore has gathered members' official investment rules into a single publication as a business guide (though unwritten rules can be more important).
And officials from member states will discuss the topic next week in Jakarta during their first session of 1994.
Just how far they can get remains uncertain, for the restrictions aren't there by accident.
They often protect special interests or force overseas investors to give locals a piece of the action as the price of admission.
The privileged few can include shoe, textile and toy makers in South Korea, businesses owned by Malaysia's ruling party, the 40 or so families that hold most Filipino wealth, Thai families that control banking there and the president's relatives in Indonesia.
"There's a lot of local politics to deal with," says a U.S. businessmen.
"They'll use their prerogatives to protect their interests until they can't do it anymore."
A recent survey of 48 major U.S. companies with extensive Asian experience -- meant to help U.S. negotiators in APEC meetings -- surfaced many complaints.
Among them:
National treatment.
Some countries discriminate against outsiders.
In Malaysia and the Philippines, foreigners can't own land.
Elsewhere, insurance companies can't make certain local investments that are open to their domestic rivals.
The 48 companies put equal treatment for all near the top of their wish list.
Joint ventures.
Having a local partner is often good business, but sometimes it's mandatory.
Indonesia, for example, demands that at least 20% of any project be held locally.
Even Australia requires companies to invest locally if they want to sell locally.
Such rules can prevent businesses from having regional strategies, or give them partners they don't really like.
Communications companies that sell to Australia's government must meet specific export requirements to keep that business.
Malaysia won't let a foreigner own 100% of a local subsidiary unless it meets export or other goals.
Foreigners say this can lead to inefficiency.
Companies call the process of getting official approvals long, complex and costly.
They often find it corrupt as well, notably in South Korea, Malaysia and Indonesia.
And in Japan and Korea they suspect it's designed to extract business and technical secrets.
They'd welcome a code with simpler, more transparent procedures.
Such barriers have caused companies to veto investments in China, Korea and Indonesia, among others.
Though multinationals often find ways around restrictions, those with less overseas experience can be frightened away -- halting projects that could benefit both sides.
Executives say thriving Pacific economies no longer need these antiquated protections.
A standardized code should increase investment, spur growth and set an example for other regions.
But given the politics involved, many don't expect to see one by November.
