John Fellows, known as "Mister Radio" in the state of Maine, is without doubt one of the best radio-time salesmen anywhere.
I worked a day with him when he led the sales team at WOKQ in Portsmouth, N.H., which is rated No. 1 in its market area.
On one call, at a lawn-and-garden supply store, his presentation to the owner was interrupted by a customer.
He waited three minutes, called out "See ya!" over his shoulder and left.
Exactly 30 minutes later, after a cold call a mile away resulted in a confirmed future appointment at an automobile dealer, we were back at the lawn-and-garden store to close a major advertising schedule.
Despite this remarkable display of sales acumen, at the end of the day Mr. Fellows apologized in embarrassment.
When we had scheduled the field sales day, he told me he did everything on his laptop computer and, even though I didn't think much of the technology, he thought the world of it.
He had planned to show me how his computer worked on our trip, but its batteries had died overnight.
I couldn't help recalling the Orbiter 4000.
It was introduced as the latest in shaving technology by Gillette in the early 1970s.
Electrical appliances were taking advantage of new advances in batteries, and the electric carving knife led all sales.
Gillette's Orbiter 4000 was a battery-operated Techmatic band razor that sort of vibrated.
After a hot product launch, it was later quietly recalled when it was discovered that it shaved just as well when the batteries ran down.
It became known in the trade as the electric fork.
Would that the latest in sales-force automation were as benign!
Years ago most enlightened sales managers did away with call reports as a waste of time.
What was accomplished was critical, not a record of how it was done.
Sales managers were required to travel with their top producers to keep their experienced eye on the marketplace and to improve the technique of their field sales professionals.
With thousands of software programs now available, sales force after sales force is being equipped in the name of electronic progress with automation systems, all of which include detailed electronic call reporting features.
These programs pump out sales management reports, indicating in multicolored bar charts and pie graphs, or with long columns of figures, exactly what is happening in the field.
No need to be there.
It's all in the system.
A field district manager for Data General Corp. told me he had no need to go into the field.
He monitored his people on "the system."
His job, as he saw it, was to be sure orders were correctly processed.
Traditionally, computer salespeople make fewer sales calls than in any other industry.
Is it any wonder they lose control of their markets and customers with greater speed than any other industry?
There is not a single function on any sales automation system that cannot be done manually with equal efficiency, with the exception of summary activity reports.
George Gilder was once quoted as saying that one pair of human eyes processed more visual data in one day than all the world's computers combined.
What a shame if those eyes are glued to the screen of a sales-force automation system.
Sales-force automation functions primarily to market the hardware and software it was designed to require.
Too often, it is used to justify the dereliction of duty of desk-hugging sales managers who don't want to do the hard job of getting on planes to find out what is really going on.
Warner Lambert, for example, actually requires its field merchandisers to record in its database the results of every call on every drugstore and supermarket made every day to replace damaged goods and dress displays, and to talk to store personnel about good merchandising practices.
This is becoming standard computer practice in the industry.
Turning field people into data-entry clerks only serves the purpose of allowing managers to police where their people say they have been.
Office machines belong in an office, not on the front seat or lap of sales professionals.
Do the administration for your salespeople; don't offload it on them.
During the growth age of electronics spanning the past 15 years, across all industries, in all markets imaginable, I have never seen even one top sales professional drag one of these electronic marvels in on a sales call.
They all understand instinctively that technology does not belong in the equation.
They know why people buy.
They keep track of 400 or 500 names in their heads without difficulty, and no database exists that can, or should, catalog what they know about how and why those people buy.
Are there exceptions to this rule?
Computers definitely belong in sales in a big way.
For example, Rick Kelly of Bristol Myers does millions in sales with just three customers.
He spends three days a month in Clearwater, Fla.; Harrisburg, Pa.; and Providence, R.I.
He knows almost as much about the store-to-store operations of Eckerd Drug, Rite-Aid and CVS as they do themselves.
He knows by being able to computer-model distribution and promotional plans with his buyers.
They share data to increase results.
Rick is a national accounts manager and uses his computer differently from the way any of the sales-force automation systems on the market now operate.
Knowing what a weekend coupon drop in a Sunday supplement will do in area outlets at what price point and in what volume by package size is what he and his computer work on.
He gets electronic mail and has in-depth market information.
But he doesn't have to follow up leads or update the names of buyers with only three customers.
His results are tabulated quarterly.
No need to check numbers of calls per day.
Take a long, hard look at how you employ computers in field sales.
Do your best salespeople work just as well with the batteries disconnected?
That ought to tell you something about sales-force automation and its place in the hall of shame with the over-promised and under-delivered computerized predecessors that have fallen by the wayside along the electronic highway.
Do you require your sales professionals to use an "electronic fork"?
Mr. Falvey is a writer and lecturer who lives in Londonderry, N.H.
