The Coen Brothers, who started out as film prodigies from Minneapolis, seem to be stuck in prodigy limbo.
Their latest picture, "The Hudsucker Proxy," seems less a movie than the graduate thesis of a very smart -- and very rich -- film student.
Ten years ago the Coens made their debut with "Blood Simple," which made them the darlings of the independent film circuit.
A cheerful sendup of horror movies, it had a cheeky visual style and deadpan wit.
Vanity Fair magazine, then the arbiter of high hip, pronounced the movie "a Hollywood movie better than Hollywood makes them."
It was a jokey picture, put together by a couple of smart guys (Joel directing, Ethan producing, both of them writing) who clearly appreciated the mechanics of moviemaking.
Over the years their movies have been long on style, short on characterization.
A lot of amazing-looking stuff goes on but more often than not you don't care much about it.
They work best when they keep up the pace and wit of a Looney Tunes cartoon (as they did in 1987 with "Raising Arizona").
When the brothers got serious in "Miller's Crossing," their 1990 homage to gangster movies, the story got lost in a series of darkly poetic images, whose significance was oblique.
Their dark period continued in 1991 with "Barton Fink," a morbidly fascinating movie about writer's block that appealed, not surprisingly, mainly to writers.
With "The Hudsucker Proxy" the Coens seem to want to have fun again.
This film, which they describe as a satire of American business, is all exaggerations, like a rambunctious cartoon.
It's full of Rube Goldberg machinations and fabulous sets.
This is a designer's movie: Its make-believe New York buildings were built as miniatures then filmed to look gigantic, and given matching oversize interiors.
Even the furniture looks gargantuan.
Indeed, the one person who can walk away from it and feel he's accomplished something worthwhile is production designer Dennis Gassner.
Maybe the Coens were influenced by their new producer, Joel Silver, a specialist in self-parody.
He's the backer of the "Die Hard" and the "Lethal Weapon" pictures, as well as "Predator" and "Commando."
Together they have produced in "The Hudsucker Proxy" the worst of both worlds -- the self-conscious hipness of independent filmmaking and unself-conscious excess of Hollywood.
The movie is about a rube (Tim Robbins) at the center of a stock manipulation scheme.
He is plucked out of the mail room by a nefarious corporate climber (Paul Newman) to run the company when its president commits suicide.
A tough girl reporter (Jennifer Jason Leigh) is trying to unmask him.
Instead, he invents the Hula-Hoop, she falls in love with him and the bad guys are punished.
The Coens make many references to filmmakers past -- to Hawkes, Capra and Sturges -- but these failed homages only remind you what "The Hudsucker Proxy" isn't.
Don't bother to see this film unless you expect to be tested in film class about the Coens' serial dissertation on American cinema.
When I heard the subject of "Raining Stones" I thought, "Oh, no!
Another movie about Brits on the dole."
My spirits weren't lifted by the additional information that it's about a man's struggle to buy a new communion dress for his little girl.
Experience led me to expect either one of those British farces where pigs relieve themselves in the living room or some bleak harangue from amateur actors with bad teeth about how nasty life is.
But there are no pigs in "Raining Stones," just a sheep who is killed -- mercifully offscreen -- by a butcher.
The sheep does start the movie, however.
It's been stolen by the hero, Bob Williams (Bruce Jones) -- one of his many schemes for making money.
Bob, as it turns out, is a very appealing hero in a very appealing movie (once you get used to the thick accents of north England).
He works whenever he can find a job, which isn't often enough.
The movie catches him in a period when he needs money badly, for that communion dress.
Screenwriter Jim Allen and director Ken Loach do a wonderful job of presenting Bob's situation as an unemployed working-class man.
"Raining Stones" unfolds with poignancy and humor and insight.
Using a documentary style, the filmmakers evoke a way of life, where the main fight isn't so much for food -- the government pays for that -- but against the loss of spirit.
Bob has to buy the communion dress he can't afford not to curry favor with the church -- the priest urges him not to do it -- but so he can feel alive.
In the matter of "Guarding Tess" it would be kinder to say nothing at all.
However, it must be revealed that this movie about a Secret Service agent assigned to watch a former first lady is only for those who feel compelled to be current on the complete filmography of both Shirley MacLaine and Nicolas Cage, no matter how low they sink.
VIDEO TIP: Wouldn't it be more fun to rent "The Apartment" and see what could happen when you put Shirley MacLaine and Jack Lemmon together with director Billy Wilder at the top of his game in 1960?
