There's no respite for John Major's scandal-ridden Conservative Party.
Just as the British prime minister is trying to regain support, his embattled government was dealt another blow with scandalous circumstances surrounding the death of a Conservative member of Parliament.
The dead MP was found in his apartment wearing nothing but a pair of women's stockings.
His case is the latest of a series of events in recent weeks that have shattered Mr. Major's efforts to set a "Back to Basics" agenda based on law-and-order and public morality.
"I think we have never experienced anything quite like this.
It is almost unbelievable," Geoffrey Dickens, a Tory MP, told BBC Radio.
Stephen Milligan, 45 years old, a junior MP, was found dead with a plastic bag tied over his head and a length of electric cord wound around his neck.
Police refused to comment on his death, but were understood to be investigating possibilities from murder to a transvestite sex session that went out of control.
A bachelor who sported pin-striped suits, Mr. Milligan had widely been regarded as one of the most talented of a younger generation of Tory MPs.
Aside from its tragic character, Mr. Milligan's death confronts Mr. Major with the uncomfortable prospect of a parliamentary by-election at a time when public attention is focused on scandals in his party.
The problems began on Christmas Day with the disclosure that Tim Yeo, a junior environment minister, had fathered a child in an extramarital affair.
After several days of trying to hang onto his job, Mr. Yeo was forced to resign.
According to reports circulating in London last night, further revelations in the British press of sexual peccadilloes by other Tory politicians could be imminent.
No sooner was that incident past than another Tory MP, David Ashby, said he had shared a bed with a man in a French hotel, though he insisted that they were merely friends and that no sexual act took place.
A few days later, the wife of a junior minister, the Earl of Caithness, committed suicide over her husband's friendship with another woman.
The opposition Labor Party has seized on the disclosures to criticize "Back to Basics" as a sham.
A general election isn't due until April 1997, but the Conservatives may find an election forced upon them much earlier.
Opinion polls currently show the Labor Party leading the Tories by around 47% to 28%.
Sharp tax increases due to come into effect in April have contributed to the government's declining popularity.
And in another incident over the weekend, adding to the general atmosphere of ineptitude, Michael Portillo, the hawkish 40-year-old Treasury Secretary touted by right-wing Tories as a possible successor to Mr. Major, accused students in other European countries of cheating on examinations.
He later apologized for the remarks, which were seized upon by foreign diplomats and commentators as evidence of British xenophobia.
The Tories are almost certain to lose the by-election to fill the vacancy left by Mr. Milligan's death.
In two by-elections last year, the Liberal Democrat Party overturned sizable Conservative majorities.
A similar outcome in Eastleigh, Mr. Milligan's former constituency in southern England, would reduce Mr. Major's majority in the House of Commons to only 15, from 21 after the last general election in April 1992.
No date has yet been set for the ballot, but it will have to take place within the next few months.
While not immediately threatening the government's survival, a probable Tory defeat would be one more setback for Mr. Major, who is Britain's most unpopular prime minister since World War II.
Additionally, Conservatives face local elections for town councils in May.
In June, there are elections to the European Parliament.
If the Tories do badly in these votes, Mr. Major is likely to come under pressure to hand over the party leadership to someone else.
