One of the biggest and most popular anti-poverty programs is getting a hard rethinking.
For 19 years, the earned-income tax credit has been embraced across the political spectrum.
The credit, usually given in an annual lump sum, is intended solely for the working poor.
Conservatives admire it because it rewards work.
Liberals like it because it helps the needy.
Some 14 million families received the credit last year.
The credit also has grown in significance.
It was virtually the only domestic program to see a substantial funding increase under last year's budget law -- a huge 50%.
Its price tag this year is expected to be roughly $14.5 billion, twice the Interior Department's entire budget.
It also is expected to be a cornerstone of President Clinton's welfare-reform plan, because it makes low-wage jobs, the first rung up from welfare, more attractive.
But its standing as unimpeachable social policy may be changing.
New agonizing over the budget deficit, and unintended consequences of last year's earned-credit expansion, have put it under new scrutiny.
"A bigger and more expansive earned credit is not always better," wrote Marvin Kosters an analyst at the American Enterprise Institute.
One goal of last year's budget law, according to the Clinton administration, was to pull all full-time workers above the poverty line.
The measure expanded the credit to a maximum of $3,370 in 1996 from $1,998 in the pre-1993 law.
The vast majority of the working poor receive the credit after filing their income tax statements.
They may also receive the credit through their weekly paychecks, though hardly anybody did this in 1991.
Advocates for the poor were thrilled with the changes.
The expanded credit, said the liberal Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, made last year's budget law "the most progressive of any major piece of tax legislation in decades."
But the expansion has raised some complex economic arguments.
Some wonder why families that earn as much as $27,000 -- getting into middle-class territory -- are eligible.
The size of the credit increases with income, reaching the $3,370 maximum for a family with two children earning $11,000.
The credit then shrinks with each added dollar of income, but it doesn't disappear entirely until income tops $27,000.
"It goes beyond the working poor," admits Robert Shapiro, vice president of the Progressive Policy Institute.
Nonetheless, he supports the program with minor changes, such as improved antifraud measures.
Some economists are troubled by how the credit affects people with incomes between $11,000 and $27,000.
Reductions in the credit as wages increase in that range give recipients an incentive to work less, these analysts say.
No empirical studies of the issue have been done, however.
Some 37% of families receiving the credit have incomes above $20,000, according to Edgar Browning, an economist at Texas A&M University.
He says the credit "creates a significant work disincentive for millions of families who aren't poor."
People who deal with the tax credit dismiss such notions as ivory-tower theorizing, irrelevant to the working poor who struggle to get by.
"Those economists are out of their minds," says Tyrone Bullock, an accountant who practices in the low-income Anacostia neighborhood in Washington.
"None of my clients have ever turned down any raise or overtime to get more from the earned-income tax credit."
For most, he says, the tax credit is an afterthought.
Last year's expansion may make the program an inviting target as the search for budget cuts intensifies.
Some conservatives, now lumping the earned credit in with other welfare spending programs such as Food Stamps and Aid for Families with Dependent Children, have set their sights on capping them all.
A welfare-reform bill endorsed by 162 of the 175 House Republicans would limit the growth of all "welfare" spending, including the earned-income credit, to 2% a year, after inflation.
Stemming the growth of the earned-income credit was "very important, particularly with the conservatives," says Rep. Thomas DeLay, a Texas Republican who backs the bill.
"They wanted a guarantee that what we say about saving money will actually happen."
His staffers believe that commitment to rein in the credit attracted 30 to 40 co-sponsors to the bill.
"It's the best of a deplorable set of programs," says Robert Rector, an analyst for the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank.
He says it's one of the best government benefits for the poor because it rewards work.
But he decries its "household splitting" effects -- a couple living together, he notes, may decide not to marry so as to qualify separately.
He also frets that the same people who receive the earned-income credit will benefit from President Clinton's plan for government health coverage.
The president is "going to be giving out gobs of benefits," says Mr. Rector.
He proposes using funds currently earmarked for the earned-income credit to pay for health benefits.
