At a time when America is focused on crime, and is ready for a serious look at firm but prudent punishment, the U.S. attorney general has become disconnected from her own troops -- the 4,000-some assistant U.S. attorneys who prosecute federal crimes on behalf of the Justice Department.
Janet Reno may have definite plans to alter the department's approach to crime, but she appears to be living in an ivory tower.
In a recent effort to comprehend this division, I interviewed some 60 assistant U.S. attorneys.
Their overwhelming concern was that Ms. Reno doesn't understand the daily difficulties facing federal prosecutors.
Summed up one veteran drug prosecutor: "Am I now employed by the Justice Department or the Department of Social Work?"
For Ms. Reno, those are fighting words.
Soon after a prickly recent interview with me, during which she bristled over suggestions that many of her career prosecutors were alienated and disenchanted, she addressed a conference of 500 federal drug prosecutors in New Orleans.
"A reporter told me," she began her address, "that one of my prosecutors thinks I am more interested in being a social worker than attorney general."
She went on to talk about the so-called root causes of crime.
She ended by asking for questions, but then sidestepped the most important one, thrown at her by a veteran drug prosecutor -- Jay Apperson from Virginia's Eastern District -- on her apparent determination to end mandatory minimum sentencing.
When Ms. Reno speaks publicly, she makes a point of addressing the NAACP, the American Civil Liberties Union and local bar associations.
The National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers can get access to her or her associates on short notice.
But she gives short shrift to her own career prosecutors.
"Who speaks for us?" one Los Angeles veteran asked.
This question has become especially acute lately, since Ms. Reno has called for a radical review of federal crime fighting tactics.
The review is now being conducted by various "advisory groups" within the Justice Department, led by Ms. Reno's deputies.
The changes that may emerge are profoundly troubling to field prosecutors, who fear that their powers will be eroded.
Ms. Reno's underlying philosophy appears to be that crime should be treated as a health and social issue.
Among the policies being "studied" are: cutting back on mandatory minimum sentences in drug-related cases; returning to the plea bargaining prohibited by the 1989 "Thornburgh memo" and giving judges and defense attorneys more input in sentence reductions; dropping the automatic charges for using a gun in a federal crime; revising the rules on direct contact between prosecutors and potential witnesses in investigations; publicizing internal investigations of prosecutors; and emphasizing rehabilitation and drug treatment instead of punishment.
Most of these proposed changes read like a wish list from the defense bar.
Veteran prosecutors have good reason to be worried.
Take mandatory minimums.
Every drug prosecutor I interviewed praised their utility.
Former Drug Enforcement Agency Director and Federal Prosecutor Robert Bonner says "mandatory minimums have been the strongest tool in getting low and midlevel dealers to cooperate with the government early enough in the case to help the government."
And yet Ms. Reno told me in our interview: "Mandatory minimums shouldn't be used as leverage."
"What are they, if not leverage?" a narcotics section chief in Washington asked me when I repeated Ms. Reno's statement.
"Listen, when a guy knows he's going to get only two to three years for distribution, he can handle it.
He knows he'll get paid for his silence and come out of prison richer than the prosecutor who put him away."
But, he adds: "When a guy is facing mandatory 10 to 15 years . . . he gives up the names of his bosses."
As to plea bargaining: "Yeah, I'd like more discretion in some cases," says a veteran in Virginia.
"But those cases are few and far between."
He adds: "She {Reno} worries about the system chewing up so-called first-time offenders.
Remember, by the time he was tried, Pablo Escobar was a first-time offender."
Then there's the recent move to ignore the automatic additional five years for use of a gun in a federal crime.
Several prosecutors say they've been "encouraged" by the new administration to ignore the firearms charge.
Former Attorney General William Barr says: "We insisted on throwing the book at career violent offenders, and now that policy is being undermined."
Ms. Reno's office admits that one of her advisory groups is studying the application of the gun charge as part of the "situation" with mandatory minimums.
"Hey," says Mr. Barr, "don't whine about new gun control laws if you won't enforce the ones already on the books."
Another problem for prosecutors is Ms. Reno's proposal to merge the inspector general's office (which reports to Congress) and the Office of Professional Responsibility (which conducts internal investigations of prosecutors).
"This will politicize the internal affairs unit," says former U.S. Attorney Henry Hudson of Virginia.
What is more, "her proposal to open up OPR complaints during high-profile cases is an invitation to defense lawyers for target practice on prosecutors."
One prosecutor who was exonerated by OPR last year remarked: "If they'd publicly opened the investigation of me while I was still prosecuting the larger case, I'd have been hung out to dry."
Also disturbing are the changes being studied regarding whether a prosecutor (or his agent) can contact the target of a criminal investigation.
Such contacts help the feds pursue complex corporate or organized crime cases by allowing them to induce members of a criminal conspiracy to assist the government.
Some state bar associations say direct contact between feds (including undercover agents) and potential witnesses and targets who are represented by counsel is an "ethical" violation.
Although Ms. Reno reiterated the right of feds to contact potential witnesses in July, Deputy Attorney General Philip Heymann and an advisory group of U.S. attorneys are reviewing the guidelines.
Sources inside Justice complain that Mr. Heymann's initial draft suggested changes that were "defense bar fantasies" and "would have made it impossible for us to conduct undercover investigations or talk to witnesses who volunteered to help."
Ms. Reno says she's been given one report on the subject, but won't discuss where she's going with it.
What's happening here?
One possible reason for the disconnect between Ms. Reno and her troops may be the lack of federal prosecutorial experience in the top triumvirate of the Justice Department.
Ms. Reno was a local prosecutor and then an elected politician.
Assistant Attorney General Webster Hubbell's private firm experience doesn't lend itself to sympathy with front-line prosecutors.
And Mr. Heymann, though once an official of the criminal division, has had little experience as a federal prosecutor, and has spent the last decade as an academic.
Another reason might be the confusion as to Ms. Reno's constituency.
Her power base is the White House, and its surrogates, Mr. Hubbell and Mr. Heymann.
She's been playing to an elite audience: Bill and Hillary Clinton and assorted clientele from civil-rights organizations, the American Bar Association and groups like the Association of Trial Lawyers of America, who gave huge sums to the Clinton campaign.
When Ms. Reno came on board, her career lawyers hoped that they'd gotten a prosecutor's prosecutor.
But now they think she's too soft on crime.
"It's all very touchy-feely," says a prosecutor from San Antonio.
After her congressional testimony on TV violence, one of her own spokemen moaned: "Next, she'll be testifying about school lunches."
Indeed, in a recent letter she sent to prosecutors with their pay slips, she outlined a kind of Zen management style, encouraging the importance of family togetherness and citing the National Performance Review's emphasis on "top-down support for bottom-up decision-making."
But a Washington-area prosecutor says: "We're not in social services.
We're here to fight crime."
Perhaps, he adds, Ms. Reno should take another job -- at health and human services.
Or Janet Reno, surgeon general.
The attorney general seemed affronted that her prosecutors are questioning her policies.
"Tell these prosecutors to stick with their job, which is prosecuting.
And let me look at the larger issues," she told me.
Even at this moment, though, she moves quickly to her favorite social policy themes.
"I have to deal with many areas . . . such as juvenile delinquency prevention."
The troops in the trenches, she indicates, should just keep shooting.
She'll tell them which direction to point and how much firepower they should use -- after her study groups meet.
Ms. Mundy writes for the Washingtonian magazine.
