Air Canada said it is dropping litigation that has blocked PWA Corp., the financially troubled parent of Canadian Airlines International, from concluding an alliance with AMR Corp.
The surprise move came amid indications the Canadian government may be preparing to grant Air Canada long-sought Asian routes.
PWA has argued that it would be seriously harmed if Air Canada is allowed to fly to Japan or Hong Kong, strong markets for PWA.
PWA and AMR welcomed Air Canada's announcement.
But they stopped short of saying AMR's proposed investment of 246 million Canadian dollars (US$187.3 million) for a 33% stake in Canadian Airlines is now a sure thing.
A PWA spokeswoman noted that other legal challenges may remain.
AMR also must still conduct a due-diligence examination of Canadian Airlines.
The legal challenges by Air Canada and others have centered on Canadian Airline's effort to withdraw its data processing business from the Gemini Group automated reservations system shared by the two Canadian carriers, and shift it to AMR's Sabre network -- a key condition of AMR's proposed investment.
Gemini is jointly owned by PWA, Air Canada and a subsidiary of Galileo International, which is owned by a consortium of U.S. and European airlines.
Sabre is Gemini's main competitor in Canada.
Canada's Competition Tribunal, a quasi-judicial agency, approved in November Canadian Airlines' withdrawal from Gemini Group.
But Air Canada, Gemini and the Galileo unit, Covia Canada Corp., appealed the ruling to Canada's Federal Court of Appeal.
It isn't clear whether Gemini and Covia intend to proceed with the appeal without Air Canada.
Gemini officials declined comment and Covia officials didn't return phone calls.
For its part, Air Canada seemed resigned to the PWA-AMR tie-up.
"It is now time for both Air Canada and PWA to move forward and focus on the task of rebuilding our industry," Air Canada said.
A spokesman for the Montreal carrier declined to say why Air Canada decided to drop its legal challenges.
Previously, company officials had indicated they would exhaust all legal options.
Meanwhile, Canadian Transport Minister Doug Young said in Ottawa that the government expects to decide "very soon" whether to grant Air Canada's recent request for access to Kansai airport in Osaka, Japan, which is scheduled to open later this year.
Air Canada is also seeking access to Hong Kong.
Canadian Airlines International, based in Calgary, Alberta, currently is the only Canadian carrier serving those markets.
Air Canada first applied for access to Japan in 1988 and to Hong Kong in 1990, but Canada's previous Conservative government never granted the routes.
The current government was formed by the Liberal Party after elections last October.
Air Canada says it is being unfairly denied access to fast-growing Asian markets.
Yesterday's developments prompted speculation that Air Canada had struck a deal to drop its litigation in return for access to Japan.
But Mr. Young, the transport minister, said Air Canada's decision "has nothing to do with Asian routes."
Shares of both Canadian carriers were bolstered by the developments.
In heavy trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange, PWA closed at C$1.50 a share, up 30 Canadian cents.
Air Canada shares closed at C$6, up 50 Canadian cents.
