At Glen Ridge High School in New Jersey, students who want to take part in sports or other extra-curricular activities are required to sign a pledge that they'll refrain from using drugs or alcohol.
Further, they pledge not to get involved in any activity that violates the criminal code.
The principal of Glen Ridge High notes that this longstanding policy -- in effect in many other schools -- has always met with approval and support from students and (not surprisingly) parents alike.
So far so good -- except that the American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey has recently charged the school with "unconstitutional" behavior.
ACLU attorney Marsha Wenk informed us that the case came down to the question of students' rights.
"Just because," Ms. Wenk explained, "there are problems in the schools is no reason for violating rights of students."
In its ability to discover new constitutional rights, the ACLU is, of course, second to none in a crowded field.
Still, it is, after all, illegal to take drugs and indeed, in the state of New Jersey, for people under the age of 18 to smoke.
Administrators at Glen Ridge High point out that they are asking no more than that students signing on for sports or similar activities honor the rules of training and of citizenship.
The ACLU of New Jersey is particularly agitated over the issue of disciplining pupils for behavior that takes place off school grounds, or as the ACLU representative put it, the "school's effort to extend the scope of control over students' lives."
In the world of the civil libertarian brigades, the dark forces of repression are always in the wings.
In truth there are forces of repression -- the kind responsible for the current threat to free speech and academic freedom -- at work in our schools and on campuses today.
Repression, however, has nothing to do with what Glen Ridge High's policy is all about.
The school has done its charges the honor of expecting them to keep pledges, uphold agreed-upon standards of legal behavior (and also of maintaining an acceptable academic grade).
To confront anything like exacting standards and expectations is, for many young people, a well-nigh exotic experience nowadays.
No wonder Glen Ridge students gave the school policy their whole-hearted support.
The issue reached the attention of the ACLU this fall, when one person who signed the contract was arrested for underage drinking, which in turn caused the school to enforce the terms of agreement.
That agreement says that students who sign the pledge and violate its conditions are temporarily prohibited from engaging in sports, cheerleading or any other such afterschool activities.
During this period of suspension, they are also required to meet with school advisers for counseling.
The ACLU's charge that the school that seeks to influence out-of-school behavior is being "coercive" is a perfect example of the kind of abstract high principle that has unhinged sanity and common sense in our time.
It is of a piece with the kind of reasoning that caused the de-institutionalization of the mentally ill -- who are now, thanks to civil-libertarians, no longer "coerced" into taking medication, or confined where they can do neither themselves nor others any harm, but are now free to live in doorways, in squalor and degradation.
To hear, furthermore, objections to a school's efforts to influence "out-of-school behavior" is especially strange, in an age when schools are called upon to do everything for students that once was the duty of parents, including giving instruction in sexual practice and morality.
"Schools don't have the authority to control activities outside of schools," argues the ACLU of New Jersey.
The ACLU might want to try telling that to the people handing out condoms in the schools.
