There is much to be said for the civil libertarian maxim that if you don't like pornography, don't buy it.
The free market corollary would seem to be that if your customers don't like pornography, don't sell it.
But a recent federal court decision has taken that option away from cable television companies.
In a 1992 act, Congress had permitted -- not required -- cable operators to ban indecent programming from public- and leased-access channels.
Congress did so in response to complaints about explicit sexual images that a viewer was likely to encounter on even the most innocent sampling of cable channels.
On Nov. 23, 1993, in Alliance for Community Media v.
FCC, a three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit ruled that Congress had violated the First Amendment by permitting cable operators to take those measures.
Last Friday, the Clinton administration petitioned the full court to reconsider the case.
If the panel's decision is not overturned, the result for many viewers -- especially parents -- may be to make cable seem more like a minefield than a superhighway.
Public-access and leased-access channels are part of a cable subscriber's basic service package.
The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 gave municipalities the right to negotiate for public-access channels as part of their franchise agreements with cable operators.
The act essentially provided that public-access channels must be open at no charge to all local residents who want to broadcast noncommercial matter.
Also, the act directly required operators to reserve a number of leased-access channels for commercial use.
Problems arose because the 1984 legislation prohibited operators from exercising any editorial control over public-access or leased-access channels.
The predictable result was that, in some areas, nudity and sex acts became part of the basic cable package -- especially on leased-access channels, which featured explicit advertisements for "adult" films, phone lines and the like.
Under federal law, the operators were powerless to respond to subscribers' complaints by keeping that material off.
When Congress reacted to the situation in 1992, one step it took was to restore some editorial control to the operators.
The Federal Communications Commission was then promptly greeted by a First Amendment challenge in the D.C. Circuit from programmers and civil liberties groups.
But the First Amendment restricts only government censorship, not the editorial decisions of private companies.
What Congress had done in restoring editorial control was to reduce government's involvement in content, not increase it.
In striking down the change in the law, the D.C. Circuit treated it, in the panel's words, as "deputizing cable operators" to censor on behalf of the government.
Because the change in the law had the effect of "significantly encouraging" private censorship, any editorial decisions of the operators to ban indecent material on the access channels were "state action" attributable to the government.
The panel based its decision on a 1967 Supreme Court case, Reitman v.
Mulkey, the high-water mark in the expansion of "state action."
In that case, Californians had enacted a state constitutional amendment to allow racial discrimination in housing and to override the state's fair housing laws.
The question was whether the Equal Protection Clause of the U.S. Constitution made the amendment invalid.
The Equal Protection Clause had long been held not to control private discrimination; at the federal level, only civil-rights statutes do so.
The Supreme Court found, however, that the California amendment encouraged private discrimination and involved the state in it, making private acts of discrimination into illegal state action.
In its decision, the D.C. Circuit regarded the 1992 cable act permitting private censorship as analogous to the amendment in Reitman permitting private discrimination.
The panel's equation of a cable company's editorial control with state action may not, however, adequately reflect the Supreme Court's state-action decisions in the 25 years after Reitman.
Most notably, the Supreme Court's 1976 decision in Hudgens v.
NLRB made clear that the First Amendment did not forbid the National Labor Relations Board from allowing a shopping center to exclude picketers, even though such a decision would authorize private censorship.
By implication, the Hudgens decision seems to indicate that government authorization of private editorial decisions, unlike government authorization of racial discrimination, is simply not a constitutional issue.
Yet the practical consequences of the D.C. Circuit's decision are real, and they extend beyond cable television.
The Clinton administration's plan for the "national information infrastructure" -- touted by Vice President Gore in Los Angeles earlier this week -- calls for the federal government to have an activist role in, among other things, setting technical standards, funding research and development, and ensuring "universal" access to information resources such as computer networks.
At some point, federal involvement in this infrastructure could be held, under the D.C. Circuit's model, to transform the content decisions of service providers into illegal censorship.
That would frustrate the will of information consumers who pay, in part, for just those editorial judgments.
Of course, the market may ultimately reject the censoring of sexual or other material from information services -- if people want the material.
But the votes for and against that type of editorial control should be cast by customers voting with dollars, not by federal judges.
Mr. Price is an attorney in Washington.
