People in this city of 260,000 like to sit visitors down and show them a thing or two on a map of Europe.
They trace a line, say, from Berlin to Bucharest, another from Vienna to Kiev and a third from Belgrade to Riga.
Then they grin: The three lines cross each other within a short hop of Kosice.
Others take a more local view and point out the city sits just an hour's drive from Ukraine, Poland and Hungary.
In good times, Kosice's location and zestful spirit could make it one of Central Europe's great boomtowns.
"For centuries people have fought for control of this city because it is truly at the crossroads of Europe," said Jan Frajt, director of one of the region's largest construction companies, Hutne Stavby.
Today, Slovakia's second-largest city boasts a broad-gauge railway that connects the nearby East Slovak Steel Works, known as VSZ, to Ukraine and the whole of the former Soviet realm.
Not far from its terminus lies the country's only duty-free zone, opened in 1991 to foster trade.
There are even plans to build an international cargo airport nearby.
Yet for all the promise and all the ambition, many here are frustrated.
Even the city's most bullish promoters qualify their enthusiasm with sentences usually starting, "If only . . ."
If only the government were less consumed by internal squabbles and more committed to privatization and foreign investment.
If only investors had more faith in Slovakia's stability.
If only Ukraine weren't in such terrible straits.
"I can guarantee you that if some of these conditions were different, Kosice would be an incredible success story," says Alfonz Lukacin, director of Slovakia's fourth-largest investment fund, Kosice-based Cassoviainvest.
While the massive steel works, with its 27,000 employees and nearly $900 million in annual sales, has yet to slash its work force, others haven't been so lucky.
The city's three big construction companies have had to dismiss up to half their workers.
Employment in the city now runs at about 10%, but the rate in outlying areas is twice as high.
Mr. Lukacin and others, however, don't plan just to sit around and wait for things to change.
People here care little for the nationalism that is bubbling up elsewhere in the country.
Just as irrelevant to them is the political scapegoating so widespread in Slovakian capital Bratislava.
What matters to the locals is business, pure and simple.
The steel works, VSZ, is investing $780 million in a huge iron-ore processing plant in Ukraine.
Local engineering firms are also busy canvassing the former Soviet republics, as are dozens of private traders in everything from household goods to food.
"Our future is clearly in the east," says Stanislav Panko, director of Kosice's sole flour mill, set outside town among a sea of high-rise apartment towers.
Up to a fourth of the mill's 145,000 metric-ton production now goes abroad, including a large order last year to Kazakhstan.
"Hungary, Poland, Ukraine, Yugoslavia," Mr. Panko says, "we consider all of these our markets, though we're also selling as far away as Brazil."
So while these may not be the best of times, Kosice is still making do with an optimistic hustle rare these days in gloomy Slovakia.
Mazda Motor Corp., Ford Motor Co., Mercedes-Benz AG, Hyundai Motor Co. and Volkswagen AG have all opened shiny new car dealerships here, and their models are a common sight around town.
New restaurants have sprung up across the city center, as have clothing shops and computer stores.
A traveler coming west from Ukraine would be stunned by the sheer abundance in shops.
In its ambitious conquest of Eastern Europe, Amsterdam-based Internationale Nederlanden Groep's ING Bank has opened a two-person branch office in Kosice to extend a network that also includes Prague, Bratislava, Budapest, Warsaw and Moscow.
By offering foreign-payment services, letters of credit and export financing, the bank has attracted many of eastern Slovakia's largest companies.
But there's more to it than that.
"We came here to be close to our clients, but also because we see this as an important base for Ukraine and other markets to the East," says Alexander Hudak, ING's manager in Kosice.
Indeed, Kosice as far back as the 14th century held a monopoly over Hungary's trade with the Baltics and with all points east.
Through the city, once second only to Buda in the Hungarian kingdom, passed huge caravans carrying salt, hides, silver and iron.
Twice Kosice figured as a national capital: once when the Turks were besieging Buda, and much later, in 1945, when it served briefly as headquarters for the new Czechoslovak government.
Even Kosice's architectural heritage speaks volumes about its position in European culture.
It is here, literally in the city's sprawling main square, that the easternmost wave of the Gothic architectural style crested and died out.
In St. Elizabeth's Cathedral, wayfarers headed to Ukraine will see Europe's last gargoyles and pointed spires.
Blocks away one finds a monument to the other side of Europe: the dusty dome of the Greek Orthodox Church.
Fewer than 50,000 people lived here just 30 years ago.
Then the Communist government built VSZ in the mid-1960s, sparking an industrial and population explosion.
Beyond the baroque palaces, the opera house and the graceful churches of Old Town, a maze of housing blocks and factories now spreads for miles across what not long before were just potato and grain fields.
This wild growth in turn lured people from across the region -- Czechs, Hungarians, Ruthenians, Ukrainians -- and reinforced the city's reputation as one of Slovakia's most cosmopolitan and tolerant cities.
Nowhere else did people oppose the split of Czechoslovakia more vehemently.
As one longtime resident here put it: "On the night of the split, when Bratislava was filled with fireworks and speeches, only a cold wind blew through the streets of Kosice."
Compared with the capital, where even many government ministers speak only Slovak, Kosice is an amazingly polyglot city.
In the foreign affairs section at City Hall, for instance, the three-person staff speaks a total of seven languages.
One of its staff, Anna Kovacova, says, "One day Kosice will regain its position as a regional force," ticking off its attractions.
Kosice has four universities, including a liberal-arts college and a technical school.
Nearby it has the ski resorts of the Tatra Mountains.
"Really," she adds, "I think the only thing missing is the sea."
