RENO'S TOP AIDE RESIGNED from his post at the Justice Department.
The department's No. 2 official, Philip Heymann, quit -- a move that both he and Attorney General Reno attributed to a lack of personal chemistry and clashing operational and management styles.
Heymann, a veteran of four administrations and a Harvard law professor, said he would stay on until a successor is selected.
Reno disputed any notion of disarray at the department, which has suffered high-level personnel problems.
The move, which was said to have taken President Clinton by surprise, follows the recent departures of high-level officials at both the Defense and State departments.
Thousands of quake victims lined up for emergency food stamps in Los Angeles in scenes reminiscent of the Great Depression.
The long, shuffling lines of bedraggled people were monitored by hundreds of police.
A day before, pushing and shoving broke out when those seeking help became frustrated and angry.
Serb gunners focused their fire along the northern front lines of Sarajevo, and Serb forces reportedly were attacking troops of the Muslim-led government in the northern Bosnian towns of Maglaj and Tesanj.
The U.N., meanwhile, closed a key route in central Bosnia after crowds plundered food convoys and assaulted armed escorts.
Secretary of State Christopher appealed to France for an end to bickering over Bosnia and urged U.S. allies to prepare for NATO military action against the Serbs to relieve two encircled towns, Tuzla and Srebrenica.
But he ruled out using U.S. ground forces to pressure the Bosnian government to accept a peace settlement.
The Senate voted to urge Clinton to end a U.S. embargo against the Hanoi government.
The 62-38 bipartisan roll call increased the likelihood that the president will act soon to lift the restrictions imposed on Vietnam after the 1975 fall of Saigon to Communist forces.
Clinton has relaxed the embargo twice.
Yeltsin's office issued a statement telling Russians he "will stand firm in the defense of reforms" despite a cabinet shake-up that removed key reformers.
It was the first public comment from the president on the cabinet crisis and came a day after reformer Fyodorov quit as finance minister, warning of economic chaos and social unrest.
The three Baltic states were accused of seeking a confrontation with Russia and told they would have to cooperate with Moscow to solve their problems.
Russia's deputy foreign minister, Churkin, further alleged that the ex-Soviet republics -- Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia -- are violating the rights of their ethnic Russian minorities.
Hosokawa made a direct, last-ditch appeal to the Japanese electorate to lobby balking legislators in order to revive his troubled political reform bills before a deadline tomorrow.
The prime minister also hinted that he would step down from his post if the reform measures fail to win parliamentary approval.
Oliver North formally launched his bid for the GOP nomination to challenge Virginia's incumbent Democratic Sen. Charles Robb.
North, a former national security aide to Reagan who played a key role in the Iran-Contra affair, said he is a "conservative outsider" who will "strike a blow to give government back to the people."
Figure skater Tonya Harding admitted she failed to immediately tell authorities what she knew about the Jan. 6 attack on skating rival Nancy Kerrigan in Detroit, but denied any prior knowledge of the assault.
Harding, who hasn't been charged, said she wanted to remain on the U.S. Olympic team and compete in Norway next month.
Firearms could become the leading cause of injury-related deaths in the U.S. within the next two to three years, according to current nationwide trends.
From 1985 through 1991, the death rate from motor-vehicle accidents -- now the leading cause -- fell 10%, while the death rate linked to firearms jumped 14%.
The Mexican government signed an accord with nine political parties calling for sweeping electoral reforms in an attempt to end a rebel uprising in the southern state of Chiapas.
The rebels reportedly have seized control of a huge area of jungle and mountain territory in Chiapas, forcing landowners and peasant families to flee.
