Vietnam's allure as Asia's latest tourism and business frontier is drawing ever-larger numbers of visitors to the country.
According to preliminary figures released by the General Department of Tourism, the number of foreign visitors last year rocketed 50% from a year earlier to 669,860.
Between 70% and 80% of the total were tourists.
While the total is dwarfed by the 5.7 million visitors to Thailand and even the 1.4 million visitors to the Philippines last year, the number of foreign visitors to Vietnam could surge as much as 20% annually for the next four years, according to PKF Consulting Ltd., a Hong Kong-based tourism consultant.
By 1995, arrivals are expected to break the one-million mark.
Last year, Taiwan was the biggest source of visitors, accounting for 40%.
The other main contributors were Japan, Thailand, Hong Kong, China, France and the U.S.
Vietnam, which began liberalizing its economy in 1986, has eased visa restrictions significantly.
In Hong Kong, for example, tourist visas can be obtained in four working days.
Already, 20 airlines from 17 countries, mainly in Asia and Europe, fly to Vietnam.
By the end of this year, at least five more foreign carriers are expected to be serving the country, according to the Vietnam Civil Aviation Administration.
"There's a lot of potential, especially for tours centering on culture and heritage," says Renton de Alwis, vice president of the Pacific Asia Travel Association.
The association, which tracks travel trends in 37 countries and plays an advisory role for their tourism development, established a Vietnam chapter this month.
But Mr. de Alwis warns that given the country's hunger to tap deep-pocketed tourists, officials and tour operators "must develop tourism in a conscious manner" to ensure that Vietnam's environment and historical heritage are preserved.
Otherwise, he says, the country will end up "repeating the mistakes of other destinations, which quickly are ruining their tourism value."
Hotels and other tourism-related projects account for about $1 billion, or 20%, of total foreign investment to date in Vietnam, according to the official Vietnam News Agency.
Of the 70 tourism-related projects under way in the country, 29 involve Hong Kong investors, the agency says.
The French, too, are wasting no time.
France's Feal International SA and local partner Saigon Tourist this month broke ground on a deluxe $76 million, 350-room hotel in Ho Chi Minh City.
The hotel is to be managed by Meridien Hotels Asia-Pacific, a unit of France's Meridien SA.
It will be the chain's first in Vietnam when it opens in 1996 or 1997.
Other Meridien hotels are planned for Hanoi and the coastal city of Danang.
Danai Wansom, vice president for marketing and sales at Hong Kong-based Century International Hotels, says his company's research found that 55 tour operators in France are actively promoting the historic city of Hue, where Century already operates an inn.
That helped tourist arrivals to Hue double last year from a year earlier, Mr. Wansom says.
Century also operates a hotel in Ho Chi Minh City.
In addition, state-owned Air France has has added a weekly flight between Paris and Hanoi, bringing to five its total number of weekly flights to the former French colony, three a week to Ho Chi Minh City and two to Hanoi.
