Chrysler Corp.
President Robert A. Lutz is furious, jabbing his cigar at the air and roaring.
"Those goddamn guys at Ford," he rages.
"You know what they're saying about Chrysler?
They're telling people, `So, you think Chrysler's so great, well, what about their quality?'"
It's true.
"Our quality is better than theirs," Ford Motor Co.'s treasurer, David McCammon, told reporters recently, referring to Chrysler's spate of recent recalls.
And there's more.
Chrysler's designers, says Ford division chief Ross Roberts, are nothing more than Ford imitators.
"All their vehicles are much more Taurus-shaped," he says.
Chrysler product executive Steve Bartoli snipes that Ford's new Contour compact is boring, and no roomier than the Chrysler Neon subcompact.
"We were surprised," he says.
So it goes, back and forth, like two bickering brothers.
And where is General Motors Corp. in this feuding?
On the sidelines, licking its wounds.
"No more ugly cars" is its latest battle cry.
"You go to Chrysler's meetings, and they're talking about Ford, and you go to Ford, and they're talking about Chrysler," says Steve Girsky, an auto analyst at PaineWebber Inc.
"Then you go to GM, and they're talking about automotive components."
Such squabbling contrasts sharply with the sophisticated images that Ford and Chrysler like to project.
Ford wants to be seen as the global car company and its chairman as the industry's chief statesman.
Chrysler wants to be known as the world's "premier" auto maker.
But as the Japanese threat has receded and GM has been weakened by years of mismanagement, Ford and Chrysler more and more have come to regard each other as chief rivals.
Psychologist Harry Levinson, a consultant and former Harvard medical-school professor, likens it to a bad case of sibling rivalry.
Chrysler is staffed with top executives who left Ford.
Now, Dr. Levinson says, they may be driven to "show that Ford made a mistake, that Ford should have loved them better."
And Ford is taking on the role of an older brother trying to squash an upstart.
Its management, says Dr. Levinson, is out to prove that Chrysler executives "are never going to be adequate."
Dr. Levinson warns that what may be harmless cross-town sniping could turn into "a neurotic preoccupation," diverting management's attention from real issues.
While that remains to be seen, the number of slings and arrows flying between Ford's Dearborn headquarters and Chrysler's Highland Park base keeps rising.
Take the Neon, Chrysler's much-publicized new small car.
The No. 3 auto maker created a stir at the Detroit auto show in January when it priced the base model at $8,975.
"How could they do that?" the automotive press asked.
Ford soon had an answer.
Officials put out a tip sheet titled "Neon $8,975 Myth."
The attack maintains that it will cost about $11,000 to get a Neon with air conditioning ($10,836, Chrysler corrects, plus $500 in "destination" fees).
But Ford couldn't very well hide its Chrysler-envy.
At the auto show, Ford engineers working on the next-generation Escort were seen crawling all over the Neons on display.
And last November, when Ford was looking for help in designing the new Escort, it sent a questionnaire to suppliers that had worked on the Neon.
Thomas Stallkamp, a former Ford executive who is now Chrysler's vice president for supply, intercepted one and returned it to Ford with a note: "We're flattered."
And then there are the minivan wars.
Ford hoped to attract reams of publicity for its new Windstar minivan at the Detroit auto show, where the vehicle made its public debut.
The product is aimed squarely at Chrysler's bread-and-butter minivans, which dominate the market.
But Chrysler launched a pre-emptive strike to take the edge off Ford's unveiling.
Some weeks earlier, Chrysler invited journalists to its design center for a look at a new Chrysler minivan that is due out next year.
The clear message: Ford's Windstar may be catching up, but the next Chrysler offering will leapfrog ahead.
It worked.
The new Ford minivan was barely noticed at the Detroit auto show.
Anticipating the introduction of the new Ford product, Chrysler just started a discount promotion for its minivans, hoping to soak up enough minivan demand to foul up Ford's product launch.
Meanwhile, Ford brags about its strong balance sheet, a dig at Chrysler's unfunded pension liability.
In return, Chrysler boasts of its record per-vehicle profits, nearly twice as big as Ford's.
Ford isn't impressed.
"I suppose they've been down so long they felt they have to get up on the mountain and crow about something," says Ford Chairman Alexander Trotman.
Chrysler knows that Ford is the low-cost U.S. producer with some of the most efficient plants in North America and that Ford has five of the 10 best-selling vehicles in the country.
So Chrysler is trying to change the competitive focus.
Mr. Lutz, the former head of Ford's European business, argues that too much attention is paid to Ford's strong suit -- per-car production costs -- while not enough is paid to initial investment costs, Chrysler's forte.
Chrysler spent $1.3 billion to develop the Neon and even less on the larger Stratus/Cirrus cars, code named the JA line.
Ford, meanwhile, spent $6 billion to develop its competing Contour/Mystique compacts and a sister European model.
Ford executives all but cringe whenever that figure is mentioned.
Mr. Lutz's line of thinking appears to have caught on.
Upon the launch of the Stratus/Cirrus models, a Detroit Free Press headline declared: "Chrysler's JA Models Take on Japan."
A few weeks later, when the Ford products were shown, a headline in the newspaper read: "Ford Defends High Cost of New Models."
Ford hasn't taken the hits idly.
An ad for its Mercury Villager minivan lampoons Lee Iacocca, the former Chrysler chairman.
The ad portrays an unnamed autocompany chairman as being furious that the Villager is so advanced.
The two companies' top public-relations executives say they are trying to arrange a truce in the war of words.
Arthur C. "Bud" Liebler of Chrysler phoned his Ford counterpart to make peace recently.
"We should be speaking with one voice as an industry," he says, "not taking cheap shots at each other."
Ford PR Vice President David Scott says he told Mr. Liebler "that we're a peaceful little auto company . . . but when the Scud missiles start coming in regularly, we sometimes have to fire off a few Patriots."
He says he agrees, though, that the missile exchanges ought to stop.
But the debut next fall of the new Ford and Chrysler compacts has already sparked a new round.
"They won't tell you when they're launching," confides a Chrysler executive, referring to the Ford product, "because they're having delays."
And the whispering at Ford is a near echo: "Chrysler's running into delays with the JA."
