This week, investors are terrified about an intensifying price war in drugs.
But for investors who can hold stocks a year or two, some depressed drug stocks may be screaming buys.
In the teeth of the widespread fears, a bold minority of money managers think it's time for investors to rush into the sector and scoop up bargains.
Merck has fallen 1 5/8 this week to 30 1/8.
A little over two years ago, it was above 56.
Bristol-Myers Squibb is off 75 cents on the week to 53 1/8, far below its 1992 high of 90 1/8.
Pfizer, which hit 87 the year before last, is off 1 1/2 this week to 55 1/2.
The trigger: Sandoz, a Swiss drug company, said it will sell its new cholesterol-lowering drug for about half the price of the mainstay drugs in the field.
Merck and Bristol-Myers Squibb make the leading drugs now.
Investors took this as a bitter reminder that pharmaceuticals makers face a rough pricing environment, whether or not Congress acts this year on President Clinton's health-care proposals.
But in a long-term context, this week's declines may not mean much.
For 18 months, starting in January 1992, the drug group fell like a stone.
In the nine months since, it's been mostly moving sideways -- a prelude, some think, to a rebound with real profit potential.
David Katz of Matrix Asset Advisors says his measure of momentum in analysts' earnings estimates has turned positive for the drug stocks for the first time since mid-1990.
This doesn't mean that analysts are raising estimates yet.
In most cases, they're still lowering them.
But now they are shaving the estimates by pennies per share, instead of dimes or quarters.
Mr. Katz says his estimate-momentum gauge provided early warning of the 199293 decline of drug stocks.
In 1990 and 1991, analysts were still raising their estimates, but at a decreasing rate.
Now he thinks the indicator signals a comeback for the stocks during the next year or two.
He owns Upjohn and Bristol-Myers.
For the first time in more than a decade, drug stocks are cheap, selling at 11 to 15 times estimated 1994 earnings.
"I don't think they're going to have the kind of profit margins they once had, or the kind of growth they once had," says David Dreman, a money manager in Jersey City, N.J.
But at today's prices, he says, "they don't have to."
He has loaded the portfolio at Dreman Value Management with close to 10% drug stocks, including Bristol-Myers, American Home Products, Marion Merrell Dow, Upjohn and Eli Lilly.
Drug stocks carry attractive dividend yields, often 4% or more.
"We call them our new utilities," says Mr. Dreman.
In fact, many drug stocks out-yield utilities nowadays, he says.
But unlike most utilities, drug companies have "great balance sheets" with very little debt.
And they are probably better positioned than utilities to raise dividends in coming years.
The companies have just begun the fight to reduce costs.
There's room for a lot more cost-cutting, both in research and development and in corporate overhead, says Richard Rubinstein of Oppenheimer Management.
He owns Bristol-Myers, Eli Lilly and Upjohn.
What's more, acquisition lightning might strike, several money managers say.
Drug companies that combine forces could slash spending on marketing, administration and duplicative research.
Frequently mentioned as possible takeover candidates are Syntex and Upjohn.
Meanwhile, the threat of extremely tight regulation is receding, as Congress heads back to the drawing board on health care instead of embracing President Clinton's plan.
If a national health insurance plan is passed, it might crimp prices but will greatly expand the market.
All this doesn't mean that drug stocks are out of the woods.
Employers, health maintenance organizations, hospitals and large purchasing services are determined to push down the cost of health care, including drugs.
Technical market analysts, who study stock charts, generally say drug stocks aren't a buy quite yet.
"They are getting close," says Gary Anderson, a technical analyst with Anderson & Loe in Eugene, Ore.
Trading volume, he says, is "drying up as they work their way sideways."
That's a good sign, he says.
In the early stages of a decline, stocks plunge on heavy volume.
Late in a decline, volume dries up.
Even so, Mr. Anderson wouldn't snatch up drug stocks yet.
He sees "one more shakeout" in the group as fairly likely.
"They're all still in late-stage declines," says Stan Weinstein of the newsletter Professional Tape Reader.
The stocks are "not a good short-term idea," he says.
But he thinks it's quite possible they will outperform the overall market for the remainder of 1994, particularly if the overall market falls.
Many money managers also say it's too early to buy drug stocks.
John Neff, manager of Windsor Fund, doesn't own any, although he says "I do look longingly" at their dividend yields.
"It seems to me that the market hasn't yet fully adjusted" to drug stocks' reduced growth rate, Mr. Neff says.
He thinks earnings growth at drug companies will average 6% to 8% annually, perhaps "10% to 12% for the good guys and zilch for the not-so-good."
"The fundamental problems are just becoming highly visible," says Stephen M. Dalton of CoreStates Investment Advisers in Philadelphia.
"I don't mean that pricing is a problem.
I mean that prices are collapsing."
Beginnings of Consolidation There "hasn't been enough pain yet," says Anthony I. Kreisel, co-manager of Putnam Fund for Growth & Income in Boston.
"I had hoped by this time to have seen . . . more massive and Draconian cost-cutting measures," along with the beginnings of consolidation among drug companies.
(Despite their skepticism, both Mr. Dalton and Mr. Kreisel do own a few drug stocks.)
Drug companies are "going to be quality, mature, slow-growth companies," says Douglas K. Raborn, a Delray Beach, Fla., money manager.
"I don't think there's any downside, but I don't think the upside is exciting."
But money managers like Oppenheimer's Mr. Rubinstein say that when the dust settles, drug companies will still have above-average profitability.
In the realm of health-care costs, "drugs are really the solution and not the problem," he says.
Even expensive drugs rarely cost more than $10 a day, but a stay in the hospital runs $900 to $1,200 a day.
"It's still a lot cheaper to treat any disease with a drug than it is to treat it in the hospital."
Charles Will, a Louisville, Ky., money manager who scored nicely with gold stocks last year, has shifted 18% of his portfolio into drug stocks, buying Bristol, Lilly, Merck, Syntex and Upjohn.
Sure, the drug companies have lost the ability to rack up price increases, Mr. Will concedes.
But most of them are world-wide companies, and they make money in other countries where pricing isn't easy.
Mr. Will thinks it's ridiculous that drug stocks yield more in dividends than utilities do.
"A utility has its prices completely set," he notes, and most have "very slow growth."
Drug companies innovate constantly.
With scientists gaining a better understanding of cell biology, the medicines of 10 years from now may be only a glimmer in a test tube today.
"America's drug companies are the world's leaders," says Mr. Will.
"As with most aspects of life, there are negatives and there are positives.
Investors right now are obsessed with the negatives."
