The dollar fell a bit against the yen, as conflicting reports on the progress of high-level U.S.-Japan trade negotiation left traders baffled as to the dollar's near-term direction.
The U.S. currency took a bigger hit against the mark as traders took profits on the sharp dollar rises that followed last week's boost in U.S. interest rates.
The mark also was helped after a senior Bundesbank official hinted that Germany is less likely to cut interest rates because of the recent weakness of the mark.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7533 marks, down from 1.7585 marks late Wednesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 108.15 yen, down from 108.35 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4620, up a bit from $1.4615.
On Friday, financial markets in Japan were closed for a national holiday.
With Japan's Deputy Premier Tsutomu Hata under pressure to produce an acceptable bilateral trade accord with the U.S. prior to today's summit meeting in Washington, D.C., between Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and President Clinton, traders noted contradictory signals about whether that would be achieved on time.
Even as an unidentified Japanese official announced that Mr. Hata and U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher agreed to reach an accord in the trade talks by the Friday deadline, White House spokeswoman Dee Dee Myers said: "We have not made a lot of progress."
The talks appear to remain stalled over Japan's refusal to accept numerical targets on trade agreements covering autos and auto parts, access to Japan's insurance market and government procurement.
Lack of an agreement is seen strengthening the yen -- despite Japan's economic-quagmire -- because the U.S. is believed unlikely to discourage a weak yen until Japanese trade barriers come down.
"The way I read it is that the Japanese won't give in, otherwise our rhetoric wouldn't be getting so loud," said Peter Daley, vice president of First Fidelity Bank Corp., Philadelphia.
He said despite market sentiment that the summit won't be productive, no one wants to be caught off guard by betting the wrong way.
"Traders don't want to get involved in the yen because some announcement could be made and the dollar will move up or down two yen in either direction," Mr. Daley said.
But other analysts said any failure to get a trade agreement would be offset by statements designed to halt overly volatile trading.
"The U.S. seems to be playing down the use of currency as a means of resolving the trade imbalance," said Eric Nickerson, chief economist for Bank of America in San Francisco.
"And if it is reiterated in an official way, that will temper the knee-jerk reaction to strengthen the yen."
The dollar, meanwhile, fell against the mark after traders took profits and reversed a week-long climb.
When the dollar failed to break past resistance at 1.7650 marks, traders tested the downside, said Charles Cossentino, vice president of Deutsche Genossenschaftsbank in New York.
He said the mark also was boosted by comments by Hans-Juergen Krupp, a member of the Bundesbank's policymaking panel, who said the German central bank wouldn't provoke an "overshooting" of the dollar against the mark.
