Health care, which hasn't generally been a primary issue for Mr. Perot and his followers, appeared to rise in prominence at a weekend convention of Mr. Perot's political organization, United We Stand America.
In particular, Mr. Perot and his group's state leaders gave a warm reception to Rep. Jim Cooper (D., Tenn.), co-author of a more moderate health-care plan that has emerged as the chief alternative to the Clinton proposal.
After Mr. Cooper's presentation, Mr. Perot said his organization isn't yet endorsing any health plan but said that the group "may endorse" the Cooper approach down the road.
And he offered nothing but critical commentary on the Clinton plan.
"Government takes over the health-care system under the Clinton program," Mr. Perot asserted.
Perhaps more important, Mr. Perot told the state chairmen of his organization: "I would urge you to make this a key issue" with followers around the country.
Mr. Perot, speaking at the United We Stand gathering in Dallas, predicted there will be a "raging debate among our people" over precisely what position to take on health care.
Even before this weekend's activities, United We Stand leaders had set up working groups to study health-care reform in every state, said a spokeswoman.
And videotapes of the Cooper presentation are to be distributed among the state United We Stand chapters, Mr. Perot said.
Still, there is some uncertainty within the Perot organization about how deeply immersed to become in the health-care debate.
Some of Mr. Perot's followers prefer to stick to the core Perot agenda of demanding various reforms of the way government does business, such as term limits for members of Congress, a line-item veto to cut spending, a balanced budget amendment, an end to political action committee donations and an overhaul of campaign finance and lobbying rules.
White House officials have suspected that Mr. Perot would choose to keep a low profile on health-care, arguing that his credibility is suspect on the issue.
They have argued that, if he were to strike a high profile, his objectivity would be questionable both because he ran a large data-processing business that made millions of dollars handling health-care claims for state governments and because the public generally tends to distrust the views of big-business men on health-care reform.
The administration is likely to try to fuel those doubts if Mr. Perot becomes very vocal on the health question.
The key question about Mr. Perot and his followers may turn out to be how they handle the health-care question in the 435 races for seats in the House this fall.
Because of its status as a tax-exempt organization, the Perot organization can't endorse candidates.
But Mr. Perot and his followers may choose to stage debates and open meetings and circulate materials to focus attention on lawmakers' views and votes of which they disapprove.
At the close of its weekend conference, the United We Stand organization named health care as one of 11 "priority" issues its members intend to focus on this year.
