For the moment at least, the Treasury bond market is running with the bulls and yesterday was no exception.
Ever since last Friday, when a weaker-than-expected employment report boosted the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond more than 1 1/2 points, investors have been getting bolder.
They are regaining the confidence they lost in the fourth quarter of last year, when it seemed as if every economic report showed the U.S. economy starting to speed up.
But with recent reports suggesting that the economy may not grow as much in the first quarter as it did at the end of last year, optimism is returning to the market, albeit cautiously.
Yesterday a report showing subdued inflation for December boosted the price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond more than 3/4 point, or more than $7.50 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 100 28/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of the price, dropped to 6.18% from 6.23%, the lowest yield in a month.
Bond investors greet news of low inflation because inflation reduces the value of investments with a fixed rate of return.
Yesterday the Labor Department said the producer price index fell 0.1% in December.
Excluding volatile food and energy prices, the core PPI was up 0.2%.
Companies took advantage of the lower rates by selling more than $2 billion of new bonds including a $300 million (Canadian) offering of 20-year bonds by Rogers Cablesystems, a cable-TV firm.
Also contributing to the optimism in the U.S. Treasury market is the belief among investors that the Federal Reserve is not going to move to raise short-term interest rates anytime soon.
Toward the end of last year there was widespread speculation that the Fed would make a pre-emptive strike against inflationary pressures by raising short-term rates early this year.
So prevalent was the speculation at that time that several Clinton administration officials went out of their way to say why such a move could choke the economy and possibly trigger another recession.
But with yesterday's inflation report, investors gained more confidence that if the Fed is going to make such a move, it won't be soon.
"As far as where the market perceives the Fed's policy," said Matthew Alexy, a government trading strategist at CS First Boston Corp., "we've dodged the bullet."
As far as the economy heating up in this quarter, said Mr. Alexy, it appears that economic "growth has not been accelerating at as rapid a pace" as investors had feared.
In the fourth quarter "the whole idea was that the economy was getting onto the highway and going from 0 to 50 miles per hour in 10 seconds," he explained, But "going from 50 to 75 miles per hour could take much longer."
The result is that investors aren't nearly as worried about the economy as they have been in recent months.
Indeed, short-term rates are nearing levels not seen since October, when three-month Treasury bill rates hit their lowest levels since the 1960s.
Yesterday, for example, the two-year note yielded 4.02%, the lowest since Oct. 29.
Mr. Alexy thinks long-term rates may follow with the 30-year bond yield dropping below 6% by the end of the month.
One Chicago bond salesman says customers were frustrated that the market got away from them yesterday before they had a chance to buy.
Most of the move higher took place before 1 p.m.
"I detect some real frustration from people, which tells me we still have room to go," the salesman said.
Many money managers, who are still wary about the market and expect interest rates to rise a bit this year, were forced into the market yesterday because they had piles of cash they had to invest.
Cary Leahey, senior financial market economist at Lehman Brothers Inc., says fund managers haven't changed their views of the market that drastically and most remain guarded.
But many, particularly mutual fund managers, have been overwhelmed with cash they need to invest.
When all these flows swarmed into the market, prices soared.
"Investors are getting lulled into a sense that you never lose money in the financial markets," Mr. Leahey said.
"So they are throwing money at managers, and these managers have to put the money to work."
There is still a lot of uncertainty in the bond markets, said Mr. Alexy of CS First Boston.
A surprisingly strong economic report could quickly change sentiments.
Today, the government is slated to release the consumer price index for December.
The average of estimates of economists surveyed by Dow Jones Capital Markets Report calls for a 0.2% increase in the CPI and a 0.3% increase excluding food and energy prices, the same increases seen in November.
Mr. Alexy of CS First Boston said bond prices could rise even further if the report shows an increase at or below the consensus.
Yesterday's buying involved a broader group of investors than those seen late last week, when the employment news hit the market.
Many managers were poised to enter the market as soon as signs of weaker first quarter growth were apparent.
But with late fourth-quarter numbers already showing the economy is not yet booming, buyers stepped in.
But prices also were lifted by transactions involving speculative accounts, many of whom were forced to cover short positions.
In a short sale, a dealer sells a borrowed security in hopes of replacing it later at a lower price.
Dealers "cover shorts" when they buy back these borrowed securities, profiting if the prices have dropped in the meantime.
The corporate bond market rallied in step with Treasurys, as issuers grabbed the opportunity to sell over $2 billion of new securities.
Among the issuers was Union Electric Co., two PNC Bank Corp. subsidiaries, Carolina Power & Light Co., Kansas Gas & Electric Co. and Smith Barney Shearson Holdings Inc., among others.
The most notable deal came from Rogers Cablesystems Ltd., a subsidiary of Rogers Communications, Canada's largest cable company, which sold Canadian dollar-demoninated junk bonds through Merrill Lynch & Co.
The company sold C$300 million of 20-year bonds at par to yield 9.65%.
The bonds, noncallable for 10 years, are rated Ba1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and double-B-plus by Standard & Poor's Corp.
Syndicate officials said they expected other foreign companies with below-investment-grade ratings to follow the example and sell foreign-currency-denominated bonds in the U.S.
These issues could come from companies in Canada, New Zealand, France and Italy, they said.
Municipal bonds were caught up in the same buying that boosted Treasury issues.
The Reedy Creek (Fla.)
Improvement District's newly freed 5% of 2014 bonds were quoted at 97 1/8 to yield 5.20%.
When a Merrill Lynch & Co. group brought the district's $219 million refunding issue to the market Tuesday, the bonds were given a price of 96.99 and a 5.24% yield.
Chicago's 5.75% of 2023 bonds were 3/8 point stronger at 100 1/8, yielding 5.71%.
The more than $2 billion of munis priced Tuesday were well received.
Issuance slowed yesterday but demand remained strong in the primary market.
A Goldman, Sachs & Co. group priced the Orlando Utilities Commission (Fla.) $137.5 million refunding bonds to yield from 3.25% in 1996 to 5.32% in 2020.
The issue was oversubscribed.
Mortgage securities realized only some of the gains seen by rallying Treasurys.
One trader at a primary dealer's mortgage desk said there were sellers of 7% and 7 1/2% coupons, while investors stepped in to buy high coupons such as 9% and above.
There also was buying of current coupons, but most accounts were waiting for a well-defined rate pattern before adding to those positions.
Near the close of trading, the 6 1/2% securities for February settlement were all up 7/32.
Government National Mortgage Association traded at 100 8/32.
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Golds were at 100 10/32, and Federal National Mortgage Association changed hands at 100 6/32.
As for higher coupons, the 9% issues from all three agencies were flat or up 1/32 near the close.
Two new real-estate investment conduits totaling $870 million were announced.
Both new deals are backed by Freddie Mac paper, one with a 6% coupon and the other with a 7% coupon.
