A University of Colorado heart doctor said patients with congestive heart failure may not be getting the right medicine from their family doctors.
Michael R. Bristow, a top researcher who has run several drug-company-sponsored human trials of experimental heart medicines, said drug-industry marketing surveys show that just 20% to 50% of heart-failure patients are prescribed drugs called ACE-inhibitors despite several major studies that show the medications are the most effective available treatment for the syndrome.
"The number should be 90%," Dr. Bristow maintained.
"But the majority of heart-failure patients are managed by family practitioners and internists, and, for whatever reason, the message isn't getting out."
Dr. Bristow's comments, made at a science writers meeting here sponsored by the American Heart Association, reflect concerns among specialty physicians as both private-sector cost-containment strategies and the drive for national health-care reform call for more and more care to be managed by general practitioners.
Many doctors continue to use diuretics rather than ACE-inhibitors as first-line treatment for routine congestive heart failure.
Doctors say a variety of factors, ranging from knowledge of the illness, familiarity with the medicines, to worries over whether patients can afford them may influence prescribing decisions.
Congestive heart failures, a chronic weakening of the heart's ability to pump blood through the body, cost $40 billion to $50 billion a year, or more than 6% of total U.S. health-care expenditures, Dr. Bristow said.
Dr. Bristow, said a congestive heart failure patient seeing a cardiologist is twice as likely to get ACE-inhibitors as those seeing family doctors.
James H. Moller, president of the heart association, said the discrepancies reflect a need for medical schools and groups such as his to improve training and education of medical students and practicing general doctors.
But William Coleman, president of the American Academy of Family Physicians and a doctor in Scottsboro, Ala., said congestive heart failure is among "a basic set of medical problems that all primary-care doctors are trained to treat well."
It isn't necessary to elevate the illness to one only "super-specialists can treat," he added.
