In an effort to broaden the appeal of personal computers, Tandy Corp. in 1990 introduced what was then a radical plan: marketing its machines to women.
Its new computers, advertised as the simplest ever, came with software for making Christmas lists, recipe programs and a feature that could be used to take inventory of silverware and china.
But many women were offended by the ditzy homemaker stereotype, and the campaign fizzled.
Technology companies haven't given up hope of attracting more women customers; if anything, the desire is even stronger today.
With the home PC market booming and women controlling more household budgets, high-tech companies realize they have to look beyond their hard-core, male base.
"Women have obviously popped up on the radar screen," says Mal Ransom, vice president of Packard-Bell Electronics Inc., a Westlake Village, Calif., PC maker.
The catch, as Packard-Bell and others have found, is developing campaigns that don't alienate more customers than they attract.
Though most of the efforts are still in the planning stages, even the prospect of a computer campaign tailored for women makes some women angry.
"My natural cynicism is: Why are they trying to con me?" says Catrina McAuliffe, a senior vice president at an advertising agency in San Francisco.
"Why should I buy anything that men won't?"
For many years, computer marketing has reflected the fact that men are the predominant users of personal computers.
Experts guess that 85% of the most experienced PC users are male, and Micrografx Inc., a Richardson, Texas, software company, estimates that men buy 70% of the computer software purchased.
But that's slowly changing because more professional women are using computers, and single-parent households led by women are increasing.
Link Resources Corp., a New York consulting concern, found in a recent survey that 26% of the households with computers count women as their primary users.
That comes out to about 8.3 million households, up sharply from the 4.4 million reported in 1989.
Moreover, the next generation of women is even more computer literate.
Many women now in their 40s weren't raised with computers, notes Cheryl Currid, a Houston technology consultant, but their daughters are already comfortable with the machines.
When it came time for gift lists last Christmas, for instance, Ms. Currid says her 11-year-old daughter sent her wish list via e-mail.
So far, Compaq Computer Corp. has led the latest marketing push.
The Houston PC giant has taken a direct approach with TV commercials aimed squarely at work-at-home moms.
One spot shows a woman putting her child to bed, then heading to her Compaq PC for some late-night work.
Digital Equipment Corp. has been more subtle, replacing its sports-oriented print advertising with messages deemed more gender neutral.
Predictably, even the most timid early moves have attracted grumbling.
Some women say they're offended that computer ads in fashion and home-and-garden magazines focus on how easy the systems are to use.
Others say the focus on children's software -- considered by marketers to be a surefire way to women's pocketbooks -- ignores the army of female managers who long ago mastered the most complex spreadsheets and engineering software.
"I wouldn't know how to put a recipe in a computer, but I can sure balance my finances," Ms. Currid says.
Women PC users, as well as corporate marketing experts, say there are ways technology companies can target women without offending.
Carol Thompson, until recently the owner of a ComputerLand franchise in Austin, Texas, notes that training classes and service programs were popular among women customers, as were female salespeople.
Tandy, the electronics retailer based in Fort Worth, Texas, plans to start an electronics-repair program and gift-delivery service to boost the image of its flagship Radio Shack chain.
The hope is that women, who are still responsible for most household gift-giving, will find the service a time-saver.
At Digital, which is considering a PC line for the home market, engineers are studying such details as the weight of their machines and how difficult it will be for women to pull them out of the box.
Meanwhile, such computer publishing giants as Ziff-Davis Publishing Co. and CMP Publications Inc. are targeting women in new family-oriented publications called Family PC and Home PC, set to make their debut later this year.
The magazines will include reviews of educational and entertainment software, as well as articles on ways people can use their computers.
Packard-Bell has resisted pitching to women a multimedia software package called Navigator that uses rooms of a house as icons to help guide users through the machine.
Says Mr. Ransom: "A 486SX 25 will do the same for you whether you're a man, woman or child."
That said, Mr. Ransom notes that Packard-Bell will begin advertising its wares in Working Woman magazine later this year.
He says the company's pitch will be essentially the same as in its other advertising, which focuses on the user-friendliness of the company's machines and Packard-Bell's wide distribution network.
Michael W. Baldwin, who runs the Compaq account for ad agency Ammirati & Puris in New York, argues that the issue for marketers is experience rather than gender.
The industry's challenge, he says, is to attract the uninitiated.
That focus will force computer companies to broaden their appeal, which will, by default, engage women who aren't as familiar with the machines.
"It's like an outsider comes into a meeting that is very inbred and asks a simple question and everybody stops in their tracks," says Mr. Baldwin.
Trying to appeal to new customers "is going to make sure that the manufacturers don't get away with using shorthand."
Perhaps the message for marketers attempting to reach women, then, is not to try so hard.
"My view," says Ms. McAuliffe, the advertising executive, "is that it's best just to treat them as intelligent human beings."
