The European Union's highest court, in a victory for Clinique cosmetics, said the products can be sold in Germany without altering the brand name.
Estee Lauder Cos. has long sold the line as Linique in Germany, which claimed the Clinique name could deceive consumers into believing the products have medicinal qualities.
When the company moved to use the correct name to reduce marketing and advertising costs, a trade group filed a challenge.
But the EU court said the products are sold only in German perfumeries and department stores, not in pharmacies, and everywhere else under the Clinique name, without hurting consumers.
Under German case law on consumer protection, deception is assumed if only 5% to 10% of consumers would be misled about a product's health implications.
The EU has long argued with Germany about what type of consumer should be considered in evaluating product claims or labels.
"I have the impression that German laws are based on the premise that being a consumer is a form of mental retardation," an EU official said.
FRANCE TO REPLACE I.D. CARDS
The French government will issue high-technology identity cards to replace citizens' paper documents.
The plastic-covered blue cards are already in use on a trial basis in a few regions and will be phased in nationwide by the end of 1995.
They will be linked to a central computer system in a bid to combat forgeries.
In 1992 alone, France found 10,000 fakes among the total of 3 million documents issued.
But no forgeries were detected among about 500,000 test cards issued since 1988 west of Paris.
France also is considering replacing foreigners' residence permits with a computerized stamp attached to passports.
MAVERICK U.K. BISHOP TO RETIRE
A Church of England bishop denied longstanding reports that he didn't believe in hell, the virgin birth or resurrection of Christ, which have stirred widespread anger.
Britain said the Bishop of Durham, the Right Rev. David Jenkins, 69, who was the subject of a Wall Street Journal article in December, will retire in July and be succeeded in the church's fourth most senior post by the Bishop of Rochester, Michael Turnbull.
As the church represents the state religion, the government appoints senior clergy.
Dr. Jenkins contended his views on blasphemy had been taken out of context and distorted.
Global temperatures last year were half a degree warmer than the average for the previous four decades, Britain's Meteorological Office said.
The agency, which analyzes governments' temperature reports, termed the rise insignificant and attributed it to usual climatic variabilities rather than global warming, a potential consequence of burning fossil fuels and sending other chemicals into the air.
Kuwait ratified a United Nations convention on combating discrimination against women.
But the Persian Gulf state said it made the endorsement "with reservations" about provisions in the 1979 pact guaranteeing women the right to vote and equal rights in child-custody disputes.
The clauses the emirate ratified stipulate equal pay, equal rights in choice of work and in job promotions, protection against bias on maternity, the right to choose a spouse and encouragement of mixed education.
Foreign investment in Colombia's nonoil sectors last year increased 25% to $436.5 million from a year earlier.
U.S. companies led the list, investing $153 million, or 35% of the total, followed by firms from Venezuela at $65.8 million and Panama at $49 million, said Invest in Colombia Corp., a joint private-public organization.
The most foreign capital went to the chemical, plastic and rubber sectors.
Russians' average life expectancy has dropped to 59 from 62 years for men and to 73.2 from 73.8 years for women, the government said, quantifying the toll on public health from poverty, violence, disease and stress.
By comparison, U.S. longevity is 72 years for men and 79 for women.
The Russian men's longevity loss was believed to be the biggest for any year since World War II and unprecedented among developed nations.
The public health decline began in the late 1980s, a Moscow physician said, citing varied reasons, including "current socioeconomic difficulties" caused by the former Soviet Union's environmental abuses and Russia's ailing switch to a market economy.
The preliminary data also showed that Russia's 1993 birth rate fell to 9.2 for every 1,000 people from 10.7 in 1992.
Births declined to 1.4 million from 1.6 million.
Legal abortions totaled 3.5 million.
The death rate climbed to 14.6 from 12.2 per 1,000.
Deaths increased to 2.2 million from 1.8 million.
The infant mortality rate, continuing a trend that began in 1990, rose to 19.3 from 17.8 per 1,000.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
About 100,000 workers at 384 companies in Germany's engineering sector walked off their jobs in the third day of rolling strikes by the metal-workers union to protest a proposed wage freeze. . . .
"Bambinello," a 15th-century artwork reputed to have miraculous healing powers, was stolen from a Rome church.
Parents traditionally take newborn or sick children to the statue depicting the infant Jesus, ask for a blessing and leave jewels, which are sold to provide money for the poor.
