Two months after the deadly Los Angeles earthquake, scientists are studying what happened and why with growing concern.
New techniques, improved sensors and faster calculations have given scientists more information on Northridge, as geologists call the quake, than on any earthquake in history.
Sensitive instruments have generated elaborate data about the epicenter of the quake, as well as details on some 6,000 aftershocks and the minute movements of some mountains and valleys.
A mailbox on the Internet lets scientists as far away as Japan and Europe exchange data and analysis -- the first use of the "digital highway" to speed study of an earthquake.
"There's so much data that it's practically grinding down our computers," says Kaye Shedlock, chief of the Earthquake and Landslide Hazards Branch of the U.S. Geological Survey.
It's the details of grinding land masses, however, that most concern scientists.
And as Sunday's powerful aftershock suggests, the earth beneath Los Angeles is far from settled, presaging more, and maybe bigger, earthquakes to come.
The initial lessons alone are striking, scientists say.
In its 10 seconds of explosive violence, the midsized Northridge earthquake, which registered 6.7 in magnitude, shook the ground over a wide area at speeds far higher than ever recorded, ending long-standing debates about how rapid such movements get and raising questions about construction in quakeprone areas.
The Northridge quake is the latest and most damaging of six substantial, midsized temblors in Southern California over the past six years.
Scientists say these, along with several earlier quakes dating to 1971, represent a burst of seismic activity after decades of quiet.
"We're seeing a pronounced increase in the seismic energy release throughout Southern California," says Dr. Shedlock.
Some scientists predict that the increased activity is a prelude to a really big earthquake along the huge San Andreas fault.
The San Francisco quake of 1906, they say, followed two decades of midsized events in the region.
The tectonic plates in the Earth's crust create energy by constantly grinding together.
In California, the Pacific plate meets the North American plate along the San Andreas fault; stresses are distributed along the San Andreas and thousands of smaller faults nearby.
When the strains get too much, the faults snap, creating an earthquake.
The longer they take to snap, the larger the quake's intensity.
Several of the area's recent quakes, including Northridge, have occurred on previously unknown geological faults near, but not directly linked to, the San Andreas.
"What concerns us is that so many of these earthquakes in the last 10 years or so are occurring near an area of the San Andreas that hasn't had a major earthquake since 1857," says Thomas Henyey, executive director of the Southern California Earthquake Center.
The worry is that while smaller faults are releasing energy, the San Andreas is storing it up -- to be released in a huge jolt when the stress gets too great.
"Simply put, we're having a lot of earthquakes, but, ironically, not enough," says Lucile M. Jones, a seismologist with the U.S. Geological Survey labs at the California Institute of Technology.
"I call it an earthquake deficit."
Whether they trigger a "big one" or not, it seems clear that the earth beneath Los Angeles is riddled with a network of small, undetectable faults.
"Blind thrusts," as these webs of faults are called, have been responsible for much of Los Angeles's recent rocking.
Sunday's aftershock radiated from a subsection of the previously hidden Northridge fault.
According to research by Kenneth Hudnut, a geophysicist at the U.S. Geological Survey, the power of the blind thrusts appears to derive from bigger forces that have slowly been squeezing the northern and southern edges of Los Angeles county together.
Five years ago, Dr. Hudnut started using satellites to measure movements of the earth in dozens, then hundreds, of locations around southern California.
Last June, he and other researchers began continuous monitoring of a 40-mile crosssection of Los Angeles.
It was fortunate timing.
Day by day, the ground stations have tracked minuscule squeezing of the earth beneath Los Angeles south of the Northridge quake site.
Preliminary, unpublished information suggests that the basin has been closing recently at about eight millimeters a year, compared with the five-millimeter rate measured during the late 1980s.
Moreover, about 170 days before the Northridge earthquake, the southwest edge of the monitored area began to move east at a rate of about three millimeters annually.
Then, about 100 days before the quake, the northeast edge began a similar migration.
Mr. Hudnut won't say that the squeezing movement foreshadows more quakes.
It is possible for the Earth's crust to scrunch together without triggering earthquakes, scientists say.
But if the enormously powerful contraction around Los Angeles isn't being eased in some other way, they say, the prospect is for more quakes of roughly the Northridge size -- a giant earthquake that would ease the strain in one massive jolt could exceed a magnitude of 8.0.
Timing of that prospect is nearly impossible to predict.
"In weather forecasting, you can see the storm coming," says the Geological Survey's Dr. Jones.
"In seismology, it doesn't quite work that way."
