Canada's new Liberal Party government will meet its budget deficit reduction targets "come hell or high water," Canadian Finance Minister Paul Martin said in an interview.
The government aims initially to reduce the budget deficit by 45% within three years to about 25 billion Canadian dollars (US$18.4 billion).
Its eventual goal is to eliminate the deficit.
In recent years, successive finance ministers have pledged to slash the budget deficit, but all have fallen far short of their targets.
Mr. Martin, however, insisted that "we are going to hit our numbers."
The chronic deficits, which have been substantially funded by U.S. and other foreign buyers of Canadian government treasury bills and bonds, have become a heavy burden for Canadian taxpayers.
Public debt charges are expected to take 33 cents of every Canadian tax dollar this year.
This compares with a projected 14 cents of every U.S. tax dollar to pay for U.S. public debt charges in the coming fiscal year.
Mr. Martin, who was named finance minister in November, was in New York to discuss his fiscal strategy, which was announced Feb. 22 in the new government's first budget.
Military Base Closures He said the budget includes enough spending cuts and revenue-raising measures to ensure that the government will be able to meet its initial deficit reduction target.
The moves include military base closures and a tightening of payout rules for unemployment insurance, one of the country's largest social security programs.
Mr. Martin rejected suggestions that Canada could "grow out" of its deficit problem, by relying on increased economic activity to boost tax revenues.
"You fool yourself if you try" to solve the deficit problem by growth alone, he said.
The government predicts that Canada's gross domestic product, the total value of goods and services produced, will rise 3% this year.
If, as many analysts predict, GDP grows faster than 3% this year, the corresponding spurt in tax revenue "is all going to be gravy," the minister said.
Mr. Martin, former chairman of Canada Steamship Lines Inc. of Montreal, said the government is planning further reforms of the social security system "to get more bang for the buck" and to eliminate work disincentives.
But he emphasized that Canada "isn't going to abandon its social safety net."
He said the government's cost-cutting will provide scope for further cuts in Canada's high payroll taxes, which have deterred businesses from taking on new workers.
The Liberal government won last October's election on a pledge to create badly needed jobs.
Canada's unemployment rate is currently 11.4% of the civilian work force.
Mr. Martin said the government intends other measures to help business including a wholesale scrapping of government regulations and a shifting of government research toward "areas that have direct commercial potential to create jobs."
