The Senate passed President Clinton's major education reform package as well as the administration's pioneering school-to-work legislation.
After four days of debate, the Senate also approved the first federal program aimed at reducing violence in the schools.
The House Education and Labor Committee, meanwhile, compromised on the most controversial part of the administration's other education initiative, approving $7 billion for disadvantaged children, while concentrating $1.4 billion of the funds on the poorest school districts.
The education reform package, called Goals 2000, and the school-to-work legislation now go to a conference committee with the House, which passed similar versions of the bills.
The House has yet to consider the Safe Schools Act.
Goals 2000, which the Senate passed 71-25, creates a national framework for setting high standards in schools.
The $422 million plan establishes eight national education goals and sets up a panel to devise model academic and testing standards.
It also creates a National Skill Standards Board that would determine what skills employees need to work in various industries.
"This is a bottoms-up education reform with support from the top down," said Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.), the bill's main sponsor.
Goals 2000 encourages school reform, but doesn't mandate anything.
If states want to get federal money to reform their schools, they must submit comprehensive plans to the Education Department that explain how they would reach the national education goals.
They aren't required to adopt any of the voluntary standards, but rather are encouraged to use them to devise plans to meet their local needs.
Since the federal government contributes only six cents of every dollar spent on education, most lawmakers believe local districts should control their own schools.
The Senate was so concerned that people would mistakenly interpret the legislation as federalizing education or establishing a national curriculum that it inserted the word "voluntary" at more than 75 places.
Already, though, 45 states have started developing new academic standards.
The Senate also incorporated the Safe Schools Act into the Goals 2000 bill, setting aside $175 million in grant money during the next two years for chronically violent schools.
These schools could receive grants of as much as $3 million to set up conflict-resolution and other programs designed to reduce violence.
Only 10% of the money could be spent on security devices such as metal detectors.
The School-to-Work Opportunities Act, which passed 62-31, authorizes $300 million in grants for communities to create better programs for high-school students who don't plan to go to college.
