Kris "Fuzzy" Feddersen has spent a decade preparing for the historic moment next week when his life's pursuit becomes an Olympic sport.
"A lot of people are going to learn that we're a serious, disciplined sport," he vows.
Also ready for this august milestone are Fuzzy's teammates Jethro, the Ace, Bergie, Junior, and Chipper the Flipper.
So is their coach, the Hatchetman, who plays with Chipper in a rock band called "Slappy," named after the drummer's dog.
(They sing an original tune about skiing called "Time Waits for Snowman.")
And so are the sport's judges, equipped with a formal new rulebook, including such pronouncements as Section 6005, "General Description of Aerial Maneuvers":
"Leroy: This is a Mule Kick in a Tip Cross Position."
"Mule Kick: This is a combination of the Side Kick and the Back Scratcher."
See also entries for Twister, Helicopter, Splitster, Spread Eagle, Iron Cross, Zudnick and Daffy.
This is freestyle aerial skiing, a sport most people know by a disrespectful six-letter epithet Fuzzy and his teammates loathe (a meat product consumed at ballgames with mustard).
It grew up on the wild fringes of American ski resorts, a vintage 1970s brew of champagne, LSD, wet-T-shirt contests and hideous disfiguring injuries.
Now, after an unlikely journey to semirespectability, it will make its debut next week as the Olympics' newest medal event.
Flying high above the Kanthaugen Arena here, the first Olympic aerialists will all be assaying variations of the sport's most brutal and outrageous move: the multiple back flip with body twists.
The Hatchetman, ne Chris Haslock, explains.
"You ski down this 20-to-30 degree slope.
You come down on this flat.
You ride up this wall of snow -- the angle on it is 67 degrees on the top.
It shoots you pretty much straight up.
Once you leave the jump, it's quite a lot like diving.
You do multiple somersaults and twists.
Then instead of diving into your landing, you obviously try to land on your feet."
It doesn't always work out that neatly.
Demonstrating the sport at the 1988 Olympics in Calgary, Mr. Haslock skied into a high wind that whipped sand onto the course and slowed down his takeoff.
Unable to complete his flips, he landed on his ski tails and slammed backward onto the ground, where he lay unconscious for half a minute.
The U.S. team's top star, a cocky young Minnesotan named Trace "the Ace" Worthington, describes another hazard that aerialists call "cat out the window."
"If you make a mistake on your takeoff, you can lose your perception of the ground," he says.
"You're spinning fast and you can get lost in the air. . . .
It's a wild feeling.
You're kind of like fighting to find where you are."
Mr. Worthington and a handful of other top flyboys will compete next week with the most advanced permissible maneuver in aerial skiing: a triple backward flip with a quadruple body twist.
Judges will rate them all on form, landing, and a height-and-distance score formally called "air."
"We catch an extreme amount of air," Mr. Worthington says.
The story of aerial skiing begins here in Norway.
On the eve of World War II, the world champion ski-jumper Birger Ruud went to Oslo for a ski show.
In the audience was 12-year-old Stein Eriksen, who watched with amazement as Mr. Ruud turned a somersault in the air.
During the war, skiing furtively in the woods around Nazi-occupied Oslo, young Stein taught himself to flip.
He added a dazzling touch, swan-diving through the air with his body extended perfectly straight.
In between somersaults, Mr. Eriksen became a skiing legend, winning gold and silver medals at the 1952 Olympics in Oslo.
He moved to America two years later and became a superstar ski instructor, famous for his chiseled looks, dashing style -- and weekly exhibition.
"I made it a trademark of mine when I came to the States," recalls Mr. Eriksen, now 66.
"Every Sunday at 1 o'clock, no matter where I was, Stein would do his flip."
Soon young ski studs across America were imitating Stein and his flip.
In 1971, Skiing Magazine summoned the best of them to Waterville Valley, N.H., for the world's first hotdog ski tournament.
It was a snowy Woodstock with the cast of Animal House, featuring Wayne Wong, inventor of the Wongbanger (a midrace somersault with poles planted in the snow) and a mad Vermonter who skied on a pair of two-by-fours.
The tournament quickly turned into a wildly popular road show.
Before long there were hefty prizes, TV cameras, and new superstars like Airborne Eddie Ferguson (who declared: "If mankind were not meant to fly, God would have given us roots") and John Eaves, who went on to become Roger Moore's ski double in the James Bond movies.
(That's him skiing down the bobsled run in "For Your Eyes Only.")
The young flippers drank it in, often literally.
One of the circuit's stars, John Clendenin, attained renown when a Rolling Stone writer called him "the best argument I know for excess, for self-indulgence, for self-abuse, for drug-abuse, for sexual depravity, for irresponsibility and all attendant risks and costs."
Hollywood captured a mildly sanitized version of the scene in the MGM trash classic "Hot Dog . . .
The Movie."
It's the story of a plucky Idaho farmboy who seeks his fortune at the Squaw Valley hotdog championship and finds happiness in a heart-shaped waterbed with Playmate of the Year Shannon Tweed.
The party came crashing to an end in the mid-70s when three hotdogs plunged onto their faces and broke their backs.
The accidents gave ski resorts and their insurers the jitters, and many moved to ban aerial skiing.
Several skiers quit the circuit, and many others started squabbling about money with sponsors.
By the late '70s the flippers had become flops.
Their savior was an earnest Canadian aerialist named John Johnston.
While his slope-mates were partying, he developed a passion for the workings of international sports federations.
One summer he holed up in Montreal, drafted a thick rulebook, and began lobbying ski authorities to make aerial skiing a sanctioned amateur sport.
It was an uphill slog, but the International Ski Federation finally recognized aerial skiing in 1979.
One decisive reason was a strict new roster of safety rules, including guidelines for constructing jumps and preparing the landing area.
Sanctioned, safe, and serious, the flippers are still the funkiest Olympians in Lillehammer.
One top medal aspirant, Philippe LaRoche of Canada, moonlights as a guitarist for a ZZ Top cover band.
His star teammate Lloyd Langlois, who studied flipping in a Quebec graveyard (reasoning that if he killed himself he'd be in a convenient place) is the composer of "Waiting for Tomorrow" and 60 other would-be hit pop tunes.
And when the competition gets under way, in accordance with proud aerial-skiing tradition, loud music will blare across the Kanthaugen arena.
The flippers will be praying for a windless day and a nondweeby tune on the speakers.
"The sport is so outrageous and wild and fun, it's hard to get psyched if they're playing some sappy Paul Simon song," says Fuzzy Feddersen.
He adds hastily: "I have nothing against Paul Simon, but it has a time and place, and when you're doing aerials that isn't the time and place."
