The House Banking Committee approved legislation aimed at curbing abuses in consumer-credit reporting, after substantially weakening the bill's requirements.
The panel passed the measure on a party line 29-20 vote.
But Consumers Union, one of the bill's leading backers, said the measure was so watered down that the group withdrew its support.
Michelle Meier, a Consumers Union lobbyist, said companies that provide consumer credit, which killed a consumer-oriented bill last year, seem to be dooming its prospects again this year.
The legislation would require credit bureaus to report more precisely on people's credit records, and to investigate complaints and delete inaccurate entries within 30 days.
It would limit the scope of information those companies may report, barring, for example, reports on how consumers spend their money.
It also would allow consumers to get one free credit report on themselves each year, so that they can check the accuracy of their credit records.
The bill included amendments adopted by the committee early last month, including one that allows the federal requirements to pre-empt state credit-reporting laws.
Consumer groups opposed the amendment, arguing that states are usually the first to enact such protections and that the amendment would nullify some state laws that have stronger protection for consumers.
Last year, a credit-reporting bill narrowly lost on the House floor when businesses opposed a provision to maintain the current requirement that federal law preempt state laws, except when states have tougher ones.
Another amendment passed last month would allow companies that sell on credit to create their own in-house credit groups.
Customer credit information could be exchanged between, say, a firm's insurance, consumer-products and other affiliates.
Consumers Union's Ms. Meier called the provision a "loophole," permitting liberal in-house trading of late-payment and other data at big, diversified companies such as Sears, Roebuck & Co. or bank holding companies.
The bill also gives credit card companies easier access to personal credit-related information, which the companies can use in selecting marketing prospects, Ms. Meier said.
