Trumpets, please.
Investment strategists at the nation's leading brokerage houses have made their predictions for 1994.
And what they foresee is . . .
On second thought, skip the trumpets.
What they foresee is a ho-hum year.
Market gurus at a dozen major securities firms tracked by The Wall Street Journal as part of a continuing study generally expect returns of 8% to 10% from stocks.
Most of them expect returns of 5% to 7% from bonds this year, and 3% from safe, short-term "cash" investments such as money-market funds.
Historically, those are normal returns, neither great nor terrible.
The more bearish strategists stress the modesty of potential gains and the high level of stock-market risk.
Those in this camp include David Shulman of Salomon Brothers, Rao Chalasani of Kemper Securities and newly appointed Katherine Hensel of Lehman Brothers.
They suggest that investors put no more than half their money in stocks.
Even many of the bulls concede the potential rewards may not be mouth-watering, but they say the risk of a stockmarket downturn is small.
This group, which includes PaineWebber's Edward Kerschner, Kidder Peabody's Easton Ragsdale and Goldman Sachs's Steven Einhorn, advocates stock positions of close to 70%.
The biggest bull in this crowd is Greg Smith of Prudential Securities, who is telling aggressive investors to put 85% of their money in stocks.
He thinks the overall stock market could rise 10% this year, and "an industrially oriented portfolio" could gain a succulent 15% to 20%.
The average blend recommended by the analysts in the Journal study is stock-heavy (62%) and bond-light (26%), with cash a little below normal (12%).
During the past seven years, according to Robin Carpenter of Carpenter Analytical Services, Hanover, N.H., the strategists' average blend has been about 54% stocks, 31% bonds and 14% cash.
(Other assets, such as gold or real estate, have sometimes crept in.)
The study estimates how an investor would do by following each brokerage house's recommended blend of stocks, bonds and cash.
The Journal tracks the strategists' advice, and analyzes it with help from Wilshire Associates of Santa Monica, Calif., and Carpenter Analytical (formerly Economics Office).
Here's a rundown on what the big brokerage firms are telling customers these days.
The firms are listed in order of how well their recommended investment blends performed in the survey in 1993.
Except as noted, all of the firms are based in New York.
PAINEWEBBER: Mr. Kerschner has led the pack for four of the seven years covered by the study.
He says experience suggests there's little reason to fear for stocks today.
"In the past 40 years, the stock market's had 10 down years," he says.
In seven of the 10 cases, the market was correctly anticipating a decline in corporate earnings the following year.
"We don't think earnings will be down in 1995 -- not with Europe about to recover and the U.S. economy so tepid that the Federal Reserve Board doesn't have to put on the brake."
The other three bad years featured sharply rising short-term interest rates, Mr. Kerschner says.
He doesn't see that as likely either, though he believes "the Fed might tighten a tad here."
KIDDER PEABODY: "Productivity looks fantastic," says Mr. Ragsdale.
"And some of our major trading partners look like they're starting to turn the corner -- although it's a very wide corner."
He thinks corporate profits will grow nicely, allowing stocks to deliver a return of 9% or so, despite high current stock valuations.
He considers bonds better than cash, but not much: Bond prices will droop this year as interest rates creep up, he believes.
GOLDMAN SACHS: "I think 1994 will deliver low double-digit returns" on stocks, says Mr. Einhorn, co-strategist (with Abby Joseph Cohen) at Goldman Sachs.
Low inflation, continuing flight by small investors from bank certificates of deposit, a 12% rise in corporate operating profits, and stable or slightly declining interest rates will all help keep the bull market alive, he says.
LEHMAN BROTHERS: Ms. Hensel sees the Fed "tightening a little bit" as the economy strengthens.
She figures the resulting rise in short-term interest rates could precipitate a 10% stock-market slide.
But that dip would be a buying opportunity, she says.
"I can't wait.
I'm salivating."
A.G. EDWARDS: The St. Louis firm increased its stock allocation to 65% in October.
The stock market "has been like the Energizer bunny -- it just keeps going," says Raymond Worseck, economist and strategist.
DEAN WITTER REYNOLDS: Strategist Bill Dodge has stuck with his current blend (60% stocks, 25% bonds, 15% cash) for 10 months.
The biggest surprise of 1994, he says, might be that the bond rally rolls on, propelled by low inflation and low oil prices.
In stocks, he says the "bull market with a beard" is still alive.
PRUDENTIAL SECURITIES: Mr. Smith, who often takes a bold stance with his investment mix, ranks first in the study's five-year rankings, mostly because of great showings in 1988 and 1989.
"I think earnings are going to be terrific this year," he says.
Corporations have "spent four years reducing costs, and finally they're going to get some revenue."
He thinks Europe's economies will bounce back late this year, helping U.S. exports.
"It seems like everyone thinks there are better opportunities overseas," says Mr. Smith.
"The big surprise might be that . . . the best market's right here at home, right under our nose."
SMITH BARNEY SHEARSON: Smith Barney tinkered just a bit last quarter with its middle-of-the-road blend, adding a shade to stocks and lightening up slightly on bonds.
MERRILL LYNCH: Steady as she goes.
Charles Clough, Merrill Lynch's chief strategist, has held the same blend as Mr. Dodge (60% stocks, 25% bonds, 15% cash) since July.
SALOMON BROTHERS: Mr. Shulman thinks stocks will provide about a 5% return this year.
"Last year we had a once-in-a-generation bond rally," he says.
"We had a friendly Fed all year, an 18% increase in operating profits, and a $5 drop in the price of oil."
He doesn't believe such a favorable combination will recur.
RAYMOND JAMES & ASSOCIATES: After being bearish, and suffering for it in the rankings (it ranked last among 10 firms with five-year records), Raymond James turned more bullish on stocks two weeks ago.
The St. Petersburg, Fla., firm raised its recommended helping of stocks to 70%.
KEMPER SECURITIES: After leading the pack in 1992, Mr. Chalasani of Kemper brought up the rear in 1993.
To his credit, Mr. Chalasani urged the Chicago-based firm's clients to put about 35% of their money abroad in 1993-wise advice as it turned out.
Mr. Chalasani doesn't necessarily expect U.S. stocks to decline this year, but says the risk level is building and investors are complacent about it.
Now it's Eastman Kodak Co.'s turn to meet the challenge from its low-priced rivals head on.
In a radical and risky move, Kodak will offer its first economy-brand film, Funtime, to compete with private-label knockoffs and low-priced competitors.
While the move could muddy Kodak's proud brand image, the company seems to have had little choice.
In recent years, its share of the highly profitable and competitive film market has dwindled to about 70% from as high as 76% five years ago as competitors like Fuji Photo Film Co. and Konica Corp. wooed consumers with lower-priced versions.
The success of private-label products has forced many large brand names from Ralston Purina Co. to ConAgra Inc. to either offer private-label versions of products, or lower the price on their premium brands.
Kodak held out, saying consumers were willing to pay extra for its respected technology and name.
"Kodak has always resisted the idea of an economy brand," said Kimberly Ritrievi, an analyst with Lehman Brothers.
But beginning this spring, Kodak will offer, twice a year in spring or fall, its Funtime brand in the U.S. and Canadian markets.
The brand is expected to be priced about 20% lower than Kodak's mainstay Gold Plus brand.
Kodak will limit the amount of Funtime it produces and ships to each retailer, and its seasonal promotions will be geared toward the times when film-buying isn't as heavy as it is during the Christmas and summer seasons.
Funtime will be offered in speeds of 100 and 200 in multipacks of two 24-exposure rolls and another of four rolls -- three 24 exposures, one 36 exposures.
The film, which will reach retail shelves in late April and September for two- to three-month spurts, will be sold in all of Kodak's outlets, including major retailers, such as Wal-Mart Stores Inc. and Kmart Corp.
Kodak had tried to counter its lower-priced rivals by taking the high road: developing a super-premium film called Ektar for professionals and serious amateur snapshooters.
But that approach apparently wasn't quite as successful as Kodak might have hoped, because consumers weren't able to distinguish quality nuances.
Kodak said its Ektar premium brand will be removed from the market and replaced by a new film called Royal Gold, which will sell for 20% to 25% more than Gold Plus, but less than Ektar had sold for.
Royal Gold will also offer a small indexing print illustrating all photos from each roll of film to facilitate finding negatives from which to create reprints.
Royal Gold is expected to benefit from being under Kodak's mainstay Gold umbrella.
"This repositioning is intelligent risktaking that will drive both our market share and earnings," said Alexander V. Wasilov, vice president and general manager of Kodak Consumer Imaging, in the U.S. and Canada region .
"It's very strategic in nature and will allow us to be more selective in targeting certain consumer segments."
In the first three quarters of 1993, industrywide film-product sales rose about 4.2% in dollars.
Yet Kodak's gain was only 3.5%, while the gain for private-label products was 9% and 15% for Fuji Photo Film, according to Ms. Ritrievi of Lehman Brothers.
Kodak said the Royal Gold film will be introduced in the second quarter, replacing Ektar, which has seen sluggish sales.
The new Royal Gold film, which offers richer color saturation and sharper pictures, will be offered in speeds of 25, 100, 400 and 1000.
Kodak will tout Royal Gold as the choice for consumers wanting to make enlargements from negatives.
Kodak announced its plan at an analysts' meeting late yesterday.
Before trading was halted yesterday, its shares rose 25 cents to $42.50 in composite New York Stock Exchange trading.
Analysts are wary of the moves, fearing consumers will switch to the lower-priced Funtime, from the more profitable Gold Plus.
"It's a draconian solution.
Customers will be more apt to stock up on the low-end film and then buy the expensive stuff only for very special occasions like weddings," said B. Alex Henderson of Prudential Securities Inc.
However, Kodak believes Funtime will add sales during off-seasons, rather than cannibalize its Gold sales.
The company said it experimented with seasonal promotions this year with its Gold film and found a market basis for its Funtime.
Consumers take pictures for different reasons at different occasions and the company has simply designed films to meet their picture-taking habits, Mr. Wasilov said.
"We now have Royal Gold film, for those very special memories -- the birth of a baby, the graduation," said Mr. Wasilov.
"We continue to offer Gold film, for capturing those unexpected moments -- the baby smiling, the father and son playing catch in the backyard.
And now we will offer a special promotion twice a year, featuring a modified version of Gold film at a slightly lower price than our other films."
But some analysts worry about what will happen should customers get hooked on the lower-priced Funtime brand and are then unable to find it in off-seasons.
"If consumers try the product and like it, may this not be an incentive for consumers to experiment with a yet cheaper product like private-label?" wonders Michael Ellmann, an analyst with Wertheim Schroder & Co.
"If this takes place, then this strategy won't work."
The potential winners in that scenario: Konica and Bayer AG's Agfa brand, both of which have long marketed themselves as quality, but low-priced alternatives.
"There will be an opportunity for us at Konica," said Paul Gordon, director of marketing.
Konica, he said, will remain price-competitive with the new Kodak products, even if it means dropping Konica prices.
"It seems like a desperate move to regain market share.
Not a way to make the industry more profitable."
But Mr. Ellmann said weaker competitors can't withstand a price war with Kodak, which controls a huge segment of the market and has extremely loyal channels of distribution, not to mention customers.
Smaller companies can't as readily withstand pressures on profits and Kodak isn't expected to relent once it gets into a price war, he added.
In addition to its new family of film, Kodak announced several additions to its line of Cameo and single-use cameras as well as introducing its Photo Impressions system to allow customers to personalize picture in stores by adding text and graphics to pictures.
The system will also include other equipment to allow customers to work with retailers in-store to remove red-eye problems with pictures, as well as other operations to make reprints and enlargements within minutes.
