Almost all major U.S. makers of silicone breast implants have struck a deal over funding a $4 billion liability-settlement plan, practically assuring the world's biggest product-liability agreement will be presented for court approval.
Under the pact, Dow Corning Corp., Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., Baxter International Inc., and their insurers, will pay for at least 79% of the settlement, say negotiators involved in the lengthy talks.
The three, along with several companies with smaller liability, reached the deal in Philadelphia over the weekend with five plaintiff-lawyer negotiators.
The other companies would pay the remainder of the costs.
However, negotiators said three other companies -- Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co., General Electric Co. and McGhan Medical Corp., which had been expected to pay for 15% of the fund -- dropped out of the deal, at least for now.
These concerns are expected to continue bargaining with a plaintiff-lawyer negotiating team and will either enter the agreement later or litigate cases individually, say participants in the talks.
The effect of their departure is to reduce the size of the plan to just over $4 billion from a previously projected $4.75 billion.
"If you have a deal on funding, you have a deal," said one participant in the talks.
"There are a dozen or so critical issues which could still pose problems, but I think it's inevitable now that there will be a deal."
Among the provisions over which some haggling will continue are clauses that leading plaintiff products-liability attorneys have attacked as unfair to many women with implants.
One participant confirmed that some of those issues will be reopened in talks during the next few weeks.
The legal terms of the settlement had been put in place last September.
But only in recent weeks had manufacturers agreed about how to apportion liability.
In talks last week, first in Dallas and then in Philadelphia, the corporate defendants won concessions over the timing of funding the initial $1.5 billion payout; that amount now will be paid over four years, instead of the three originally agreed to in September.
The actual value in current dollars is estimated to be about 70% of the total because many of the payments will be deferred, according to one participant in the talks.
The talks involved three defense lawyers, five plaintiff lawyers and three current or former federal judges serving as mediators.
Before it becomes final, any deal must be scrutinized in court and approved by Federal District Judge Sam C. Pointer Jr. in Birmingham, Ala.
All federal breast-implant cases were consolidated before Judge Pointer after thousands of cases were filed claiming that silicone implants caused immune-system and other illnesses.
Currently, there are an estimated 12,000 breast-implant liability cases filed in federal and state courts.
The Food and Drug Administration has sharply limited implants' sale, and most of the companies in the litigation don't make them anymore.
Baxter never did, but inherited liability through a merger.
One issue still to be negotiated involves the plaintiffs' desire to get corporate defendants to guarantee their participation in the deal once the judge signs off on it.
As the plan is written now, any company could drop out and not fund its portion if it concluded that too many women had "opted out" of the plan and pursued their own litigation.
The agreement sets out about $4 billion to compensate, over 30 years, all U.S. and foreign implant recipients with certain symptoms and disabilities.
Of that amount, the initial $1.5 billion would compensate women who are currently ill; an additional $800 million in initial funds would be set aside for specific purposes including surgical removal of implants, diagnosis of illness and compensation of women with ruptured implants.
The plan also has an innovative feature through which a woman can be compensated more than once if her illness worsens over time.
The settlement plan would set a ceiling on potentially huge future liability for the corporations involved, giving them some financial certainty.
It also might eliminate a host of cases brought individually that could clog the courts.
But the plan has provisions that have been criticized by several plaintiffs' attorneys as too generous to some women -- and exceedingly stingy to others.
For instance, even women who got sick before getting implants could collect money if their symptoms later worsened.
As a result, one plaintiffs' lawyer who asked not to be identified says a client with a case so poor she didn't even bother to file it could collect $1 million under the deal.
Such cases could deplete the fund at the expense of other women.
Plaintiffs attorneys also complain about a provision that could cut off access to the courts for some women.
Women would automatically be included in the deal, and lose the ability to sue on their own, if they don't opt out by notifying the court.
But in addition, women who want to participate must clear a procedural hurdle: They must register with the court in a "timely" fashion at the beginning of the plan -- unless they can show "good cause" for not having done so -- or lose all legal remedies, according to lawyers involved in the litigation.
Critics say this could be unfair to women who are healthy now and feel they have no reason to register with the court, but who become sick later.
Atlanta lawyer Ralph I. Knowles Jr., who negotiated the deal for the plaintiffs, calls this "a harsh provision that defendants insisted on.
I don't like it, and it wouldn't upset me if the judge rejected the provision."
Mr. Knowles says advantages of the settlement include an efficient claims-paying process, under which women can be paid without having to go through a lengthy process of proving that their illness was caused by the implant.
He also says that without the funds available in the settlement, "women who got implants from smaller companies would get nothing."
Baxter, Bristol-Myers and Dow Corning, which is a joint venture of Dow Chemical Co. and Corning Inc., all declined to comment on criticism of the plan.
