Gtech Holdings Corp., the big maker of computerized state-lottery systems, won a seven-year, $200 million contract to replace food stamps with an electronic system in Texas, opening a potentially huge new market.
Texas is the first state to award a contract for a statewide electronic benefits-transfer system, and many other states are expected to implement such systems in the future.
Vice President Al Gore's National Performance Review recently recommended adopting electronic systems for making government payments.
Stock of Gtech, based in West Greenwich, R.I., soared $3.25 a share, or 11.2%, to close at $32.25 in composite New York Stock Exchange Trading yesterday.
"This puts Gtech right at the beginning of a new industry," said Thomas Ryan, gaming analyst with Ladenburg, Thalmann & Co.
Under the Texas plan, which will first be implemented in the Houston area this fall, food-stamp recipients will be given plastic cards with magnetic stripes on the back that will function like bank debit cards.
The recipient will use the card at a checkout counter by punching in a personal identification number.
The system will refuse to pay for nonfood items such as cigarettes, napkins and household cleaners.
John Sharp, Texas state comptroller, said the system will cut costs by reducing fraud and stolen food stamps.
It will also stop thieves from robbing people of the stamps and keep them from being sold for drugs or liquor.
"The EBT program will reduce food-stamp costs by eliminating printing, warehousing and mailing paper coupons," he said.
Gtech operates the state-lottery system in Texas and is the leading vendor of such systems nationally.
Robert J. Rendine, manager of public affairs for Gtech, said, "This fits nicely with what we do.
We design, install and operate transaction-processing systems for governments."
He added, "We think there is a significant opportunity for strategic growth," including adding other benefit services at the terminals, once they're installed.
Mr. Rendine said New York state, where Gtech already runs the lottery, is expected to soon consider bids for an electronic-benefits system.
He said the business carries "the same type of profit margins as the lottery industry."
Texas said that Gtech beat out two bidding groups, one composed of Deluxe Data Corp. and Electronic Data Systems, a General Motors Corp. subsidiary, and the other including Citicorp and Lockheed Corp.
The Gtech system, when completed, will include 16,000 retailers around Texas and serve 2.7 million food-stamp recipients.
Gtech entered the benefits business in 1992 by acquiring the parimutuel wagering business of General Instrument Corp.
That business runs an electronic system for authorizing food-stamp issuance in New York City, although it doesn't use the debit-card model.
Mr. Ryan, the gaming analyst, said, "If this works in Texas, it can work anywhere, and Gtech will be seen as the front-runner in the industry."
He said the business isn't likely to contribute to earnings until the fiscal year ending in February 1996.
In the nine months ended Nov. 27, Gtech reported net income of $44.1 million, or $1.01 a share, on revenue of $469.2 million.
TEXAS isn't the first state to award a contract for a statewide electronic benefits-transfer system as was stated in an article Friday.
Maryland already has a system.
The claim that Texas was first was made by a spokesman for Gtech Holdings Corp., the contract winner.
(WSJ Feb. 15, 1994)
