Two years after foreign donors unleashed a flood of U.S. dollars to help rebuild ravaged Cambodia, the country's central bank wants to breathe life back into its own currency, the riel.
Officially, the riel is Cambodia's only currency.
But such big-ticket items as cars and property are bought and sold with either foreign cash -- primarily U.S. dollars and Thai baht -- or gold.
In this city where the wealthiest residents include hundreds of young foreign-aid workers, many restaurants and pedicab drivers also insist on the greenback.
Some banks even are fighting to attract U.S. dollar deposits: One crude sign outside a bank branch in Phnom Penh offers interest rates of 8.5%.
The dominance of foreign money means Cambodia's central bank, the National Bank of Cambodia, has little power to fight inflation.
But rebuilding confidence in the riel promises to be difficult.
Cambodians don't trust their own currency or banks.
Many prefer to keep savings in foreign cash rather than in bank accounts, even though that means forgoing interest income and risking theft.
Such wariness is natural, given the riel's dismal history.
When the Khmer Rouge seized power in 1975, it abolished all money and blew up the central bank's headquarters.
Even when the riel came back into circulation after Vietnamese troops invaded in 1979, Cambodia's banking system never truly recovered.
So the foreign investors who have trickled into the country during the past five years have relied on U.S. cash.
The same has been true of foreign-aid groups and United Nations agencies.
The Khmer Rouge still poses a threat with its guerrilla war against Cambodia's fragile government.
Meanwhile, rapid inflation -- currently about 30% -- raises fears of devaluation.
The riel's official rate against the U.S. dollar has fallen sharply over the past two years.
Despite its ambitions for the riel, the central bank must help channel dollars into the economy.
Three times a week, it holds auctions in which it exchanges U.S. dollars (through loans from international agencies) for riels (to pay civil servants).
Auctions put nearly $8 million in private hands since late September.
Currently, "maybe more than half of Cambodia's money supply is not in riel," says May Tola, head of the central bank's exchange-management department.
Cambodia pays a heavy price for running its economy on other countries' currencies.
For one thing, counterfeiting of U.S. dollars is a serious problem.
Khmer Rouge guerrillas are rumored to have flooded territory under their control with false bills.
Moreover, Cambodians lose out on potential interest income by depending on cash.
But uncontrollable inflation is the real danger.
Other countries fight inflation by coaxing interest rates higher to deter borrowing and entice consumers to save.
With U.S. dollar interest rates hovering at low levels around the world, however, rates can hardly rise in Cambodia.
Most Cambodian banks offer deposit rates so far below inflation that subtle changes in interest rates are unlikely to have much effect on inflation.
The national bank's fight against inflation rests on its attempts to avoid lending money to the government.
That effort already has helped slash inflation to around 30% from nearly 100% a year ago; it isn't clear how the central bank will reach its 10% target for 1994.
