The next time you use Federal Express or another overnight shipping service you may be committing a federal crime.
A little-known law requires that for you to use a private carrier to deliver mail, you must pay at least twice the cost of a first-class stamp and your shipment must be considered "urgent."
The Postal Service says that means your shipment must require an "immediate response," effectively the same business day it's received.
If it doesn't, you are a lawbreaker.
All this would be merely amusing except that the feds are actually enforcing this absurd rule.
The law allows the U.S. Postal Service to audit mailings to see if they are indeed "urgent."
Typically, postal inspectors will show up in the shipping room of a company, flash their badges and ask to examine the records.
Inspectors recently visited Equifax, an Atlanta credit reporting agency, and found that it was using overnight services for non-urgent mail.
It promptly fined Equifax $30,000, the amount the Postal Service would have collected if the materials had been sent first class.
Equifax isn't alone.
In the past year, 12 companies -- including GTE of Stamford, Conn. -- have been audited and asked to cough up $312,000 in what the USPS calls "recovered" revenue.
The Postal Service defends its audits, and points out that it could even prosecute violators, but magnanimously chooses not to.
Naturally, overnight shipping companies are furious at what they consider bullying tactics by a competitor with the power to inspect and fine its rivals.
A. Doyle Cloud, a Federal Express vice president, told us that searches of company shipping rooms are illegal and that he has urged his customers not to pay any fines.
"The post office is using its badge-toting policemen to intimidate customers into using its product," he told us.
He says the Postal Service has even launched an audit of the federal government's own overnight shipments to determine if Uncle Sam's use of Federal Express is lawful.
Of course, one reason the government uses Federal Express is that the Postal Service's two-day Priority Mail service fails 23% of the time.
The Postal Service denies harassing anyone.
John Brugger of the Postal Inspection Service calls Mr. Cloud's charges "nonsense" and says it inspects a company's shipments only after securing its "voluntary cooperation."
Of course, we doubt many hapless shipping clerks object or call a lawyer when the federales show up in a company's mail room asking to search.
Senator Paul Coverdell of Georgia has introduced a bill to prevent the Postal Service from fining anyone who uses a private carrier.
That's fine, but we'd go further and repeal the Private Express Statutes, which were passed in 1872 to give the government a monopoly over mail.
In an era when the fax machine, computer modems and overnight carriers are routinely used to bypass the sluggish Postal Service, it is absurd to consign the rest of the population to the clutches of an inefficient government monopoly.
New Zealand has largely privatized its postal service.
Service and efficiency have both improved.
Britain also has privatization plans in the works.
Meanwhile, the U.S. Postal Service announced plans last month to raise the price of a first-class stamp to 33 cents from 29 cents.
We wouldn't be surprised if some of that extra revenue paid subsidizes even greater snooping around companies whose only offense is a desire to have their mail arrive on time.
