THE U.S.
AND JAPAN tentatively settled several important issues in their dispute over cellular phones, and the two sides appear headed toward a compromise that would avert U.S. sanctions against Japanese goods.
Although differences remain, an accord would signal compromise at a critical time in relations between the U.S. and Japan, and would be a boost to Motorola's effort to expand in Japan.
It could, however, hurt AT&T.
The economy expanded moderately in January and February despite the California earthquake and a bitter winter, the Fed said.
Moreover, the Fed's regional report suggested that many merchants expect solid sales growth in the coming months.
Raytheon said it will consolidate operations and cut as many as 4,400 jobs, or 7% of its work force, in the next two years, in an effort to cut costs in its defense and commercial units.
The House banking panel voted to remove the remaining restrictions on banks' ability to form unified branch networks across state lines.
Brokers would be barred from selling most municipal bonds unless the underwriters guaranteed that the issuers would file financial statements, under rules proposed by the SEC.
Florida's insurance department accused 87 sales agents for Metropolitan Life of fraudulent sales practices.
The administrative complaint is one of the most sweeping actions ever against a group of insurance agents.
Some of the biggest U.S. companies are joining forces in a well-financed push for new laws to curb jury awards and discourage frivolous lawsuits.
Pacific Investment Management and Thomson Advisory Group agreed to merge, in a move that would create one of the largest publicly traded money-management firms in the U.S.
A probe into General Instrument's powerful position in the cable-television equipment market by Justice officials sprang in large part from the bitter feud between Viacom's Sumner Redstone and TCI's John Malone.
Ameritech plans to form a joint venture with a Canadian company to allow computer users to get access to an array of computerized information at all levels of government.
IBM gave its former chairman a severance payment of more than $3 million in cash last year, plus salary, pension, stock options and bonus.
General Motors launched a corporate advertising campaign that highlights humility and "enthusiasm for the customer" instead of products.
GM and a small firm agreed to develop an electric car battery, with exGM Chairman Stempel in a key role.
Jenny Craig's chief financial officer became the second executive this month to resign after a short tenure at the operator of weight-loss centers.
Stocks: Volume 309,802,870 shares.
Dow Jones industrials 3853.41, up 1.69; transportation 1743.33, off 8.39; utilities 210.39, off 1.25.
Bonds: Lehman Brothers Treasury index 5333.49, up 17.54.
Commodities: Oil $14.18 a barrel, up eight cents.
Dow Jones futures index 144.46, off 0.04; spot index 131.04, up 0.58.
Dollar: 105.80 yen, up 0.43; 1.7025 marks, off 0.0118.
