For shell-shocked bond investors thinking about stashing their money under the mattress after last week's market turmoil, there is some good news.
Analysts say that many of the political crises that roiled the world's markets last week are unlikely to have a significant long-term effect on U.S. bond markets.
Certainly, there appears to be much to worry about.
Calamities, tensions and confrontations involving Korea, China, Russia and Mexico have terrified investors who hold the debt of those nations and many of their neighbors.
Here at home, the Whitewater controversy and fears about inflation also have sparked selling in bonds.
If that weren't enough, the Federal Reserve decided Tuesday to raise short-term interest rates.
All together, these issues drove the yield of the 30-year Treasury bond above 7% for the first time since May last year, to end at 7.01%.
"What's happened in the last week is a convergence of bad economic news and worse political news," says Robert D. Hormats, vice chairman of Goldman Sachs International.
"The bad economic news is that interest rates have turned around in the U.S.
The worse political news is that you have an assassination in Mexico, deterioriation in Russia, a threatening situation on the Korean peninsula, trade frictions with Japan and human rights frictions with China."
This combination "is very harmful for markets and creates a huge amount of uncertainty," he says.
"Investors are more cautious now than at any point in my recent memory," says Mr. Hormats.
"As Americans have moved more and more into foreign bonds, this barrage of international bad news has a larger and larger effect on their portfolios."
He points out that ten years ago, China-U.S. tensions, for instance, wouldn't have had much of an effect on portfolios because few Americans owned Chinese bonds.
The same is true for Argentina and Mexico.
Remember China's much-promoted $1 billion issue of 10-year global notes last month?
Investors who climbed over each other to buy those bonds from underwriter Merrill Lynch & Co. are now scrambling to sell them this month, thanks to concerns over China's Most Favored Nation trade status with the U.S.
According to Geoffrey L. Kurinsky, a portfolio manager at Massachusetts Financial Services, the price of those notes has dropped more than nine points, or more than $90 for a note with $1000 face value, to 90 1/2.
The yield is now 7.90%, for a spread over Treasury 10-year notes of 1.35 percentage points, compared with 0.85 percentage point when the bonds were sold.
"People get into these emerging markets and get caught up in the excitement and don't really know what they're doing," says Mr. Kurinsky.
"People got caught up in the euphoria thinking China was a Western democracy," he adds.
But Mr. Kurinsky thinks much of the political worries will evaporate in coming months.
"Three or four months from now, this stuff will have worked its way through," he says.
Many fund managers believe Mexico will recover from the shock of the assassination of its leading presidential candidate and continue on the path of economic reform.
They also think that the U.S. and China could eventually mend fences.
The Whitewater affair has been used as an excuse to sell bonds by investors caught flat-footed by rising short-term interest rates.
But so far it hasn't turned into a crisis capable of causing serious damage to the bond markets on its own, though it could if investors believe President Clinton is neglecting his economic program as a result.
But fund managers are keeping a close eye on Korea and Russia.
They fear that a Korean conflict could occur, with Asian nations taking sides.
And they see instability in Russia as having a very negative effect on all of the financial markets of Europe.
While many investors are indeed worried about rising rates and a stronger U.S. economy, Goldman Sachs's Mr. Hormats remains unconcerned about the fundamentals of the U.S. market.
"The inflation outlook in the U.S. and throughout the world is very benign," he says.
"Global competitive pressures and massive amounts of underused production capacity and relatively modest increases in commodities prices will produce very low rates of inflation."
On Friday, chief White House economist Laura Tyson argued that recent inflation fears were overblown.
"We have looked at what we believe to be the fundamental determinants of inflation: wages, productivity, import prices and energy prices," she said in a speech.
"And when we look at all these, we think that the inflation fundamentals picture continues to look good and that the recent concerns about inflation look to be a little exaggerated."
Mr. Hormats thinks that the best opportunities for bond investors these days are the bonds of nations with slack economies, such as many European nations including Italy, Spain, France and the Netherlands.
"There is no rational reason why European bonds should have weakened after the Fed raised interest rates," he says.
"Inflation in those countries is very slow and interest rates are still going down."
Part of the reason for the slowdown in the bond markets is that "you don't know where the bad news is coming from next," says Mr. Hormats.
"If Russia really deteriorates, that's bad for German bonds and bad for the . . . mark; you lose on the currency and on the bond."
But he adds that "if you're cautious but want to get a decent real return on your money," the three-year to five-year U.S. Treasury notes are probably the best bet.
These would be good "if you're not sure about inflation or the political outlook and you want to get a good night's sleep," he says.
Others are less sanguine about the fundamentals, but nevertheless see opportunity for bond investors in all the political turmoil.
"We've had a liquidity-driven market which has, until now, enabled markets to ignore political events," says John Diver, an adviser to Eichler Magnin Inc., an investment firm in Los Angeles.
"But once you remove the liquidity, which the Fed has done" by raising interest rates, "then you have to look more at the politics."
"If things blow up overseas," says Mr. Diver, "then quite often the dollar will act as a store of value for a flight to quality and people may then rush in and buy U.S. bonds."
The bond market's sell-off continued into its third consecutive session Friday, taking the yield on the Treasury's 30-year bond above 7% for the first time in 10 months.
No specific news was responsible for the declines, much of which took place late in the session as volume thinned ahead of the weekend.
Instead, traders blamed the drop on underlying bearishness and a reluctance among investors to step in and take advantage of the higher yields.
The 10-year note dropped more than 1/2 point to 94 14/32 as its yield rose to 6.63% from 6.55% on Thursday.
More trouble for the market may be looming, analysts said.
So far this year, much of the economic data have been on the weak side because of the impact of the unseasonably harsh winter weather.
Now that spring is here, temperatures are rising and economic activity is likely to snap back.
The first official glimpse of how the economy fared in March will come this Friday, when the government releases its latest figures on the labor market.
Economists are calling for a solid gain of about 250,000 in nonfarm payrolls for March.
The cash bond market will be closed Friday in observance of the Good Friday holiday.
Financial futures markets will be open for an abbreviated session.
