If prizes for writers came in the same categories as those for athletes, Henry Roth would win Comeback Novelist of the Year hands down.
Maybe of the century.
"Mercy of a Rude Stream, Volume 1: A Star Shines Over Mt. Morris Park" (St. Martin's Press, 290 pages, $23) is appearing 60 years after his first novel, the widely acclaimed "Call It Sleep."
Even many of his greatest fans figured they would never hear from him again.
Lots thought he was dead.
(And, of course, many are dead themselves.)
During his six decades of near-total silence (he wrote a few short stories and articles), Mr. Roth had jobs as a woodsman, schoolteacher, attendant in a state mental hospital and waterfowl farmer, among others.
But since 1979 he has been writing again and we are told that "Mercy of a Rude Stream" is already six volumes long.
So, on the basis of volume one, as the sports announcers would ask, can 87-year-old Mr. Roth still cut it?
I think so.
"Mercy of a Rude Stream" is a reworking and further development of the Jewish New York boyhood that Mr. Roth described in "Call It Sleep."
Mr. Roth so passionately felt his childhood, so loved it, unlovely as it was, that his pages written in old age are remarkably fresh and touching.
For long passages they are scarcely novelistic, reading more like autobiography.
The novel follows a straight time line.
Not much happens and nothing is done to intensify the effect of what little plot there is.
In the MTV age it is slow, but Mr. Roth's voice is attractive while also skillfully evoking a time and place long gone.
The novel is the story of a Jewish boy, Ira Stigman, growing up in a largely Irish Harlem neighborhood and keenly resenting his family's move from the all-Jewish Lower East Side block that he loved.
It opens in the summer of 1914.
At times the diction is 1914.
Mr. Roth uses words such as "ere" for before, "hie" for go and "viands" for meats.
As in "Call It Sleep," the boy loves his mother and hates his mean, cold failure of a father.
Although Ira is confronted several times by males wanting to initiate him sexually, he is extremely shy, and, accentuating the Oedipal situation, only finds himself genuinely excited once, while sharing his mother's bed during one of his father's absences.
Mr. Roth interrupts Ira's story periodically with the voice of an elderly author named Ira in the 1980s talking to his computer about the work in progress and also about contemporary affairs.
The most compelling of these passages touch on the author's long silence.
His tone is rueful, lamenting lost years.
How much better he would remember this material, the aged writer says, if he had used it earlier.
At another point: "For almost five decades you were well-nigh immobilized by your inability to go beyond childhood," his muse, the computer, tells him.
That was part of the story.
Mr. Roth has said elsewhere that his inability to write also came from his confusion over the uses of literature.
When "Call It Sleep" appeared in 1934, it got mixed reviews.
Mr. Roth was a communist, but the left found his novel insufficiently politically correct.
Why this maundering about a young boy when there were heroic proletarian novels to write? critics asked.
Mr. Roth tried to marry his politics and his talent only to find they wouldn't cohabit.
His effort to follow "Call It Sleep" with a proletarian novel ended, years later, in a burnt manuscript.
(And, "Call It Sleep" only achieved its widespread acclaim when it was republished in the '60s and sold millions of paperback copies.)
What saved the elderly author of "Mercy of a Rude Stream" during his long nonwriting years, he tells us, and what made it possible for him to start again, was the devotion of his wife, whom he calls M. Each short passage that mentions M. is suffused with love.
"If life, his life, were worth living, it was she who made it so," he writes.
The book's title is taken from Shakespeare's "Henry VIII."
The Shakespearian passage describes a man swept away by the stream.
But for Mr. Roth, the word "mercy" is literal.
After a rough ride, life showed him mercy.
"Call It Sleep" was steeped in Joyce; some have called it the most successful American Joycean novel.
Now, however, the artist is a very old man.
And in his old age he has cast off literary device in favor of the plainest of styles.
Even as he wrote this first volume, he was so limited by rheumatoid arthritis that his wife had to lift him to a sitting position each morning.
Mr. Roth's wife, Muriel, died in 1990.
Since then, others have helped him to his computer.
The approach of death is much in the writer's mind.
Some 10 years ago, he already called himself "an old man scrivening to ward off time."
Yet time, at the end of his life, has been generous to Mr. Roth.
As the book ends, Ira is only 14.
No wonder Mr. Roth had many more volumes to write after this one.
I look forward to the other volumes of "Mercy of a Rude Stream" with hope that he found ways to make art of life after childhood.
