The Clinton administration plans big increases in a number of obscure commercial research programs -- NIST, ARPA, TRP, HPCC -- that only Vice President Al Gore could love and probably few others understand.
This is a big change from 12 years of Republican rule when the science and technology budget was dominated by big-science projects that promised to land astronauts on Mars and pulverize atoms on Earth.
Clintonites want to harness science and technology "toward the end of economic recovery," says John Gibbons, the president's science adviser.
To that end, the biggest winner is a little-known agency, the National Institute of Standards and Technology, or NIST, located in one of Washington's sleepiest bureaucracies, the Commerce Department.
NIST now is to be the nerve center of the nation's industrial policy and was rewarded with a 78% budget increase, to $874 million, in the year beginning Oct. 1, 1994.
Commerce Secretary Ron Brown says he wants to nearly double that budget two years later.
What does NIST do?
It used to be known as the National Bureau of Standards, and it still figures out the exact measurement of a pound.
But it also funds a variety of commercial R&D ventures in electronics, computers and other exotica under what's called the Advanced Technology Program.
The ATP is scheduled to receive $450 million in fiscal year 1995 -- more than twice what it currently gets.
The ATP is a favorite of technology watchers because it has so far awarded projects strictly based on technical and business merit, as decided by various panels of experts.
But with its budget ballooning, without hiring any more managers, the program may start making bigger awards -- the kind that draw the attention of lawmakers trying to lard up the budget with pork.
Historically, pork has poisoned a number of big commercial R&D projects, ranging from the supersonic transport to the breeder reactor.
Lawmakers and the companies they represent have kept the projects alive, well after it was apparent that the programs were losers and wasting hundreds of millions of dollars.
The Clinton administration is too new to have added to that sorry legacy.
But technology watchers worry that the administration's supercar project, which aims to triple the gasoline mileage of current cars within a decade, may turn out to be another loser.
The administration is targeting at least $175 million for the project in fiscal 1995, which is supposed to be largely matched by the Big Three auto makers.
But there is no evidence that consumers have much interest in better gas mileage -- or that the Big Three have much interest in developing technologies that would make their cars obsolete.
"When firms in oligopolistic industry get together to do research, rather than increasing information, they might collude to delay it," says Linda Cohen, an economist at the University of Southern California.
The Clinton plan also targets a number of other commercial R&D projects for big increases.
The much-ballyhooed information superhighway -- a fancy name for advanced computing and communications projects -- is slated for a 32% increase to $1.3 billion.
The Advanced Research Project Agency -- that's ARPA, the Pentagon research agency -- is supposed to get a 13% increase, to $625 million, for its projects to convert defense programs to civilian use.
And the budget for the Human Genome Project, which is trying to decode the information in human genes, would be boosted 22% to $241 million.
The gene work is officially categorized as basic research, but the effort underlies a number of new genetic tests and therapies.
The Environmental Protection Agency's budget also provides an increase for R&D and other aid to the nation's environmental technology industry, which faces competition from Germany and other countries.
The Clinton team, though, isn't a sucker for every sexy program with a high-tech smile.
The Pentagon plans to cut funding to develop the next generation of video screens, known as high-definition TV, by 20% to $68 million.
During the Bush administration, the fight over HDTV funding became a symbol of the Republicans' displeasure with so-called industrial policy.
Clintonites are comfortable with the concept of government pushing commercial R&D, even if they don't like to admit to industrial planning.
And they understand that Congress invariably boosts HDTV funding anyway.
