Cheap oil may be here to stay, at least for the foreseeable future.
Evidence suggests a fundamental shift downward is taking place in crude oil's pricing structure, locking in the past year's drop of $5 a barrel.
As a result, crude oil prices, recently around $15 a barrel, could be stuck on a lower plateau for years.
"The {oil} market is going to be under pressure for an indefinite period of time," says Lawrence Goldstein, president of the Petroleum Industry Research Foundation.
The oil ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries could, of course, surprise the oil market at their meeting that begins Friday in Geneva.
But the betting in the industry is that a fractious OPEC is unlikely to be able to agree to slash production enough to rescue prices from near five-year lows -- or even to keep them from falling further amid the second quarter's seasonally weak demand.
The oil ministers have much less control over oil prices than they used to.
Today, crude values are based more on economics than politics, and prices are set on the futures exchanges in New York and London rather than in the petroleum ministries of Riyadh and Tehran.
"OPEC has surrendered the driver's seat to market forces," says Joseph Stanislaw, managing director of Cambridge Energy Research Associates.
In the marketplace, oil traders and buyers perceive a world awash in crude.
Supply worries, such as the "running out of oil" panic of the 1970s, have faded away for now.
Fereidun Fesharaki, director of the resources program at Honolulu's East-West Center, cites absence of this "fear factor" as the chief reason oil prices are expected to remain low.
Petroleum is indeed plentiful.
The world's proven reserves have nearly doubled since the first oil crisis of the 1970s to one trillion barrels.
"Oil may not be renewable, but through better exploration and development it is increasingly abundant," the American Petroleum Institute says.
New technology is helping to change the oil picture by reducing production and finding costs.
Companies now can develop new fields formerly considered marginally economic in so-called mature oil provinces such as the North Sea.
Also, oil companies are being welcomed in regions of major promise that previously were closed to them.
One example is Russia, although economic and political chaos is delaying the oil payoff there.
Still, oil output is rising elsewhere by more than enough to offset the declines in Russia and the U.S. Saudi Arabia, the world's leading oil producer with output of eight million barrels a day, is expanding capacity to 10 million a day.
Except for Saudi Arabia, OPEC members are producing flat out to try to make up in volume what they are losing in depressed prices.
Meanwhile, Saddam Hussein of Iraq waits in the wings, ready to try to flood the market with his oil as soon as the United Nations lifts the ban against Iraqi exports.
Iraqi officials were in New York last week to press anew for removal of the embargo.
Even as odds of a supply disruption ease, oil-consuming nations continue to stockpile fuels against just such an emergency, noting that no one expected the oil crises of the 1970s, either.
According to the International Energy Agency, government stockpiles totaled 148.5 million tons at the end of January, up 4.1 million tons from a year earlier and equal to a 15-day cushion for the entire world if all oil output suddenly ceased.
A year ago, the U.S. benchmark crude -- West Texas Intermediate, or WTI -- was $20 a barrel and was expected to go higher.
But that was before an oil glut pushed prices into a free fall.
Now, continuing pessimism over the price outlook is triggering yet-another round of restructurings, layoffs and other cost cutting by the oil companies.
WTI recently has been trading near the $15 that is becoming the industry's yardstick for measuring feasibility of new oil projects, even those requiring years to complete.
To select projects, Unocal Corp. assumes "$15 oil this year, $16 next year and $17 for 1996," says John F. Imle Jr., executive vice president.
The Petroleum Industry Research Foundation doesn't expect WTI to regain its former price level, even in nominal terms, for several years.
"By 1997," Mr. Goldstein says, "it's possible we will see a $20 world again."
Lower oil prices hold obvious benefits for Western economies.
Last year's drop was equal to a $30 billion cut in Americans' annual fuel costs.
Cheap oil also helps hold down other costs, keeping inflation in check, and is good for the stock market.
Oil prices today are the cheapest, in real terms, since the Arab oil embargo.
This month marks the 20th anniversary of the end of the embargo that triggered the first oil crisis and price surge of the 1970s.
Prices peaked in 1981.
Since then, except for brief spikes up during the 1990-91 Persian Gulf crisis, they have drifted lower and lower.
The new world order seems to have brought a new pricing order for oil, too.
