MFS Communications Co., an upstart fiber optic telephone service provider, said it will make a hostile $160 million cash offer to acquire Centex Telemanagement Inc.
Centex, a San Francisco reseller of phone services, offers some similar services as MFS and would significantly boost MFS's size and customer base.
Last fall, Centex rejected friendly overtures by MFS.
Centex company officials did not return phone calls for comment.
MFS, of Omaha, Neb., said its offer for $9 a share for all common shares outstanding of Centex will begin today, and represents a premium of about 85% over the closing price of Centex shares yesterday.
MFS's announcement was made after the market closed and Centex's shares fell 12.5 cents to $4.875 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
Centex had about 17.9 million shares outstanding as of Dec. 31.
MFS shares were unchanged in Nasdaq trading, ending at $30.75.
MFS is one of the largest independent and most aggressive companies that provide high-speed voice and data services over a sophisticated fiber-optic network.
It serves roughly 800 businesses and government agencies.
The company is 72%-owned by closely held construction, energy and mining company Peter Kiewit Sons Inc.
MFS, along with closely held Teleport Communications Group of New York, has increasingly become a thorn in the side of regional phone companies.
By offering "one-stop shopping" for local and long distance phone service they have successfully wooed away lucrative business customers from the Baby Bells.
James Q. Crowe, chairman and chief executive of MFS, said the acquisition of Centex, if successful, would bolster the services of MFS's Intelenet unit.
While "Centex offers identical services in 21 cities, they don't own their own network like we do," Mr. Crowe said.
By acquiring Centex "we can serve a growing number of Centex's 11,000 customers" at lower costs.
He noted that Centex had revenue of about $200 million in 1993, while MFS reported revenue of $145 million.
Mr. Crowe said he had originally approached Centex with an offer for a "friendly business combination" last fall, but Centex had turned it down.
Lately, however, intensifying competition among local phone providers and changes in the regulatory climate persuaded MFS to launch its hostile offer, he said.
The offer hinges on, among other things, that at least a majority of the Centex shares are tendered and that a preferred-share purchase rights recently issued by the Centex board be redeemed or invalidated.
MFS, which said it already owns almost 8.4% of Centex shares, said Salomon Brothers Inc. and Gleachers & Co. Inc. are acting as financial advisors and deal managers.
MFS has never reported a profit, and expects losses into the near future.
But the company says it is determined to strengthen its hand against the dominant regional phone companies and other competitors by quickly building up its fiberoptic network.
According to Mr. Crowe, MFS will invest over $1 billion to construct networks over three-to-five years, expanding the company's reach to 65 domestic and ten international cities.
