Starting a cable-TV network may turn out to be the toughest game that golf pro Arnold Palmer has ever played.
A little more than three years ago, Mr. Palmer, the four-time Masters tournament champion, teamed up with Joseph E. Gibbs, a Birmingham, Ala., businessman, to create the Golf Channel.
Back then, many cable systems had ample room for new networks, and industry experts were beginning to forecast a 500-channel TV universe.
Niche channels featuring everything from major league baseball to game shows to the military were taking shape, and the idea for a golf network looked like a hole in one.
Now, the Golf Channel is adjusting to a vastly different business climate.
Cable-industry executives and Golf Channel investors say a start-up network has little chance of success unless it raises big money and aligns itself with major players in the communications business.
Even then, the course is lined with bunkers.
Start with the competition.
While it has attracted some formidable partners -- including International Management Group, a sports-marketing concern based in Cleveland -- Mr. Gibbs and friends are still dwarfed by the resources of the broadcast networks and cable powers like ESPN, a division of Capital Cities/ABC Inc.
All these rivals have increased their golf programming in recent seasons; ESPN alone plans to show 50 events this year.
"I don't know that there's necessarily a need for niche networks per se," says Loren Matthews, senior vice president of programming at ESPN.
"There is a certain hard-core viewership that can't get enough," Mr. Matthews says.
But "are there enough of them to create a profitable business?"
The answer, according to Mr. Gibbs and his marketing studies, is a confident "yes."
The Golf Channel, which recently postponed its launch date from this July to next January, plans to generate as much as two-thirds of its revenue by charging each subscriber $4.95 a month.
About half of that would be shared with cable operators.
Mr. Gibbs figures 57% of the nation's 12 million hard-core golfers (those who play eight times or more each year) would be willing to pay the monthly fee.
The Golf Channel, he calculates, could break even with just 1.5 million to two million subscribers-a figure that could be reached, according to his business plan, in about two years.
Those same potential subscribers, though, may soon have dozens of televised offerings competing for their $4.95.
Currently, more than 75 channels are being readied for rollouts, including many with well-connected backers.
The chief executive of Wal-Mart Stores Inc., for instance, is one of the main investors in Americana Television Network, a music channel originating in Branson, Mo.
What's more, the Golf Channel and other new networks are finding that cable capacity is more limited than they had expected.
Last fall, in response to federal regulations that let cable operators base their rates on the number of channels offered, most cable systems rushed to fill all their available slots.
Meanwhile, delivering 500 channels to homes nationwide will require "big players investing a lot of time and money on new technology," says Alastair Johnston, a senior vice president at International Management Group, who adds that the collapse of Bell Atlantic Corp.'s planned merger with Tele-Communications Inc. is likely to slow that kind of investment.
One area where Mr. Gibbs, now president and chief executive of the Golf Channel, has encountered fewer problems is programming.
International Management Group helped the network lock up nearly 100 exclusive tournament contracts, including events from the major golf tours.
"We've basically tied up the world," Mr. Gibbs says.
Sessions with potential investors, meanwhile, have yielded a plethora of possible programs, including international and domestic tournaments, which would be televised a few hours each day; golfing news, instruction and interviews; and a home-shopping segment, which would market equipment, clothing and travel packages.
Then there's the esoteric: shows on "golfing ethics," for instance, in which beginning players would be counseled "not to cough when a guy is about to make a putt," says Mr. Gibbs.
"It won't be any problem filling up 24 hours," he says.
But it will be expensive.
The ambitious ideas for programming mean that Mr. Gibbs and his partners need to raise about $60 million to start the channel, a hefty sum in an industry where a start-up like the Cartoon Network, part of Turner Broadcasting System Inc., costs about $20 million.
Annual programming costs are expected to hover around $30 million.
Stockpiling cash is crucial, says David Barry, an investor in cable systems and one of the original backers of the Golf Channel.
"You need to generate A-plus quality from the get-go," he says, especially if you plan to charge for the service.
After talking with dozens of financial institutions and corporations in the past nine months, Mr. Gibbs says he now has verbal commitments for the $60 million.
The channel will get signed pledges once it brings in firm commitments from three major cable operators -- with whom it is deep in talks -- as partners, says John Waller of Waller Capital Corp., a cable-investment company in New York.
Mr. Gibbs, himself an owner of small cable systems around the country, expects a deal to be announced within 30 days, barring any last-minute glitches.
Not everyone likes the idea.
One big cable operator that passed up a chance to invest in the Golf Channel was Cox Cable, a unit of Cox Enterprises Inc. in Atlanta and the sixth-largest U.S. cable operator.
Cox Cable's president, James O. Robbins, describes himself as a "fervent golfer" who would subscribe to the channel, but he says "the combination of regulatory uncertainty -- plus the difficulty with getting widespread distribution quickly -- left us cool to making an investment."
Of course, uncertainty and cool responses are now par for the course at the Golf Channel.
Starting a new network, says Mr. Barry, the investor, is "certainly not for the faint of heart."
But, he adds, "it's one of the few opportunities around to give yourself a shot at hitting a home run."
