Editor's Note: On Tuesday, nine parties registered their candidates for Mexico's Aug. 21 presidential election.
Notably absent was Manuel Camacho Solis, the government's peace negotiator in Chiapas.
One month ago, a column by Americas editor David Asman caused a stir by describing Mr. Camacho's presidential ambitions, despite his having been passed over as the official candidate of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI).
Mr. Camacho called Mr. Asman this week to say he'd like to go on the record about some of the points raised by that column and to bring up a few new points.
He specifically asked to respond to questions about the economy, an issue he has not had a chance to address during his two months in Chiapas.
Though not now registered, Mr. Camacho has until July 21 to substitute for one of the nine candidates.
I don't want to generate any obstacles for the negotiations in Chiapas or for the economic stability of Mexico.
I feel that my role in politics has been to strengthen a force in the center that can push for needed reforms.
As for reforms leading to the August election, there are two general considerations: First is to have an impartial electoral structure.
Second is to have a clean election.
It's really as simple as that.
Of course, no election is completely without problems.
And people don't expect perfection.
What's important is that there is a strong trend in the right direction.
There is no possibility of Mexico growing faster and our economy becoming more modern unless we maintain the responsible fiscal and monetary policies that we have followed for several years.
Specifically, there is a need for continuity.
Monetarily, this will be met through the new, independent central bank, under the directorship of Miguel Mancera.
On the fiscal side, that continuity will be maintained through the continued participation of Pedro Aspe and his economic team.
Pedro and his excellent group must be part of what is to come in Mexico.
On the micro side, the Mexican government also has to be conscious of who are being left behind and how to improve their prospects for jobs and their quality of life.
The government has to do more in the areas of job promotion, retraining and incentives for those areas of the economy -- like agriculture -- in which there are going to be major changes as a result of modernization.
We need an industrial policy that is not merely about stabilizing the economy, but that will actively promote economic growth.
While job creation is vital, it has to be compatible with the macroeconomic program.
We are not talking about government subsidization of jobs.
We are talking about creating the incentives for new jobs by deregulation and an increase in tax incentives.
Of course, there must also be job training programs -- specifically in areas like Chiapas, where modernization of the economy may cut jobs before new jobs are available elsewhere.
People whose labor-intensive jobs have been lost through modernization must be given opportunities to train for new jobs in their own communities.
Good schools and jobs are two of the best instruments for reducing Mexico's extreme income disparities.
Finally, we must develop policies to address Mexico's new openness and, specifically, the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Now that we have Nafta, we need to direct more policies for it and around it.
Certain areas of Mexico -- like the north -- are already in a good position to take advantage of Nafta.
But other sections -- like the south -- are not.
For example, the government can do more to promote small industries in Chiapas -- like textiles -- that could directly benefit from Nafta.
We could help these communities export their products through quality control, marketing and training programs.
That could mean thousands of jobs in the Indian communities.
So instead of being a concern, Nafta could help Chiapas increase its development in relation to the rest of Mexico.
And individuals could begin to create enterprises independent of powerful individuals or social forces that seek to control them.
Now, one thing all this requires is for the rule of law to be monitored, respected and enforced in Mexico as never before.
We simply cannot afford to make private or public investments such as those I have described if local groups or political forces merely go back to ignoring individual rights and forcing their power over everyone else.
In coming up with a solution for Chiapas, we are proposing important legal changes and new legal authorities that would create a better application of the rule of law.
If the federal government applies all its resources in backing the enforcement of the rule of law, then the balance will work in the right direction with much greater consensus.
One example is the establishment of federal and local prosecutors throughout the area to bring charges against human rights abusers and ensure that citizens' constitutional rights are fully protected.
These prosecutors will have full autonomy and will be backed by federal marshals to ensure that local interests cannot twist the law for their own benefit.
An executive committee, consisting of federal undersecretaries, will regularly monitor the activities of these new officials.
What is absolutely clear in light of Chiapas is that Mexico has to take dramatic steps to ensure that no one is above the law, and that all Mexicans have equal rights under the law.
In fact, Chiapas may become a national model for ensuring the guarantee of the rule of law under the most adverse conditions.
Early in January, {immediately after the Chiapas rebellion began,} everyone thought that things were falling apart in Mexico.
However, these past two months have been a process of things coming together.
The war was stopped in 10 days.
Face-to-face dialogue was set up in less than six weeks, and we will continue to follow a policy of peace and reconciliation.
We should see the final agreement for electoral reforms approved by all the political parties shortly.
So the positive investment climate in Mexico is going to increase.
Because of what has been done, we now have the possibility to have strong growth with low inflation.
The political solution of the Chiapas conflict, backed by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, is without precedent.
The issue is not so much whether Mexico has problems.
No country is problem-free.
What is important is Mexico's capacity to admit mistakes and to change its course without destroying the basis for economic and political stability.
If the next election is viewed as fair, and the right people keep control of the economy, we will be consolidating those things that foreign and domestic investors need -- incentives for growth and social and political stability.
