A Justice Department investigation into General Instrument Corp.'s powerful position in the cable-television equipment market sprang in large part from the bitter feud between Viacom Inc.'s owner, Sumner Redstone, and cable-TV mogul John C. Malone of Tele-Communications Inc.
According to people familiar with the matter, the Justice Department began its investigation late last year after Viacom filed a sweeping antitrust lawsuit against TCI and other cable-TV companies.
The legal assault, in which Viacom accused TCI of monopolizing the cable-TV industry, was Viacom's counterattack against TCI and its chief executive officer, Mr. Malone.
Mr. Malone backed QVC Inc. in the bidding war for Paramount Communications Inc., which Viacom ultimately won last month.
Among the major accusations in the suit, which is proceeding, Viacom alleged a "TCI/GI General Instrument conspiracy" to "create and control . . . distribution" of cable-television programming through the use of the equipment supplier's technology.
TCI, Englewood, Colo., is the nation's largest cable-TV operator, while General Instrument, based in Chicago, is one of the largest providers of equipment.
The inquiry was first reported by Satellite Business News, a trade publication.
The Justice Department confirmed earlier this week that it is pursuing a broad inquiry into investigating "arrangements and practices" in the cable-TV industry.
It declined to provide details or identify any subjects of its probe.
Meanwhile, General Instrument's chairman, Daniel Akerson, said yesterday the company had been twice contacted by the Justice Department and that it is cooperating fully.
Meanwhile, General Instrument's main competitor, Scientific-Atlanta Inc., said the federal investigators have issued a subpoena and that the company is complying.
Scientific-Atlanta, based in Atlanta, added that the Justice Department informed it that it wasn't a target of the investigation.
A TCI spokesman said the cable giant hasn't been contacted.
He added that TCI "doesn't see any antitrust exposure."
As the Justice Department investigation heats up, however, there are signs that Viacom and TCI may want to settle their private differences.
In an interview last month, Mr. Redstone, Viacom's chairman and controlling shareholder, expressed respect for Mr. Malone and noted that since the suit was filed, TCI and Viacom's pay-TV service Showtime had reached an interim agreement for TCI to carry the channel.
"I expect to meet with him Mr. Malone soon," Mr. Redstone said, adding that Viacom "isn't looking for war but peace."
The two reportedly were expected to hold discussions this week.
Moreover, speculation of a possible settlement of the lawsuit arose two weeks ago after talks were held between TCI and Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., which Viacom already has agreed to acquire.
The dispute was harsh and expressed in personal tones.
In the suit, which TCI dismissed as "frivolous," Viacom accused Mr. Malone of using "bully-boy tactics and strong-arming competitors."
It added: "In the American cable industry, one man has, over the last several years, seized monopoly power. . . .
That man is John C. Malone."
