Grant Memorial Hospital is nearly paralyzed by a blizzard.
The lights are off to conserve power, and the operating room has no heat.
But Penny Stewart has traveled two hours over storm-swept mountain roads so John Hahn can deliver her baby.
Out of a darkened hallway appears the 37-year-old obstetrician, clad in blue hospital scrubs.
The labor is long and difficult; "just push and breathe," he tells the mother.
Ten days past her due date, Angel Dawn weighs in at five pounds.
"This proves it's never too cold to have young'uns," jokes Dr. Hahn, himself the father of five.
Dr. Hahn, who grew up in nearby Wardensville, rides a circuit of five rural counties to care for the pregnant women of West Virginia's panhandle.
With a patient load of about 4,000 women -- his record is delivering eight babies in one day -- Dr. Hahn barely has time to scan the daily headlines.
When asked his opinion of the national health-care debate, he has to stop and consider.
Dr. Hahn works about 180 miles -- and degrees -- from Washington.
Dr. Hahn thinks President Clinton's vow to provide everyone with health care shows he is "a good-hearted person," but in rural West Virginia, most patients are covered by Medicaid, the federally funded health-care program for the poor.
Dr. Hahn doesn't want any more government bureaucracy affecting his practice.
The panhandle's dense forests and steep hills aren't inviting sites for industry.
In Dr. Hahn's territory, some women find jobs as waitresses at the Dairy Queen or clerks at the 7-Eleven.
Others, like Mrs. Stewart, work at seasonal jobs like those at an apple-packing plant.
Earning little more than minimum wage, they depend on food stamps for groceries and can find themselves rebuffed by hospitals and doctors unwilling to accept Medicaid payment alone for their services.
Part of the problem is West Virginia's troubled economy.
Indeed, Dr. Hahn was among the state's physicians whose payments were held up from 1987 to 1989 for Medicaid patient care because West Virginia couldn't muster its share of the matching funds for the government program.
But Dr. Hahn continued to care for his patients during that time, and he bristles at the accusation that doctors are the culprits in the high cost of health care.
"I get paid good, but I'm not greedy," says the obstetrician, who is on salary at Grant Memorial.
"If somebody is hurting, I help them."
At times he has delivered second children to mothers who haven't paid the bill for their first, and he has performed free hysterectomies for women who can't afford a fee.
"I know what it's like to be poor," he says.
"These women could be my mother or sister."
The son of a sawmill operator and a seamstress, Dr. Hahn remembers how his parents struggled to pay their bills.
For years, they lived rent-free in an abandoned shack that lacked indoor plumbing.
"We didn't go upstairs because it was dark and cold up there.
We didn't even have a bare light bulb up there," he says.
To heat the downstairs, the family burned wood that his dad brought home from the sawmill.
"Coal cost money," he says.
So did health care.
But the local physician, J.D. Mathias, limited his fees to $1 to $3 for those in need.
When he retired, the Hahn family paid the $70 Dr. Mathias's tattered ledger showed they owed for a lifetime of care.
"He never turned us down," Dr. Hahn says.
That made a big impression on both John and his older brother, Jerry.
They grew up wanting to be doctors, too.
Striving for good grades and scholarships, they also earned money for college by working alongside their father at the mill, feeding trees through a saw powered by an old Buick engine.
Both made it to Marshall University medical school in Huntington, W.Va., and John signed up with the National Health Service.
In exchange for the promise of four years' service in a rural area, the NHS helped pay for John's medical education.
He chose to specialize in obstetrics to guarantee an assignment near his hometown.
Besides, "delivering babies is wonderful," he says.
Many doctors have gotten out of the baby business because of high malpractice premiums and even higher awards against doctors made by juries in birth-injury cases.
In 1987, Dr. Hahn joined the Grant Memorial Hospital staff and handled obstetrics work once shared among six other physicians.
At that time there were about 300 doctors in West Virginia practicing obstetrics; now there are about 130.
Of those remaining, only half accept Medicaid patients on an unrestricted basis.
The shortage of obstetricians, not to mention doctors in general, is so severe in impoverished rural areas that it isn't uncommon for states like Tennessee, North Carolina, Virginia and West Virginia to prospect for physicians and even try to lure doctors away from one another.
Dr. Hahn doesn't want to practice anywhere else, nor does he want to give up his specialty.
His persistence has been good for the region's women and babies, and it has turned him into something of an entrepreneur.
To expand area doctors' traveling range, Dr. Hahn persuaded some colleagues at the hospital to pool their money and build a $45,000 radio tower high atop nearby Charley's Knob, so beepers and mobile telephones would work in the deep valleys of the Shenandoah mountains.
With his brother, Jerry, who specializes in family practice and dermatology, Dr. Hahn has opened regional "doc in a box" clinics in three surrounding towns.
Dr. Hahn figures it takes at least $500,000 and two years to establish and maintain a clinic until it is self-supporting, but the system brings patients to his obstetrics practice at the hospital.
His $80,000 salary when he started at Grant Memorial seven years ago has tripled, thanks to patients coming to his hospital practice from the clinics, he says, permitting him and his brother to continue underwriting the clinic facilities.
He still needs to finance ultrasound machines for each office, and the Hahn brothers dream of eventually opening a clinic in Wardensville to care for their old neighbors.
These days, Dr. Hahn gets some help from a midwife and a part-time doctor at the hospital.
But many women won't schedule their appointments with anyone but Dr. Hahn.
Some show up in the delivery room at the tender age of 12 or 13, denying they are pregnant until they go into labor.
"I've had them in here with crayons and coloring books," he says.
"One girl carried a doll for herself, not the baby."
But he says he treats each mother and child as if they were members of his own family.
"I was so scared," says Susan Stokes, who was 15 years old and a high-school dropout when Dr. Hahn delivered her first child.
"But Dr. Hahn told me not to worry.
He made me feel like everything would be OK.
I hope he stays in this business for a long time -- we need him."
