Actava Group. reported a steeper-than-expected fourth-quarter loss and said it was suspending its dividend and beginning a search for a new president.
The company, with operations in lawn-and-garden equipment, sports gear and photo-finishing, said the loss totaled $31 million, or $1.76 a share.
That compared with a year-earlier profit of $5 million, or 31 cents a share.
Sales rose 15% to $319.5 million from $276.6 million.
The results, which were below analysts' expectations, helped push Actava down $1.375, or 16%, to $7 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
For all of 1993, Actava reported a net loss of $47.6 million, or $2.77 a share, compared with a year-earlier profit of $11.6 million, or 70 cents a share.
Sales rose 7% to $1.24 billion from $1.15 billion.
Actava, which has now reported four consecutive quarterly losses, continues to be plagued by problems within its Snapper lawn-and-garden division.
Manufacturing difficulties and high costs have dogged the unit for more than a year.
Indeed, Actava said Snapper accounted for roughly 63% of its loss for all of 1993.
Still, Actava said yesterday that it has tabled efforts to sell Snapper.
The company said the attempts, led since March 1993 by Merrill Lynch, caused "substantial distraction for Snapper's management, distributors and dealers."
Analysts said the move could make the unit more profitable and, therefore, more attractive in the marketplace.
Still, Actava's troubles aren't confined to Snapper.
Results at recently acquired Diversified Products Corp., which makes fitness and recreation equipment, were disappointing, the company said.
And analysts noted that Actava's Qualex photofinishing division is lagging behind the industry, which is moving from chemical processing to digital imaging.
"They need to become more involved in the newer technologies with a partner," said Joel Krasner, an analyst at SouthCoast Capital Corp. in New Orleans.
Two of Actava's sporting-goods companies brightened the earnings picture somewhat.
Profits at Nelson/Weather-Rites, a camping and outdoor equipment subsidiary, improved 43% over 1992, and profits at Hutch Sports, which produces licensed sporting equipment, increased 27%.
The overall losses, however, prompted Actava to suspend its quarterly dividend of nine cents a share.
And the company said it has appointed a special committee of independent directors to search for a president to succeed Charles R. Scott, who also serves as Actava's chief executive.
Mr. Scott, 65 years old, couldn't be reached for comment.
In a prepared statement, however, he said he "fully" supported the company's decision to "begin a search for my successor."
Mr. Scott also described himself as "very disappointed" with the company's latest financial results, but said Actava's problems "have been properly addressed, and a turnaround is in progress."
