Walt Disney has always been very protective of Mickey Mouse.
For years, the entertainment company has sued or threatened to sue even the smallest copyright violators -- including three Florida day-care centers that painted Disney characters on their walls.
"We pursue all known infringements of our rights," says John J. Tormey III, a Walt Disney Co. attorney in New York.
Now Nicholas Demou, owner of the locally famous Modern Diner in Pawtucket, R.I., is giving Disney a taste of its own medicine.
He has sued Disney over a Mickey Mouse sweatshirt that shows his diner in the background.
Last summer, Mr. Demou says he saw a customer wearing one of the shirts.
His first reaction, he says, was disbelief.
"I'm a little tiny guy in the smallest state with a 50-seat restaurant," he says.
"If it was me and I was selling those shirts, you know they would have shut me down."
Disney declines to comment.
East Side Modern Diner Inc.'s suit against Disney in a Rhode Island state court seeks an accounting of all "ill-gotten gains" and unspecified compensatory and punitive damages.
The suit also names the shirt's manufacturer and a discount retailer where Mr. Demou bought one of the shirts for $19.95.
The Modern isn't just any diner.
An art-deco Sterling Streamliner-brand diner built around 1940, it was the first diner accepted by the National Register of Historic Places, Mr. Demou says.
After his family bought the abandoned diner eight years ago and moved it to its current roadside location, they worked with preservationists on the restoration.
The Modern has been featured in a number of books on diners and road food.
Michael Feldhuhn, the Modern's lawyer, speculates that the sweatshirt picture, which clearly displays the Modern Diner sign atop the restaurant, might have come from one of them.
During the week, the Modern serves "classic diner food -- meatloaf, beef stew, chicken croquettes."
Weekends, Mr. Demou, a graduate of the nearby Johnson & Wales culinary school, says he attracts "the artsy crowd" with delicacies like baked eggs Florentine and pear and almond pancakes with hot figs.
Mr. Demou says he's sensitive to the need to protect trademarks.
After all, he sells his own Modern Diner T-shirts.
Without Mickey.
