President Clinton is taking political soundings on whether he should lift the trade embargo against Vietnam.
Although I fought and was wounded in the Vietnam War and for years opposed lifting the embargo, I now believe -- with one important caveat -- that it is in the interest of both our peoples, as well as of America's future role in Asia, to move forward.
Over the past three years I have spent a great deal of time traveling throughout Vietnam.
It has not always been pleasant.
The country's infrastructure is badly deteriorated, and -- to put it mildly -- its officials have not always welcomed me.
But changes have occurred.
Also, the U.S. embargo lost much of its economic leverage more than a year ago, when Japan ended its own.
Ironically, the strongest investors in Vietnam are anti-communist countries: Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and Hong Kong.
Probably the ugliest new building in downtown Saigon is a massive green glass structure erected by the South Korean trade ministry.
In addition to the embargo's having lost its original purpose, two vital concerns dictate that we now move carefully but surely toward normalization with Vietnam.
The first regards our diminished presence in Asia, at a time when China is growing ever stronger and more dangerous.
Vietnam retains a historical antipathy to China.
As China's economic and political might expands, one can foresee future circumstances where Vietnamese and American interests could intersect.
The second relates to an unfinished obligation to the Vietnamese who stood with us during the war, and who continue to suffer second-class citizenship as a result.
We are literally the only people on earth who retain memories of the brave and caring allies who were humiliated after our withdrawal, most of whom will never have a full life without our reinvolvement.
It would be shameful for our country to begin a new relationship without protecting those who have suffered so greatly as a result of our old relationship.
Lifting the embargo will be strongly resisted by many, including several well-intentioned veterans groups that remain concerned over the lack of full accounting of those still listed as missing in action from the war.
The POW dilemma is one of the great tragedies of our time.
Its roots were in Hanoi's unprecedented use of POWs as negotiating "pearls," which turned POWs into anonymous hostages, and in the American government's failure to obtain a by-name listing of those who were being held in captivity prior to the signing of the Paris Peace Accords.
We knew from the French war in Indochina that such an accounting should have been required.
Lacking such a list, we have been operating in the dark ever since.
The present POW search inside Vietnam has been well executed by both sides, and the Vietnamese government has fully cooperated in this effort.
But in terms of solving the issue of whether Americans were held inside Vietnam after the war, it approaches farce.
Tens of millions of dollars have been spent in searching remote jungle areas where crashes occurred a quarter-century ago, when the answers, if available at all, can be found only in "compartmented" intelligence data kept by the U.S., Vietnam, China and Russia.
For this reason, it also has been fruitless for our politicians to berate Vietnamese diplomats for not producing information.
They would no more have such sensitive information than would our diplomats.
Looking back, the sort of pressure that has been brought on the POW issue by well-meaning Americans has surely been counterproductive: If the Vietnamese were indeed holding live Americans after the war, the greatest deterrent to releasing them (and the greatest danger to their survival) would be loud accusations and threats.
Accusations involve a loss of face.
Quiet negotiation is the Asian way.
Much of the emotion over the POW issue stems from the reality that it provides one of the few focal points for those who know we should have defeated the communists, and who remain rightfully angry at their blatant violations of the 1973 Paris Peace Accords, the repression they brought after their 1975 takeover (more South Vietnamese died in re-education camps after the war than Americans did during the war), and the failure of those who opposed the war in this country to acknowledge that they erred in their judgment of communist intentions.
The best way to address those historical inequities is to remember what brought us into South Vietnam in the first place, and to pledge an effort to assist the people of Vietnam as they reach toward economic growth and political liberalization.
Therefore, I have been proposing for more than a year that our government do the following:
-- Lift the trade embargo immediately, with the Vietnamese government clearly stating that all Vietnamese, regardless of their wartime affiliation, have the right to share fully in the benefits of renewed economic and political ties with the U.S.
-- As Vietnam's policy of equal treatment becomes measurable and clear, and as other issues such as political prisoners and POW/MIAs are acceptably resolved, reciprocate by establishing full diplomatic relations.
-- After normalization, consider granting most-favored-nation trading status to Vietnam, based on Vietnam's continued commitment to allowing all citizens equal access to the benefits of the new relationship with the U.S.
If this policy is adopted and pursued, the result could be better relations for the U.S. in all of Asia; a basis for the Vietnamese to begin a new era removed from the hatreds and retributions of the past; and, in time, a strong, Western-oriented ally with a mutual interest in counterbalancing the ever-burgeoning strength of China.
Mr. Webb served as assistant secretary of defense and secretary of the Navy in the Reagan administration.
