A newly confident U.S. is shifting gears in its strategy for cutting its auto-trade deficit with Japan: Instead of curbing imports from a mighty Japanese industry, America is championing the exports of a resurgent Detroit.
Washington's new approach to handling the most serious economic irritant between the two nations was on full display here last week.
Visiting Clinton administration officials said they would consider letting Japan end its decade-old "voluntary" quotas on car exports to the U.S.
Instead the U.S. would focus on demanding "benchmarks" of improved access to Japan's market.
"I have a feeling it would not be a big deal" if Japan scuttled the quotas, U.S. Commerce Undersecretary Jeffrey E. Garten said in an interview over the weekend.
"The preoccupation of the administration right now. . .is how to sell more parts and autos, how to generate more jobs in the auto sector as a result of better access to the Japanese market."
Japanese officials said last month they plan to drop the export quotas, though it isn't clear when they will do so.
In a separate trade matter, U.S. officials said they are optimistic about settling a long-standing dispute over access to Japan's construction market by the Jan. 20 deadline.
The Japanese cabinet is expected to approve a sweeping new plan to open up the bidding process for public works as soon as Tuesday.
"There are still some things that need to be worked out, but from what I understand about the plan, it's going to be fairly good," a senior U.S. government official said Sunday.
Scuttling the car-export limits wouldn't be much of a concession on Washington's part.
Japanese auto makers last filled their quota in 1986.
What's more, the U.S. still plays aggressive defense in trade, retaining the right to protect industries with antidumping tariffs, and manipulating currency rates to make Japanese goods more expensive in the U.S.
Still, the mood has clearly changed.
Just two years ago, President Bush and Detroit executives came to Japan in what was widely portrayed as a humiliating mission to beg for mercy from unstoppable competitors.
The tone was radically different last week, when Mr. Garten and Undersecretary of State Joan Spero came to negotiate greater U.S. access to Japan's markets for autos, medical and telecommunications equipment, and insurance.
In one speech, Ms. Spero called the U.S. "the world's greatest export machine" and compared America's robust growth with the sluggish Japanese and European economies.
She advised Japan to follow the U.S. lead in deregulation.
"Will you," she asked Japan and Europe, "be able to compete in the future with the `new American economy' we are creating if you do not make structural changes?"
Washington's confidence doesn't, however, mean that trade tensions have evaporated.
The U.S. and Japan are trying to hammer out a broad new "framework" for cutting the bilateral trade imbalance.
The two sides are committed to reaching an agreement by Feb. 11, when Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa is scheduled to meet with President Clinton in Washington.
But negotiators from both sides say they are still far apart on basic philosophical issues: The U.S. wants numerical benchmarks to promote U.S. exports to Japan; the Japanese object to that as "managed trade."
Despite the impasse, Japan is making some conciliatory gestures.
On Friday, a Nissan Motor Co. sales affiliate said it intends to begin marketing Ford Motor Co. vehicles this spring.
On Saturday, the local press reported that Toyota dealers also are thinking about selling Ford cars in Japan.
Greater access to Japanese dealerships for Big Three cars is a key U.S. demand.
In recent years, the Big Three have been seen in Japan as symbols of U.S. economic decline.
Lately, however, Detroit's image has improved.
The clearest evidence of a new Japanese respect for U.S. industry is a public fascination with Chrysler Corp.'s Neon, a punchy, bargain-priced compact car that just went on sale in the U.S.
The Japanese press has dubbed the Neon "The Japan-Car Killer."
Neon's celebrity is part of a wider popular reassessment of U.S. power.
The cover of this week's Nikkei Business magazine depicts a lean-and-mean Uncle Sam towering over Asia.
The drawing illustrates a story titled "Rising Sam," about U.S. policy of "containing" Japan and opening markets in Asia.
Last year, Ford, Chrysler and General Motors Corp. had a combined 2.9% share of the Japanese vehicle market.
Japanese auto makers' share of the U.S. market is about 10 times that large.
Trade in autos and auto parts accounts for roughly twothirds of the U.S. $50 billion trade deficit with Japan.
Jacob M. Schlesinger contributed to this article.
