Robert Fiske Jr., who was appointed independent counsel to investigate President Clinton's investment in Whitewater Development Co., said he would take testimony from the president and Hillary Rodham Clinton under oath.
Mr. Fiske, a former U.S. attorney in New York, promised a "complete, thorough and impartial" probe of the Whitewater affair.
Attorney General Janet Reno said at a news conference that she chose Mr. Fiske because he is an "excellent prosecutor" who is "ruggedly independent."
"I have talked with Mr. Fiske and told him that I want him to do everything he thinks proper and appropriate to make sure that he is truly independent," she said.
Mr. Fiske personally wrote the charter that outlines his duties.
"The specific language," he said, "authorizes me to investigate whether any individuals or entities have committed a violation of any federal criminal law relating in any way" to the president's or Mrs. Clinton's relationships with Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan Association, a Little Rock, Ark., thrift; Whitewater Development; or Capital Management Services Inc., a failed Little Rock investment company.
The Clintons were partners in Whitewater with James McDougal, owner of now-defunct Madison, and his former wife, Susan, who received a $300,000 loan from Capital Management.
David Hale, a former municipal judge who owned Capital, has charged that the Clintons and Mr. McDougal pressed him into making the loan as a way of bolstering Madison.
In addition, the Resolution Trust Corp. has asked for an investigation of possible diversion of funds from Madison to Whitewater and to pay certain campaign and other debts of then-Arkansas Gov. Clinton in the mid-1980s.
Mr. Fiske also will look at the involvement in Madison-related matters by Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell.
Mr. Hubbell, who was Mrs. Clinton's law partner, was hired by federal regulators to sue Madison's accountants to recoup taxpayer money spent when the thrift failed.
The regulators later said they didn't know the firm had a long relationship with Madison.
The Clintons' Whitewater papers were kept by former White House Deputy Counsel Vincent Foster, who committed suicide.
Mr. Fiske said he will investigate the suicide to the extent it involves Whitewater-related events.
Last night, Mr. Clinton said he didn't know in advance about the selection of Mr. Fiske, and said he "absolutely" would cooperate with the investigation.
Asked by talk-show host Larry King on CNN about Mr. Fiske's plan to take sworn testimony from him and his wife, Mr. Clinton said, "Whatever they want to do, we will be glad to do it."
"The main thing I want to do is to just have that turned over to him so we can go back to work," he added.
"I just want to do my job.
I don't want to be distracted by this any more.
I didn't do anything wrong."
Mr. Fiske plans to open an office in Little Rock.
He added that he would submit reports to Congress on his activities.
The new independent counsel isn't required to report to Ms. Reno.
Mr. Fiske, who is 63 years old, was named U.S. attorney for New York by President Ford in 1976, and he was retained by President Carter.
A self-described "life-long registered Republican," Mr. Fiske said he would take a leave of absence from the law firm Davis Polk & Wardell, where he is a litigation partner.
Mr. Fiske said he won't use the career Justice Department people who had been investigating the Whitewater affair.
Ms. Reno said she called those probes to a halt when she announced last week that she would appoint an independent counsel.
Rep. Jim Leach (R., Iowa), who had long urged Ms. Reno to appoint an independent counsel, called Mr. Fiske "a quality appointment, an individual of appropriate background and integrity."
Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole (R., Kan.), has called for a separate congressional investigation into the Whitewater affair.
Mr. Fiske discouraged that, saying: "I think the history of these situations is that it is difficult to conduct this kind of investigation at the same time a congressional investigation is going on."
Mr. Fiske said he would give no interviews.
That would come as no surprise to some lawyers who predicted that, based on his handling of the news media in other cases, he is likely to keep his distance from the press during his investigation.
Said Carey R. Dunne, a partner at Davis Polk who has worked closely with Mr. Fiske: "He isn't the kind of lawyer who looks for the spotlight."
Wade Lambert in New York contributed to this article.
