Bugaboo Creek Steak House Inc., an initial offering of 1.5 million common shares, via Tucker Anthony Inc.
Carolina First Corp., an offering of 1.2 million common shares, with an overallotment option for 180,000 additional shares, via J.C. Bradford & Co. and Fox-Pitt Kelton Inc.
DynaGen Inc., an offering of 1,350,000 units, each unit consisting of three common shares and a warrant to purchase two common shares, transferable immediately upon issuance, with an overallotment option for 202,500 units, via RAS Securities Corp. and Thomas James Associates Inc.
Eaton Corp., a shelf offering of up to $600 million of debt securities and stock, via CS First Boston, Lehman Brothers and Merill Lynch & Co.
Empresas ICA Sociedad Controladora SA de CV, an offering of $435 million of convertible subordinated debentures, with an overallotment option for $65 million of debentures, via Baring Securities Inc. and Acciones y Valores de Mexico SA de CV.
Hanover Direct Inc., an offering of 10 million common shares, via Merrill Lynch & Co. and Alex. Brown & Sons Inc.
JDN Realty Corp., an initial offering of 5.9 million common shares, via Alex. Brown & Sons, A.G. Edwards & Sons Inc., J.C. Bradford & Co., Equitable Securities Corp., and Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp.
Landry's Seafood Restaurants Inc., an offering of 1.8 million common shares, via Montgomery Securities, Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. and J.C. Bradford & Co.
Novellus Systems Inc., an offering of 1.5 million common shares, with an overallotment option for 225,000 additional shares, via Hambrecht & Quist Inc., Bear, Stearns & Co. and Montgomery Securities.
Saxon Mortgage Securities Corp., a shelf offering for $1 billion of mortgage participation securities.
ScanVec Co., an initial offering of two million ordinary shares, via Furman Selz Inc.
Software Professionals Inc., an initial offering of one million common shares, via L.H. Alton & Co.
Vectra Banking Corp., an initial offering of 560,000 common shares and 700,000 Series A cumulative preferred stock, via Dain Bosworth Inc.
