The nation's leading small-business group said it opposes a possible Democratic health-care compromise designed to win small-business support.
But the group, the National Federation of Independent Business, indicated that the compromise seems less onerous for small businesses than the Clinton administration's approach.
Some Democrats in Congress are seriously considering a plan that would exempt small businesses from the administration's proposed requirement that employers help pay for their workers' health insurance.
John Motley, the chief lobbyist for the NFIB, said his group opposes the suggested compromise in principle because it would require midsize and larger companies to provide health insurance for their workers.
But for small businesses, he added, the alternative idea is "certainly a better solution" than the Clinton plan, which would require all employers to pay 80% of the cost of their workers' basic health-insurance costs.
The NFIB has been among the most vocal opponents of the Clinton plan and of employer mandates in general.
Any softening of its opposition could be a major factor in the final congressional overhaul of the nation's health-care system.
At the moment, however, there is a stalemate in Congress over the shape of that overhaul.
A plan that ultimately emerges may differ radically from Mr. Clinton's proposal or the Democratic compromise.
The compromise under consideration would exempt employers with 100 or fewer workers from the mandate.
Under the suggested compromise, the government would use tax incentives to help those companies' employees purchase health insurance.
Midsize and large businesses would be required to pay for a portion of their workers' health-care coverage.
The Clinton plan has been criticized for imposing too great of a burden on small business, though it would provide subsidies to hardpressed employers.
The NFIB and several other small-business groups said that the compromise idea sounded intriguing, though there still are few details.
"NFIB will never support a mandate on any employer, large or small.
Philosophically we're against it," Mr. Motley emphasized.
"But if this proposal becomes a viable bill, we'd have to recalculate our efforts.
The mandate would become less of an issue, the impact on our members would be less and the degree of our opposition would be less."
Most of the federation's 607,000 members employ fewer than 100 workers.
"The discussion of this compromise shows how effective the small-business argument has been and the problem it's creating" for the Clinton administration, Mr. Motley added.
Other small-business organizations also see promise in the compromise proposal.
"In looking for a compromise that makes sense, they're getting closer," said John Galles, executive vice president of National Small Business United, the second-largest small-business membership organization.
But "I'm not sure this is the answer yet," he cautioned, noting that Congress still has to decide how to finance the alternative plan and how rich any health-benefits package would be.
The Small Business Legislative Council, which has been generally supportive of President Clinton's reform proposal, also wants to pursue the compromise idea.
"It has significant potential because the significant majority of small businesses have under 100 employees," said SBLC president John Satagaj.
"We're not saying throw everything else out.
But we're interested in exploring this option."
Small-business organizations agreed that if a compromise exempting the smallest concerns seems likely to pass, they would concentrate instead on fighting other provisions of the Clinton plan.
Among them: requiring bigger employers to provide a costly set of health benefits and forcing companies to join health-care purchasing groups.
It's unclear whether the suggested compromise would include those requirements.
If it does, the compromise may still rankle small and midsize firms with more than 100 workers.
The National Association of Manufacturers says 60% of its members are small companies and 98% of all members already provide employees with health insurance.
"The real fear is that this will become a government entitlement program and expand," said Christian Braunlich, director of the association's Smaller Manufacturers Council.
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce, currently involved in a bitter internal debate over which health-care plan to support, declined to comment on the congressional compromise proposal.
Last week, the chamber's health committee recommended that it endorse requiring employers to help pay for their workers' health insurance.
Many of the chamber's small-business members strongly oppose that stance.
The chamber says it plans to poll all members for their views on several different approaches to health-care reform before the business group's full board makes a decision.
