Industry experts -- and a few potential rivals, predictably -- said the plan launched yesterday to operate a network of 840 satellites will have a hard time reaching altitude, despite the lofty successes of its two patrons.
Mr. McCaw's pioneering company McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. is now the world's largest wireless carrier.
And Mr. Gates built Microsoft Corp. into the world's largest software maker.
But their satellite plan to provide a variety of services to rural areas world-wide is sure to fly into technical, financial and political flak that hasn't been adequately addressed in their proposal to the Federal Communications Commission, industry experts contended.
"God save us, it's the stupidest damn thing I've ever heard of," said John Pike, director of the Federation of American Scientists' Space Policy Project.
"Terrestrial telephone is much less expensive to implement, and who would use their system who could afford it?"
Howard Anderson of the Yankee Group added: "This is a midlife crisis for both" Mr. McCaw, 44 years old, and Mr. Gates, 38.
"It ain't gonna work."
If the two entrepreneurs were truly serious, he asserted, they would put up far more of their own money rather than seeking backers.
But executives at the McCaw-Gates venture express confidence that the various hurdles will be overcome.
"Today, the cost of bringing modern communications to poor and remote areas is so high that many of the world's people can't participate in our global community," Mr. McCaw said in a prepared statement.
His new effort, he maintained, will be "an opportunity to broaden this vision to include all of the world's citizens."
Indeed, the McCaw-Gates venture, known as Teledesic Corp., will have to entice numerous manufacturers and governments to back what would be an extraordinarily costly project.
By the year 2001, Teledesic plans to have its network of 840 satellites circling the Earth in a low orbit, offering a broad array of interactive voice, data and video services at prices similar to conventional wired services.
Yet potential investors already have myriad other satellite suitors.
Motorola Inc. is building support for its similar Iridium effort, a $3.4 billion launch aimed at mobile users.
Loral Corp., the defense contractor, is teaming with tiny Qualcomm Corp. to launch its 48-satellite GlobalStar system.
TRW Inc.'s Odyssey project is a smaller, 12-bird system in final development stages.
And still another effort, Ellipsat, already has the support of Westinghouse Electric Corp., Harris Corp. and Fairchild Space Corp.
"We'll exploit rural telephone service before the others even get started," said Gerald Helman, a vice president at Ellipsat's holding company, Mobile Communications Holdings Inc.
Teledesic is far more ambitious, given its goal of putting 840 satellites aloft.
Even if Messrs. McCaw and Gates can raise the money needed, however, they would need to lure millions of users to generate enough traffic to pay off the cost of the network, which will be at least three times more expensive than Motorola's elaborate Iridium satellite project.
Rural folks and underdeveloped regions, the primary target of Teledesic marketers, aren't used to paying large sums for communications services.
Just launching that many birds will be an awesome undertaking, noted a spokeswoman at TRW.
Assuming the launch of 840 satellites is successful, "there's an awful lot of ground control."
More ground control of satellites, in fact, than the North American Aerospace Defense Command, known as Norad, handles from its base in Colorado Springs, Colo., noted Mr. Pike.
"In the whole world, there are about 300 to 350 active satellites," he added.
It is also hard to see how the Teledesic partnership will be able to compete with conventional phone networks, much of which will be efficient high-speed digital fiber-optic highways by the turn of the century.
And where there isn't fiber, Motorola and Sweden's LM Ericsson are selling cellular radio networks to fill in the gaps.
Motorola says it has already sold 120 such networks in China, for example.
Motorola already has a big jump with Iridium.
While the network would be marketed primarily to high-paying mobile phone and data users, there is nothing in the service's plan that would prohibit Iridium from offering a fixed regular phone service to rural customers.
For now, Iridium and Teledesic don't regard each other as rivals.
While Iridium, by terms of its FCC license, is a mobile service aimed at hand-held devices, Teledesic is aiming its beams at people at home or in a business.
"There are real distinctions," said Russell Daggatt, Teledesic's president.
"We aim to deliver affordable broadband communication services to areas where there isn't wired services, and Iridium would deliver high-cost narrowband service to mobile customers."
There could be some overlap with Teledesic in developing countries, however.
Iridium's spokesman noted that a state phone company in one of these countries, for example, could decide as a temporary measure to set up a portable kiosk to provide a global link to a village, but that would likely be an interim step to building a traditional phone infrastructure.
Still, rivals hope that there's room for one more player in the satellite game.
Ellipsat's Mr. Helman says the McCawGates entry helps to "validate the need for mobile and fixed satellite services," such as Ellipsat's under $1 billion project.
Another rival, CellularVision of New York L.P., is setting up a wireless service to deliver video programming to the home, starting in Manhattan.
The service operates in the same 28-gigahertz frequency that Teledesic wants to use.
While the FCC is currently looking at whether satellite systems will interfere with terrestrial systems such as CellularVision, Shant Hovnanian, CellularVision's chief executive officer, says, "I think that there is definitely room for everybody. . . .
I think what this does is that it shows another sign of overwhelming support for wireless in general."
Teledesic also may have an edge over rivals in the data race.
While Iridium would transmit data to portable devices at as much as 2,400 bits per second, Teledesic is promising data transmission at millions of bits per second, enough to send data files at high speed and even moving images.
A top Sony Corp. executive finds that intriguing.
"It's very appealing," said Michael Schulhoff, president and CEO of the company's Sony Corp. of America unit, a major purveyor of programming and of the electronic devices that would make use of global networks.
Just extending fiberoptic cable to homes in California alone would cost an estimated $16 billion, he noted, "so $9 billion isn't an outrageous amount of money for a global telecommunications network. . . .
I'd be the first subscriber."
But Messrs. McCaw and Gates need to find more owners for Teledesic.
Today, each owns slightly more than 30% of the partnership, on which they have spent a "couple of million dollars," according to a McCaw spokesman.
The remainder is held by McCaw Cellular, at 28%, and Kinship Ventures II, at 10%, a Los Angeles venture-capital fund run by Edward Tuck, who founded the Magellan global-positioning satellite system.
The McCaw Cellular holding would be transferred to American Telephone & Telegraph Co. once AT&T completes its expected $12.6 billion purchase of McCaw later this year.
Don Clark in San Francisco contributed to this article.
