Sugar appears poised to sweeten traders' profits.
"Prices should rise in coming months," says Christopher Pack, head of research at C. Czarnikow Sugar Futures Ltd., a London sugar merchant.
Demand for the sweetener currently exceeds supplies, he says, and until Southern Hemisphere nations such as Australia and South Africa sell larger crops later in the year, the market will be supported by the supply shortage.
Adds Judith Ganes, senior commodity analyst at Merrill Lynch, "World sugar stocks are set to drop toward historically low levels, equivalant to 28% of consumption."
At those levels, she says, the market tightens and sugar futures contracts traded in New York and London tend to break into higher price ranges.
Sugar futures have traded in a range of 9 cents to 11 cents a pound since last May, Ms. Ganes says.
She estimates that they could rise to nearly 16 cents in 1995, particularly if inventories remain insufficient to meet importers' requirements.
World sugar demand of about 114 million metric tons could exceed production this year by 2 million to 3 million tons, says Mr. Pack of C. Czarnikow.
Most of the sugar produced is consumed by its producers, he says, leaving only around 26 million tons traded on the international market.
A relatively small difference between international supply and demand can therefore have a strong impact on international trade and world prices, Mr. Pack says.
A major influence on the market this year will be import requirements of India and China.
Both nations are huge consumers and producers of sugar, Mr. Pack says.
Since crops will be far lower than expectations, the market will closely monitor their imports.
Meanwhile, continuing concerns about the potentially small size of the Cuban crop and, to a lesser extent, the output of Thailand and Brazil, are also bolstering prices, Mr. Pack says.
Analysts have doubts about official Cuban statistics, which state the country's production is as high as 4.5 million tons.
They believe that shortages of fuel, fertilizer and spare parts for farming and processing equipment mean that the harvest will be much lower than that.
Meanwhile, the Russian Interfax news agency quoted Oleg Davydov, Russia's minister of foreign economic relations, as saying that Russia will sell Cuba 4 million tons of crude oil this year, in exchange for 2.5 million tons of sugar.
The market expected that less Cuban sugar would be bartered for Russian oil, analysts say.
That implies there will be even less Cuban sugar available for purchase by the international market.
Sugar has proved to be an extraordinarily volatile commodity in the past, plunging to 2.5 cents a pound in 1985 from 43 cents in 1980 and then rising sixfold by the end of the decade.
Any sugar bull market could be limited to 20 cents this time round, although buying by commodity funds, which are managed pools of investor money, potentially could add momentum not present in the past.
Two factors potentially limiting the upside potential of sugar prices are that more sugar substitutes are available now, and consumers are more sensitive to rising prices, analysts say.
"The most difficult sugar supply-demand variable is world consumption," says Farideh Bromfield, head of sugar research at E, D & F Man Sugar Ltd.
"As soon as prices rise, demand will fall quickly and the market balance will shift to surplus from deficit," she says.
It is mainly for this reason that sugar prices failed to match optimistic expectations last year and failed to break out of a narrow trading range, Ms. Bromfield says.
Illustrating the potential volatility of the market, however, was the fact that futures prices in New York jumped 5% in very little time the week before last.
For months traders had expected Russia, a major importer, to reduce sugar purchases because of the nation's economic crisis and a vigorous import tax the country was expected to impose on sugar.
When rumors spread that the tax would be lower than expected, sugar prices soared, dealers say.
London dealers were surprised that rumors of smaller import restrictions affected international prices.
According to Russian officials, Russian sugar imports fell 30% last year to 2.6 million tons.
Moreover large Cuban exports to Russia are likely to reduce Russia's orders from Western farmers, they say.
"Considering the collapse of the ruble, the hyper-inflation and recession, any import tax should limit Russian purchases," a London dealer says.
