The Environmental Protection Agency said it will require that new cars and trucks include a device that captures gasoline vapors that otherwise would escape into the atmosphere during refueling.
The device is an enlarged and somewhat reconfigured version of the charcoal-filled canister required to capture evaporative emissions on current-model automobiles.
But where existing canisters are in the engine compartment or near the gas tank, the new canister will extend to the "filler neck," where gasoline is pumped in at the service station.
The new refueling canisters are required for automobiles under the 1990 Clean Air Act.
In issuing its final rule on the matter, the EPA extended the requirement to trucks, though with a slower phase-in period.
Auto companies and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, an agency within the Transportation Department, have long contended that the new canisters would pose a safety hazard by increasing the likelihood of fire during a crash.
But environmental groups and the EPA, noting that vehicle use has doubled since the early 1970s, when evaporative emissions controls first came into being, contend that the new devices are needed to reduce smog.
"It's a huge step forward" that will be "good for consumers," said EPA Administrator Carol Browner.
The EPA said the new rule, when fully phased in, would reduce evaporative emissions 95%.
Brian O'Neill, president of the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, said his group would have preferred the federal government to impose the refueling controls at the gasoline pump, an option he termed "a clear and safe alternative."
The 1990 clean-air law did impose refueling controls on gas pumps at service stations in 55 cities -- including Los Angeles, St. Louis, and Washington -- where smog is especially severe.
Nearly all of those cities have by now installed technologies to recapture vapors from the pump nozzle, varying in sophistication from a somewhat clumsy plastic sheath to less-obtrusive vacuum devices.
An EPA official said these requirements are likely to be scaled back or dropped once the on-board controls are fully in place.
Automobile makers must install the new refueling canisters in 40% of new cars by the 1998 model year, 80% of new cars by the 1999 model year, and 100% of new cars by the 2000 model year.
Makers of light trucks such as minivans, pickups, and delivery trucks must phase in the canisters from 2001 to 2003 for trucks up to 6,000 pounds, and from 2004 to 2006 for trucks of 6,000 to 8,500 pounds.
The EPA estimates that implementing the rule will cost $10 per vehicle, while the industry estimates the rule will cost about $30 per vehicle.
