The past quarter century has witnessed a dramatic rise in the educational achievements of American women.
According to the National Center for Educational Statistics of the U.S. Department of Educational Statistics of the U.S. Department of Education, more girls than boys are going on to college (67% of high-school girls compared with 58% of boys) and women have gone from being only 41% of undergraduates 20 years ago to 55% today.
In graduate education the progress of women has been even more impressive.
Since 1970, the percentage of women earning master's degrees has risen to 53% from 40%; that of women receiving doctoral degrees has jumped to 39% from 14%.
Thirty-six percent of those now receiving medical degrees are women, up from 8%, and this year 42% of first-year medical students are women, while the percentage of women earning law degrees has climbed to more than 40% from 5%.
These are impressive figures, but they are not impressive enough for Myra and David Sadker, whose new book, "Failing at Fairness" (Scribner's, 347 pages, $22), maintains that girls are systematically discriminated against in American schools from kindergarten onward.
It's a subtle business, this discrimination, and you had best be guided by the Sadkers' writings or enroll in one of their workshops if you hope to have your eyes opened to the various ways in which teachers continue (the figures above notwithstanding) to ignore girls and fail to steer them to math, science, medicine and law.
It is the Sadkers' contention that teachers pay more attention to boys than to girls, call on boys more often, and wait longer for boys to answer a question before going on to the next pupil.
But how scientific are their studies?
The Sadkers have never had their conclusions replicated by an objective outside authority.
Their book looks scholarly, with more than 30 pages of footnotes, but on close examination some of the sources prove to be out-of-date or unpublished, and many more footnotes cite either the authors' own previous work or that of their students.
Even if it were true that classroom teachers pay more attention to aggressive boys than to more reticent girls, it is a leap of faith from that observation to the conclusion that boys therefore are learning more.
It may be that teachers employ various techniques that have more to do with keeping order among the generally more obstreperous boys than with pedagogy per se.
It is even possible that quiet girls are processing more information, acquiring more knowledge than the more active boys in the class, since girls go through school getting better grades than their male counterparts, although boys do better on objective tests.
Does this mean that tests are unfair to girls?
That was the oft-repeated headline in the media blitz of last year's publication "How (not "If") Schools Shortchange Girls," issued by the American Association of University Women and dedicated to the achievement of "gender equity."
The report is based largely on the questionable conclusions of the Sadkers and is, like their book, a work of advocacy rather than scholarship.
The report is strikingly written and handsomely packaged and it proved convenient to the many education writers at newspapers all over the country who printed its assertions as established truths.
Both the report and the Sadkers' book, which is subtitled "How America's Schools Cheat Girls," provide ammunition for the effort now under way to reactivate the Women's Educational Equity Act Program.
In the early '70s, this program funded the development of "nonsexist" textbooks.
The effort was so successful that the 1987 National Assessment of Educational Progress test found that more American high-school students could identify Harriet Tubman than Winston Churchill or Joseph Stalin.
But that is still not good enough for the ideologically driven among radical feminists.
Buying into the current trend toward the Balkanization of American society -- which has groups defined by race, ethnicity and gender vying with one another for victim status and compensatory entitlements -- both the report and the Sadkers' book will probably be widely cited as evidence of the need for new legislation.
That will, of course, require funding a bureaucracy to enforce the regulations, and eventually we can expect demands for tests that women will pass in percentages corresponding to their percentage of the population.
The kind of groupthink involved depends on a denial of individual differences in ability, talents and interests resulting from anything but discrimination.
(Those in the thriving gender-equity business don't seem to notice that Asian-American girls often outperform boys from other groups.)
The trouble with such thinking is that it detracts from the real problems in American education, which have to do not with discrepancies between the achievements of girls and boys but with the still shocking discrepancies between the achievements of American boys and girls and the boys and girls in other countries.
We should be worrying about why our youngsters of both sexes are near the bottom of the ladder in international tests of math and science and excel only in measures of self-esteem.
The Sadkers' polemic will do little to remedy that situation.
Ms. Kramer is the author of "Ed School Follies: The Miseducation of America's Teachers."
