David Mullins, vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, resigned to go into the high-technology money-management business with a group of prominent exiles from Salomon Brothers Inc.'s bond-arbitrage desk.
Mr. Mullins's unexpected resignation coincides with the expiration of Wayne Angell's term as a Fed governor, allowing President Clinton to fill two of the Fed's seven seats at a pivotal moment.
As Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan made clear earlier this week, the Fed is now contemplating when to raise short-term interest rates and how much.
The White House hopes the Fed won't move soon and when it does, that it won't move rates up very much; putting two of its own appointees on the board can't hurt.
"Two out of seven, now that's real leverage," Rep. Barney Frank (D., Mass.) said yesterday.
Mr. Mullins's term would have extended until January 1996.
Mr. Greenspan's term as chairman lasts until March 1996.
Bond prices reacted negatively to Mr. Mullins's resignation, in part because it will give the Clinton administration a greater chance to influence the makeup of the board.
Mr. Mullins will become a partner at Long-Term Capital Management, a Greenwich, Conn., firm founded last September by John Meriwether, the former Salomon Brothers vice chairman who was forced out after the 1991 Treasury securities scandal at the firm, a unit of Salomon Inc.
The Securities and Exchange Commission suspended him from the industry for three months and fined him $50,000 for failing to supervise trader Paul Mozer, the central player in the scandal; Mr. Meriwether neither admitted nor denied wrongdoing in accepting the suspension.
At Long-Term Capital, Mr. Meriwether has set out to recreate the swinging atmosphere of the Salomon trading floor, where he won renown for reportedly bluffing then-chairman John Gutfreund at a $1 million hand of liar's poker, a betting game played with dollar bills.
Mr. Meriwether has lured a mix of brainy academics and former Salomon colleagues, many of them long-time associates of Mr. Mullins, including Myron Scholes, Mr. Mullins's first finance professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and MIT classmate Eric Rosenthal.
Mr. Mullins described the job yesterday as "a return to his roots in the intellectual challenges of high-tech finance."
It also pays better than the $123,100 he earns at the Fed.
He wouldn't say how much.
Mr. Clinton's economic advisers learned of Mr. Mullins's decision only Monday and were to meet late yesterday to talk about looking for a successor, chief White House economist Laura Tyson said.
She said she doubted there would be a quick decision.
The advisers have recommended that he name Brookings Institution economist George Perry to replace Mr. Angell.
The White House has asked government lawyers whether Mr. Perry may have a conflict of interest because his wife is a portfolio manager for three stock mutual funds; the lawyers haven't yet given a final answer, White House officials said this week.
Mr. Perry would be a contender for the vice chairman's job, which is Mr. Clinton's to fill.
But others who weren't interested in being a rank-and-file Fed governor might also be interested, among them Treasury official Alicia Munnell, deputy budget director Alice Rivlin and White House economist Alan Blinder.
The White House will face strong pressure to name a woman or minority-group member to one of the two vacancies.
A Bush appointee who was well-liked by Clinton administration officials, Mr. Mullins was instrumental in orchestrating the Fed's attention-grabbing interest-rate cut at the end of 1991 and is regarded as second only to Mr. Greenspan in his influence at the Fed.
He had often vowed to press as hard to raise interest rates as he did to cut them, but leaves after four years without ever voting to boost rates.
Mr. Mullins, 47 years old, came to Washington in 1988 as assistant Treasury secretary for domestic finance after 14 years at the Harvard Business School.
The plan for Long-Term Capital is an ambitious one.
Mr. Meriwether intends to raise about $2.5 billion to trade complex and highly illiquid financial instruments using computers to identify market imperfections.
This would be by far the largest start-up of its kind.
With the leverage common to such instruments, traders say the firm could take positions as large as $100 billion for every $1 billion of cash in hand.
But the venture seems to be off to a slow start, people at other similar trading operations say.
Mr. Meriwether hired Merrill Lynch & Co.'s institutional sales force to speed the money-raising, and set the minimum investment at $10 million.
But investors proved far less eager than Mr. Meriwether had thought.
People familiar with the fund-raising say the effort has stalled out short of $1 billion, preventing the fund from accepting its first round of investments, a milestone that was to occur on Jan. 4, and from starting to trade.
A spokesman for the firm says that the fund anticipates closing on some investors' money later this month, which would allow the firm to start trading then.
The firm's private-placement memorandum suggests several reasons why investors may have balked.
To begin with, investing $10 million at one shot is stiff for most investors.
More damaging may have been the disclosure that the firm's principals plan to contribute $100 million, but their fees are so generous that they get their money back no matter how well their investors do.
Long-Term Capital collects 2% on the money they raise annually on top of a 25% share of each limited partner's profits.
Indeed, Mr. Meriwether's crew would recoup their initial investment with a lousy performance even if the firm raises not one cent more.
That's because investors can only withdraw their funds every third year, instead of every three months as is common among such speculative funds.
Mr. Mullins left the Treasury before the Salomon scandal hit and hadn't anything to do with the disciplining of Mr. Meriwether.
He was the Fed's point man on the Salomon matter and other financial-market issues.
"If I had the slightest reservation about the integrity of my partners, I would have had many other opportunities," he said yesterday.
Neither Mr. Mullins, whose resignation is effective Feb. 14, nor Mr. Angell will participate in this week's meeting of the Fed's policy-setting committee.
