Late afternoon sunlight glints off the steel skeleton of a model house.
Home builders, here for a recent convention, stomp across a floor screwed to the steel frame, testing its strength.
Others prod, poke and kick at the strange beast.
One throws up his hands and wails: "So this is the future?"
For years a few builders have used steel instead of wood to frame houses, and skyrocketing lumber prices have triggered a surge in those using -- or interested in -- the material.
But some builders argue that if steel really bites into the lumber market, the pressure on the timber supply will decrease, and the price will drop.
Still, timber prices have nearly doubled in the past two years, adding as much as $5,000 to the cost of a house.
And because of lawsuits by environmentalists, even the meager amount of lumber the Clinton administration promised from federal land hasn't been cut.
That has created a shortage that could send prices climbing another 20%, according to Lynn O. Michaelis, chief economist at Weyerhaeuser Co., a Tacoma, Wash., timber concern.
As a result, builders are looking for alternatives to wood, and the most widely touted is galvanized steel.
"Everybody's looking at it," says Robert Lewis, president of Lewis Homes of Nevada.
Proponents rhapsodize about the material.
Three to four recycled cars will produce a steel house frame, compared with 15,000 board feet of lumber.
Steel doesn't burn, warp, rot or attract termites.
And fire insurance drops on steel houses.
Screwed together instead of nailed, steel homes have weathered hurricanes better than traditional houses, whose roofs blow off when nails pull out.
Builders' interest in steel moves in lock-step with lumber prices.
A few residential builders have used steel since the 1920s, and intermittent lumber price spikes have piqued curiosity about the material, which costs about the same as wood at current prices.
A survey by the National Association of Home Builders recently found that 11% of those questioned already use steel framing and a third plan to try the material.
Two years ago, the association found only 20% interested and a scant 1% using any steel.
The American Iron and Steel Institute expects 75,000 steel homes to be put together this year, up from 20,000 last year and a mere 500 in 1992.
But there is also resistance.
"There has been a lot of hoopla about steel everytime there's a lumber crisis," says Robert I. Toll, chairman and chief executive of Toll Brothers Inc., a large builder in Huntingdon Valley, Pa.
"Just as soon as you get ready to put in your order for steel studs, lumber prices come down."
"I won't become interested in steel until it becomes significantly cheaper than lumber and we see how the consumers react," adds Ira C. Norris, chairman and chief executive of Inco Homes Corp. in Upland, Calif.
So do builders, which explains the skepticism at the Home Builders convention here recently, when thousands of people inspected a 1,350-square-foot steel-frame construction in a parking lot.
Builders also have other options than steel, including constructing fewer or smaller homes and using less wood -- pouring concrete patios, say, instead of putting in a wood deck.
More than a third of those in the association survey said they were already using engineered wood products, in which cheap wood parts are glued together, and almost a quarter said they would use them in the future.
"It's not steel vs. wood.
I use a lot of wood," says Bruce Ward, a builder from Salem, Ore., whose company, Restek Inc., promotes the use of steel and teaches others how to build with it.
Mr. Ward has been making homes out of light gauge steel for 16 years.
"I think it's a superior product," he says.
Clad in wood and other traditional materials, steel homes don't look any different.
Steel does have problems, though.
Metal is more conductive than wood so it heats up and cools off faster, and thus requires more insulation.
After sitting at a building site in the hot sun, steel studs can burn ungloved hands.
And while interior steel studs are fairly widely available, exterior steel framing material still isn't widely distributed.
But the biggest drawback is unfamiliarity.
Few construction workers know the material well, and its introduction slows down building, though backers say that crews can be up to speed with steel after a few projects.
Steel's key selling point is its relative price stability, compared with timber's frequent rollercoaster rides.
Last week lumber was selling for $370 per thousand board feet, up 10% from a year ago but down 28% from its peak in December.
"We got slaughtered for $2 million last year" because of price spikes, says Mr. Toll.
Steel prices, meanwhile, are up less than 10% this year, and capacity can be increased in a year to respond to demand.
That means that developments in the housing market are being watched closely in timber country.
"Steel will make some inroads," concedes Mr. Michaelis, the Weyerhaeuser economist.
"If lumber prices do come back down, the question is will builders come back to traditional products?"
