What Treasury security matures in 15 years but yields as much as the 30-year bond?
For a dozen investors yesterday the answer was a synthetic 15-year Treasury note.
It's a new kind of bond that Wall Street firms are rushing to market to fill a void in the market for Treasury securities and create alternatives for yield-starved buyers of corporate and Treasury bonds.
Yesterday, CS First Boston Corp., a unit of CS Holding AG of Switzerland, sold $500 million of these 15-year notes, which were made by pooling 30 different Treasury securities and using their coupon and principal payments to pay interest and principal on the new notes.
Like Treasurys, the notes will be noncallable.
They carry a 6% coupon and were sold at a yield of 6.30%, the same yield as the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond yesterday.
The long Treasury bond's yield dropped to 6.30% from 6.34% on Tuesday, as its price, which moves in the opposite direction, rose nearly 1/2 point, or almost $5 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 99 5/32.
But you can't get something for nothing in the bond market, and the 15-year synthetic Treasury note is no exception.
What investors gain in yield, they will lose in liquidity, says Kevin Reed, manager of fixed-income investments at First National Bank of Commerce in New Orleans.
Mr. Reed bought some of the notes for a mutual fund he manages.
The bonds yield something "similar to a double-A-rated corporate bond, but you have substantially higher credit quality," he said.
"But you give up some liquidity," he warned.
"If you go to XYZ firm" instead of CS First Boston, which sold the notes, "they're not going to bid on it."
That means that if bond prices fall, it may be difficult for an investor to sell the notes.
John Costas, head of government-bond trading at CS First Boston, said his firm would make sure to continue making markets in the new security to maintain its liquidity.
But if the market takes a nasty turn, there is no guarantee that the notes will be easy to buy and sell.
On Friday, Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp. sold a similar $600 million 15-year offering.
Other firms have already sold similar versions of these securities.
Chase Securities Inc. termed the first such issue, in July, "Spots," or synthetic par Treasury securities.
DLJ called its issue "Sorts," while CS First Boston has dubbed them "Treasury-Lincs."
For its part, Merrill Lynch & Co. named the securities it issued last November "Steers."
Merrill Lynch is expected to launch a 15-year synthetic issue next week, while CS First Boston and DLJ both say they will follow with additional issues.
Officials at Bear, Stearns & Co. and Lehman Government Securities Inc. also say they are considering issuing similar securities.
Until 1985, the government sold 30-year bonds that were noncallable for 25 years, says Louis Crandall, chief economist at R.H. Wrightson & Associates Inc., a firm that does Treasury market analysis.
In 1985, the government began making all 30-year bonds noncallable.
Nearly a decade later, this change has resulted in a shortage of noncallable Treasurys maturing in 15 years.
All Treasurys maturing in 15 years can be called by the government.
This situation has helped to lift the prices of Treasurys with slightly longer or shorter maturities so high that they have become prohibitively expensive for many investors.
Dealers are trying to create an alternative to highly rated corporate bonds, which offer paltry yields at an extremely tight yield spread over comparable Treasury securities.
The new products also offer investors high-quality paper amid a drought of new issues in the investment-grade corporate-bond market.
Firms create the securities by gathering stripped Treasurys to produce the desired income stream.
The DLJ and CS First Boston deals, for example, consist of 30 noncallable Treasury strips.
The strips are placed into a custodial account, acting as collateral for the synthetic bonds.
Thus an investor is actually buying a custodial receipt.
In the case of the CS First Boston deal, investors can go to the custodian and exchange the receipt for the securities, which provides an element of liquidity.
The DLJ and CS First Boston issues, aimed at larger investors, were sold in lots of $100,000.
"The product is largely an institutional product," said John Friel, a managing director at DLJ.
The investors in the CS First Boston deal included state and corporate pension-fund managers, insurance companies, and money managers.
Corporations haven't ignored the demand for noncallable securities with 15-year maturities.
They have sold many of them in recent months.
A flood of the new synthetic 15-year Treasury notes could push the prices of these corporate securities lower, analysts say.
Meanwhile, Treasury notes and bonds chalked up moderate gains yesterday as the market was able to weather somewhat disappointing bidding at the government's auction of new five-year notes.
The market's ability to post gains in the face of a lukewarm auction yesterday marked a reversal from Tuesday's session, when slightly weaker-than-expected bidding for new two-year notes provided an excuse for traders to knock prices lower.
The Treasury's 10-year note rose less than 1/4 point to 100 6/32 to yield 5.71%, compared with 5.73% on Tuesday.
With no major economic news to guide trading, dealers had only the Treasury's auction of $12 billion in five-year notes to focus on.
The Treasury awarded the offering at a yield of 5.10%, which was at the high end of expectations.
The details of the auctions, meanwhile, also revealed sub-par bidding interest.
The bid-to-cover ratio, a measure of demand comparing the number of bids tendered to those accepted, was 2.38 to 1, and noncompetitive bids, which typically reflect interest from outside the Wall Street community, were $566 million.
That compared with an average bid-to-cover ratio of 2.76 to 1 over the past 12 auctions, and average noncompetitive bids of $603 million.
The yield on the when-issued five-year note finished the day near 5.07%, compared with 5.09% late Tuesday.
The two-year note sold on Tuesday yielded 4.12% in when-issued trading, unchanged.
Here are the details of yesterday's auction by the Treasury of five-year notes.
All bids are awarded at a single price at the market-clearing yield.
Rates are determined by the difference between that price and the face value.
The notes are dated Jan. 31, and mature Jan. 31, 1999.
International debt issues continued to take center stage in the corporate-bond market.
Eksportfinans A/S priced a 1.5 billion Swedish krona ($187 million) offering of global bonds.
The Norwegian export financing agency sold the 10-year global bonds with a 6.875% coupon.
The bonds were priced 0.24 percentage point above comparable Swedish government bonds to yield 6.975%.
The paper was sold through lead underwriter Salomon Brothers International Ltd. and is rated double-A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and triple-A by Standard & Poor's Corp.
Global bonds are securities issued by a corporation or a government simultaneously in the U.S., European and Asian markets, usually in a single currency.
Eksportfinans priced the longest krona-denominated global this year; other offerings have been either five- or seven-year issues.
U.S. investors continue to find European currency bonds attractive, especially as this year's new-issue calendar is slim, syndicate officials said.
In trading, bonds of Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales SA, Argentina's largest oil company, rose after their sale Tuesday.
The price of the 8% coupon YPF 10-year Yankee note was up 1/2 point, or $5 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 100.27.
The yield dropped to 7.93% from 8.033%.
Yankee notes are fixed-income securities sold in the U.S. by foreign companies.
Attention now turns to the Province of Ontario's floating-rate, five-year global note offering, expected today.
It may be as big as $1.5 billion, market participants said.
In addition, $1.58 billion of debt was priced in the domestic market, including a $700 million deal from the Student Loan Marketing Association.
Other issuers included First Fidelity Bancorp., USAir Group Inc., Hoechst AG's Hoechst Celanese Corp. and Riggs National Corp.
Secondary trading was extremely light Wednesday.
Junk bond prices ended unchanged.
Investment-grade bond prices followed Treasurys slightly higher.
Municipal bonds finished unchanged to 1/4 point higher, helped by optimism about the slowdown in issuance this week.
The York County, S.C., 5.70% bonds due 2024 finished unchanged at 99 3/4 to 100, yielding 5.70%.
Among this session's gainers were the Harris County, Texas, 5.30% bonds due 2013, which closed 1/4 stronger at 99 3/8 , yielding 5.33%.
Meanwhile, the Maine State Housing Authority's $110 million of mortgage-purchase bonds, priced by a Goldman Sachs group, was given yields ranging from 4.35% in 2000 to 5.75% in 2033.
The issuance falloff is "the key thing" helping the secondary market, said a New York muni specialist, noting that bonds with 15-year to 20-year maturities are currently popular.
The municipal market's issuance lull is expected to continue for a while, but next week's pricing calendar includes at least one very large offering.
A Bear, Stearns & Co. Inc. group is expected to price the New York Triborough Bridge & Tunnel Authority's $665 million of general-purpose revenue bonds Tuesday.
After outpacing government securities in the morning, mortgage securities fell back in line with Treasurys to finish only marginally better.
Mortgage trading desks sometimes like to see mortgages fall behind Treasurys, whenever underwriting groups want to generate real estate investment conduits and get the biggest bang from those Remics.
It's more profitable to create a Remic when yield spreads between mortgages and comparable Treasurys are widening, because it's cheaper for dealers to buy mortgage securities as collateral.
Only one Remic deal was announced, a Federal National Mortgage Association 1994-29 deal backed by Fannie Mae's 6 1/2% securities.
Among prices of 6 1/2% mortgage securities for February delivery, Ginnie Maes were up 5/32 in late trading at 100 3/32.
Freddie Mac Golds and Fannie Maes rose 1/8 point to 100 5/32 and 100, respectively.
Adjustable-rate mortgages also finished higher yesterday.
Traders say Ginnie Mae ARMs of all coupons gained 1/8 to 1/4 point on the day.
These securities had been rising for much of the past few weeks, but trailed off this week after investors decided the issues were getting too rich.
Jacqueline Doherty contributed to this column.
