The antitrust cops are calling in reinforcements.
To bolster the ranks of its antitrust division, the Justice Department has launched a quiet but aggressive hiring drive.
Its quarry: experienced trial lawyers from the private sector.
Among the new hires is Samuel R. Miller of the powerful San Francisco firm of Morrison & Foerster and chairman of the American Bar Association's antitrust-litigation committee.
His assignment: to help spearhead the Justice Department's investigation of Microsoft Corp., the nation's largest software maker.
The idea of recruiting seasoned trial attorneys from private law firms to government jobs isn't unprecedented, of course -- attorneys routinely rotate in and out of government jobs.
But retaining what are essentially hired guns to work on particular cases is rare -- and difficult.
The most that any of the new hires will make is $93,500 a year, just slightly more than what a young lawyer might make starting out at a major New York firm.
The experience factor has long been a sticky issue in the antitrust division.
In the 1970s the division sought a waiver from the Office of Management and Budget so it could pay attorneys above government scale.
It didn't get one and had to continue hiring young lawyers to fight even the biggest cases.
"We had relatively inexperienced, young lawyers running up against very high-quality opposition and working at a disadvantage," says Joe Sims, a former deputy assistant attorney general for antitrust in the Carter administration.
"We were trying to fix that problem.
We didn't fix that problem."
Mr. Miller will in effect be floating senior litigation counsel along with Max L. Gillam, the senior trial lawyer at 500-lawyer Latham & Watkins in Los Angeles, and K. Craig Wildfang, a Minneapolis attorney known for representing plaintiffs in antitrust cases against the workers' compensation insurance industry.
Although they'll be working full time for the Justice Department, Messrs. Miller and Gillam will be allowed to maintain offices in San Francisco and Los Angeles, respectively.
Among other cases the new lawyers may work on: the department's review of the proposed merger of Tele-Communications Inc. and Bell Atlantic Corp.
"The deal is, I would go where the action is," says Mr. Gillam.
"That is a nifty job for a trial lawyer."
Anne K. Bingaman, assistant attorney general for antitrust, has lured experienced attorneys to the Justice Department with promises that they will have unusual latitude in helping to identify and try major cases.
Last fall, she received congressional approval to fund the additional salaries.
"It is the first time the division has ever had the resources available to engage in a concerted hiring program," says Steven Sunshine, a deputy assistant secretary to Ms. Bingaman.
Antitrust was among the hardest hit areas of the Justice department during the Reagan and Bush administrations, when the ranks of lawyers, economists and staff within the division were greatly thinned because of the prevailing free-market attitude.
Today, the division employs about 600 people, down from roughly 1,000 in 1980 when Mr. Reagan took office.
Ms. Bingaman's hiring push reflects an effort to reverse that trend.
Aside from hiring up to 40 new attorneys, the division is adding a comparable number of paralegals, another signal that the department is gearing up to bring some major cases, private attorneys say.
"She certainly wants to make sure that she can have a high degree of confidence in her trial lawyers," says Jack Brown, a Phoenix attorney who used to practice law in the same firm as Ms. Bingaman.
"Remember, they haven't done any substantial trial work there for a long time."
Mr. Miller, assigned to the Microsoft team, has already dived into his work.
Bill Neukom, Microsoft's vice president, law and corporate affairs, says he has had a preliminary discussion with Mr. Miller about the status of the investigation.
"We would hope at the end of the day that he would agree with us that the company is doing business in a perfectly legal and competitive way," Mr. Neukom says.
The investigation is believed to focus on whether Microsoft used its position as the dominant supplier of operating-system software for personal computers to illegally thwart competition.
Mr. Miller declines to comment on the case.
He says that while he expects the Microsoft case to take up most of his time for the foreseeable future, he expects he will eventually work on other matters.
"There's a lot to do," he says.
Many attorneys say the new hires' trial backgrounds are just what the antitrust doctors ordered.
"I think that when a lawyer defending a company looks across the room and sees a Sam Miller or a Max Gillam, they are going to think six times about what they are going to do in this case," says James Brosnahan, a partner of Mr. Miller's at Morrison & Foerster.
An individual who files a claim with a local antibias agency doesn't necessarily forfeit his right to privacy, a federal appeals court ruled.
The case involved a former Pan Am employee who filed a complaint with the City of New York Commission on Human Rights, alleging that Delta Airlines, after acquiring some of Pan Am's assets, failed to employ him because he was a gay male and because of suspicion, correct as it turned out, that he was HIV positive.
After the parties entered into a settlement resulting in the man's hiring, the city issued a news release in August 1992 disclosing the terms of the deal.
Although the statement didn't expressly identify him by name, the man alleged that it contained sufficient identifying information to have violated his constitutional right to privacy.
The trial-court judge dismissed the man's invasion-of-privacy suit against the city, determining that he had waived his privacy right by bringing the claim to the commission, which was required by statute to disclose all settlements.
In reinstating the complaint, the Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, New York, found that the man retained his right to confidentiality and that the statute in question didn't automatically make the medical information a matter of public record.
To rule otherwise, the court wrote, would be to "undermine entirely the purpose of the Commission on Human Rights, and to heedlessly make public that which is often surely intended to remain private."
(In re John Doe vs. the City of New York, et al., 93-7596.)
Law Note . . . .
CHICAGO MERGER: Corboy & Demetrio, one of the nation's premier personal-injury law firms, is merging with Robert A. Clifford & Associates.
The combined staff of 30 lawyers will concentrate on aviation, medical negligence, product liability and other personal-injury cases.
Corboy & Demetrio's lead lawyer is Philip H. Corboy, 69 years old, co-chairman of the American Bar Association's litigation section.
Mr. Clifford, 42 years old, is a former associate of the firm who split off in 1984 to start his own shop.
The new firm will be called Corboy Demetrio Clifford P.C.
Margaret A. Jacobs contributed to this article.
