Cable companies quickly began revamping plans and revising financial projections in the wake of new federal cable rate cuts that helped scuttle the merger between Bell Atlantic Corp. and Tele-Communications Inc.
The new 7% cutbacks ordered by the Federal Communications Commission, which follow a 10% cut last year, won't be fatal to the industry.
And in the longer term, larger diversified cable operators will likely prosper.
But for the immediate future, cable companies say they are scaling back anticipated expansion; they are also trying to make up the lost revenue from basic cable-rate cuts by reshuffling channel offerings and pushing unregulated services such as premium channels and pay-per-view events.
"We don't have much of a choice," says Glenn Jones, president of Jones Intercable Inc., the eighth-largest cable operator.
"We have to comply with the law."
Most cable operators say they will be forced to cut capital spending, slowing construction of the vaunted information superhighway.
Thus, ambitious plans to buy new computer-like cable converters, to upgrade coaxial cable with fiber optics and to buy expensive new digital "video servers" may now be put on hold.
Indeed, TCI, which dubbed the latest round of rate rollbacks as "unwarranted, excessively severe and harmful," said yesterday that it plans to suspend $500 million of capital spending (50% of its 1994 budget) pending further clarification of the FCC regulations.
The news sent the stock prices of two cable-equipment suppliers -- General Instrument Corp. and Scientific-Atlanta Inc. -- falling yesterday.
"It will be difficult to make up the revenue in the near term," says Howard Vogel, a vice president with Merrill Lynch & Co.
"They really do have to slow the spending."
And Jessica Reif, an analyst at Oppenheimer & Co., says of the FCC's actions: "The government can't expect private enterprise to spend billions of dollars on the information highway, then cut them off at the knees by rolling back rates."
Reed Hundt, the new FCC chairman, dismissed such claims as alarmist rhetoric from the cable industry.
He predicts it will "continue to prosper" despite cable companies' cries to the contrary.
"I am absolutely confident that the cable industry, after reading the rules and putting their ingenuity to work, will find ample opportunity for revenue with new services and products," he said.
Mr. Hundt added that he believes the FCC's action was fair and warranted.
"We are here to protect consumers from excessive monopoly prices," he said.
"That's our job."
The formal FCC order will be issued in mid-March; it will contain the formulas cable systems need to measure the impact on the businesses.
"If their story is that uncertainty killed the deal, why not wait 30 days?" said Michael Katz, the FCC's chief economist.
Both companies, he said, "should have looked to see what we have done."
The rules allow cable companies to charge more for news services and give them incentives to invest in their network.
Ms. Reif says it is too early to fully assess the impact on individual cable companies.
Specific rules relating to cost-of-service standards -- how cable operators calculate their costs -- and a la carte pricing of channels won't be published by the FCC for a month or so.
Companies under the new FCC benchmarks won't have to cut rates further, she says.
The FCC's position is that cable operators haven't been complying with the letter of the law, and that's why more cuts are necessary.
An agency survey found that roughly a third of cable consumers' bills rose after the 10% cut was ordered last year.
In many cases, cable operators took all but a handful of channels out of the so-called basic package, so that consumers had to pay more to get the more desirable services in different "tiers" of service.
More than anything else, the new rate cuts will pinch cash-flow growth, a primary indicator of a cable company's health.
Because of heavy debt taken on for expansion in the 1980s, most cable operators don't report profits; instead, they have leveraged steadily rising cash flow to expand and get loans from banks.
In general, Ms. Reif says, two-thirds of cable cash flow is from basic service and expanded basic service, which includes several more popular channels.
Thus, a 7% rate cut would decrease the cash flow that companies get from basic and expanded basic subscriptions by 14%, assuming operating profit margins of 50%.
Some companies are more vulnerable than others.
TCI, for example, gets all of its cash flow from cable and thus stands to be hit hardest, with a 9% decline in cash flow, Ms. Reif says.
Time Warner Inc., by contrast, has other businesses such as filmed entertainment, records and publishing, so its cash flow would only be reduced by about 3%.
With pressure on cash flow, cable operators will have to look even harder to find new money.
Many cable companies had been counting on investments from telephone companies to help foot their bills, but future deals may now be in limbo with the collapse of the Bell Atlantic-TCI merger.
Just this month, concern over rate rules forced Falcon Cable Holdings, a California cable operator with more than one million subscribers, to shelve an initial public offering.
Falcon Chairman Marc Nathanson, who was hoping the sale would generate $125 million for upgrades and debt repayment, blames the delay of the offering on uncertainty over the FCC rate regulations.
"The future is uncertain," says Mr. Nathanson.
"We're holding off until the dust settles."
The National Cable Television Association, which estimates that cable operators have already lost some $2 billion in revenue, is planning to appeal the FCC regulations in the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.
TCI said it planned to appeal the rules.
Meantime, many cable companies will rebound from the FCC action by aggressively pushing unregulated services or offering new a la carte services that don't come under the rate rules.
Indeed, consumer advocates question how much real relief subscribers will get from the new cuts.
Because cable companies are still a monopoly in their local markets, some say the new rules will have the affect of squeezing a balloon -- wherever pressure is applied, equal efforts will be made to extract revenue elsewhere.
"The net effect is that consumers aren't likely to get the same cable at a lower price," says Thomas Hazlett, an economist at the University of California at Davis and a former chief economist with the FCC.
"They're likely to get a lower-quality cable package at a lower price."
As the FCC works to write the final rules, cable operators fret over the task of recalculating rates for each of the 11,000 systems.
"The thing we really have to worry about is the rain forests," says Mr. Jones of Jones Intercable.
"For the first round of rules, there were 500 pages going to every city and county and cable operator.
Now there's a new set coming down."
