We hear a lot about welfare reform, and certainly the President found the topic useful in his State of the Union speech, but why don't we look at something specific: the $131 billion elephant called Medicaid.
Medicaid has moved considerably beyond its original welfare bounds when it was created in the Great Society.
It may surprise you to learn that Medicaid (meaning federal and state taxpayers) now pays for nearly half of this country's births.
That's right.
Under provisions of the Pregnant Women and Children program that California Congressman Henry Waxman and others weaved into the Medicaid law in recent years, states on average are providing prenatal, obstetric and/or one year's follow-up services to well over 40% of women giving birth.
The child, of course, immediately becomes a Medicaid beneficiary.
This is all by design.
The sponsors argued that reducing the percentage of low-weight and otherwise problem births was good economic as well as social policy, so they arranged for households making 133% of the national poverty-line income to be eligible for these services.
In some lower-cost states, that national standard results in persons of median income qualifying.
Moreover, states have the option of raising the bar: In South Carolina, you can make 185% of the U.S. poverty level and be covered.
So 49% of births there are under Medicaid.
That's one reason why this is a national phenomenon and not seen just in California and Texas, where medical welfare is out of control.
Another reason is that eligibility is based on income in the month prior to application.
That means states with highly cyclical employment patterns, typical of farming, logging or mining, are likely to get a rush of tax-paid babies during the down months.
This may explain North Dakota's 43% of births paid for by Medicaid, or Idaho's nearly 42%.
Sheila Sorensen, who chairs the Senate Health and Welfare Committee in Idaho, endorses the program's aims but says it has "opened the floodgates" beyond the expectations of anyone, at least at the state level.
In 1987, Idaho's Medicaid birth rate was 6.7%.
Last year, in one of its northern resource-based counties, it exceeded 80%.
The problem, as she sees it, is the approach the program takes to encouraging pregnant women to attend better to their condition.
Instead of saying, "What are your resources?
Let's figure out how you can afford this," Medicaid leads with, "We'll pay for it," she complains.
Thus, the pregnancy benefits are one more engine powering the Medicaid rocket that has taken the states (which cover from 25% to 45% of the costs) into fiscal orbit along with the federal government.
(Ironically, the states have just been hit again, with a White House mandate that they provide abortions.)
How successful the latest Waxman initiative is proving in reducing low-weight births is uncertain.
Misbehavior by the mother, including smoking and drinking, is the chief cause of that problem, and experts disagree about the effectiveness of pre-natal counseling in getting at that.
At the same time, it's unclear how much the new eligibility standards are contributing to the alarming increase in illegitimate births.
Changes in federal law aren't the only factor here.
The shrinking of health-insurance coverage among low-wage earners has led some to Medicaid.
But as Douglas Besharov of the American Enterprise Institute points out, the dynamics of this program also serve to widen its net under a greater section of the American middle class.
"Do we want a system that creates socialized medicine for such a large portion of Americans at a certain point in their lives?" he asks.
If you are Henry Waxman or some like-minded folks in the White House, eager to hook middle America on a benefit and create a constituency for its perennial expansion, you probably do.
And you are succeeding.
