The bears known as short-sellers have been wrong about many stocks in the current bull market, but U.S. Surgical is one of those they got right.
From a peak above 134, the stock took a course worthy of an Olympic-mogul skier, hitting a few bumps but basically going down, down, and down.
And the downhill drift remains, even after the stock's 21% plunge Wednesday, some market veterans assert.
Triggering the drop was an unfavorable court ruling, a one-time setback that prompted some buying yesterday by "bottom-fishers" looking for a rebound.
Also doing some buying yesterday were shortsellers cashing out portions of their bets against the stock.
Still, the stock fell again yesterday, losing three points, or 14%, to 18 1/2.
And the short-sellers -- who have been spectacularly right about this once-highflying stock up to now -- say the worst isn't necessarily over.
They maintain big short positions.
(In a short sale, stock is borrowed and immediately sold.
The idea is to profit from any ensuing price decline that allows the return of cheaper shares to lenders.)
"At this point you can flip a coin" as to whether U.S. Surgical will recover or collapse, says Robert Holmes of Gilford Partners, Chicago.
U.S. Surgical this week lost its bid for a favorable court ruling in a patent-infringement claim against rival Johnson & Johnson and has said it's looking for a "cash infusion."
U.S. Surgical makes tiny surgical instruments that are inserted into the body through a tube.
Mr. Holmes says he shorted U.S. Surgical in the short-selling fund he runs when it was in the mid-to-high 20s.
He has shrunk that bet "a little at this level," meaning he bought shares to cash out some of his bearish bet.
But Mr. Holmes cautions: "If the small investor is trying to bottom-fish here, he'll be trying to catch a falling knife."
Traders say that one of U.S. Surgical's most ardent bears, Meyer Berman, a Great Neck, N.Y., short-seller, maintains most of his huge short position, too.
In one of Wall Street's best short-selling bets in an otherwise poor period for shortsellers, Mr. Berman shorted at least two million shares of U.S. Surgical at prices as high as 108.
And he has stubbornly refused to cash out.
One trader said Mr. Berman has "covered some stock, but not too much."
Mr. Berman declined to be interviewed.
When the company was flying high some prescient bears correctly foresaw problems from competition with Johnson & Johnson's Ethicon unit, as well as a declining market for the disposable (non-reusable) surgical instruments that are U.S. Surgical's mainstay.
"It's not the fact that U.S. Surgical is in the wrong industry, but the wrong part of the industry," says one bear.
That U.S. Surgical continues to decline, following a 67% drop in 1993, recalls advice from Fidelity Investments' star stockpicker Peter Lynch.
One of his "10 most dangerous things" people say about stock prices is: "If it's gone down this much already, it can't go much lower."
(Speaking of Fidelity, rumor had it that Fidelity was bottom-fishing in U.S. Surgical after selling out in early 1993.
In-the-know traders confirm Fidelity bought almost one million shares, but in early January this year.
Fidelity declined to comment about its current plans.)
Wall Street analysts have been kinder to U.S. Surgical than have the bears.
But that is changing.
PaineWebber analyst David Lothson yesterday cut his rating to "unattractive" from neutral.
Even a bull has faint praise: Fahnestock & Co. yesterday upgraded U.S. Surgical to "speculative buy" from hold.
"While we do not minimize the company's financial and operating problems," wrote analyst Robert C. Dunne, "we believe it is unlikely that USS will be forced into bankruptcy proceedings."
PRIVATIZATION FEVER: The hot-button for investors this week was the one marked "privatize."
More than $1.1 billion poured into yesterday's initial public offering of Global Privatization Fund, a publicly traded or closed-end fund managed by Alliance Capital Management.
The fund's initial public offering of 74.5 million shares was priced last night at $15 a share, drawing about triple the $350 million the fund was expected to pull in.
The fund, to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange with the symbol GPF, will invest around the world in privatizing state enterprises.
Underwriter Kidder Peabody declined to comment, citing SEC restrictions.
