It's budget time again and, like many governments, the administration of this British colony is facing an embarrassing imbalance.
But while the U.S. Congress stays up nights failing to clean up a $4.5 trillion red-ink splotch, Hong Kong officials suffer a more enviable plight: how to contain pesky, perennial surpluses.
Yesterday, Financial Secretary Sir Hamish Macleod admitted that his projections a year ago of a $440 million deficit in the fiscal year ending March 31 were too cautious.
Instead, he said, the government will have chalked up a $1.95 billion surplus for the year.
"Unlike many other societies, both Asian and Western, we have found the right budgetary balance," Mr. Macleod said.
The cash in the colony's coffers, including money generated by land sales or set aside for monetary management, has swelled to $40 billion, analysts estimate -- about the same as Britain's reserves.
That's enough to buy each of the 5.8 million people who live in the colony a first-class round-trip air ticket to London, and cover limousines at both ends.
But fat surpluses and huge reserves inspire more worry than pride.
Mr. Macleod fretted in the past that the government wasn't spending enough on infrastructure.
This year, he said, "urgent steps" taken to lift spending were producing "a heartening improvement."
Not enough to please everyone.
"I don't think the government has a right to collect money if it doesn't have a purpose," complained Rod Houng-Lee, senior tax partner at Price-Waterhouse.
"The taxpayer shouldn't have to pay for a surplus."
Tax specialists say Hong Kong's fiscal fortunes are tied to its high growth -- the economy grew 5.5% in the last calendar year, its 27th straight year of expansion -- and thriving trade with China.
There, the economy raced along at a growth rate of 13% last year.
The government's approach to fiscal policy is a conservative's dream: it keeps spending and income taxes low.
The top personal tax rate is 15%, and fewer than 2% of residents must pay that much.
The fiscal year just ending may have been exceptional, though: Stock and property transactions, on which the colony collects stamp duty, boosted revenues as the stock market's Hang Seng Index soared 116% and land prices soared.
And, with prosperity spreading, high sin taxes kicked in; Mr. Macleod effectively lowered the duty on most liquor yesterday to a flat 100%, though the cigarette tax remains at a steep $2 a pack.
The government's golden touch even reached its plans to build a massive new airport at an estimated cost of nearly $19 billion.
A political dispute with China kept some budgeted money from being spent.
And because the Hong Kong government is the only client in the world for some of the huge dredgers and equipment used on such projects, the colony has been able to negotiate lower fees for their use.
So the government is looking for new ways to spend its money.
Nearly half of public spending in Hong Kong goes to housing and social welfare.
Mr. Macleod wants to boost outlays for health, welfare, education and the environment.
The increase in spending, Mr. Macleod said, should alleviate Hong Kong's fiscal imbalance in the coming 12 months: The surplus will narrow to slightly less than $1 billion.
