Woolworth Corp. launched an internal investigation of "allegations of accounting irregularities," including the procedures that the retailer said will cause it to restate its interim financial results for at least one of its past two fiscal years.
Although the company said it expects that "nothing in the allegations" will "materially adversely affect" Woolworth's financial position, analysts said the disclosure raises concerns about the retailer's operations.
The variety-store and specialty-store operator, which has closed and sold stores in an effort to boost its sagging operating results, declined to elaborate on its terse statement.
But the announcement, which surprised analysts, appeared to suggest that the problems could go beyond typical year-end reviews of merchandise-markdown policies that retailers often undergo.
Indeed, Woolworth said a special committee of the board, headed by an outside director, has hired the law firm Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison.
The law firm, in turn, has retained accountants KPMG Peat Marwick to assist in the investigation.
Price Waterhouse is Woolworth's outside accountant.
The announcement prompted two major ratings agencies to launch or intensify reviews of Woolworth debt.
Moody's Investors Service Inc. said it will review the debt for a possible downgrade, exploring "details of possible weaknesses in Woolworth's internal controls," among other issues.
And Standard & Poor's Corp., which put Woolworth debt on its CreditWatch list with negative implications this month, said "the investigations involve the integrity of financial management and may reveal deeper problems than initially anticipated."
Karen Sack, a retail analyst with S&P, said, "This raises lots of issues about the management of the company and the kinds of controls they have or don't have."
Moody's rates about $1.5 billion of Woolworth debt securities, including Baa1 long-term debt.
S&P, reviewing $500 million of debt, rates senior debt single-A-minus.
The announcement delayed opening of trading in Woolworth shares on the New York Stock Exchange.
The shares fell 5.6% to close at $17 a share, a 52-week low, down $1 in composite trading, after trading as low as $16.25 a share.
Volume was about four times the average 560,000 shares.
In a brief statement, Woolworth, which had revenue of $9.63 billion for the fiscal year ended in January, said it will restate its interim financial results for latest year and may have to restate similar results for the year ended Jan. 30, 1993.
The company, which operates Woolworth stores as well as such specialty stores as Foot Locker, said the restatements aren't expected to "have an impact" on the full-year results of both fiscal years, and will reflect "the correction of gross margins."
Woolworth said it couldn't yet estimate the size of any restatements.
Some analysts speculated that the retailer was making adjustments for miscalculating the effect of markdowns in the past fiscal year.
The company may end up restating results for fiscal years that have been marked by major closings and sell-offs of stores, some of which were no longer profitable, and by a variety of special charges.
This month Woolworth reported an audited loss of $495 million, or $3.76 a share, for the year ended Jan. 29.
Results for the period included a loss of $104 million, or 79 cents a share, on the sale of the company's Woolco stores in Canada to Wal-Mart Stores Inc. and other Woolco stores that will be closed, sold or reopened under a different format.
For fiscal 1993, Woolworth reported net income of $280 million, or $2.14 a share.
Woolworth's results from the most recent fourth quarter reflect the disappointing results from the company's continuing operations.
Woolworth reported an operating loss of $21 million compared with an operating profit of $286 million a year earlier.
The company said the results were "negatively impacted by disappointing sales and heavy promotional activity."
Ms. Sack of S&P said the tremendous growth of the company's Foot Locker stores in recent years has slowed significantly.
"The sports-footwear business is growing for them, but slowly, and it has become very competitive with more companies jumping in."
Analysts noted that a number of details remain unclear -- including the nature of the allegations and their severity, as well as to whom they might point.
Some analysts noted that the fiscal years in question include a time in which the company's chairman, William K. Lavin, served as chief financial officer.
Ann Marie May, an analyst with Fitch Investors Service Inc., said the hiring of outside law and accounting firms raises serious questions.
"That suggests its more than just a typical account adjustment.
It leads me to believe something else could be going on."
