Potential foreign investors dazzled by China's gold and diamond deposits confront a confusing question: Who in China minds the mines?
Beijing is expected to approve by midyear regulations allowing foreign investment in the prospecting, exploitation and sale of gold, diamonds and many other minerals.
But the prospect of an influx of foreign capital has unleashed a scramble among Chinese agencies at all levels of government to assert control over the nation's mines.
And that, as well as the mining industry's ill-defined tax and regulatory frameworks, is tempering foreigners' enthusiasm for China's latest step in opening its economy.
"We're increasingly confused as to which Chinese party has the ultimate authority to negotiate deals," says David Owens, president of Asia Minerals Corp. of Canada, who has been scouting for mining deals in China for the past 18 months.
To be sure, mining isn't the only sector plagued by questions of ownership.
Under China's constitution, all assets -- land, factories, natural resources and the like -- belong to the state.
That wasn't a problem so long as the central government managed these assets.
But in recent years, economic reform has decentralized decision-making, fragmenting state agencies into many powerful regional units without clarifying where ultimate ownership of assets rests.
That has fueled frequent turf battles, especially when various agencies vie for the right to link up with foreign companies.
These days, the fighting is particularly fierce in the mining sector.
A major reason: China's gold, diamond and other mineral reserves have long been regarded as part of China's national heritage, and thus they have been kept off limits to foreigners at a time when many other industries -- and the individuals managing them -- have benefitted from inflows of overseas capital.
With the sector set to open, Chinese mining officials don't want to miss out.
"Chinese officials would tell you they now believe that the mineral resources belong to the entire world, so it's OK for foreigners to dig," says an executive of Olds Industrial Inc., another Canadian mining concern.
"The truth is, they now believe in the get-rich-quick policy: Sell the minerals and grab the money."
For their part, foreigners relish the prospect of exploring one of the world's last mining frontiers.
Despite the industry's crude extraction methods and financial constraints, China already is the world's sixth-largest producer of gold, and ranks among the top five in production of iron ore, aluminum and lead.
"We're very excited by the opportunities" presented in China, says Wayne Spilsbury, a vice president of Teck Exploration Ltd. of Canada.
The company is setting up a regional office in Singapore that will serve as a base for exploring for gold and other minerals in China.
Gold mines appear to be attracting the most attention, especially now that international gold prices are strengthening.
The State Gold Bureau controls nearly half of China's gold mines, with the rest operated by provincial and even county governments.
All, however, are required to sell their output to the central government, which controls distribution and sets domestic prices for the metal.
Last December, the Ministry of Geology and Mineral Resources announced that foreigners would be allowed to explore for gold and even acquire existing deposits that are difficult to extract.
The ministry also recommended allowing foreigninvested gold mines to sell their output on the domestic and world markets.
At the same time, it publicized the names of a dozen gold mines, mostly marginally profitable, looking for foreign investors.
But foreign companies keen to tap China's gold and other resources are concerned about more than whom they should be negotiating with.
For one thing, China has yet to clarify what their tax liabilities will be.
A geology ministry official says Sino-foreign mining joint ventures will be subject to the same 33% profit tax and 17% value-added tax as other businesses in China.
However, these ventures also will pay a "resources-compensation tax," and that rate hasn't been decided yet.
Lack of a regulatory framework for foreign investment in mining is another worry.
For instance, it remains unclear whether a foreign partner in a diamond mine will be allowed to buy its Chinese partner's share of output for sale on the international market.
Such concerns will be addressed in the changes to the nation's mining law that are expected to be approved by midyear, the geology ministry official says.
Even so, the ownership issue will likely persist.
Already, executives with several foreign companies say negotiations to acquire mining stakes have been stalled by power struggles among Chinese agencies.
Asia Minerals last August signed a letter of intent to invest in a lead, zinc and silver mine in Shaanxi province.
All along, the Canadian company dealt with a provincial concern comprising interests of the provincial government, the Beijing-based China National Nonferrous Metal Industry Corp. and Cnnmc's provincial affiliate.
But recently, Cnnmc itself stepped in to claim control of the mine and the right to negotiate with potential foreign partners.
That has put the deal on hold.
"The chairman of the provincial concern told us that he represented interests of all parties, but in hindsight, he may not have the real authority," says Mr. Owens.
