The chicken king is on the move again.
In the past two years, Tyson Foods Inc., by far the nation's largest poultry processor, has spent much of its time diversifying into seafood processing -- with its acquisitions of Arctic Alaska Fisheries Corp. and Louis Kemp Seafood Co. -- as well as beef and pork.
But 75% of Tyson's business is still poultry and the continuing boom in chicken consumption has prompted a return to the coop -- in a big way.
This month in its biggest expansion since nearly doubling in size in 1989 by acquiring Holly Farms Corp. for $1.29 billion, Tyson announced plans to build over the next three years four poultry plants that will each process 1.3 million chickens a week.
Counting one other plant already under construction and some enlargement of existing facilities, Tyson's plans will cost about $400 million and increase its weekly processing capacity by at least 30%.
The overall expansion is expected to add at least 8,500 jobs to Tyson's payroll.
The company now employs about 50,000 workers.
Executives at the company, based in Springdale, Ark., say they are merely acting to meet growing demand, domestic and foreign, especially in restaurants, where Tyson is especially strong.
"We don't see it as a huge risk," says Donald "Buddy" Wray, Tyson's chief operating officer.
Neither do investors.
The stock didn't move much after the announcement and closed at $23.875 a share, down 37.5 cents yesterday, in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
"I guess I'd be concerned about four new plants going into the pork business, or beef," says Eric J. Larson, analyst at Morgan Stanley Group Inc.
"But this is a business they know."
Still, he adds, "this is a big number.
A big, big number."
But with the nation in a love affair with the chicken, that big number may be justified.
With the help of exports, U.S. chicken production has grown at an annual rate exceeding 6% in the past five years and is projected to grow 5% this year.
And while per capita U.S. consumption of beef, pork and seafood has been largely stagnant or declining during that period, per capita chicken consumption has grown at a rate of about 4% a year, with Americans projected to eat on average about 70 pounds of chicken each in 1994.
Much of that consumption is taking place in restaurants.
Most of the big hamburger chains have introduced new chicken offerings in recent years, as have full-service restaurant chains.
And the growing popularity of roasted chicken has yielded a number of rapidly growing fast-food chicken chains -- along with a swift response from PepsiCo Inc.'s KFC unit, the nation's dominant fast-food chicken purveyor.
Last year, the chain introduced The Colonel's Rotisserie Gold, a marinated and roasted product, and the public gobbled it up.
Already, the menu item generates 25% of KFC's sales, much of that revenue the chain says it wouldn't otherwise have.
"We all used to go out for a hamburger," says John M. McMillin, an analyst at Prudential Securities Inc.
"We all now go out for rotisserie chicken."
Rotisserie Gold also has been golden for Tyson, which supplies much of the raw material for the hot new product.
And Tyson has strengthened its hold on the rest of the restaurant chicken business as well.
The company says it sells chicken to 90 of the 100 top restaurant chains.
Its "food service" customers -- which include schools, hospitals and hotels as well as restaurants -- account for 55% of the company's total poultry sales, up from 40% to 45% five years ago.
But Tyson's expansion isn't without risk.
William P. Roenigk, senior vice president of the National Broiler Council, a Washington group representing chicken producers, expresses concern about overproduction that could depress chicken prices.
"One of these days we're going to have to start to slow down," he says.
But in announcing its expansion, Tyson insists that chicken consumption will continue to rise, though not quite as fast as in recent years.
Analysts agree, citing poultry's nutritional value and adaptability to different seasonings, flavorings and cooking methods.
"It's a very versatile source of protein," says Ron Paul, a restaurant consultant at Technomic Inc. in Chicago.
Even if weakened demand depresses the industry, Tyson is relatively insulated from the market's volatility because only 10% of its poultry is basic fresh chicken sold in supermarket meat cases.
The bulk of Tyson's poultry products are processed in some additional way, for example, by deboning, marinating, breading or partly or fully cooking it.
The profit margins on this "value added" chicken are higher, and its prices are less subject to market price swings than unadorned poultry is.
For example, Tyson marinates Rotisserie Gold chickens before delivering them to KFC restaurants, which then roast them.
Other products shipped to restaurants need only be heated up.
Tyson even lends food technologists from its 75-person research-and-development department to restaurants to help develop new products.
KFC says Tyson was instrumental in developing its Hot Wings menu item and also worked on Rotisserie Gold.
Tyson also sees continued growth outside the U.S.
Though the company doesn't break out figures on sales to individual countries, its total exports doubled to 8% of overall sales in the year ended Oct. 2 from 4% in fiscal 1990.
A number of Tyson customers, such as KFC, McDonald's Corp. and the Sam's Club wholesale outlets of Wal-Mart Stores Inc. -- are expanding rapidly in Mexico.
"I think Mexico has huge potential for them," Morgan Stanley's Mr. Larson says.
The decision to build processing plants from scratch is a departure for Tyson.
Of its roughly 65 facilities, all but three were acquired, including two beef plants in Texas whose purchase was announced this month.
Mr. Wray says Tyson would have bought existing facilities this time too, but the prices being asked were too high.
Nonetheless, Tyson officials say the company can easily absorb the added capital costs without taking on much, if any, new debt.
Mr. Wray estimates the company's total capital outlays will increase to $300 million in each of the next three years from $225 million last year.
But Tyson's accelerating expansion could cause some growing pains.
Just as it no longer could find suitable existing processing facilities for sale at the right price, the company may find it increasingly hard to recruit farmers willing to work under contract to raise Tyson's chickens.
In fact, the company has already ruled out its home base of northwestern Arkansas as a location for any of the new plants, citing a labor shortage there.
