When we first looked into the peculiar case of the Alabama sturgeon back in November, the fish hadn't been spotted in nearly a decade.
Nevertheless, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service was pressing ahead in its quest for an endangered species listing, even though the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers warned that a listing might force it to curtail dredging along some of the South's busiest commercial waterways.
The unspotted sturgeon was in danger of becoming the next spotted owl, prompting Alabama's entire Congressional delegation to come out against a listing.
A couple of weeks after our editorial, the frantic angling of the government's biologists paid off: They caught one.
"What this does is remove any doubt that the fish still exists," exulted James Stewart of the Fish and Wildlife bureaucracy.
With the fish now in their hands, scientists were within striking distance of solving another conundrum of the sort that now occupies the energies of the U.S. political system: Whether the Alabama sturgeon really represents a rare and distinct species from the Mississippi shovelnose, which is nearly identical and frolics in abundance in waters from North Dakota to New Orleans.
On New Year's Eve, the prized specimen was found floating belly up in its holding pond.
Curiously, the public wasn't notified until some four days later.
And while it may be premature to call for an independent counsel, other suspicious circumstances attended the famous fish's brief life in federal custody.
One question concerns how FWS even knew it had a non-shovelnose on its hands.
Three friendly biologists were brought in to match the fish up against the 1991 article in the Bulletin of the Alabama Museum of Natural History that first dubbed the hometown sturgeon as a different critter from the shovelnose.
One of the specialists, Scott Mettee of the Alabama Geological Survey, tells us that the actual measurements jibed with the standards laid out in the article, though whether eyeball diameters and scale counts capture variation within rather than between species is "in the eye of the beholder."
While the sturgeon lived, its captors rebuffed several requests for a blood sample from the Corps of Engineers.
This seems strange, for jointly the Corps and FWS have developed a large database on the blood genetics of the Mississippi shovelnose, and a sample might have shown how closely the breeds were related.
"We were shocked that the specimen died and we missed an opportunity to obtain blood tissue," Brian Peck of the Corps' Mobile office tells us.
What's more, the dead sturgeon was immediately wrapped in paper (not the Journal, as far as we can find out) and frozen, speeding the breakdown of blood proteins and amino acids.
It took a full week after its spirit had ascended to fish heaven before outsiders were even allowed to examine the cadaver, and then only for 15 minutes, timed by stopwatch.
Among them was Mike Howell, a local ichthyologist who led the recovery effort for the endangered watercress darter but doubts that the sturgeon represents a unique species.
He wasn't allowed to take any tissue samples either.
Mr. Howell was told that FWS intended to perform an autopsy and then preserve the fish in formaldehyde, polluting the tissue and probably ruling out any chance of genetic analysis.
Even so, the mystery of the late sturgeon's identity may still be solvable.
The Fish and Wildlife folks have acknowledged taking and freezing samples of fin tissue from the living fish.
Providing there's enough of them, these fin clips could provide insight into connection between the shovelnose and the Alabama sturgeon, though Mr. Stewart insists that genetics is not dispositive if the fishes look different.
Mr. Stewart, who objects to our earlier characterization of him as the sturgeon's political champion, says, "I concentrate on staying very biological on this issue."
In his view, it's the Corps of Engineers that's motivated by politics, namely a desire to curry favor with tugboat operators and local industry (aka, the humans).
FWS wasn't about to annoy the only living specimen by poking at it for blood samples or muscle tissue, Mr. Stewart tells us.
Rather, he was praying that he'd catch another and make a breeding pair.
We stress that there's no evidence of foul play here, just endangered-species politics as usual.
But it would certainly be more than a little ironic if the FWS, in attempting to prove the Alabama sturgeon should be protected, accidentally killed the last one.
And things would begin to smell distinctly fishy if the agency were now to stonewall attempts to get to the bottom of the genetic consanguinity between the common shovelnose and its Alabama cousin.
