Deluxe Corp. expects per-share earnings for the first quarter to be in the 45 cents to 50 cents range analysts are projecting, according to Chief Financial Officer Charles M. Osborne.
In an interview, Deluxe officials also offered an update on the company's plans for marketing an environmentally friendly ink they expect will produce substantial revenue within a few years.
Having so far failed to link up with a production partner for the proprietary product, Deluxe is moving forward with producing and marketing the ink on its own.
All of its own plants have been switched over to the product, and the first commercial sales occurred in the current period.
The company also outlined its other diversification plans, which are based on management's expectations that the growth of its primary business will continue to slow.
The results Mr. Osborne projected would represent a substantial downturn from the year-ago quarter's $51.8 million, or 62 cents a share.
As evidence of the pressure on Deluxe's profit margins, the earnings decline will come despite an increase in revenue to about $425 million from the year-ago period's $405.7 million.
The results the company anticipates for the current first quarter would be in line with the latest estimates by analysts -- a number of whom have slightly lowered projections that previously ranged up to 55 cents, Mr. Osborne said.
In part, he pointed out, results in the latest period were hurt by production disruptions related to the California earthquake, as well as a slowdown in orders from regions affected by unusually harsh winter weather.
Deluxe's traditional business is printing checks for financial institutions.
But as the industry's consolidation trend continues, customers are growing bigger and using their increased buying clout to demand discounts.
At the same time, the drive for additional noninterest income is indirectly contributing to margin pressure.
To boost revenue, many banks are sharply hiking the price of checks they provide customers.
That drives the customers to make use of lower-cost checks available by mail.
As a result of those pressures, Deluxe has instituted a number of cost-cutting moves.
It took a $49 million pretax charge last year, for example, to cover closing 16 check printing facilities; all but two of those shutdowns have been completed, Mr. Osborne said.
In addition, the company is expanding its own production of direct-mail checks.
Those checks are manufactured by Deluxe's Current unit, which also makes "social expression" products such as greeting cards, gift wraps and the like.
Current is one unit the company has targeted for growth.
The company similarly plans to expand its Business Systems unit, a printer and distributor of short-run computer forms and business forms, including checks, all aimed at small businesses.
The third area where the company intends to expand is its electronic payment systems division.
The segment's biggest business is processing transactions, and providing software, for regional ATM networks and financial institutions.
It also is seeking to use those electronic funds-transfer technologies into higher-growth areas, in particular, into what is known as the electronic benefit transfer market.
