Allegations of improper financial disclosure have emerged as the single biggest source of lawsuits against corporate directors and officers, supplanting complaints about mergers and acquisitions.
Results of an annual survey by the consulting firm Wyatt Co. illustrate shareholders' increasing efforts to hold companies financially responsible for statements they make in earnings reports, press releases and prospectuses.
Disclosure was the key issue in about 17% of lawsuits against corporate officials during the nine-year period ending in 1992, the survey found.
The number of disclosure suits in this year's survey far surpassed the number of cases complaining about corporate takeovers, the category that had previously topped the list of legal perils facing corporate officials.
The survey discovered about 10% of claims stemmed from mergers and acquisitions, a drop from 17% in last year's survey, which covered nine years ending in 1991.
Of the cases reported in the survey that have been resolved, 59% were settled out of court and 22% went to trial.
About 19% of the complaints were dropped.
In all, plaintiffs recovered money in about half the cases.
The overall average payout for successful claims against corporate officials was $3.3 million; the average payout in an improper-disclosure suit was higher, averaging $8.2 million.
Such claims are usually paid out of a company's directors' and officers' liability insurance.
Disclosure issues appear to be especially dangerous tripwires for companies making public stock offerings.
In the past nine years, public offerings triggered 5% of all lawsuits against directors and officers, compared to about 3.5% in last year's survey.
Investors increasingly are saying, "`Wait a minute. . . .
Something that you said in the prospectus was inconsistent with what it should have been,'" says Phillip Norton, a Wyatt consultant in Chicago who wrote the survey report.
Disclosure suits have become so common that it is probably impossible for big companies to ward them off entirely, lawyers say.
The suits are often filed by shareholders who have bought stock after reading a company's rosy assessment of its prospects, only to see shares plunge when the company releases more disappointing earnings later on.
But some lawsuits can be avoided if companies refrain from trying to increase their stock price "by making enthusiastic statements not only about where they are, but about where they will be in the months and weeks ahead," said Alan Bromberg, a corporate-law specialist at Southern Methodist University in Dallas.
"The best advice is, `Don't hype.'"
In addition, some courts are beginning to protect companies from disclosure suits if the prospectus for the deal at issue included plenty of warnings about potential pitfalls.
"There was a period when the courts began to regard such warnings as boilerplate.
They're now giving them a lot more credence," Prof. Bromberg said.
Wyatt sampled returns from 1,203 survey participants, mostly publicly traded companies.
The surveyed companies had median assets of about $600 million.
Legislation to enable lawyers registered in one European Union country to set up practices in other member states looks set to emerge from the EU Commission.
The commission is considering a draft proposal submitted last year by the Council of the Bars and Law Societies of the EU.
A commission official said the proposal has been generally well received in Brussels.
The plan, he noted, emerged as a compromise from EU bar groups after some 15 years of often tortuous debate, so it would be counterproductive to tinker with it too much.
He expects the commission's final proposal to be presented to EU member states in the next few months.
Under the draft proposal, a lawyer registered in one country could practice in another member state, or "host" nation, under his or her "home" country title.
So, for example, a British "solicitor" could establish a practice in France as a "solicitor," rather than as an "avocat" -- and would have the right to advise on French law if competent to do so.
"This is important," says the new EU bar group head, Danish lawyer Niels Fisch-Thomsen, "because very often a lawyer would be called upon to advise partly on home-country law and partly on host-country law."
The bar group's plan also outlines a procedure to allow lawyers to become fully integrated into the host country's bar: A lawyer licensed in one EU country would have to pass an exam in the host country to demonstrate basic knowledge of the local law and language -- but the test would be less rigorous than that given to new lawyers who were not already a bar member in that country.
Sexual abuse allegations were dropped against Roman Catholic Cardinal Joseph Bernardin of Chicago after the plaintiff said his memories of the situation were unreliable.
U.S. District Judge S. Arthur Spiegel, in Cincinnati, dismissed the $10 million lawsuit brought by a 34-year-old man, Steven J. Cook, who said he now realizes that his recollections of alleged incidents occurred during and after hypnosis, according to the Archdiocese of Chicago.
Efforts to reach attorneys in the case, and the court, were unsuccessful.
The archdiocese said the withdrawal of charges isn't part of any compromise or settlement.
It also said Cardinal Bernardin was dismissed as a party to Mr. Cook's allegations of sexual abuse against a Cincinnati priest.
The plaintiff initially said the alleged incidents occurred in the 1970s.
Charles Goldsmith and Richard Gibson contributed to this article.
