MEXICO'S COLOSIO DIED after being shot during a campaign rally in Tijuana.
The ruling party's presidential candidate was shot twice, in the head and abdomen.
Several hours later, the Mexican office of the presidency said he had died.
Colosio had undergone emergency surgery and at one point a transfer to San Diego was considered and rejected.
At least one suspect was seized immediately by the crowd, and authorities later said they had two in custody.
But they gave no indication of what may have motivated the attack.
The assassination came as Colosio appeared to be headed for a solid victory in the elections set for August.
The shooting is sure to convulse the country.
Israeli troops fired rockets into an apartment building in Hebron during a fight with Hamas guerrillas that left four dead.
Military censors banned reports on the 22-hour battle until it was over.
In Cairo, Israel and the PLO reported progress at negotiations aimed at reviving stalled peace talks.
The talks are focusing on Palestinian security.
South Africa warned Zulu leaders to cooperate in all-race elections next month in their apartheid-era homeland of KwaZulu.
Similar warnings preceded government takeovers of Bophuthatswana and Ciskei, two other black homelands that had refused to allow voting.
Zulu leader Buthelezi said he would allow voting, but wouldn't take part.
Clinton refused to grant executive clemency to Jonathan Pollard, who was sentenced to life in prison in 1986 after pleading guilty to passing secrets to Israel.
The Israeli government and some Jewish groups in the U.S. asked for clemency, but Clinton acted on recommendations against it by the Justice Department, Pentagon and CIA.
An Aeroflot jetliner crashed in Siberia, killing all 75 aboard, including passengers from the U.S., Hong Kong, Taiwan, Canada, Britain and India.
Russian authorities said there was no indication what caused the jet, a two-year-old Airbus A-310 flying from Moscow to Hong Kong, to plunge into a remote forest near the Mongolian border.
North Korea warned the U.S. not to forget the lessons of the Korean War as South Korea put its 650,000 troops on a higher level of alert than it usually orders during periods of tension with the North.
A State Department spokesman called the North Korean rhetoric belligerent and said that the U.S. was prepared for any contingency.
A Sarajevo bridge opened to civilians for the first time in 23 months, restoring a link between Muslim and Serb areas.
The reopening of several roads within and outside the city also added to a sense of returning normalcy after a two-year Serb siege.
Near Maglaj, however, Serb forces looted 94 tons of relief supplies from a U.N. convoy.
The Whitewater prosecutor sought documents from a bond dealer involving former Associate Attorney General Hubbell and White House aide Thomasson.
Thomasson once worked for the dealer, Dan Lasater, whose firm dealt in Arkansas bonds while Clinton was governor.
Lasater also was a Clinton fund-raiser.
Somalia peace talks broke down and a special U.N. representative to the negotiations said it appeared unlikely that the impasse would be resolved.
U.N. officials said the failure to reach an agreement on steps toward forming a government could lead to renewed fighting following the departure of peacekeeping troops this month.
Two Air Force planes collided over Pope Air Force Base in North Carolina, showering debris on a plane on the runway and paratroopers in a staging area below, killing 15 and injuring 82.
The crews of the two planes that collided, an F-16D fighter and a C-130 transport, weren't injured.
The fighter crew ejected and the transport landed safely.
Administration officials said White House aide Kennedy's duties will be reduced following revelations that he failed to pay Social Security taxes for a nanny.
The officials said Kennedy will no longer supervise issuance of White House passes or be responsible for doing background checks.
U.S. prosecutors are weighing criminal charges against Rep. Tucker of California, a Democrat, people close to the situation said.
A three-year investigation of Tucker focused on alleged bribery while he was the mayor of Compton in '91 and '92.
Tucker denied any wrongdoing.
