Maybe the resume should go the way of the dinosaur.
"To me, a resume is a deselection device," says Dennis Lunder, who as head of marketing communications at American Greetings Corp. in Cleveland manages about 80 people.
"My method is radically different."
In six job hunts over nearly 30 years, Mr. Lunder says he sent out "thousands of resumes at a time" with little effect.
Now, as a mentor in Hudson Job Search, a volunteer program in Ohio for unemployed executives, Mr. Lunder preaches this gospel:
-- Treat your search as full-time work.
Each weekday should be structured as a workday, with a schedule of events.
-- Compile a list of the 20 companies you would most like to work for, and then research them.
Call the secretary of the executive who is most likely to hire you and ask for the annual report and other corporate materials.
-- Keep researching.
Mr. Lunder went to stores that sold American Greetings cards and products, asking the store manager: How is the service?
Are you happy with American Greetings products?
How can things be improved?
He also received permission to accompany a sales rep for a day.
-- Write a one-page personal marketing letter, selling yourself to the person who is hiring, which isn't necessarily the company's human-resources executive.
Explain what you have learned (including some flattering comments on the company's innovations) and how you would fit in.
Enclosing a resume is a one-way ticket to the personnel department.
-- If asked for a resume, tell them you need a week to update it.
Then try to focus on aspects of your career that fit what the company is looking for.
-- Try to set up a 20-minute "informational meeting" with the hiring person.
(Don't call it an interview.)
If you get the person's voice mail, suggest a time, like 7 a.m. tomorrow.
-- Tell the hiring person what you know and admire about the company, and about your skills.
Have five smart questions on the company's strategy.
Only at the end of the meeting suggest you are looking for work.
Mr. Lunder advises listening to motivational tapes to keep spirits and energy high and checking whether your target has more job cuts in its future.
You wouldn't want to have to do this again.
