President Clinton unveiled his ambitious proposal to streamline the nation's unemployment system while providing increased job-search services, counseling and training to the jobless.
The plan, projected to cost more than $13 billion over five years, now faces dicey prospects on a crowded Capitol Hill calendar.
While the bill already has garnered more than 50 congressional co-sponsors, no Republican has yet signed on, and several had harsh words for the program.
Others, including the General Accounting Office, contend it doesn't go far enough.
The bill, called the Re-employment Act of 1994, is targeted largely at the middle class.
It would merge six federal training programs narrowly aimed at specific groups of unemployed workers, ranging from those who lost their jobs as a result of international trade to others hurt by military retrenchment.
Workers who lose their jobs, regardless of the reason, could come to a "one-stop shopping" center that would act as the central starting point for job searches.
From there, they would be sorted into whether they are temporarily laid off or permanently cut.
Those who were permanently laid off would be assigned job counselors, who could provide them with resume-writing and career advice or might recommend job-training programs.
Workers choosing federal job training could receive unemployment benefits for up to 18 months while they were attending the training.
Others would receive only the regular state benefits of up to six months.
Administration officials view the program as a way to better prepare workers for a changed economy, in which workers must shift careers more often and aren't wedded to individual companies or jobs.
"The current unemployment system is designed for people who were getting their old jobs back" after a temporary plant closing, Mr. Clinton told a group of business leaders and politicians at the White House.
But, he said, about three-quarters of people losing jobs now are permanently laid off.
Labor Secretary Robert Reich also stressed that point.
"The old jobs are not coming back," he said.
"That's a reality, and we have to accept it."
These days, he argued, workers must retrain to remain flexible and useful.
The bill also would let some unemployed workers receive part of their jobless benefits up front to start their own businesses.
In addition, states could set up programs to provide cash re-employment bonuses as an incentive to workers who find jobs in the first 12 weeks after becoming unemployed.
Some business leaders instantly backed the plan, which is expected to cost $3.4 billion a year when fully implemented.
"It's an excellent start," said Lawrence Perlman, chief executive of Ceridian Corp. and head of the Business Roundtable, a group of large companies.
But the GAO, Congress's investigative arm, criticized the proposal for only merging six of the government's roughly 150 job-training and education programs.
"This consolidation needs to be part of a larger restructuring of employment training programs," said Clarence Crawford, associate director for employment issues at the GAO.
While the bill would merge only some Labor Department programs, he cited others scattered around the Agriculture, Housing and Urban Development, Education and Labor Departments, as well as other federal agencies, that would remain independent.
Sen. Nancy Kassebaum (R., Kan.), the ranking Republican on the Senate Labor Committee, was more harsh.
She called the Clinton plan "another costly job-training program, based on questionable assumptions of success."
She argued, "The starting point on any discussion about job training is how to completely overhaul the current system and create a new one that works.
Nothing less."
The bill could have trouble unless President Clinton works hard for it in Congress.
Administration officials noted that liberal and conservative Democrats and many business leaders back the plan.
But while Mr. Reich suggested the bill could pass this spring, others expressed doubt that it could in a year that already will feature legislation to deal with health-care reform, crime and welfare reform.
"This is a very complicated piece of legislation," said Anthony Carnevale, who heads the National Commission For Employment Policy.
While he backs the idea, he said, "The real question is where does this end up in the legislative queue?"
