David Blech, an aggressive investor in biotech stocks, is shaking up his portfolio in a big way at a time when biotech shares have been among the worst performers in this year's choppy market.
Mr. Blech declines to comment.
But the biotech mogul has a reputation for trying to boost the prices of stocks he's invested in long term and for supporting the share prices of companies that his brokerage firm has taken public, traders say.
Mr. Blech is the chairman of D. Blech & Co., a New York brokerage firm that specializes in financing biotechnology companies.
In the first quarter, Mr. Blech dumped large chunks of his holdings in two biotech stocks -- Ribi Immunochem Research Inc. and NeoRx Corp. -- for about $16 million in total and invested about $7 million in 10 other, mostly smaller and little-followed, biotech firms, recent filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission show.
A number of those companies targeted for investment were taken public by Mr. Blech's wholly-owned brokerage during the past year.
SEC filings show that Mr. Blech's trusts sold about 1.2 million shares in Ribi between Jan. 13 and Jan. 18 at an average $10 each for approximately $12 million.
Mr. Blech then unloaded on Jan. 18 nearly 500,000 shares in NeoRx at an average $8.50 each for more than $4 million in total.
In both cases, Mr. Blech profited handsomely.
He and his trusts sold the shares after exercising large numbers of warrants acquired at significant discounts to the ultimate sale price.
Warrants confer the right to buy a certain number of shares at a fixed price at a later time.
Mr. Blech has acquired large numbers of warrants in biotech firms such as Ribi and NeoRx by providing sorely needed cash -- via private placements and other offerings -- to the companies.
Biotech firms are in desperate need of capital for product development in an overcrowded market, and profits remain elusive, analysts say.
Indeed, D. Blech & Co. has become known on Wall Street as the place where many biotechnology companies seek help raising money, even after being rejected by other firms, money managers say.
D. Blech & Co. has underwritten nine offerings in the last eight months.
D. Blech & Co. can get a deal done, money managers say, because Mr. Blech and his team have developed an extensive network of retail brokers to sell a stock.
But building such a network requires a lot of money, and many analysts suggest that Mr. Blech's portfolio shakeup may be aimed at raising cash.
That may explain part of the reason for his selling such a large position in Ribi, a company that some analysts think can turn profitable by 1996 on the strength of its various vaccine products and its promising anti-cancer therapy, Melacine, for malignant melanoma.
They add that Mr. Blech's selling may simply be profit taking in the wake of a good run.
Says Wole Fayemi, a biotech-stock analyst with Hambrecht & Quist in New York: "This was clearly the case of profit-taking from an earlier investment.
His average strike price on his Ribi warrants was between $3 and $3.60 a share, and he sold the stock in the $9 to $10 region."
Mr. Fayemi says Ribi is one of his top stock picks for the year, on the basis of Melacine's pivotal phase III clinical data expected to be released this summer.
Analysts are somewhat at a loss to explain why Mr. Blech has injected about $7 million into 10 other biotech firms that seem less promising.
Some said he is buying these stocks, many of which his brokerage helped to go public, simply to keep them afloat: the brokerage has to support the prices of the stocks because no one else will, particularly in this jittery market.
As a group, biotech ranked second from the bottom in performance this quarter, down 17.1%.
Only entertainment stocks did worse, posting an 18.4% decline thus far this year.
In his largest purchase this quarter, Mr. Blech and his related trusts appear to have invested about $5 million in the stock and warrants of Interferon Sciences Inc.
According to his SEC filing, Mr. Blech acquired 2.48 million shares, paying $4 a unit, with each unit comprising two shares and two warrants each.
The purchases, between Dec. 12 and Jan. 3, lifted his total holdings in the company to 4.5 million shares.
Market pros who analyze SEC insider filings say the Interferon filing by Mr. Blech is somewhat confusing.
"The fact that each unit, according to his filing, consists of two shares and two warrants implies that his purchase price for the stock was less than $2 a share, at a time when the shares were going for well over $4.50 a piece," says Bob Gabele, president of CDA/Investnet, a Fort Lauderdale, Fla., firm that tracks and analyzes insider activity.
In February, Mr. Blech acquired 169,200 shares in Texas Biotechnology Corp. at an average price of $6.80 for one unit, which consists of one share and one warrant.
That February purchase price was in line with the market price at the time.
Mr. Blech, whose firm took Texas Biotech public in mid-December, currently holds some 2.1 million shares of the company.
Mr. Blech's other purchases this quarter included smaller stakes in Bio-Technology Corp, Neoprobe Corp., Envirogen Inc., Microprobe Corp., Incyte Pharmaceuticals Inc., Advanced Surgical Inc., Pharmos Corp., and Ecogen Inc.
D. Blech & Co. took Advanced Surgical public in August, Microprobe in September, Envirogen in October, and Incyte in November.
Mr. Fayemi, the Hambrecht analyst, says he isn't a great fan of any of the stocks targeted by Mr. Blech for investment this quarter.
"Of all the public biotech drug companies, I think there are more interesting plays to follow," he observes.
As previously reported, SEC enforcement investigators have been looking at whether Mr. Blech may have violated securities laws by bestowing cheap stock on money managers and others prior to public offerings.
In the past, Mr. Blech sold cheap stock and warrants to brokers and influential Wall Street executives who then had a vested interest in promoting his deals to investors.
Mr. Blech has denied any wrongdoing.
