Last spring two major medical-equipment manufacturers were locked in a $30 million patent infringement battle over a testing device.
Already they had spent one year and several hundred thousand dollars in pretrial work.
To resolve the issue through the courts, the parties faced the prospect of an additional 18 months and at least $5 million in litigation costs.
A federal judge suggested mediation.
With the help of a highly qualified neutral, they resolved the matter in less than two days.
Managers of health-related companies must contend with the same broad range of business disputes that confront their counterparts in other industries -- including intellectual property, construction, product liability and employment issues.
However, an overhaul of the health system invites a flood of new litigation.
If the Clinton plan passes in anything like its current form, these suits might include new insurer challenges to the regulation of premiums and objections by drug companies and physicians to pricing limits.
Private antitrust actions would undoubtedly increase.
If health care becomes a federally protected right, consumers and regional alliances might bring claims against federal and state agencies.
The courts, limited in capacity and funding, are ill prepared for the increased burden.
In some parts of the nation, civil court dockets already are delayed by as much as five years.
While critical policy and constitutional issues should be resolved through the courts, alternative dispute resolution (ADR) is a better, lower-cost way to handle many issues that are emerging from health care reform.
The use of nonbinding ADR processes has advantages not available in the courts.
For instance, highly qualified scientific or technical experts can help resolve technically difficult medical disputes or render expert nonbinding opinions.
Disputes can be resolved promptly -- often in a matter of days or weeks, rather than months or years.
A highly skilled, innovative mediator can help parties achieve advantageous business results and frequently retain important business relationships.
In collaboration with a committee of health law specialists representing managed care organizations, hospitals, physicians and medical product manufacturers, the Center for Public Resources Health Disputes Project recently examined 59 categories of disputes that have both large excess costs and the potential for resolution through ADR.
A resulting publication gives health industry counsel a broad range of model ADR procedures that can be used to address industry conflicts, including models specially designed for managed care and disaffiliation disputes.
-- Boston University's School of Public Health is training doctors, nurses and administrators in negotiation and mediation skills to better handle conflicts within hospital settings.
-- A nationwide group of health insurers has agreed to resolve through mediation or arbitration, instead of litigation, any territory or licensing disputes that may arise among its members.
-- The nation's blood banks are adopting ADR to minimize the costs and disruption of litigation for people infected with transfusion-associated HIV and their families.
-- Stanford University Hospital uses an ombudsman's office that combines improved communication and mediation to resolve disputes amicably between students or employees and the hospital.
-- A medical cooperative in the Northwestern U.S. uses a private mediation process for patient malpractice claims.
While mediation is not offered in every case, at least 40% of the claims are being submitted to the system with a 50% settlement success rate.
-- A large pharmaceutical company engages highly qualified neutral parties to help resolve contract and patent disputes.
Various drug manufacturers have employed mediation and advisory arbitration in consumer injury cases, and several have incorporated ADR clauses in supply contracts and liability insurance policies.
-- New York City's Commission on Human Rights handled 80% of its 1,700 AIDS-related complaints in the 1980s through early intervention, negotiation and mediation.
Use of ADR by health industry organizations need not wait for health care reform or congressional action.
Health managers and counsel have a unique opportunity to help bring about meaningful cost reductions within their own organizations.
In the process they can play a role in reforming national health care.
Mr. Henry is president of the New York-based CPR Legal Program, a nonprofit alliance of lawyers and academics developing alternatives to litigation.
