T2 Medical Inc., hurt in recent months by internal turmoil and increasing competition, said it agreed to merge with three other health-care companies in a combination that would create the country's second-largest infusion-therapy concern.
Under the terms of the agreement, T2 Medical shareholders would receive 67% ownership in a company created by a pooling of interests among T2 Medical, Curaflex Health Services Inc., HealthInfusion Inc. and Medisys Inc.
The latter three companies in December disclosed plans to merge with one another.
For T2 Medical, the merger could provide a graceful exit from myriad problems.
The company has been reeling from the disclosure in August of accounting irregularities and errors and a subsequent investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The company has also been a subject of a Medicare fraud investigation by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, which is trying to determine whether T2 doctors improperly referred patients to centers in which they have ownership stakes.
T2 has denied any wrongdoing and emphasizes that most of its referrals come from physicians who don't have direct ownership in T2 centers.
The merger would allow the company, which is based in Alpharetta, Ga., to disengage from its relationships with its doctor-owners.
T2 Medical said it now plans to buy out physicians who have ownership stakes in its centers.
After the merger, some 7.5 million restricted T2 shares held by other doctors will become unrestricted, the company said.
Instead of having to rely primarily on doctor referrals to generate new business, T2 would then be able to use the sales force of the combined companies.
Previously, it only had a tiny sales force of its own.
For Curaflex, HealthInfusion and Medisys, the addition of T2 creates a 220-center nationwide network that will be more competitive than any of the companies could have been individually.
The new infusion-therapy concern, to be called Coram Healthcare Corp., will be second in size to Caremark International Inc., which had 1993 sales of $1.78 billion.
The combined companies, which deliver drugs intravenously either in the home or in outpatient centers, will have annual revenue of about $500 million.
About 60 of the four companies' combined 220 therapy centers overlap, according to a company executive, who said approximately $10 million can be saved through consolidation.
Charles A. Laverty, currently president and chief executive officer of Curaflex, will serve as president and CEO of the new company.
Mr. Laverty said he expects an individual from outside the companies to be named chairman of Coram Healthcare in about two weeks.
Executives at T2 Medical will assume lesser roles.
Tommy Carter, T2 Medical's president and CEO, will be vice chairman of Coram.
And Thomas E. Haire, T2 Medical's chairman, will hold no official position in the new company.
T2 Medical's stock rose 12.5 cents to $8 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Curaflex fell 6.25 cents to $5.625, HealthInfusion fell 87.5 cents to $6.125 and Medisys fell 6.25 cents to $3.50, all in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
T2 was once a highflier, whose stock sold for as much as $67 a share in January 1992.
The company's problems began when its doctor-ownership arrangements came under scrutiny in 1992.
The company disclosed accounting irregularities, relating primarily to the underestimation of bad debt, in August.
A number of key executives have since departed.
For its fiscal first quarter ended Dec. 31, the company posted a 42% earnings decline, to $8.1 million from $14.1 million for the year-earlier period.
Revenue fell 11% to $63.7 million from $71.8 million.
T2 Medical attributed the drop to continued pricing pressure throughout the healthcare industry.
Curaflex is based in Ontario, Calif., HealthInfusion in Miami and Medisys in Minneapolis.
