Tom Clarkson has worked for 27 years in the payroll department at Warner Bros.
But it wasn't until last year that the 60-year-old administrator was offered a company benefit that most of his co-workers take for granted: health-insurance coverage for spouses.
That's because Mr. Clarkson's "spouse" of 34 years is a man.
"This is the time of my life to stand up for who I am and what I am," says Mr. Clarkson, who has spent the past several years prodding the human-resources department of the Time Warner Inc. studio to extend benefits to his companion, Tony Baque, 57.
Last August, Warner Bros. joined a growing list of name-brand companies providing such benefits to domestic partners.
Last week its corporate sibling, Time Inc., went along.
All over corporate America, executives are being pressed to acknowledge the changing face of many American households as unmarried employees -- both gay and straight -- demand benefits for their domestic partners.
Spurred by the success of activists who have won such benefits for city employees from New York to Seattle and at universities from Stanford to Harvard, dozens of private-sector employee groups are now pushing for coverage of "significant others" under corporate health-insurance plans.
Already, more than 70 major companies offer domestic-partner benefits, with most limiting coverage to gay employees.
Among them: Lotus Development Corp., Silicon Graphics Inc., MCA Inc., Microsoft Inc., Viacom Inc., Oracle Systems Corp., Apple Computer Inc. and Time Warner's HBO Inc.
A few also cover heterosexual unmarried couples, including Ben & Jerry's Homemade Inc., Levi Strauss & Co., Federal National Mortgage Association and Borland International Inc.
Political correctness goes only so far to explain this growing phenomenon.
For many companies, a more persuasive factor may be cost: The added benefits turn out to come surprisingly cheap.
For starters, only a minuscule portion of eligible employees actually sign up for the benefits, both because they face tax implications and because some gay workers don't want to declare their sexual orientation in the workplace.
And contrary to many firms' expectations, health-care costs for gay partners are often less than those of heterosexuals, despite corporate fears of footing the bill for more AIDS cases.
Firms can "adopt a benefit that doesn't cost much of anything . . . but that sends an incredibly powerful message of a company's support of all of its employees, regardless of sexual orientation," says Richard Jennings, executive director of Hollywood Supports, a group promoting awareness of gay and AIDS-related issues that was created by MCA president Sidney Sheinberg and Barry Diller, then chief of News Corp.'s Fox Inc.
Pressure is mounting on some of the country's largest companies to follow.
Employee groups currently are pressing for the benefits at American Telephone & Telegraph Co., Walt Disney Co., American Express Co., RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.'s Nabisco Foods Group, Nynex Corp., Eastman Kodak Co. and DuPont Co., among others.
Kathy Stigmon, Ben & Jerry's personnel-operations manager, says she gets an average of three calls a week from companies considering domestic-partner benefits.
"It's the No. 1 question I get asked," she says.
But before any company grants such benefits, executives must grapple with a host of prickly issues: Will they alienate customers or face battles with antihomosexual groups, as Apple did last year in Texas?
Should coverage be limited to gay employees, who can't legally get married, or should heterosexual unmarried couples be included, too?
And, perhaps most pressing of all at some companies, will they face an increased load of costly AIDS cases?
It took Lotus a full two years to weigh those questions before it took the plunge in 1991, becoming the largest publicly held company at the time to offer health insurance to its gay employees' partners.
"Much of the hesitation was around AIDS and the additional costs," acknowledges Bryan Simmons, spokesman for the Cambridge, Mass., software developer.
The lifetime medical cost of HIV treatment averages $119,000 per patient, according to the most recent federal AIDS Cost and Utilization Survey.
But Lotus was convinced by a study of other plans already in place at several municipalities.
The study found that "gay and lesbian couples enrolled in the plans were at no greater risk of catastrophic illness than married heterosexual couples," Mr. Simmons says.
Levi Strauss, too, was concerned about AIDS costs when it instituted its plan two years ago.
But "the cost for the group covered by our domestic-partner benefits was significantly lower than for spouses," says Reese Smith, director of employee benefits at the jeans maker, where 1% of the 23,000-member U.S. work force has signed up.
Companies say the lower cost so far reflects the fact that eligible employees tend to be younger, and as a result healthier, than older married workers -- a condition that, to be sure, will change as current workers age.
Lesbians, who make up an estimated half of all domestic partners, are at very low risk for AIDS.
And domestic partners tend not to rack up the maternity costs that spouses do.
Those factors haven't been lost on insurance companies, many of which used to shy away from domestic-partner coverage but no longer do.
When Seattle added domestic-partner benefits in 1990, one of its carriers, King County Medical Blue Shield, refused insurance, saying it couldn't assess the risk; two others added surcharges of 2% and 3.6% to the city's monthly premium.
But "experience showed that domestic partners cost less than married partners," says Sally Fox, the city's benefits and safety manager.
Blue Shield ultimately decided to offer coverage, and the other two dropped their surcharges.
Moreover, less than 1% of employees sign up for the gay-partners benefits; that figure rises to about 3% when benefits are also offered to heterosexual unmarried partners, estimates Ilse de Veer of William M. Mercer Inc., a Stamford, Conn., benefits consulting firm.
Taxes are a major culprit: The Internal Revenue Service treats domestic-partner health benefits as taxable imputed income, unlike health insurance for spouses.
At Oracle Systems in Redwood City, Calif., gay employees who enroll their partners in the company's premium health plan pay as much as $1,000 in extra taxes each year, estimates Phillip Wilson, a senior vice president.
So if both partners are working, as tends to be the case in gay households, it is more economical for each to have his or her own insurance.
Many gay employees also don't participate because they are afraid that by declaring their sexual orientation at work, they may jeopardize their careers.
Only 20 of Lotus's 3,200 U.S. workers are currently signed up for domestic-partner benefits.
At Viacom, only 18 out of 5,000 U.S. employees have signed on, and at MCA, it's 15 out of 15,000 employees.
Ronald Stephenson, a casting director at MCA's Universal Studios who has worked for 15 years on such TV shows as "Murder She Wrote" and "Columbo," was terminated as a full-time employee last year and put on free-lance status -- without benefits -- five months after he added his partner of 29 years to the plan.
"I think what the studio wanted was to dump my benefits package," says Mr. Stephenson, 55.
MCA declines to comment, referring queries to Mr. Jennings of Hollywood Supports.
Mr. Jennings says Mr. Stephenson's claim makes "no sense at all."
Companies have tried to alleviate employees' fears of reprisal by making the enrollment process as confidential as possible.
To get benefits, employees typically file affidavits of "spousal equivalency," showing a history of living together and commingling of assets, directly with the human-resources department -- not their supervisors.
The records are kept secret.
Still, it may be some time before large, conservative corporations join the mostly young firms offering the benefits now.
Few of those firms would relish doing public battle with antihomosexual groups, as Apple did last year when officials in Williamson County, Texas, initially refused to grant it a tax break because of its policy.
When Lotus announced its domestic-partner plan, "there were some customers who sent their disks in, saying `You people are supporting Satan and we'll never use your software again,'" says Polly Laurelchild-Hertig, who lobbied for the benefits.
Levi Strauss was threatened with boycotts.
At Disney, where about 130 gay employees are pushing for the benefits, a company spokesman says, "We aren't inclined to provide medical benefits for partners who have no legal relationship to one another."
Some employees believe the family-entertainment giant is concerned about mottling its wholesome reputation.
"How would this impact the corporate image?
You know they must be thinking something akin to that," says Garrett Hicks, head of the gay group.
The Disney spokesman says the company's concerns are "the costs as well as the legal issues involved."
Helping lead the push at Disney is Rick Leed , who heads the production company responsible for Disney's most successful TV show, "Home Improvement."
Says Mr. Leed: "Disney is supposed to be a family company, yet they don't recognize my family."
Some companies also worry about pitting straight and gay employees against one another, since most offer the benefits only to same-sex couples.
Local antidiscrimination laws generally prevent municipalities and universities from offering the benefits only to gay couples.
But corporations are exempt from certain provisions of local antidiscrimination laws under the federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, or Erisa.
Most justify offering the benefits only to gay employees by reasoning that they are simply rectifying an inequity in marriage laws.
The gay-only policies, though, have caused tension at some companies.
When Oracle gave domestic-partner benefits to gay employees last year, many heterosexuals were in a huff, says Kate Haffner, a lesbian employee who campaigned for the benefits.
She says the rift was exacerbated because, in an unrelated move, the software company implemented a new flexible-benefits plan that caused an increase in some workers' contributions, and some employees mistakenly thought the higher charges were to cover the new benefits for gay partners.
"Our costs are getting higher because we're giving special rights to homosexuals," read one of the many comments that flooded the company's electronic-mail system, Ms. Haffner says.
Some firms also are concerned that employees will abuse the domestic-partner benefits by signing up friends or a string of partners.
Most companies try to prevent that by requiring that the partners have lived together for six months or more and that the employee wait up to a year before signing up a different partner.
But the downside is just too great for some major companies.
AT&T officials, for example, are "exploring the issues," says spokesman Burke Stinson, but "I don't sense a movement yet toward the granting of such benefits."
AT&T's human-resources department has told the firm's 1,000-member gay-employees group that it will have to convince management -- and perhaps the board of directors -- of the tangible benefits of such an arrangement.
"We've figured out the costs, but it's harder to quantify what benefits this would bring to the company," concedes Steve Mershon, cochairman of the gay group's national benefits committee.
"We can cite improved recruiting and retention, but they are very hard to quantify in terms of finances."
Gay employees, though, say they reward firms that offer them benefits with fierce loyalty.
"I feel it's a validation of sorts," says Jennifer Poteet, a marketing associate for HBO whose lesbian partner is now covered by the company's health insurance.
"And it makes me want to stay here a long time."
