Lehman Brothers Inc. has launched a tough cost-cutting drive that could force the departure of as many as 400 investment bankers, traders and salespeople.
The corporate housecleaning paves the way for Lehman's spinoff by parent American Express Co. later this spring.
The cuts were needed to bring Lehman's bloated costs more in line with other brokerage houses, analysts and Lehman officials said, and to make Lehman stock more palatable to investors.
"We're asking high-ticket people who aren't productive" to leave, a Lehman insider said.
Many of these so-called high-ticket employees make $300,000 to $500,000 or more a year, people familiar with the matter say, and all but about a fifth of them have been notified.
The forced departures come in tandem with firmwide performance and productivity reviews.
Behind the move is a bid by Lehman to shed its spendthrift ways.
Lehman, with about 9,000 employees, paid out 53% of its net revenue in compensation last year, and 55% a year earlier.
Many major Wall Street investment banks keep that percentage at or below 50%.
This year, Lehman wants to chop its percentage to about 50%.
If revenue remains at 1993 levels, this will translate into savings of $70 million in compensation, analysts say.
But if revenue lags behind last year, it will mean further cost-cutting will be needed.
Lehman is trimming expenses in other areas, ranging from car service and air travel to legal advice and pencil orders.
In anticipation of the public offering of Lehman stock, American Express had to make a capital infusion of more than $1 billion, double what it had planned, to shore up Lehman's balance sheet and to meet demands by credit-rating agencies.
Offering documents on Lehman stock will be released later this month.
The firm's bottom-line problem, insiders say, is that Lehman's split from retail brokerage house Shearson last year left Lehman with the costly infrastructure of a huge retail firm but the operations and earnings potential of an investment bank.
(Shearson joined with Smith Barney, a unit of Travelers Inc.)
Indeed, 100 of the departures earlier this year were sales and trading employees who serviced the firm's former retail-brokerage effort.
The additional departures, totaling between 200 and 300 employees, will largely be centered in investment banking, and sales and trading.
"We want to be fair and hard-nosed.
We want to do what's right by the business as well as by our employees," said T. Christopher Pettit, managing partner of the firm and Lehman's No. 2 executive.
But one motive for the layoffs is that Lehman is hoping to replace some of the departing employees with more productive or less-expensive counterparts.
"Lehman is a place to be today.
It wasn't a few years ago," said Mr. Pettit.
Given the replacement hires, Lehman won't be materially smaller in staff by year end, executives said.
Aggressive cost-cutting is also needed because Lehman is widely seen as having missed the best window of opportunity for a spinoff as a public company.
Most brokerage-house stocks peaked late last summer and early fall, when the underwriting boom was still going at a ferocious pace.
Now, most brokerage houses are trading at 15% to 20% below their 1993 peak prices, and the pace of the underwriting boom is slowing.
Year to date, Wall Street securities firms have underwritten 1,307 stock and bond issues; that volume is down 11% from the year-earlier period, according to Securities Data Co.
For Lehman's senior management, forcing departures ahead of the firm's spinoff represents a high-wire balancing act.
On one hand, Lehman must assure stock-market investors and traders that it is serious about cost-cutting and that revenue will flow more quickly to the bottom line.
On the other hand, the firm wants to prevent the alarm arising from mass departures that can hamstring a firm and paralyze its employees.
So far, departures from Lehman have been numerous and have cut across division and geographic lines.
Some were by choice, some forced, and many arose out of substantially lower-than-expected year-end bonuses.
Among the high-profile exits: Robert Barbera, Lehman's chief stock economist; Sam Wasserman, a senior executive at Lehman's brokerage division; and Richard Gilmartin, who had been head bond salesman in Lehman's Hong Kong office.
Rival Bear Stearns Cos. has recently hired nearly a dozen Lehman expatriates, including several bond salesmen, traders and brokers.
Equitable Cos.'
Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp. also snared two Lehman bond salesmen.
This year's departures of high-priced Lehman employees follows the exodus of a total of about 1,500 members of Lehman's corporate staff, sales and trading support, and back-office, or trade-processing, operations, since last April.
Those departures stemmed from the sale of the firm's retail-brokerage business to Primerica Corp., now Travelers.
The cuts last year included more than 30 Lehman brokers, or 7% of its remaining brokerage force.
Few areas at Lehman have been spared the ax.
In a recent memo, Lehman said it has spent $12 million a year on company cabs -- including more than $1.2 million for "waiting time" and more than $1.3 million for using car-phone services.
"Quite frankly, as a Firm, we are a disaster when it comes to car service," according to the memo, written by Robert Genirs, a managing director referred to internally as the firm's "cost-control czar."
Mr. Genirs also complained in the memo about seeing company cabs "lined up in droves" in front of Lehman's downtown Manhattan headquarters well before 8 p.m., which is when employees are allowed to start using the car service.
Lehman wants to slash its annual car-service tab by $2 million to $3 million, people familiar with the firm said.
Lehman also now will require investment bankers and others to use American Express to set up air-travel plans, instead of arranging the scheduling themselves.
And the firm plans to slash the number of outside law firms it uses to handle its litigation docket.
It will also order pencils from a single vendor, as opposed to several stationery outlets.
Among other signs of the times around Lehman these days are notices tacked up around the office exhorting employees not to spend money the way they used to.
The notices read: "Don't Just Accept It!
Robert Steiner in Hong Kong contributed to this article.
