Prices of long-term Treasurys lost a little ground in the aftermath of a successful 30-year bond auction, largely because of thin trading ahead of today's inflation report.
As bond investors nervously watched the market drop, many asked themselves if prices of long-term securities could rally again since the Federal Reserve has started raising short-term interest rates.
A number of Wall Street's largest firms said it is possible, though a number of analysts said they believe it unlikely.
Yesterday, the price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dropped nearly 1/2 point, or nearly $5 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 97 13/32.
Its yield rose to 6.44% from 6.40% on Wednesday.
The average yield on the Treasury's $11.05 billion of 30-year notes sold yesterday was 6.43%, in line with expectations.
The Treasury received bids totaling $30.77 billion and it accepted bids totaling $11.05 billion, including $355 million of noncompetitive tenders at the average yield, down from $390 million at the previous auction on Aug. 12, 1993.
The bid-cover ratio, which compares the number of bids received and the number sold, was 2.78-to-1.
The previous bond sale in August 1993 produced an average yield of 6.33% and a high yield of 6.35%.
The bid-cover ratio was 2.13-to-1.
Bond investors are worried about a report on the January producer-price index, scheduled for release today.
A big jump in the index, which is a key measure of inflation, could convince investors that inflation is back and the Fed moved too slowly to raise short-term rates to battle it.
Economists estimate the core PPI, excluding the volatile food and energy components, will rise by 0.3%.
If the number comes in at 0.4% and retail sales show strength, the market could sell off.
Bond investors fear inflation because it reduces the value of investments with a fixed rate of return.
In trading, the when-issued 30-year bond traded at a yield of 6.44%.
The 10-year note sold Wednesday was trading at a yield of 5.90% in when-issued trading, while the new three-year note was yielding 4.82%.
Among the big bond houses calling for long-term yields to fall this year despite the last week's Fed rate increase were CS First Boston, Goldman Sachs, Lehman Government Securities, Merrill Lynch and Salomon Brothers.
Economists at these firms argued that inflation will remain well-contained this year after falling below 3% in 1993.
They said it is possible that the Fed will be able to contain price pressures and that economic growth won't be sustained at levels which will result in a flare-up of inflation.
However, a number of analysts contended that long-term interest rates have never been able to fall for a sustained period of time when the Fed has been raising short-term interest rates.
They deemed it unlikely that the link will be broken.
The Federal Reserve pushed up the federal-funds rate by a quarter of a percentage point a week ago, in what most analysts said they believe will be the first of many tightenings.
Normally, Wall Street would be bracing for long-term interest rates to head higher as well.
But it is the chance that bond yields could decline even as short-term interest rates are rising that has captured the attention of traders and investors.
Bruce Steinberg, senior economist at Merrill Lynch, is among those who argued that the Fed may have helped create a unique set of circumstances in which long-term rates could decline.
"The path of long rates is going to depend principally on inflation and inflation expectations," Mr. Steinberg said.
"And the Fed's tightening right now has to be seen as preemptive.
It's an attempt to keep inflation from going higher and an attempt to convince the market it is acting proactively rather than reactively."
Aside from the Fed tightening, there are other reasons to believe inflation can fall further, Mr. Steinberg said.
He argued that the productivity boom of the past few years has raised the pace at which the economy can grow without developing price pressures.
"I don't think there is a risk this year or next of inflation heating up," Mr. Steinberg said.
But other analysts weren't quite so sure.
John Williams, chief global market economist at Bankers Trust, said it was "highly unlikely" that long-term bond yields could fall at the same time as the Fed is tightening.
"During a cyclical upturn in the economy, you are going to have some upward pressure on all interest rates," Mr. Williams said.
"Once we get through this economic cycle and the Fed sucessfully slows the economy," he added, "we can have a further downward move in long-term rates."
Dana Johnson, head of market analysis at First Chicago Capital Markets, was also skeptical.
"If inflation was continuing to fall, why would the Fed continue to tighten?"
Should long-term interest rates fall as the Fed tightened, it would be a significant break from past patterns, most analysts said.
"It has never happened on a sustained basis of over three or six months," said Louis Crandall, chief economist at R.H. Wrightson & Associates.
Mr. Crandall argued that part of the reason long-term rates have followed short-term rates is that the market reads an "implicit forecast" into Fed policy moves.
He said the way the reasoning typically goes is "if the Fed is easing, the Fed must be worried about the health of the economy."
Mr. Crandall went on to add that "the Fed is presenting this move not as a reaction to inflation pressures but as a pre-emptive move.
So there is an implicit forecast of rising inflation."
There is also a technical reason for long-term interest rates tracking the direction of short-term rates, analysts said.
Higher short-term rates mean higher costs of financing inventories of securities.
"If a guy is buying bonds, the cost of financing has just gone up," said Samuel Kahan, chief economist at Fuji Securities.
But Robert Ariel, an assistant professor of finance at Baruch College, said the link between long-term and short-term interest rates is not as strong as it appears to be.
"The old-time bet of the connection between long rates and short rates is much more tenuous than is commonly thought," Mr. Ariel said.
At its most basic level, short-term interest rates reflect near-term credit demand, while long-term interest rates reflect long-term credit demand and inflation expectations, Mr. Ariel said.
"When we draw a yield curve, we are in fact connecting separate markets," he said.
In addition, "long-term rates tend to move in long cycles.
Long-term rates peaked in 1981 and short-term interest rates have bounced around quite a bit since then."
Mr. Ariel also argued that the gap between long-term and short-term rates is "historically huge," leaving plenty of room for short-term rates to move higher without taking long-term rates along for the ride.
"Short rates could go up without dragging long rates up because long rates already are up," Mr. Ariel said.
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The bonds are dated Feb. 15 and mature Aug. 15, 2023.
Kaiser Aluminum's Kaiser Aluminum & Chemical Corp. and Calpine Corp. led activity in the junk-bond market yesterday, while Northern States Power Co. sold $200 million of debt through a competitive offering early in the session.
Otherwise, secondary trading was extremely thin as the market focused on the Treasury's auction of 30-year bonds.
Yield spreads in the investment-grade market over comparable Treasurys were slightly narrower and prices followed Treasurys down.
Northern States Power sold $200 million of first-mortgage bonds through a competitive bid won by Morgan Stanley.
The 5.5% coupon bonds were priced at 99.825 to yield 5.54%.
In the junk-bond market, Kaiser Aluminum's 9 7/8 coupon eight-year senior notes were priced at 99.324 to yield 10% in conjunction with a stock offering through lead manager Merrill Lynch.
The offering's size was increased to $225 million from $175 million to meet investor demand, a Merrill capital-markets official said.
"People view this as a cyclical turnaround story," the official said, noting that the aluminum market has been helped by positive-trade agreements.
The offering, which was priced late in the session, was three times oversubscribed, he added.
The notes are noncallable for four years.
Meanwhile, bonds of Time Warner Entertainment Co., a unit of Time Warner Inc., took a slight jolt yesterday following the firm's registration of a shelf offering of as much as $2 billion of debt securities.
Time Warner Entertainment includes all of the cable television and filmed entertainment operations of Time Warner Inc.
In the filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the firm said proceeds would be used for debt repayment and general purposes.
The unit has about $7.1 billion in debt, including $2.4 billion in bank debt.
The unit's long-term debt traded late yesterday at about 1.32 percentage points above the benchmark 30-year Treasury, up from about 1.28 percentage points before the filing, a Wall Street syndicate official said.
Max Holmes, a Salomon Brothers analyst, said some investors may be spooked by the prospect that Time Warner is loading up with debt to make it difficult for suitor Seagram Co. to gain control of the company.
Mr. Holmes said: "The most interesting question is: Does this have anything to do with the potential raid of Time Warner by Seagram?"
But a Time Warner spokesman said the debt's purpose is "what we said in the filing."
Prices of municipal bonds finished narrowly mixed after an uninspired session.
Among secondary issues, the Monroe County Development Authority of Georgia's 5.4% bonds of 2024 finished 1/4 point lower at 98 1/4, to yield 5.49%.
But the Reedy Creek Improvement District of Florida's 5% bonds of 2019 closed 1/8 higher at 94 3/8 to yield 5.37%.
Market participants are getting set for the sale of California's $3.2 billion of 1994 revenue anticipation warrants in competitive bidding Tuesday.
Standard & Poor's Corp. said that it has revised its long-term rating outlook on California to negative from stable.
S&P said the action reflects continued deterioration in the state's cash position and a projected 1994 adjusted operating deficit, which will prevent the state from making progress toward deficit reduction.
S&P also assigned its SP-1 rating to the state's revenue anticipation warrants.
Mortgage-securities prices ended mixed, with higher-coupon issues outperforming lower-coupon issues on trade based on expectations of slowing prepayments.
The Federal Reserve's tightening move last week and the latest Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. report on mortgage-lending rates bolstered speculation that higher rates will stifle refinancings.
The corporation's weekly survey showed lenders asked for an average rate of 7.21% on conventional 30-year fixed-rate mortgages in the latest week, up from 6.97% a week earlier.
In secondary trading, prices of 8% to 10.5% coupons were unchanged to 3/32 firmer, trading roughly between 103 1/2 and 112 1/2.
But lower-coupon prices were down as much as 5/32.
Among 6.5s for March delivery, Ginnie Maes were 4/32 weaker at 98 20/32.
Freddie Mac Golds and Fannie Maes were 5/32 lower on the day, trading at 98 25/32 and 98 19/32, respectively.
Leslie Scism contributed to this article.
