As civic and religious leaders dedicated to ending intolerance and discrimination in our society, we are responding to the Feb. 24 editorial-page article "Morality and Homosexuality," and to the justifications for unequal treatment offered by the authors, a group of Christian and Jewish scholars called the Ramsey Colloquium.
The authors are setting out to do far more than merely explain "the largely intuitive and pre-articulate anxiety of most Americans" toward gays.
Indeed, rather than serving as dispassionate channels for the expression of popular discomfort, the authors, by allusions to the "vulnerabilities of the young" and the peril of "predatory behavior," invoke the vicious -- and patently fallacious -- stereotype of gays as child molesters and fan the flames of intolerance.
Clearly, trafficking in such stereotypes, however contemptible and inaccurate, renders their conclusion that "certain discriminations are in fact necessary within society" more palatable.
But it is precisely from such stereotypes that much of the authors' argument in this case really devolves.
While suggesting how "dehumanizing" it is that gays and lesbians have chosen "to define {them}selves by {their} desires alone," the authors reflect the same fixation with sexuality that they purport to condemn.
They renounce the gay and lesbian political movement as a fundamentally selfish -- and sexual -- quest for "liberation from constraint" and for the bodily "fulfillment of desire.
Contrary to the authors' insinuation, the gay-rights agenda is really not the destruction of "fragile institutions" such as marriage or the elevation of homosexuality to "moral equivalent."
Unfortunately, for political figures of the secular and religious right alike, arguments about moral equivalency have become a rhetorical disguise for rank intolerance and discrimination.
Instead, the push for equality on the basis of sexual orientation is a quest to enrich social institutions by ending the corrosive effect that intolerance and discrimination have upon them.
Allowing previously excluded groups equal access to the enjoyment of certain institutions -- the workplace, the home, and yes, our families, too -- does not weaken any institution, but rather reaffirms its attractiveness and its claim to moral legitimacy.
Finally, we disagree with the authors that greater recognition and legal protection for gays and lesbians has already or will cause "damage . . . to our common life."
It is only for those with a direct stake in the perpetuation of bigotry that the eradication of injustice can be construed to cause damage.
Rep. Lynn Woolsey (D., Calif.)
Rev. Meg Riley
(The letter was also signed by 12 other men and women.)
It's refreshing to read an anti-gay piece that openly calls for discrimination instead of trying to hide behind a mendacious claim of opposing "special rights."
But the Ramsey Colloquium's article uses a lot of space just to say "it's bad because it's bad because it's bad," which may be more honest, but is no more illuminating.
They claim gay relationships destroy the institution of marriage.
Are they seriously thinking that heterosexuals would turn gay in droves given the opportunity?
It's true that when one partner in a heterosexual marriage is gay, the marriage tends to fail, but that's a tiny fraction of all marriages.
What do they mean here?
They also feel that discrimination is necessary to protect children.
But child abuse by openly gay people is almost nonexistent.
Abusers are either heterosexual or pretending to be, so more discrimination against us is unlikely to make a dent in that problem.
What exactly is the "gay agenda" they oppose?
Our right to exist?
Our right to have jobs?
Gregory N. Hullender
Bellevue, Wash.
The writers state that "Since there are good reasons to support the heterosexual norm, since it has been developed with great difficulty, and since it can be maintained only if it is cared for and supported, we cannot be indifferent to attacks upon it."
The "heterosexual norm" must be a fragile creature indeed if it needs all this caretaking.
Besides, who's "attacking" it?
Since when is my request for respect and civil rights an attack on heterosexuals?
I am outraged at the statement that "Public anxiety about homosexuality is pre-eminently a concern about he vulnerabilities of the young . . . {and that} this is a legitimate and urgent public concern."
Statistically speaking, the vulnerabilities of the young are more apt to be taken advantage of by heterosexual men who prey on both young women and young men.
For the writers to imply that programs addressed to supporting young people in their (obviously well-founded) anxieties about their sexual identities are a ruse for "predatory behavior" by homosexuals is insulting and demeans the very real pain that often pushes young gay and lesbian people to attempt, and all-too-often succeed at, suicide.
The hatred and intolerance that come across in this article is quite clear to this Jewish lesbian mother.
(Oh, yes, we do have families; some of our kids even eat Rice Krispies for breakfast.)
I hope your readers take this for what it's worth, which in my book is absolutely nothing.
Joyce Kauffman, M.Ed., J.D.
Cambridge, Mass.
The Christian and Jewish scholars of the Ramsey Colloquium are wrong to describe American anxiety about homosexuality as "intuitive" and "pre-articulate."
Much to the contrary, reasoned and articulate religious teaching produces homophobia.
Discrimination against lesbians and gays and bisexuals damages innumerable individuals and our common life.
Gays are no more in need of tolerance, compassion or affirmation than anyone else.
Equal treatment under the law is not a threat to the heterosexual norm.
Jersey City, N.J.
Did the Ramsey Colloquium base its diatribe on clergy who molest little boys?
They couldn't possibly have been thinking about the many upstanding gay men and women of America who also happen to be the sons, daughters, brothers, sisters and other relatives of our larger "normal" (straight) society.
Shame on you for imposing your ignorance, under the guise of religious instruction, on an already dysfunctional society.
Where is true religious guidance, based on love and compassion, when we need it most?
While the authors acknowledge the long-standing existence of homosexuality across cultures, they categorize gays and lesbians as predators whose actions are dictated solely by physical desire.
The authors cling to the notion of the fragility of the traditional family and that it will be upheld by denying differences in sexual orientation or, at the least, through self-control of same-sex "desires."
Many recent economic studies, including Nobel Laureate economist Gary Becker's "A Treatise on the Family," have analyzed the decline of the traditional family and have identified technological advancement, higher wages, declining birth rates, higher levels of education among women, and the increasing role of women in the labor force as significant factors.
Just as the majority of heterosexuals are not predators of the young, neither are the majority of homosexuals.
Further, most homosexuals, like most heterosexuals, simply seek the opportunity to live without fear of economic, societal or legal penalties.
It is curious indeed that a collection of scholars representing some of our best universities have fallen prey to stereotypical fallacies in categorizing gays and lesbians.
Perhaps even more curious (and telling), however, is the absence of a female co-author in their battle to uphold the "traditional" family.
Audrey B. Davidson
Louisville, Ky.
The authors shift the burden of proof to me: I must justify (to them? to society?) my sexual behavior.
Since I do not accept their doctrine of "sin," I do not accept their burden of proof.
They are entitled to adhere to archaic doctrines regarding sexual behavior (among other things), but in a civil society they are not entitled to force me to behave as if I adhere to them.
I cannot hold myself, or the public awareness of the existence of homosexual behavior, accountable for the increase in divorces (among heterosexuals, since gay marriages are not recognized) or illegitimate births (presumably also among heterosexuals).
The source of the problem seems to be that the religious establishment believes it has a monopoly on morality, both in discourse and conduct.
By defining God in their own terms and then insisting that they have special access to god, they arrogate into themselves the "parent" role for society; the rest of us are wayward "children" badly in need of their (kindhearted and well-meaning, of course) direction.
The authors trot out the old war-horse of insinuating that young people need to be "protected" from homosexuals.
I do not recall anyone ever "protecting" me from heterosexuals, and yet I grew up into a well-educated, hard-working, responsible queer member of society.
Whether it's in my genes or in my jeans, my sexuality is as much somebody else's business as is my choice of toothpaste, or religion, for that matter.
Peter L. Derksen
