On the eve of a trade summit between the leaders of the U.S. and Japan, U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor suspended negotiations on a range of bilateral trade issues.
Mr. Kantor's move was clearly meant to signal the U.S.'s displeasure at the pace of the talks and to put maximum pressure on Tokyo to make concessions.
The dollar retreated against the yen on fears that a U.S.-Japan trade accord won't be reached in time for the summit.
Even before Mr. Kantor's move, Japan dispatched Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata to the U.S. yesterday, a day ahead of schedule, to try to patch things up.
Yet upon arriving in Washington last night, Mr. Hata told reporters he had no new plans to offer.
Meantime, Mr. Kantor said in a news briefing earlier in the day that "we are stuck at dead center."
Still, bilateral talks haven't broken down completely.
While the negotiations between bureaucrats have been frozen, Mr. Hata is expected to meet with top U.S. officials today.
Mr. Kantor said he still expected the two sides to reach an agreement in the so-called framework trade talks tomorrow.
That's when Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and President Clinton are scheduled to meet in Washington for about 2 1/2 hours and finalize a trade accord covering autos, auto parts, insurance, medical equipment and telecommunications.
The two sides remain deadlocked over the U.S. insistence that Japan agree to numerical targets to increase its imports.
The U.S. has drawn demands that would, in essence, commit Japan to double its imports of manufactured goods.
Japan says it rejects those efforts because it would require tighter government control over domestic industries at a time when Japan wants to deregulate.
The dispute over numerical goals has been at the core of the trade fight for eight months.
But Tuesday night, after another day of lengthy negotiations, the U.S. trade team huddled at the trade representative's office and decided that the talks were going nowhere and needed a jolt.
U.S. officials said that Mr. Kantor pressed the group to call off talks scheduled for yesterday with senior bureaucrats.
After some resistance, the group agreed.
Bowman Cutter, a White House economic official who is leading the U.S. negotiating team, telephoned his counterpart, Koichiro Matsuura, Japan's deputy foreign minister, at about 9:30 p.m. EST to cancel yesterday's negotiations.
Japanese negotiators seemed stunned by the news and spent yesterday waiting for a call, which didn't come, to resume talks.
"It's rather difficult to understand why the U.S. team doesn't try to take a broader view" of the Hosokawa government's position, said a Japanese negotiator.
He cited Tokyo's recent decisions to open its rice market and clean up its construction industry.
U.S. officials said they didn't think they would know until late tonight -- at the earliest -- whether Japan was ready to move.
"We will wait until hell freezes over" for an agreement with measurements, said Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman.
"This endless debate over `yes, there's progress in Japan trade; no, there isn't' has got to end."
Mr. Altman also expressed the administration's unhappiness with the extent of Japan's proposed one-year tax cut.
He called the plan "the equivalent of rebates," which won't do much to spur consumer spending.
The U.S. wants Japan to broadly stimulate its recession-plagued economy and put it in the position to increase imports.
The summit is shaping up as a major test for both Prime Minister Hosokawa and President Clinton -- particularly if the two sides can't reach an agreement.
If the U.S. gets tough, Hosokawa supporters say, that would upset Japan's fragile reform movement -- a movement, they insist, that will benefit the U.S. in the long run by making the Japanese government and economy more transparent.
If Mr. Clinton goes easy, trade hawks say, the U.S. will again be duped by the illusion of change in an inherently closed Japanese system.
Yoshi Tsurumi, a professor of international business at Baruch College in New York, compared Mr. Hosokawa to Boris Yeltsin and warned that too much American griping "could hurt this very difficult process of change."
Japanese officials also worry that a trade fracas could undermine broader cooperation between the two countries at a critical time.
"It would be very unfortunate if bilateral relations go wrong solely because of numerical targets for autos, insurance and government procurement," Yukio Hatoyama, one of Mr. Hosokawa's top aides, said in an interview yesterday.
If the summit is considered a failure, he warned, "the damage will be very big."
U.S. business executives, however, are growing tired of this plea.
"I question whether the U.S. should place its hopes in one politician in a fellow democracy instead of making long-range economic plans independent of personalities," said John Stern, head of the Tokyo office of the American Electronics Association.
In Washington, the Economic Strategy Institute, a think tank that takes a hard line toward Japan, put together a letter, signed by 50 business officials and trade groups, backing the Clinton approach of demanding quantifiable "results" in trade talks with Japan.
Should the talks fall apart, Japanese negotiators are ready to blame U.S. intransigence.
A Japanese official in Washington said that the two sides "are very close to an end to these negotiations" because Japan has announced a fiscal stimulus package and has agreed to make procedural changes in its government procurement.
"The only thing that isn't agreed to is numerical targets," the official saidwhich the U.S. considers the nub of the controversy.
This past week, when Messrs. Kantor and Cutter were in Tokyo, the Japanese official said, they were clearly told that Japan wouldn't back down over the issue of numerical goals.
But Mr. Kantor heard things differently, reporting that Foreign Minister Hata was silent on that issue.
But U.S. officials don't know whether that means Mr. Hata was signaling an opening, or simply trying to get away from the two Americans without an argument.
