The New York Stock Exchange said it took disciplinary action against 16 individuals for violations of exchange rules and federal securities laws.
John Engelskirger, Wilton, Conn., a branch office manager, was censured for failing to reasonably supervise a broker who made unsuitable investments for a customer.
He had denied the charges.
Allen Derflinger, Falls Church, Va., a former broker, was barred for misappropriating funds from two customer accounts, as well as sales practice misconduct.
Anna Maria Lucia Donato, Philadelphia, a former nonregistered employee, was barred for misappropriating funds and property from her member firm.
Unless otherwise noted, none of the parties could be reached or had any comment.
Ada Michelle Garvin, Staten Island, N.Y., a former non-registered service representative, was barred for misappropriating petty cash funds.
James J. Harrington, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., a broker, was barred two months for failing to pay within 30 days a $31,278 arbitration award.
He neither admitted nor denied charges.
Guy D. Robinson, Brooklyn, N.Y., a former options trading right holder, was barred four months for signing a specialist's clearing number on a questioned trade form without authorization, and failing to disclose certain facts to his employer.
Gregory Edward Norlander, Camarillo, Calif., a former broker, was barred four weeks for asking a customer to make a misleading statement to his office manager, and for misleading his manager about a personal payment made to a customer.
Mr. Norlander didn't admit or deny findings.
Louis Francis Albanese, Fairfield, Conn., a broker, was fined $15,000 and suspended one month, without admitting or denying that he made excessive and unsuitable trades in two accounts.
Leonard W. Krane, Louisville, Ky., a former broker with A.G. Edwards & Sons Inc. and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., was barred five years, without admitting or denying that in 1989-90, he entered trades that improperly affected the price of Wheeling Pittsburgh Steel Corp. stock, and failed to secure the best price for his customers.
The Exchange said during the period, Mr. Krane and his customers held about 9% of the freely traded shares of Wheeling Pittsburgh, which was operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings.
The Exchange said on at least 95 occasions, Mr. Krane entered orders for the stock at or near the close of trading at prices at or above the prevailing quote, in order to artificially maintain the market price or prevent a decrease in value of the positions.
The exchange said that, to date, complaints against Mr. Krane have resulted in settlements totaling about $102,500.
Robert L. Fox, Columbus, Ohio, a former branch office manager, was fined $5,000 for failing to supervise a broker who made unsuitable trades in elderly customers' accounts.
John C. McCloskey, Haddonfield, N.J., a former broker, was barred eight months for speculative options trades in an account, resulting in losses of about $29,000.
Robert Carl Jenican, Yorba Linda, Calif., a former broker, was barred for misappropriating customer funds and issuing false account statements to customers.
John James Nolan, Bronx, N.Y., a former non-registered employee, was barred, without admitting or denying misappropriating $23,000 from his firm.
Karen Butler, Palisades Park, N.J., was barred for misapproprating funds from her employer.
Stephen Tucker Cottrell, Waltham, Mass., a former trainee, was barred one year, without admitting or denying using unauthorized assistance while taking the general securities broker qualifying exam.
Gregory Jay Parks, Lansing, Mich., a former broker, was barred four months for misconduct in handling his personal securities account at his member firm.
He didn't admit or deny allegations.
