Procter & Gamble Co., disclosing some specifics of the restructuring program announced last summer, said it will close four plants and eliminate production lines at six others.
About 1,800 employees will be affected through layoffs, early retirements or transfers, the consumer-products company said.
The cuts represent about half of the North American manufacturing positions the company said ultimately will be eliminated as part of its plan to shut 30 plants and cut 13,000 jobs, or 12% of its work force world-wide.
The plants to be closed are a dishwashing-detergent and glycerin plant in Baltimore, to be shut by July 1995; a soap and fatty acid plant in Quincy, Mass., to be shut by January 1995; a Folgers coffee plant in South San Francisco, Calif., to close by July 1994; and a health-and-beauty care products plant in Pointe Claire, Quebec, to be phased out by January 1995.
Production lines will be shut within other plants that will remain open.
A laundry-and-household-cleaning products line will be phased out by year end at the Sacramento, Calif., plant, which still will produce industrial chemicals.
Meanwhile, health-and-beauty care products and fabric softeners will be eliminated at the Hamilton, Ontario, plant, which will continue to produce toilet soap, liquid detergents and household-cleaning products.
Incontinence products will be transferred from the Modesto, Calif., plant, where production of Pampers and Luvs diapers will be "streamlined" over the next 18 months.
Undisclosed lines will be eliminated, though no jobs will be cut, at three additional locations: Iowa City, Iowa, which makes health-and-beauty care products; Kansas City, Kan., which makes soap; and Greensboro, N.C., which makes health-care products.
The cost of the moves was incorporated in the $1.5 billion reserve P&G established in July 1993 to cover plant consolidations and organizational restructuring.
At that time, the company noted that $1.2 billion of that reserve would fund changes to its world-wide manufacturing operations, including the closure of 20% of its manufacturing operations over a period of three to four years.
