Japan's government is putting the finishing touches on a massive package of tax cuts and other measures to spur its slumbering economy.
But the political costs may prove prohibitive.
Moreover, while the plan may keep the economy from deteriorating, it probably won't spare Japan the kind of painfully long and anemic recovery that the U.S. recently endured.
Early Thursday morning, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa announced the first part of the stimulus package, a cut in income taxes and other related levies valued at roughly six trillion yen ($55.6 billion).
Mr. Hosokawa added that the government, worried about balancing the books, would make up for lost revenue by boosting the current 3% consumption tax to 7%.
Apparently to appease the dissenting Socialists, the tax will be renamed the "welfare tax."
Nevertheless, the de facto tax increase drew immediate fire from the largest bloc in Mr. Hosokawa's fragile coalition, the Socialists, who threatened to abandon the alliance as a result.
"It will be difficult for us to continue to cooperate" with the coalition, said Tomiichi Murayama, the Socialist Party chairman, at a 2 a.m. news conference.
He said the party may decide within 24 hours whether to pull its six members out of Mr. Hosokawa's cabinet.
Mr. Murayama also threatened to try to block Mr. Hosokawa's stimulus plan when it comes up for parliamentary debate in the next few weeks.
It isn't clear how a Socialist defection would affect Mr. Hosokawa's ability to govern.
Political analysts have speculated Mr. Hosokawa's alliance could survive for some time as a minority government, but would become more dependent on cooperation from the conservative opposition.
The full package, which may be released Thursday, is expected to total about 15 trillion yen ($138 billion), more than any of the three previous stimulus packages Japan has released in the past 17 months.
By complementing the conventional public-works spending with income tax cuts, as well as deregulation, this economic stimulus package puts the burden on Japan's consumers, not its bureaucrats, to get the economy going.
But while any package comes as a relief, largely because long-expected economic measures have been delayed by political turmoil and splits over how to finance tax cuts, economists don't have high hopes for an immediate turnaround.
"The problems go so much deeper" than a shot of stimulus can fix, said Donald Kimball, economist at Mitsubishi Bank Ltd.
"The only out is time."
Economists think the tax cuts will help, yet they warn against too much enthusiasm.
Despite the 30 trillion yen total for the previous packages, most analysts think the fourth quarter, during which industrial production fell at an estimated 13.9% annualized rate, may have been the worst yet in Japan's long economic slump.
The tax cut is hardly the start of an economic revolution.
For one thing, the cuts probably won't kick in until midyear at the earliest.
Moreover, they will be offset eventually by the new welfare tax, a reflection of the power of the fiscally conservative Ministry of Finance, which opposes deficit spending.
Economists also are skeptical how much consumers would spend right away, and how much they would save.
Tax relief should have a positive psychological effect on the average person in Japan, where the top tax rate is about 65%.
(The top U.S. federal rate is under 40%.)
"It takes some of the burden off us salarymen," said Yoshikazu Miyabe, a 65-year-old executive.
But he doubts he'll spend much of his windfall.
"I don't have any room to put new things" because of Japan's notoriously small homes.
Most analysts see the Japanese economy bouncing along the bottom over the next six months, registering little or no growth.
They see a gradual pickup once consumers start to spend, and businesses resolve their inventory overhangs and resume investment.
Consensus Economics London puts growth at just 0.2% this year and 1.5% in 1995.
That adds up to the sort of slow-growth recovery that until recently frayed nerves in the U.S. Robert Feldman, chief economist at Salomon Brothers Asia Ltd. sees an annualized 0.1% rate of growth in the first half of 1994, and a 1.9% rate in the second half.
The biggest obstacle to recovery is that some of Japan's economic problems are beyond the reach of stimulus packages.
Take, for example, the resurgent yen.
The yen has risen to about 108 to the dollar from 112 in the past three weeks, partly out of fear that trade frictions may again prompt U.S. officials to talk up the Japanese currency.
Since that makes Japanese goods more expensive overseas, that could wound this export-driven economy.
Moreover, the package wouldn't attack some of the structural problems in the economy.
There's a huge amount of overcapacity in the manufacturing sector, a result of excess capital spending in the late 1980s.
Auto executives say Japan has two million cars' worth of idle factory capacity, a situation that's likely to worsen as Japanese auto makers shift production overseas to cope with the high yen.
Excess capacity also means excess labor in Japan, where it's still hard to lay off workers.
Even low estimates say Japan has about one million redundant workers still on payrolls.
