The Justice Department says a federal court, at least for now, shouldn't grant American Telephone & Telegraph Co. a legal waiver that would remove an obstacle to its proposed acquisition of McCaw Cellular Communications Inc.
While the action presents a setback to the telephone company's effort to secure McCaw, it doesn't necessarily thwart it.
AT&T predicted that it will be able to persuade the court to grant the waiver despite the department's oppposition.
And a department spokeswoman said the Clinton administration hasn't yet concluded its review of the proposed merger itself.
"This is not our judgment regarding the merger of AT&T and McCaw," said the spokeswoman, Gina Talamona.
"This filing does not say what we're doing regarding the merger."
"We're still confident the merger will go off on schedule," an AT&T spokesman said.
"The Justice Department is denying our request for an expedited waiver, which means they want more information from us.
We'll provide whatever information the court thinks is necessary."
AT&T wants the federal district court in Washington to issue a waiver from a consent decree that prevents it from owning stock or assets of Bell operating companies.
Because McCaw owns interests in cellular systems that are controlled by Bell companies, AT&T would need the waiver before completing the planned acquisition.
In a memorandum filed with the court, the department said AT&T provided "no factual support" for the waiver.
"AT&T does not explain why the court should conclude that AT&T's obtaining significant or controlling interest in these cellular systems -- which are obliged to provide equal access to AT&T's interexchange competitors -- will not result in the very evils the decree was intended to prevent."
AT&T has said a waiver isn't needed, but that it wouldn't be difficult to obtain one if necessary.
The company has argued that the consent decree that broke up the company prohibited it from reacquiring Bell assets AT&T owned at the time of the breakup.
It asserts that the cellular franchises aren't in that category.
If Federal Judge Harold Greene refuses to grant a waiver, AT&T could appeal or restructure its deal with McCaw.
Specifically, McCaw would have to sever its business relationships with the Bell companies in a number of lucrative cellular markets -- including Los Angeles and Houston, where McCaw's subsidiary LIN Broadcasting Inc. operates a cellular-phone company with BellSouth Corp.; in the San Francisco Bay Area, too, a joint venture between McCaw and Pacific Telesis Group offers cellular service.
This could make McCaw a less desirable property to AT&T, which is seeking to set up an ubiquitous national wireless service that takes in the largest U.S. markets.
