Researchers said they developed a new gene-based diagnostic test that might solve problems caused by the frequent misdiagnosis of Lyme disease.
The researchers, led by the doctor who in 1976 discovered the bacterium that causes Lyme disease, said the new test identified the presence of the bacterium in joint fluid removed from 75 of 88 patients who had chronic arthritis apparently caused by the disease.
Most of the patients hadn't been properly treated with antibiotics, which can destroy the bacterium and cure the illness.
"The results of this study represent a major advance in our ability to detect the bacterium," said Allen C. Steere, chief of rheumatology/immunology at New England Medical Center in Boston, who headed the new research.
Lyme disease is caused by infection from a spirochete bacterium called borrelia burgdorferi that is transmitted to humans by a tick that previously has bitten infected deer or mice.
The infection generally causes a rash and flulike symptoms.
If untreated, it can cause chronic arthritis and other ills.
In 1992, the national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said almost 10,000 cases were reported to it.
But Dr. Steere said more than 75% of patients referred to his clinic were wrongly diagnosed with the disease.
More troubling, the CDC recently reported that 14 children treated at one medical center in New Jersey had to have their gallbladders removed because they were treated excessively with antibiotics.
The CDC said most of the children showed no evidence of ever having Lyme disease.
The blood test currently used can't tell whether the bacterium is still present in a patient and thus whether a patient's arthritis is the result of an active infection that could be treated with antibiotics.
The new test developed by Dr. Steere and his colleagues at Tufts University Medical Center and the Mayo Clinic can detect a gene common only to the bacterium.
The test makes use of a relatively new technique called PCR, which helps identify a gene's presence by quickly making millions of copies of a gene.
Dr. Steere said the test can find the bacterium only in joint fluid, noting that the test isn't useful for detecting early Lyme disease that has yet to cause joint problems.
Using the PCR method, the researchers said they identified the bacterium's gene in fluid removed from arthritic joints of 85% of the 88 patients with Lyme disease arthritis.
The researchers failed to find the gene in fluid from 64 patients without the disease.
Moreover, the researchers found the bacterium in 70 of 73 patients who hadn't undergone antibiotic therapy or whose therapy was inadequate.
Dr. Steere, whose research team reported the study results in today's issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, said the PCR test should be able to identify which patients have active infections that would benefit from antibiotics and which infected patients already treated might benefit from additional antibiotics.
He added that the PCR test is a "complex, painstaking procedure to perform," that laboratories need to "take extraordinary precautions against contamination that could produce false-positive results," and that the test is costly, all of which might hamper its widespread use.
