While other telecommunications companies are rushing into new multimedia ventures, Britain's Cable & Wireless PLC has decided to stick to a steadier approach.
"We're just putting our toe in the water," James Ross, the company's chief executive officer, said in an interview.
"We're learning about the market and we're going to be players, but we're not entering this feeding frenzy of acquisitions."
Drawn by prospects of the so-called information superhighway, many of the world's biggest communications companies have been setting up joint ventures or seeking to acquire media companies.
Mr. Ross said Cable & Wireless has no intention of being left behind and is in a good position to move into the world of combined communications, entertainment and business services.
But until recently, the company viewed itself as a provider of "plain old telephone service" to emerging countries, he said, and it is still in the learning process when it comes to more sophisticated technologies.
Analysts agree that Cable & Wireless, while taking a cautious approach to multimedia breakthroughs, isn't guilty of failing to keep up with other communications companies.
Chris McFadden at Smith New Court Securities noted that the company is about to set up an "intelligent" communications network for the fast transmission of data through fiber networks.
"They're not leaping in and buying" big media production companies, the analyst said, but Cable & Wireless is making "small, tactical investments" in both its own operations as well as ventures with other companies to put itself in position to take advantage of technological breakthroughs.
Cable & Wireless' 58%-owned subsidiary, Hongkong Telecommunications Ltd., still dominates the outlook for the parent company despite strong growth from Cable & Wireless' mobile telephone operations in the U.K.
In a recent study, Salomon Brothers valued Cable & Wireless's stake in Hongkong Telecom at #10.1 billion ($14.9 billion) compared with a value of #14.75 billion for all of Cable & Wireless.
Its next biggest unit, 80%-owned U.K. telephone company Mercury Communications Ltd., was valued at #2.8 billion.
Analysts expect Hongkong Telecom to prove be the main generator of earnings growth when Cable & Wireless reports annual earnings in June.
The consensus forecast is for Cable & Wireless to report a #1.05 billion pretax profit for the year ending in March 1994, up 14% from a year earlier.
Cable & Wireless's Asia-Pacific region, which is mainly Hongkong Telecom, is expected to contribute about #720 million, or 69%, of that, analysts say.
Mr. Ross said that because of where the company has its operations, the vast majority of Cable & Wireless's future business won't be in basic telecommunications.
"So when you realize we have so much of our portfolio in the more sophisticated markets, either we play in this emerging multimedia convergence game or in time we'll become uncompetitive, and we have no intention of that happening."
Mr. Ross said the learning process involves Cable & Wireless's buying stakes in cable television operators in the U.K. as well as joining with ventures in the U.S. and Japan in other areas of telecommunications.
For example, it plans to introduce its personal communications network (PCN) mobile telephone service into the U.S. along with its partner in the PCN venture, U S West Inc.
The U.S. and Japan are special situations, he said.
"In the U.S. -- that's fiercely competitive -- we're not going to make that a major region as a percentage of our total activity.
But it's a region we have to be in in order to participate in all the technological developments that are coming in multimedia communications.
Japan we feel we have to be in as a source of alliances . . . to serve our international customers."
Nevertheless, Asia and the U.K. will remain the company's principal areas of operations and growth.
Hongkong Telecom was recently rocked by the sudden death of its chief executive officer, Mike Gale, who died in January from a heart attack.
Linus Cheung will become the first Chinese chief executive of Hongkong Telecom on March 1.
"The organization, in personal terms, was knocked sideways," Mr. Ross said.
"But I think in sort of corporate terms the show has to go on."
Mr. Cheung had been set to take over as chief executive anyway, he said, and Mr. Gale was to become managing director in Asia.
Now a new managing director will be named for operations in Asia outside of Hong Kong, with both positions reporting to Mr. Ross.
"So I think we have a very strong team there, and I don't think in those terms you will see any difference," Mr. Ross said.
"We are in a privileged sector, in a sense, where there really is growth," Mr. Ross said.
"We benefit from the growth particularly in the Far East with the activity into and out of China and the fact that they are growing economies . . . except maybe for Japan."
For the U.K., Cable & Wireless has been getting a sharp boost in sales from the introduction of its "Mercury One-2-One" wireless telephone business.
The mobile phone venture, which is a 50-50 venture between Mercury and U.S. West, "has taken off remarkably fast" without taking business away from other mobile phone companies, Mr. Ross said.
"We've grown the total market, which is what we said we were always attempting to do," he said.
"The only problem we have is we can't keep up with the demand in the short term."
