CMS Energy Corp. said bitterly cold weather, as well as strong nonutility operations, will enable the company to at least meet analysts expectations for the year.
William T. McCormick Jr., chairman and chief executive officer of CMS Energy, said he was comfortable the company would achieve consensus 1994 profit estimates of $2.11 a share.
For the full year 1993, CMS reported net income of $155 million, or $1.90 a share, on revenue of $3.48 billion.
He also said CMS Energy should top analysts consensus earnings estimates for the first quarter of 80 cents a share.
The consensus, however, is below last year's performance for the quarter.
In the 1993 first quarter, CMS reported net of $71.9 million, or 90 cents a share, on revenue of $1.01 billion.
CMS, of Dearborn, Mich., like most utilities, has spent the past several months attempting to decipher the quickly changing electric utility market, including rapid deregulation, increasing competition and a tougher rate environment.
In order to take advantage of the easing regulatory environment, CMS established nonregulated businesses in independent power, gas and oil exploration and natural gas services.
"We decided four or five years ago that we needed to change our approach, and get involved in nonregulated businesses especially in the power generation side," Mr. McCormick said.
Mr. McCormick noted that almost all power generation is now unregulated.
In fact, most states require utilities to put new power projects up for competitive bid.
As a result, more than half of all power projects in the U.S. are now being built by independent power companies.
CMS's independent power production unit has established itself not only domestically with the largest gas-fired co-generation project in the U.S., in Midland, Mich., but also in the international market.
CMS has independent projects operating in Argentina.
In the next year, it plans more than $1.2 billion in construction projects in India and the Philippines.
In 1993, CMS derived more than $334 million in revenue from its seven-year-old independent power project unit, by far its largest unregulated business.
Another $149 million came from its nonutility natural gas services formed in the late 1980s and $80 million from its exploration operations.
Mr. McCormick said growth in these nonutility enterprises is crucial for the company's future success.
"Utilities that stick strictly to the traditional tactics of building capacity and increasing their rates are destined for long-term decline," he said.
"We're not playing that game."
Still CMS's utility businesses will remain as the important core for its nearterm success.
In 1993, CMS had more than $2 billion in electric revenue and more than $1 billion in natural gas revenue.
