"Cellular phones are being way overemphasized.
People just don't spend that much time in their cars."
-- Herschel Shosteck, 1986, Business First magazine, Louisville, Ky.
Predicting the future of new technology is perilous, as those who tried in cellular's infancy can attest.
In 1986, Mr. Shosteck, a Silver Spring, Md., consultant, forecast a total of 1.5 million cellular users in the U.S. by 1990.
McKinsey & Co. was even more conservative, compiling an earlier study for American Telephone & Telegraph Co. forecasting only 900,000 users by the year 2000.
Out of hundreds of other predictions, only a handful were much more optimistic.
The actual 1990 figure: 5.3 million.
And by the end of last year, an estimated 14 million people had cellular phones.
Growth forecasts for most new technologies are wildly overoptimistic, mainly because "the people who made them have been seduced by technological wonder," says Steven P. Schnaars, a professor of marketing at Baruch College in New York and author of a book on the subject.
With cellular phones, however, exactly the opposite was true.
How could so many forecasters fall so far short of the mark?
By repeating a mistake they made with computers.
In both cases, they failed to grasp the relentless advance in microprocessors and other microchips, abetted by the development of software-trends that drove up performance and drove down prices with unexpected rapidity.
Moreover, demand for mobility and for quick access to information has proved far vaster than expected.
Demand for new wireless products and services, such as digital data networks and hand-held digital communicators, should be driven by the same forces.
But things get tricky when other variables are factored in, such as the lack of standards for wireless transmission, the fragmented nature of existing and proposed wireless networks and the uncertain nature of the competition.
At least for now, market-research firms and industry officials are moving toward a consensus that the growth curve for new wireless products and services will resemble a hockey stick with a fairly long blade: that is, several years of dormancy and slow acceptance, and then an explosion of demand after the technology has been refined and costs driven down.
Keeping in mind that forecasting microchip-based technologies is much more art than science, we now offer some specific predictions by industry experts and executives about the wireless future.
Gleaned from interviews and other publications, the forecasts are accompanied by our assessment of probability, from 0 (least probable) to 10 (most probable).
Herschel Shosteck, Herschel Shosteck Associates: "It's likely every credible forecast for cellular phones is low."
He now expects the number of users worldwide to jump to "around 100 million" in the year 2000 from 30 million now, but "wouldn't be surprised if it were closer to 200 million."
Probability: 8.
Who could go wrong with a forecast like that?
Mr. Shosteck has apparently learned his lesson.
He cites looming price competition and huge new demand from China and Eastern Europe.
Craig McCaw, chief executive officer, McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., Kirkland, Wash.: "The home telephone will go the way of the dinosaurs," driven to extinction by personal digital assistants.
Probability: 1.
Maybe in the year 2020, but for a long time wireless data devices will be limited largely to the most affluent 20% of the population.
Mr. McCaw may have fallen into what Prof. Schnaars calls "the trap of unbridled optimism brought on by a love of exotic technology."
Booz-Allen & Hamilton, New York: Predicts 14 million wireless data devices in use by the year 2000, explaining that with the imminent introduction of networks and easy-to-use software, the market is more advanced than it looks.
Probability: 8.
A boom in wireless subnotebook computers should make this possible, and the prediction is in line with most other market researchers' forecasts.
Barry Goodstadt, an analyst for consultants Arthur D. Little Inc., Cambridge, Mass.: "The market is there for handheld satellite phones that handle voice, data and fax.
It's going to grow pretty fast."
He predicts four million subscribers to satellite services by 2005.
Probability: 5.
That's an awful lot of people who don't care how much a phone call costs.
But then look at the explosion in portable computers and electronic mail.
Akira Mitarai, general manager, Sharp Corp.'s information systems group, at a Santa Clara, Calif., conference: "The market for PDAs will grow to 50 million units by the year 2000."
Gaston Bastiens, general manager of Apple's personal interactive electronics division, on Mr. Mitarai's forecast: "Absolutely.
It could go even higher."
Probability: 0 for both.
The Chinese would have to buy these things in lieu of chopsticks.
Marc Porat, chief executive officer, General Magic Inc., Mountain View, Calif.: "1995 will be the year of the mass market" for hand-held wireless devices.
Andrew Seybold, editor, Outlook on Mobile Computing, Brookdale, Calif.: "The sharp increase in users will begin in 1996."
Probability: 6 for Mr. Porat and 7 for Mr. Seybold.
Given the chaotic state of wireless networks, 1997 is a safer bet, and so say market-research firms such as BIS Strategic Decisions, Norwell, Mass.
Mr. Seybold: "Everyone who has ever predicted the "year of the whatever has been wrong."
Probability: 8.
That's roughly the probability Prof. Schnaars came up with, also.
Mr. Porat: "During the next three years, there will be opportunities for companies to lose very large amounts of money."
Probability: 10.
There isn't room for all the wireless networks companies plan to build, for example.
Something has to give.
Don Valentine, venture capitalist, Sequoia Capital, Santa Clara, Calif.: "These fancy wireless networks -- I'd be surprised if much existed before the turn of the century."
Probability: 3.
It's true that the complexity of using wireless networks could be a big obstacle, but that, as William H. Gates would say, is just a software problem.
William H. Gates, chairman of Microsoft Corp.: "I think the idea of information available at your fingertips and instant global communication is realizable.
It will happen substantially over the next four to five years."
Probability: 10 (well, maybe 9).
Why else would we do this report?
Michael Spindler, chief executive officer, Apple: "Forecasts come and go, and many of them are forgotten."
Probability: 10.
That's how market-research companies stay in business.
Mr. Hill is the chief of The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau.
