The economic and political forces that are transforming U.S. health care are also buffeting one of the hospital industry's bedrock investments: tax-exempt bonds.
Managed-care strategies used by employers to control health costs are applying a tourniquet to inpatient hospital revenue even while legislative health-reform proposals in Washington target expenditures for hospital care as an important source of savings.
These developments are raising new questions about the quality of the assets behind some of the more than $115 billion of tax-exempt hospital bonds currently held by investors.
"Whether it's coming out of Washington or happening in the private sector, it's changing the volatility of the industry," says John Goetz, of Moody's Investors Service, a rater of hospital bonds.
"That creates risk in an investor's mind."
No one predicts that hospital bonds are poised for a rash of defaults.
About half the health-care bonds issued each year are backed by bond insurance or other credit boosters.
And a flurry of hospital mergers and alliances that are part of a health-care industry consolidation may strengthen the financial position of participants by reducing inefficiencies or competition.
Nevertheless, experts say the changing climate increases risks for current bondholders at the same time hospitals are beginning to seek new capital to transform themselves into organizations that can compete in the future health-care market.
"Investors bought into a way of delivering and financing health care for 30 years and now we are trying to abruptly change direction," says Christopher Conley, senior vice president, public finance at Lehman Brothers, an underwriter of many types of tax-exempt bonds.
These worries haven't yet translated into higher interest rates for hospital bonds, Mr. Conley says, "but our concern is that it could.
The more trouble you have, the higher the rates."
Hospital bonds typically bear an interest rate one-quarter of a percentage point higher than similarly rated revenue bonds for, say, municipal sewer projects, he said, while rates among hospital bonds of different risk can vary by a full percentage point or more.
For years, the combination of tax-exempt bonds and a federal Medicare reimbursement policy that favored debt-financed capital projects has fueled a construction and technology boom at U.S. hospitals, paying for projects ranging from cancer centers to parking garages.
Individual investors have put up much of the capital, snapping up bonds issued for their local hospitals through state and municipal financing authorities.
But economists, health-policy experts and employers who purchase health care think this has led to too much of a good thing: Many markets are burdened with an overcapacity of hospital beds and medical technology, big drivers of excessive health costs.
Large customers are demanding not only discounts, but more efficiency from hospitals -- a major factor behind the consolidations in the health-care sector.
Hospital credit quality has already eroded in recent years, reflecting these developments and the Medicare program's switch a decade ago to paying hospitals on a fixed rate per diagnosis, from paying fee for service.
In 1992, Standard & Poor's rated 52% of hospital bonds as A or above, down from 77% in 1983; 7% of bonds were considered below investment grade compared with 1% a decade ago.
Now, growth of managed-care contracts and expectations that hospital care increasingly will be paid in advance in set monthly rates and not based on services provided, will put even more pressure on hospital revenues.
"If managed care is wildly successful, about half of the inpatient volume would fall out of the hospital marketplace," says Richard Clarke, president of the Healthcare Financial Management Association, a Chicago-based organization of hospital finance officials.
Meantime, President Clinton's health-reform plan calls for stanching growth in Medicare expenditures -- and for reducing payments for capital-related costs for inpatient services -- to help finance coverage for the uninsured and new benefits for the elderly.
Kenneth Raske, president of the Greater New York Hospital Association, estimates that the proposed cutbacks would chop $4 billion of revenue from his members over five years.
For investors, all of this means a hospital's financial strength will depend less on its ability to fill beds, and more on the quality of its management, its control of operating costs and its success in negotiating contracts with managed-care companies and other large purchasers of care, says Steven Harvey, portfolio manager at Fidelity Investments, Boston.
For hospitals, that means adjusting to the growing clout of purchasers.
Membership is soaring at many large health-maintenance organizations, giving them increasing leverage in negotiations with hospitals that are part of their delivery networks.
And many employers are pooling their purchasing power with the same objectives.
Hospitals covet relationships with large customers.
But an institution could become vulnerable to a couple of big accounts who could dash its fortunes just by taking their business next door.
Experts say to survive under changing conditions, hospitals need size, a diversity of outpatient services to complement inpatient care, and sophisticated information systems.
All of that takes capital.
Blessing Hospital, Quincy, Ill., for instance, last year used $15.6 million of a $42 million bond issue to acquire a rival and earmarked another $11 million for retrofitting the merged facilities to concentrate inpatient services at one location and outpatient and long-term care at another.
"We estimate a $22 million savings over five years," says James Waterkotte, chief financial officer.
At Inova Health System, Springfield, Va., officials are using $10 million of proceeds from a recent $70 million bond issue to revamp their information systems with a goal of computerizing not just billing functions, but patient medical records.
Among other things, says Richard Magenheimer, chief financial officer, "We think there's going to be a competitive advantage for organizations like ours to provide feedback of outcome data" to managed-care companies and insurers.
Industry participants say such projects demonstrate that despite a reduction of traditional "bricks and mortar" projects, not-for-profit hospitals will continue to need capital to meet new demands from their customers as well as to keep their current facilities up to date.
"Their only access to external capital is debt, they can't sell shares," says Robert Fuller of S&P.
"If you destabilize that, you may do things you don't intend to do."
Adds the Greater New York's Mr. Raske; "Capital formation is a litmus test for health-care reform.
If the industry has difficulty forming capital to rejuvenate itself, the long-term measure of health reform is at risk."
