Picture a dramatic close-up of a fashion model, her face glistening in the sun, her hair slicked back, the blue sea visible behind her.
Sounds like the cover of Elle magazine.
Well, not quite.
It's actually Sun magazine, brought to you by Ray-Ban sunglasses, a unit of Bausch & Lomb.
But in many details, from the typeface on the cover to the choice of model, the new publication bears more than a passing resemblance to Elle.
In fact, the Ray-Ban magazine's cover model is Gabrielle Reece, the 24-year-old professional volleyball player who has graced the cover of Elle at least twice and, as of March, will make regular appearances inside the magazine as its sports columnist.
That Elle should have an advertiser-produced clone is no coincidence: Sun is the latest "custom" publication from Elle's publisher, Hachette Filipacchi Magazines, a unit of Matra-Hachette of Paris.
Subscribers to some Hachette publications will get the first issue of Sun for free, but it will also be sold at newsstands.
Custom magazines are growing in popularity with advertisers and publishers, who are becoming desperate to sidestep the current clutter in traditional print media.
But advertisers and publishers are straining their credibility by asking consumers to pay for what, at worst, are little more than long, glossy ads and, at best, are advertiser-controlled publications posing as independent media.
Hachette Filipacchi alone has brought out seven custom-published magazines, including Sony's $4.95 Sony Style, a twice-yearly magazine that also doubles as the company's catalog.
Lesser-known titles include Know How, a women's magazine sponsored by General Motors; Tell, a teen magazine published for General Electric's NBC television network; and Your Body & Your Health, from weight-loss company Jenny Craig.
All of these custom magazines are sold on newsstands.
Companies have long published their own magazines, with mixed results.
Philip Morris Cos. started publishing Philip Morris Magazine in the mid-1980s, as a soapbox from which to preach about smokers' rights, but extinguished the effort in 1992.
Federal Express Corp. publishes Via Fed Ex, a free magazine full of career and office-management tips, for one of its most important customers, the professional secretary.
The new corporate magazines, however, differ in that they are produced by the same companies that publish traditional magazines and readers are expected to pay to read them.
The big question, of course, is, will they?
Sun has copious fashion photographs, in which most of the models wear Ray-Bans.
The Ray-Ban name and the sunglasses appear on the cover.
Inside are articles on topics tangentially related to Ray-Bans and sunglasses, such as sports celebrities, driving safety and the danger of ultraviolet rays.
A picture feature on American icons highlights such brands as Levi's, Oreo, Campbell's Soup and, yes, Ray-Ban Wayfarers.
There's even a photo of President Clinton wearing a pair of Wayfarers.
The purpose of the magazine is to go beyond the limits of traditional advertising and bring readers several messages about the benefits of Bausch & Lomb's premium-priced sunglasses, said David Whalen, vice president of marketing at Bausch & Lomb's eyewear division.
It's all part of a grander plan to get people to buy and wear at least one, and maybe more, pair of Ray-Bans.
"We want readers to say, `Wow.
This magazine has demonstrated to me that sunglasses should be an integral part of my attire.
I should go buy a pair of Ray-Bans,'" he says.
"Phony publishing," is the verdict of Martin S. Walker, the chairman of publishing consultancy Walker Communications.
Efforts such as Ray-Ban's Sun, he says, are no more credible than a television infomercial.
But for advertisers, he says, the idea is attractive because it is seen as a relatively inexpensive, long-lasting form of advertising.
Publishers, meanwhile, welcome the revenue.
Neither Ray-Ban nor Hachette would discuss the terms of the Sun venture.
But David Pecker, Hachette Filipacchi's president, said first issues typically range from $500,000 to more than $2 million.
Mr. Pecker noted that the editorial staff for Hachette's custom magazines is entirely separate from those of regular magazines.
Some of the magazines tackle topics that tend to make advertisers queasy, he says.
For example, NBC's Tell recently published an article about teens and sex.
Yet even General Motors' Know How, which originated with Hachette and not General Motors, he said, isn't about to run a car-buyer's guide in which a Ford comes out on top.
Don't expect any apologies from Peter Arnell, whose agency, Arnell Group, just won Ray-Ban's consolidated $7 million account, previously at Grey Advertising.
Mr. Arnell, whose is also Sun's publication director, says he doesn't mind thinking of Sun as an infomercial in print.
That isn't far from what some traditional magazines are anyway, he says.
"Magazines promote ideas, yet every fashion magazine has a shopping guide," he said, citing the Shopping Guide in Elle magazine that tells readers where to buy the clothes, furniture and cosmetics in the editorial photos.
"Let me be very straightforward," he added.
"Dare I ask this?
Do you really think any advertiser who never saw his product in a magazine would ever advertise there?"
About 200,000 subscribers to Elle and several other Hachette publications will receive a free copy of Sun in the mail this spring, bagged with their May issues, Mr. Pecker said.
Hachette and Ray-Ban also hope to sell thousands more on newsstands across America, for $2.50 a pop.
Ray-Ban plans to start distributing the magazine this week, to athletes at the Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.
Whether consumers bite at the newstand may determine whether Sun is perceived as more ad than magazine.
Even Mr. Walker gives it a good shot at performing well.
"There's no accounting for what people will buy," he said.
Ayer, the New York agency whose plans to merge with Hal Riney & Partners, San Francisco, fell through last week, said Chairman Jerry Siano has given up day-to-day control of the agency's operations.
Mr. Siano, 59 years old, will retain his title but concentrate on seeking opportunities "through mergers and acquisitions and further investment in our existing business," the agency said in a statement.
Mr. Siano will work with Adcom, the investment group that also includes former Saatchi & Saatchi executive Richard Humphreys and W.Y. Choi, an owner of Asian media properties.
Adcom acquired a substantial stake in Ayer last March after merger talks with Ketchum Communications collapsed.
Tom Maxey, Ayer's 56-year-old chief operating officer, will retire "as soon as possible," the agency said.
Assuming Mr. Maxey's duties is Glenn Corlett, 50, chief financial officer.
Patrick Cunningham, 50, was named president and chief executive of Ayer's New York operations, a new position.
He was formerly vice chairman and creative director.
Two executive vice presidents, Keith Gould, 58, and Janet Keeler, 46, were named managing partners of the New York office, overseeing the agency's clients there.
A spokesman said Ayer continues to search for an executive to head its U.S. operations, a post that has been vacant since July when Dom Rossi, then Ayer's U.S. president, was named vice chairman, business development.
McDonald's, which has had a knack for choosing controversial movies for its marketing tie-ins, said it has found a controversy-free film this year with "The Flintstones," Universal Studios' revival of the animated Stone Age television family.
A Stone Age "RocDonald's" is featured in the live-action flick, in two scenes that take place in the town of Bedrock, McDonald's said.
The fast-food chain plans to capitalize on the RocDonald's joke in ads, from Omnicom Group's DDB Needham, said Craig McAnsh, McDonald's marketing manager.
McDonald's plans in-store tie-ins for adults and for children.
Two of the company's previous blockbuster tie-ins, with "Batman Returns" and "Jurassic Park," helped those films have record-breaking opening weekends, but also raised eyebrows because some franchisees considered them too scary to promote to small children.
Mr. McAnsh said that since "The Flintstones" is rated PG, and not PG-13, "there is no anticipation that anything like that could possibly happen again."
Universal Studios is a unit of Matsushita Electric Industrial MCA.
MCA/Universal Merchandising said it also has licensing plans with marketers including Mattel and Philip Morris's Kraft General Foods unit.
