Although office-vacancy rates dropped in many cities last year, the financial squeeze on owners of many newer buildings actually tightened.
"The good news is that a recovery is under way," said Raymond Torto of Torto Weaton Research, an arm of CB Commercial Inc., a Los Angeles-based brokerage firm.
"The bad news is that building owners are not out of the woods yet."
The average metropolitan vacancy rate dropped to an eight-year low of 17.6% last year, the firm reported, but it remained high enough that tenants seeking new space could still push hard for bargains.
Consequently, many office-users whose leases expire in the next year or two will still have the welcome opportunity to cut rental costs.
Their savings will come at the expense of already hard-pressed developers as well as banks and insurance companies that got stuck with buildings when the previous owners defaulted on their loans.
Still, the declining vacancy rate may prompt many of them to hold onto the properties until rents start to recover.
"Vacancy rates are a leading indicator, but net effective rents are where the rubber meets the road," said Craig Hatkoff of New York-based Victor Capital Group, which helps banks and insurance companies determine what to do with foreclosed properties.
Because vacancy rates in most markets remained high enough to give tenants the upper hand in lease negotiations, net effective rents eroded last year in nine of the 12 markets surveyed by Julien J. Studley Inc., a New York-based brokerage firm.
Net effective rents -- the bottom line return to the landlords, before debt payments -- are what's left for the owner after operating expenses, real-estate taxes and tenant concessions are taken into account.
Owners of post-1988 office buildings in Chicago actually lost $1.32 per square foot on the average new, 10-year lease, and owners in downtown Los Angeles lost 53 cents a foot, according to the survey.
"It shows how far building owners have to go to get back" to economic stability, said Studley Chairman Julien Studley.
"Few people realize how far down they are."
Chicago-based Sam Zell, who has been growing his national office portfolio by buying foreclosed properties from lenders, said owners who write break-even or money-losing leases are trying to cut their losses.
"What they're saying to tenants is, `I'll give you your space for free, if you carry my operating costs for 10 years.'
In 10 years, that's when they start seeing a return."
Mr. Zell said that about the only owners who can afford to write such leases are deep-pocketed developers, those who have restructured their debt, or lenders who have taken buildings back.
"There are very few owner-developers left who are still alive," he said.
Owners of newer buildings in Atlanta, Baltimore, Boston, Houston, West Los Angeles, Philadelphia and San Francisco also saw effective rents drop last year, the survey reported.
In Washington, and in midtown and downtown Manhattan, they saw modest increases.
Slowly declining vacancy rates, however, are expected to reverse the downward trend in most cities, but not right away.
According to New York-based Cushman & Wakefield, another national brokerage firm, average vacancy rates in central business districts dropped to 18.7% at year end, from a record 19.6% a year earlier.
In the suburbs, rates fell to 18.9%, from 20.4%.
One reason for the improvement is that new construction plunged to just four million square feet last year, from 26 million in 1992, the firm said, with 40% of new 1993 building concentrated in the relatively healthy markets of Washington, suburban Maryland and Northern Virginia.
"It's good news for landlords, but some of them are going to have a long row to hoe before they get back to positive yields," said Arthur Mirante II, Cushman & Wakefield's chairman and chief executive officer.
In the absence of new construction, real-estate experts say, recovery will hinge on the creation of white-collar jobs.
For example, because of the rapid growth of NationsBank Corp. and First Union Corp., both of Charlotte, N.C., that city's vacancy rate plunged to 9.8% last year from 19.8% in 1992, according to CB Commercial, the largest drop of the 50 markets it tracks.
"They gobbled up virtually anything that would be considered Class A or Class B property," said Thomas O'Brien, who heads the firm's Charlotte office.
After dropping from a peak of about $23 a square foot three years ago to $16.50, Charlotte office rents have now jumped back up to about $18, he said.
Owners are also benefiting from the "general erosion" of concessions like free rent, tenant improvements and parking allowances.
Salt Lake City; Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; Kansas City, Mo.; and Orlando, Fla., also saw vacancy rates drop significantly over the past year, according to CB Commercial.
In tightening markets, owners often feel they can trim out-of-pocket expenses without risking tenant loss.
This is particularly true for large blocks of prime space, which are usually the first to become scarce.
"The first things to go in a tightening marketplace are the owner's soft costs -- the rent concessions" and promises to pay for construction, explained Bruce Mosler, vice chairman of Galbreath Riverbank, a New York-based brokerage.
"The next thing that goes is the landlord's willingness to lock in a lease for 15 years."
In Washington, for example, one of the healthiest office markets in the nation, owners have become far stingier on concessions, the Studley survey revealed.
As a result, Washington saw net effective rents jump more than the 11 other cities surveyed.
"We do think rents are stabilizing," said Jeff Hines, president of Houston-based Hines Interest, which owns office buildings nationwide.
"But they may be stabilizing at a very low rate for a very long period of time."
Mr. Torto of CB Commercial predicted: "In 1998, the rents, in real terms, will be what they were in 1990.
It's a great situation if you're buying now.
But if you're sitting there trying to recover to where you were in 1990, you've got four more years to wait."
And with many insurance-company lenders reluctant to extend five-year and seven-year loans that are now coming due, the bottoming out of the market has come too late for some owners.
"Landlords are still losing their buildings," says Mr. Studley.
"But it may be that the financial institutions that are recovering the buildings will be better off than they anticipated."
