Memorex Telex NV filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law protection for the second time in 25 months, proposing a reorganization plan that gives senior bank creditors and bondholders 100% of the company's equity.
The prepackaged reorganization plan, which already has the approval of 95% of holders of each class of the company's securities, could allow Memorex Telex to quickly emerge from bankruptcy court.
Memorex Telex, which makes computer data-storage equipment, said the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Wilmington, Del., scheduled a March 14 confirmation hearing for the plan, and that clearance could come shortly afterward.
The Dutch company has executive offices in Irving, Texas.
A spokesman said both the Dutch parent and its U.S. unit filed in bankruptcy court.
In prepackaged reorganizations, companies seek to line up the support of creditors before filing their plans, in order to expedite the proceedings.
Prepackaged plans generally take a few months to complete; the conventional reorganization process can take considerably longer, sometimes years.
The latest plan follows the filing of a separate prepackaged reorganization plan in January 1992.
That plan was approved in February 1992.
A company spokesman said that with the recession in Europe, where 40% of the company's revenue is generated, coupled with a slow recovery in the U.S., where 50% of revenue is generated, the company continued to report losses and determined that it needed further restructuring.
Under the plan, about $850 million of the company's $950 million of senior bank and public debt and accrued interest will be converted to a 100% equity stake.
The remaining $100 million in debt will continue as a five-year term loan from a syndicate led by Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. of New York, Memorex Telex said.
Current shareholders would lose most of their equity to senior debtholders, who would control virtually all of Memorex Telex.
But the shareholders would get warrants to buy stock in the new company that, if exercised, would give them a stake of about 4%.
