Tokyo stocks tumbled 2.7% Monday after the failure of the U.S.-Japan trade summit sent the yen rocketing upward, and a further 3.1% Tuesday morning.
Many other Asian stock markets also slumped on Monday, with Hong Kong and Taipei each plunging 4.5%.
London shares fell but ended above the day's lows in lifeless trading.
In Frankfurt, prices rose 1.2% on hopes for a German interest-rate easing this week.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 116.92, up 0.90, reflecting higher European and Asia/Pacific markets and lower American markets.
Trucking stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 126.35, up 3.23, or 2.6%, with Trimac of Canada posting a 1.6% gain in its local currency.
Plantations stocks trailed at 218.91, down 4.99, or 2.2%, with Dunlop of Malaysia sliding 7.3% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which rose 149.32 points Thursday, slumped 531.45 Monday -- its second-biggest fall this year -- to 19459.25; the market was closed Friday for a national holiday.
Monday's first-section volume was estimated at 300 million shares, down from 359.5 million shares in the previous session.
Declining issues swamped gainers 934-155.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which rose 10.12 points Thursday, skidded 26.16, or 1.6%, to 1581.98.
At the close of trading Tuesday morning, the average had plummeted a further 612.07 points, to 18847.18.
The yen's steep gains followed last week's news that the U.S. and Japan broke off their so-called framework talks to improve bilateral trade, leaving the Tokyo market deeply pessimistic.
The yen was driven up by speculation in the foreign-exchange market that the Clinton administration will try to boost the Japanese currency to make Japan's exports relatively more expensive.
Investors on the stock market also were worried about possible U.S. trade sanctions against Japan, which could hurt its exporters.
In London Monday, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-stock index dropped 15.4 points to 3363.5, up from the session's trough of 3350.2.
The FT 30-stock index declined 8.6 points to 2586.7.
Volume was 616.9 million shares, compared with one billion shares in the previous session.
The market was stagnant following last week's volatility, which left investors wary.
The exchange also was on hold pending this week's release of several reports on Britain's economy, which will provide a clearer picture for making decisions on stocks.
Losses in Tokyo and other Asian bourses also pressured the London market, mindful of British corporate earnings reports to start in a few weeks.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index climbed 25.40 points to 2116.01, though dealings were quiet; the index last week lost a total of 28.35 points.
Investors' hopes swelled for a reduction in key interest rates when the German Bundesbank's policysetting central bank council meets Thursday.
The central bank last cut rates Oct. 21.
The hopes were raised by poor unemployment data and relatively good inflation figures for Germany.
The market wasn't much affected by the breakdown of contract negotiations late Friday between industrial employers and the metal workers union.
In Paris, the market sank 1.4% in thin trading marked by an absence of news to stir investors, who also were deterred by an unusual cold spell and snowfall in the French capital; despite the main index's sharp decline, selling wasn't heavy, though the market had nagging doubts about whether Germany will lower rates this week.
In Amsterdam, shares ended broadly lower, driven down by profit-taking amid lackluster turnover; other markets' declines and a slightly lower dollar in foreign-exchange dealings pressured stocks and thinned activity.
In Milan, profit-taking pulled share prices down on the first day of the March trading account, and the index that includes issues traded electronically lost 1.1% in what was termed a healthy correction.
In Madrid, stocks slumped because of a gloomy economic outlook for Spain, based on data showing rising unemployment, worse-than-expected January inflation and little likelihood for Spanish rate reductions soon.
In Stockholm, shares advanced but closed below the day's highs, as the market lost steam partly because of the absence of foreign buyers; the gains came on corporate news and declining Swedish lending rates.
In Zurich, stocks sank 1.3% but dealings were extremely quiet in the absence of fresh news.
In Hong Kong, dashing hopes for the traditional rally following the Chinese New Year celebrations, the Hang Seng Index plummeted 515.22 points, the fifth-biggest drop ever in terms of points, to 10988.81.
Stocks opened lower because of weakness in other markets during the Hong Kong bourse's holiday break, and losses continued throughout the session, led by Hang Seng futures contracts.
Foreign investors continued their recent pattern of selling, but local retail buyers didn't appear as a buffer.
Including Monday's drop, three of the blue-chip index's four biggest declines occurred this year, but in percentage terms, Monday's loss didn't approach several double-digit plunges in the past two decades.
In Sydney, the benchmark index slipped and share prices mostly lost ground but ended up from their lows for the session; the finish continued the trend from last week, when the market fell 3.9%.
Stocks opened weaker on expectations of sell-offs in Tokyo and Hong Kong; those downturns weren't as large as expected, but Sydney investors also were concerned about a trade impasse between Japan and the U.S.
In Singapore, shares ended solidly lower in quiet dealings, as sentiment was subdued following a four-day break to celebrate the lunar new year.
In Kuala Lumpur, which also had a long holiday closing, the market lost 1.4% in moderate trading; prices opened higher but quickly softened because of profit-taking.
In Taipei, the 4.5% loss was broadly based and attributed to weak buying interest linked partly to the Taiwan central bank's tight monetary policy and to margin lenders, for buying stocks on credit, being at their maximum loan limits.
The finance sector led the losers, plunging 6.3%.
In Seoul, prices tumbled 1.7% in light turnover, continuing last week's correction triggered by the third round of marketcooling measures by the South Korean government; losses were spread across the board.
In Manila, shares skidded 1.1% in moderate dealings, hurt by profit-taking.
In Wellington, lack of overseas buying and some profit-taking pushed the stock market lower in late trading, and the main index sank 1.3%.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
