Chrysler Corp., which is enjoying record sales and profits, last year paid its two top executives a total of $19 million, and took action some analysts saw as a precursor to a stock split.
In its preliminary proxy statement, Chrysler asked shareholders to double the number of shares the corporation is authorized to issue, to one billion common shares, up from 500 million shares.
"I think they are positioning themselves for a stock split," said Ronald A. Glantz, an analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds.
The additional shares could also be used to acquire another company or to raise capital.
But Chrysler management has repeatedly said the company won't go on an acquisition binge, and the company is well-positioned to generate large profits in a booming auto market -- enough to fund its capital needs.
Chrysler said it has no plans to issue additional shares but needed the authorization for additional flexibility.
Separately, the company reported that two directors, A. Jean de Grandpre and William G. Milliken, will retire from its board, reducing the number of board members to 13.
Chrysler disclosed that it paid its chairman, Robert J. Eaton, $9,259,786, including a $4,478,272 gain from exercising stock options and a few perquisites such as a $25,000 initiation fee for a private club.
Mr. Eaton earned $1.9 million in salary and stock awards in 1992.
Chrysler also granted Mr. Eaton options on 200,772 shares, at prices ranging from $39 to $53 a share, exercisable in the next three years.
Chrysler estimated the options' current value at $2.9 million.
Robert A. Lutz, Chrysler's president, earned $9,750,495, including a $5,965,435 gain from the exercise of options.
Chrysler also granted Mr. Lutz options on 99,301 shares at prices ranging from $44 to $46 a share, exercisable over three years.
The company estimated the current value of those options at $1.4 million.
Mr. Lutz took home $1.8 million in 1992.
The corporation said its generous compensation was due in part to the auto maker's record pretax earnings and record sales and revenue for the year.
The United Auto Workers union blasted the pay as excessive.
Chrysler also made sure its former chairman, Lee A. Iacocca, won't have to fly commercial while he's on Chrysler-related business.
Mr. Iacocca's original consulting agreement entitled him to $500,000 a year, an office, staff for two years and use of corporate aircraft for one year, following his retirement at the end of 1992.
The new agreement gives Mr. Iacocca an additional year on Chrysler's fleet of corporate jets.
