Portable computers around Europe may start making a lot more cellular phone calls this spring.
Next month at CeBIT , the annual European computer show in Hanover, Germany, a wave of new products will go on sale to let notebook and laptop computers talk over the new, pan-European "GSM" cellular-phone network.
Finland's Oy Nokia, and Siemens AG and Dr. Neuhaus Mikroelektronik GMBH of Germany are among several communications-equipment companies now readying products.
The major portable-PC makers, including Compaq Computer Corp. and International Business Machines Corp., are also on the bandwagon.
In the beginning at least, these gadgets will be expensive -- but in time prices are expected to fall and make a tempting market.
Today GSM, or Global System for Mobile Communications, has more than 1.2 million subscribers in Europe with 9.7 million forecast for 1997, according to market-research firm BIS Strategic Decisions Ltd.
It's the biggest all-digital cellular-phone system in the world -- transmitting in the bits and bytes of computerese -- and is being rolled out gradually across Western and Eastern Europe and the Middle East, so the same phones will work in every country.
Though GSM is used for voice chatter today, starting this year GSM phone-companies are upgrading their systems to handle data.
This may provide a hot selling point for laptop and notebook PCs.
Anyone can buy portable-PC gear to send wireless messages, but it's expensive, klunky and often unreliable -- not "the most pleasant thing to do," says Per Larsen, IBM's mobile-computing brand manager in Europe.
As a result, most portable PC-users save their messages until they get to a normal telephone, and then use their builtin PC modems to dump them down the phone line.
But as a digital system, GSM is lessprone to garbling or losing computer messages than conventional, static-laden analog cellular networks.
It isn't the only technology for that; the U.S. cellular industry is developing other digital data systems.
But it is one of the first.
In the future, industry gurus predict tiny "personal digital assistants" like Apple Computer Inc.'s unsuccessful Newton MessagePad will be chattering over such digital networks.
But for now, most PC makers are content to contemplate the money to be made merely in simplifying wireless chatter for today's notebook PCs.
"For the first time, this is going to be a good part of the market," says Andreas Barth, Compaq's senior vice president in Europe.
Almost all the systems on display in Hanover next month will use the same basic idea.
You start with a standard GSM mobile phone and a portable PC with a so-called PCMCIA slot -- a high-tech hole that most new notebooks have, for plugging in add-on equipment.
(The acronymn stands for Personal Computer Memory Card International Association -- an industry group behind the standard.)
Then you buy some hardware to connect phone and computer.
That's a PCMCIA "card" -- a piece of electronics about the size of a fat credit card -- that slides into the side of the PC and translates the computer messages into GSM-speak.
Also, you need a cable to connect the card to the phone, and some software to control it all.
In theory it sounds fine.
But watch out for start-up problems.
The first generation of GSM voice-telephones, for instance, had bugs that took time to resolve, notes Gunter Hefner, head of Siemens's mobilephone marketing.
While the new data-systems work great in field tests, he says, they have yet to prove themselves in mass-market use.
And only a few GSM phone companies, including Deutsche Bundespost Telekom, will have their networks ready this year to start accepting the data calls -- meaning early notebook-callers will be marooned in their own countries for a while.
"As with any new product, whether a car or a washing machine, in the transition period you can expect some sort of problem," Siemens's Mr. Hefner says.
Another problem: steep prices.
In Britain, Nokia's GSM kit will sell for about #550 ($813.13), says Alex Mott, Nokia's United Kingdom mobile-phone marketing manager.
In Germany, Hamburg-based Dr. Neuhaus plans to charge 880 marks ($509), including tax; Siemens's system will be about 1,000 marks ($578.43), Mr. Hefner says.
That's on top of the steep phone-company charges for making any GSM call, whether computer or voice.
The PC makers, whose role has been to make their portables accept the new devices, expect prices to fall in the time-honored pattern of the electronics industry.
Even this year's prices aren't a lot more than the $400 that Europeans pay for conventional notebook modems, says IBM's Mr. Larsen.
Many people may pay extra for a reliable wireless connection, he says.
True road warriers will be undaunted.
Says Nokia's Mr. Mott: "It's an ultimate solution for people in eight different European capitals a week, and who need to get messages off quickly."
