Waste companies, intensifying their efforts to win back business lost to cement-making kilns, plan to petition the Environmental Protection Agency today to prevent hazardous-waste burning at six kilns and two other plants.
The move, which could lead to a federal lawsuit against the EPA if the agency doesn't act on the petition, reflects the growing distress in the waste industry.
It also illustrates the increasing role of the EPA not only as an environmental regulator, but as referee in billion-dollar business disputes, a job the agency is much less comfortable with.
The environmental-services industry -- and other industries the EPA regulates, such as paper-making and heavy manufacturing -- are by their natures capital intensive, requiring huge investments that can be imperiled by changes in regulation.
Companies such as WMX Technologies Inc., Westinghouse Electric Corp., Union Pacific Corp. and Rollins Environmental Services Inc. collectively spent hundreds of millions of dollars in recent years to build and win permits for hazardous-waste incinerators.
Those were specifically built to burn hazardous waste.
By contrast, the kiln operators learned to burn hazardous waste along with the huge amounts of fuel they use, thus lowering their overall fuel costs.
The EPA intended to force increasing amounts of toxic wastes toward the incinerators.
But, quite unexpectedly, major industrial companies found ways to sharply reduce the wastes they generate.
And cement kilns have taken ever more of the remaining wastes.
Prices in the business have plunged.
The EPA contributed to this mess by overestimating future waste volumes and worrying publicly that a shortage of disposal capacity loomed ahead, even as a glut was developing.
That reversal was responsible for most of a $550 million pretax charge at a WMX unit last year, as it wrote down the value of incinerators, and generally depressed results among operators of hazardous-waste incinerators.
In a meeting last November, officials of these companies told EPA Administrator Carol Browner that, based on current volumes, they had overinvested by about $280 million, or 140,000 tons a year of incinerator capacity.
That meeting, at which executives asked Ms. Browner for help -- by pushing a wider variety of wastes toward incineration, and by cracking down on less-regulated kilns -- hasn't produced any noticeable results.
Since an announcement last May that she would be taking a tougher stance toward hazardous-waste burning, Ms. Browner has had agency officials studying the business.
The petition is being filed by an industry group, the Hazardous Waste Treatment Council, and by about 10 local environmental groups that have been fighting the kilns and other plants targeted in the filing.
The petition targets plants in Michigan, California, Missouri, Texas, Oklahoma, Indiana and Louisiana that either currently burn hazardous wastes or have indicated that they may begin doing so soon.
The filing, a copy of which was provided to The Wall Street Journal, asks the EPA to prevent these plants from burning hazardous wastes, alleging they lack proper permits and other violations.
Generally, the kilns are less regulated than hazardous-waste incinerators.
Kiln operators contend they burn wastes responsibly.
EPA officials couldn't be reached over the weekend.
Since late last year, they have declined to comment on the waste companies' lobbying effort, and on their specific enforcement plans.
