An investment partnership said it is seeking to organize a $3.5 billion bid for the natural-gas transmission unit of Columbia Gas System Inc.
William Dimeling, a partner in Dimeling Schreiber & Park, a Philadelphia-based group that specializes in buying companies in bankruptcy-court proceedings, said his group would need to raise $500 million to $700 million in equity for such a bid.
The remainder, he said, would be financed through debt.
Columbia Gas System filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy-court protection in mid-1991, when it was burdened by fixed-price contracts to buy natural gas at a time when the price of gas had fallen sharply.
Gas suppliers have filed claims totaling $10 billion against the company, which insists a more realistic number would be around $900 million.
Although Mr. Dimeling said he hasn't arranged financing yet, he said he is in talks with a number of utilities, creditors and investment bankers.
One East Coast energy company, which declined to be identified, separately confirmed that it is considering taking part in the offer.
An offer for the Columbia Gas unit, if it materializes, would be a vastly larger investment than those his firm has made up to now.
Previous investments of the group have been in the $40 million to $50 million range, including a pending agreement to purchase Piper Aircraft Corp., Vero Beach, Fla.; and purchases of McCall Pattern Co., New York; Gulfstream Resources Inc., a New Orleans oil and gas company; and Pietro's Corp., a pizza chain purchased in the late 1980s from Campbell Soup Co.
At $3.5 billion, Mr. Dimeling said, the group would be paying about five times net cash flow, which he called "a good price."
A spokesman for Columbia Gas's pipeline unit said the unit wasn't for sale "but we'd consider any bona fide offer."
He said the company hadn't yet received any acquisition offers for the pipeline unit.
A separate group also is understood to be exploring a possible bid for the pipeline business -- the TAG Group, composed of units of Coastal States Petroleum and Public Service Enterprise Group Inc.
Any offer for the business would have to be approved by the bankruptcy court.
The pipeline subsidiary in January filed a reorganization plan that valued the unit at $3.1 billion.
It also called for the parent to inject $200 million in cash or stock into the unit.
Potential bidders for the Wilmington, Del., company's pipeline unit were aided recently by a court ruling requiring the company to open its books to interested parties, a move the company insisted would complicate the reorganization.
Creditors and others insist making the data available permits them to get a more accurate reading on the company's value.
