For once, the New Democrats may actually intend to take on the Iron Triangle.
The Clintonites may have gone faint of heart on liberating the poor from the welfare bureaucrats, but there's a whiff of seriousness about their proposal to liberate the nation's air traffic control system from the fumble-fingers at FAA.
Uttering the unspeakable, a member of Vice President Al Gore's Reinventing Government squad tells us, "We want to see how close to `privatization' we can get."
The answer in the current ideological climate seems to be "corporatization."
That means government would retain title to the radars and control towers, but the airlines would run the system and make the investment calls.
Since it would be funded by user fees, the Congressional porkophiles would have to seek gratification elsewhere.
When Australia and New Zealand adopted the same theory five years ago, the cost of handling a flight dropped by 25%.
Let's do it.
From the Third World to Jersey City, you can observe that privatization happens when bureaucrats reach the intersection of panic and despair.
By now even the most purblind FAA apparatchik must perceive the wisdom in getting somebody -- anybody -- to take this $17 billion white elephant of a modernization program off their hands.
A few months ago the agency was digging in its heels, but now it's on board.
Tired of the federal procurement labyrinth giving them yesterday's technology the day after tomorrow at government prices, the airlines and their unions are gung-ho to run the system themselves.
Even the air traffic controllers applaud the move, figuring they'll get more competitive pay and a better working environment.
Predictably, the only oar rowing in the opposite direction is the reactionary U.S. Congress.
Rep. James Oberstar wails that the "safety of the traveling public" would be jeopardized if the pork-barreling opportunities of his House aviation subcommittee were trimmed back.
Slapping another coat of red on this herring are the private pilot and corporate jet-set lobbies.
Right now the system pays them to hog space on runways while jumboloads of paying passengers wait and burn up precious fuel.
Mr. Gore's commandos make a big show of reminding everybody that safety enforcement would remain a vital federal function.
Off the record, they recognize that it's a phony issue.
Flying got safer after deregulation.
The airlines were suddenly competing for passengers and nothing draws people into the air like a reputation for not killing your customers.
The biggest challenge for the Clintonites will be to stop the Hill from loading up the new corporation's board of directors with political hacks.
These would be promoted in the name of defending the "public interest."
But what really interests the public is safe, efficient air travel, the same as the airlines.
That's why the airlines should have the dominant voice in managing the control system.
On a swing through Washington recently, Peter Proulx, the top man at New Zealand's air traffic control agency, sang the praises of the Gore proposal, but added a warning note: Sooner or later the politicians will exploit whatever opening you leave them.
In the long run, the best course lies with true privatization.
