Bop Air's motto could be: The airline that's neither here nor there.
Bophuthatswana's flag carrier can't fly international routes because the world doesn't recognize its home country, saying it is part of South Africa.
And Bop Air can't fly domestic routes within South Africa because it is considered a foreign airline.
That leaves it flying only between South Africa and Bophuthatswana.
"This makes our life extremely difficult," complains finance manager Glenn Orsmond.
"We're squeezed on all sides."
Bop Air's predicament goes to the heart of a question that is bedeviling South Africa's historic transition to black rule: Where does Bophuthatswana fit in the nascent multiracial South Africa?
To many, the demise of apartheid has stripped the nominally independent black tribal homeland, which is recognized only by South Africa, of its raison d'etre -- if it ever had one.
Bophuthatswana -- pronounced Bop-pooh-tats-wana but commonly called Bop -- should be bopped off the world map, its detractors say.
"These are the very last days of Bophuthatswana," says Thaba Seboka, a law professor at the University of Bophuthatswana.
"If nothing dramatic happens, its fate is sealed: It's bye bye Bop."
But drama there is: Bophuthatswana's autocratic president, Lucas Mangope, is resisting reincorporation, defying not only South Africa's likely future president, Nelson Mandela, but also, in all likelihood, a majority of his own 2.3 million citizens.
"We are not going to willingly revert to a system where once again we will be oppressed and deprived by a far-away government, the only difference this time around being the color of the skin of the people at the top," Mr. Mangope, who has ruled the homeland since its 1977 independence, said recently.
"We want to be ruled by our own people, for our own people."
As South Africa prepares for its first democratic elections April 26 to April 28, this challenge highlights how the dismantling of apartheid has unleashed a complex power struggle between ethnic groups that was long obscured by the overriding issue of race.
Joining Bophuthatswana in resisting South Africa's new constitution, the king of the Zulu tribe is reported to want to secede from South Africa, and white supremacists are threatening "total war" if they don't get an autonomous homeland.
Talks involving the government, the African National Congress and the unhappy parties of the new South Africa broke down Tuesday and are given little chance of resuming before parties are to register for the ballot on Saturday.
While unlikely to derail the elections themselves, the clash raises serious doubts over how free the ballot will be and threatens to turn what began as a negotiated revolution into a messy, violent affair.
It would be the ultimate irony of apartheid that a homeland ostensibly created to give blacks the rights they were denied in South Africa could be the spoiler in the country's transition to black rule.
But by insisting on continued independence -- or at the very least, broad powers within a federal South Africa -- Mr. Mangope is on a confrontation course that could turn what was the playground of apartheid, where whites flocked to taste the domestically forbidden fruits of gambling and pornography, into a battleground of the new South Africa.
"If the only option left to us is to roll in the tanks, then that is what we would do," Matthew Phosa, the ANC's legal adviser, said recently.
Bophuthatswana is one of the 10 black tribal homelands created by apartheid's architects in the heyday of white supremacy.
In a form of ethnic cleansing, South Africa sought to create a white majority by stripping blacks of their South African citizenship, rights and benefits and making them citizens of make-believe nations created for them.
Through forced removals, gerrymandering and the redrawing of borders, about 18 million of South Africa's 28 million blacks were parked on these reservations, which represented barely 15% of South Africa's territory.
Now, as apartheid goes, many feel the homelands should go, too.
Their citizens recently regained South African citizenship, and plans have been drawn up to swallow the homelands in the nine regions that will comprise the new South Africa.
Three of the four "independent" homelands -- Venda, Ciskei and Transkei -- and five of the six self-governing ones, with the exception of KwaZulu, have agreed to reincorporation.
Bophuthatswana refuses to go along, saying that it is the legitimate home of the Tswana people and that its economic growth has uplifted blacks more than South Africa would.
To press its claim, the land that based its case for independence on its hatred of apartheid and historical aspiration for a Tswana nation has formed the Freedom Alliance with white supremacists fighting for a homeland of their own, and with Mangosuthu Buthelezi, the chief of the Zulu tribe, which occupied part of the Tswanas' land in the 1820s.
"It's almost like sleeping with your enemy just because you have common goals," admits Rosemary Mangope, the president's daughter-in-law and one of the country's negotiators.
In resisting joining in the elections, Bophuthatswana appears to be taking a page out of the old South Africa's book.
Even as the ANC freely campaigns through most of South Africa, it is not allowed into Bophuthatswana, whose citizens will have the right to vote in the coming elections.
Political meetings and voter education programs are routinely disrupted, and civil servants suspected of ANC membership are frequently dismissed.
"The only difference between Bophuthatswana today and South Africa in the 1980s is the color of the president," charges Elijah Loete, a Lutheran pastor in Bophuthatswana.
Popo Molefe, a member of the ANC's national executive committee, discovered this when he tried to campaign there.
First stop on the planned tour was Leeufontein, a village that was arbitrarily incorporated into Bophuthatswana in 1989 against its people's wishes.
Arriving at Leeufontein in the morning, Mr. Molefe finds a 400-strong crowd gathered to hear him.
But he also finds about 30 heavily armed policemen who tell him firmly that he should leave immediately because the ANC is not registered as a political party -- a move the ANC refuses to make because it doesn't recognize Bophuthatswana.
At his request, Mr. Molefe is taken to the police station in nearby Braklaagte to seek permission to hold the rally.
Mr. Molefe states his case.
"As of Jan. 1, the people living in this area are considered full citizens of South Africa," he says.
"We came to talk about the ANC manifesto, about housing, education and health. . . .
We found a police contingent, heavily armed. . . .
People on the other side had nothing, not even sticks.
Why can't people meet in a country that says it's democratic and has a bill of rights?
This is a new South Africa.
You can't use old methods."
A Kafkaesque dialogue ensues: Mr. Molefe is told he has no permission for the rally.
He says he has come to get it.
That has to go through internal affairs.
So can he call the man responsible for internal affairs?
The police say they don't have his number.
After a few more minutes, Capt. Cyril Mosupye says: "There's no need to prolong this.
The issue is short and precise: You don't have permission to hold this meeting.
You don't have any other option but to pack your things and go."
Mr. Molefe complies to avoid a bloodbath.
But as he crosses the border between Bophuthatswana and South Africa -- a mere signpost -- a final scene drives home how out of step Bophuthatswana is with the country that spawned it: The man who was prevented from bringing the message of black liberation to a black-ruled country stops to share a barbecue with white South African soldiers, long bitter foes of the ANC, who man the border post.
On a map, Bophuthatswana doesn't make sense.
The land consists of six separate enclaves within South Africa, so that it's often impossible to know which country one is in.
"At night I walk my dog in Bophuthatswana and go to bed in South Africa," says Alwyn Viljoen, a government spokesman.
The country's appearance as a fantasyland is enhanced by the extravagant Lost City complex in Sun City, which features a lagoon with artificial waves, a golf course with crocodiles in the hazards and an area that trembles in a simulated earthquake.
But Bophuthatswana can point to real achievements that make it the only independent homeland that isn't an economic wreck.
Its mines produce nearly a third of the world's platinum, its industrial zone attracts multinationals like Germany's Bayerische Motoren Werke AG, and the hotels and casinos of South African leisure giant Sun International Hotels Ltd. bring in tourism and tax revenue.
Locally generated revenue provides about 80% of its budget, and the country claims its growth rate outpaces much of Africa's.
Bophuthatswana's high-school graduation rate is nearly double South Africa's, and Mmabatho's manpower center attracts students from South Africa seeking to acquire marketable technical skills.
The country has achieved a degree of racial harmony and social peace that strikes visitors from South Africa.
And then there's Mmabatho itself, a showcase capital that boasts a variety of gleaming structures, including a 60,000-seat stadium and a recording studio considered one of the best in the world.
"Our people continue to enjoy a standard of living their counterparts in South Africa can only marvel at," Mr. Mangope boasted recently.
It is to preserve this that he wants Bop to remain independent or retain control of the region's wealth.
But critics say Bop's tranquility is achieved through constant harassment of opponents and laws that can turn a meeting between two people into an "illegal gathering."
In the last election, Mr. Mangope was unopposed.
His claims of uplifting the Tswana people are contradicted by the fact that the buck usually stops at a white desk.
Whites hold top managerial posts in virtually all state companies, and the head of the army is South African.
Unemployment outside the civil service is massive, and those employed often work in South Africa.
And then, does Mmabatho really need a stadium that can seat half its population?
Or an "international" airport that can take jets?
"Bophuthatswana's case is full of holes," asks Francine de Clercq, a professor at the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, who has written on Bophuthatswana.
Indeed, the town of Bodibe, only 18 miles outside of Mmabatho, reveals a different Bophuthatswana.
Bodibe is a collection of brick and adobe houses without running water, electricity or phones.
A man named Joseph, who declines to give his last name, lives in a tiny house with his wife and four children.
He sleeps on the one bed with two of the children; the other two sleep on the floor with his wife.
He has been unemployed since 1992, when he gave up a construction job in South Africa because the pay was too low to justify the long commute, leaving at 5:30 a.m.
Joseph laughs when asked whether Bophuthatswana offers him better opportunities than South Africa.
"What opportunities?" he asks.
"Look for yourself.
It's a mess."
At a neighboring house, a group of 20 people sit down to discuss their lives.
Of the 20, three have jobs -- all in South Africa.
"When Mangope says we're independent and well off, he's referring to himself and his friends," says one.
All those interviewed say they wanted to rejoin South Africa, but complain of harassment.
As their visitors leave, police cars are seen entering the village.
Many believe Mr. Mangope eventually will have to give in because the change in South Africa's government will deprive him of his only ally -- an ally whose army restored him to power in 1988 when he was briefly toppled in a coup.
Already, South Africa's Transitional Executive Council, a multiracial advisory body, is tightening the screws, suspending a $63.5 million loan by the South African Development Bank to Bophuthatswana until free political activity is allowed.
If that is not enough, ANC and government officials say South Africa could cut off power and water and suspend financial transfers.
Some officials of Bophuthatswana speak of retaliating by withholding supplies from the mines, but Finance Minister Martin van den Berg, a South African citizen, admits: "If they're willing to cut electricity, terminate the customs union and 10 other steps I can think of, they could bring Bophuthatswana to its knees economically and financially within six months."
And even if Mr. Mangope's defiance is simply a negotiating ploy to obtain greater regional powers in the hopes of continuing to play a role within South Africa, that move could backfire, too.
South African polls show the ANC could get 74% of the vote in the region that would swallow Bophuthatswana.
Jacob Buti Malefye, a 46-year-old resident of the town of Phokeng, explains why: "I woke up one morning and without moving anywhere, I was told I was in Bophuthatswana and had a new president," he says.
"I want to wake up one morning and be back in my own country."
