At Melrose Elementary School here, students rarely face suspension for schoolyard fights, and 11-year-old Adriana Hernandez is one of the reasons.
Adriana is a volunteer "conflict manager" in a program aimed at solving student spats amicably.
During recess, she and several partners scan the schoolyard for skirmishes, then swoop in and cite rules for resolving conflicts: Restate the problem, agree not to interrupt, agree to solve the problem, talk about your feelings.
Melrose, which is 60% Hispanic and 25% African-American, says the conflict-manager program has helped reduce student violence and cut suspensions to just two students last school year from 100 five years ago, before the program began.
Students largely support the approach, says Moyra Contreras, the program's coordinator, because they "know they don't necessarily need an adult to help resolve their issues."
A growing number of schools are enlisting student diplomats in their effort to keep kids in school and out of trouble.
Public schools in Albuquerque, N.M., and Wichita, Kan., have recently organized mediation teams.
Ohio has set up programs in more than 300 of its 4,600 schools.
Maryland's Prince George's public-school district, which started with three programs three years ago, hopes to implement peer mediation or similar programs in all 22 district high schools beginning next year.
And New York City, Tucson, Ariz., and other early adopters of student mediation have expanded their programs.
All told, there are roughly 5,000 "peer-mediation" programs in U.S. public and private schools, up from about 2,000 in 1991, according to the National Association for Mediation in Education, an Amherst, Mass., nonprofit group.
Just last week, at the California education summit in San Francisco, California Attorney General Daniel Lungren praised peer mediation as one of the most effective means to deter public-school violence.
Tough kids appreciate the effort, too.
"One of the things gang members tell us," says Jane Richards, a program coordinator for the Wichita public schools, "is they would like their schools to be safe because they're tired of having to watch their backs 18 hours a day."
Melrose Elementary's program is typical.
At the beginning of each school year, teachers enlist about 15 fifth-grade and sixth-grade volunteers to undergo a week of training with the school's psychologist and other staff members.
Trainees memorize a script with rules of conduct that they can recite to would-be combatants.
At Holy Names High School, a Catholic girls school with 300 students in Oakland, volunteers are taught to look for girls glaring at each other or homing in on each other as if for a fight.
The student volunteers move in to urge the would-be combatants to discuss their differences; if a fight still erupts, they alert teachers, who pull the girls off the schoolyard.
Schools say student mediators are a product of changing times.
Dealing with miscreants by suspending them -- the punishment of choice for decades -- increasingly doesn't change behavior, they say.
For one thing, says Melrose's Ms. Contreras, many students see a suspension as vacation.
Suspensions don't generate the kind of concern they used to among parents either, adds Karen Riley, dean of Holy Names High School, because parents "are not home to watch the suspended kids anymore."
John Stephens, research director of the state of Ohio's Commission on Dispute Resolution and Conflict Management, says that a survey of 20 Ohio schools found that suspensions declined to 450 in the school year ended in May 1993 from 600 three years earlier, before student mediators were installed.
An ethnically diverse middle school in Dayton saw a drop in the number of suspensions to 63 last school year from 166 three years before, he says.
As a result of its program, San Francisco's Holy Names school has "already seen an improvement in behavior, and kids are acting out less in class," says Ms. Riley.
"They now have a place to go talk before fighting."
Some critics argue that students need more discipline rather than empowerment.
M. Melissa McCormick, a research assistant at the University of Arizona who participated in a Tucson mediation project, says the program ran into roadblocks because "some teachers and educators saw us being wide-eyed liberals . . . giving our `at-risk' students too much power and focusing less on more discipline."
The program was canceled because of a lack of funds and a lack of support from teachers, although some other Tucson schools have expanded their programs.
Indeed, schools that use student diplomats caution against giving too much credit to mediators for a reduction in violence.
Conflict managers must be part of a broader program to create safer schools, says Melrose's school psychologist, Carolyn Urbanksi.
"While the program is a good tool to use, it can't be the only one," she says.
And Melrose, like most other schools experimenting with student mediators, still metes out punishment for infractions, such as 10-day suspensions for carrying weapons to school.
Still, says Gloria Bolds, associate superintendent for pupil services at Prince George's public schools, "what we've learned is that kids can, and do, indeed, mediate their disputes, if we give them the skills to do it."
