Texas cotton is going green.
Buoyed by consumer demand for chemical-free products, the state's cotton farmers last year more than tripled the number of acres planted with organic and pesticide-free cotton.
The surge has meant new business for Texas cotton mills and caught the attention of buyers in Europe and Japan.
And now some apparel manufacturers and export companies are opening offices in Texas to be closer to the supply.
"We actually turned people down last year because we didn't have enough cotton," says La Rhea Pepper, a member of the Texas Organic Cotton Marketing Cooperative in Lubbock who farms about 700 acres of organic and so-called transitional organic cotton.
"It's almost like the market is just exploding," Ms. Pepper says.
"I've had people who were placing 10,000-pound orders in the past, and I'm doing 80,000-pound orders for them now."
Despite organic cotton's rapid growth, it represents just a fraction of the state's cotton industry.
In 1993, Texas cotton farmers planted 15,000 acres of organic or transitional-organic cotton (state officials don't certify cotton as truly organic until it has been pesticide- and chemical-free for three years).
That's a big rise from 500 acres in 1991.
But it pales next to the more than five million acres planted last year by the state's traditional-cotton farmers.
Texas is the nation's No. 1 producer of both traditional and organic cotton, says the National Cotton Council in Memphis.
Organic cotton is still considered high-risk by many farmers.
They view the demand for it as a fad destined to go the way of disco and pet rocks.
In addition, organic cotton is more labor-intensive, and so it can be more expensive to produce.
Though the fibers from organic and conventional cotton plants are the same, researchers are having problems finding natural substitutes for the man-made chemicals used to spin, weave and dye conventional cotton-chemicals that would shrink the appeal of organic cotton.
Nevertheless, many apparel makers and exporters are sold on the Texas organic fiber.
Glenn Stinebaugh, president of Jonathan David Apparel, which sells clothing under the trademark EnviroGanics, is negotiating to move most of his company's operations to Dallas from Downey, Calif., to be closer to the organic cotton supply.
Though California is No. 2 in production of organic cotton, Mr. Stinebaugh says he will buy only from Texas.
The reason, he says, is the state's stringent certification standards, which create a paper trail back to the farmer showing the cotton was grown organically.
Texas has more than the certification program on its side.
The state's weather, particularly in the High Plains near Lubbock, gives farmers here an edge over those in other parts of the country.
Low rainfall aids in pest control (for which organic farmers also use "beneficial" insects, such as ladybugs and lacewings), and a reliable natural freeze in late fall means they don't have to use herbicides to kill the plants for harvest.
But while organic-cotton farmers don't use expensive chemicals, fertilizers and pesticides, the crop can be more expensive than traditional cotton.
Weed control, for example, means pulling weeds by hand.
Farmers say that costs $20 to $80 an acre, vs. about $7 an acre for spraying.
Organic farming calls for natural fertilizers, like compost and manure.
But without chemical fertilizers, the land requires more preparation, and most farmers leave at least one-third of their organic farmland idle for a season to let it rejuvenate.
But organic farmers earn more for their crop.
This year conventional cotton has sold for about 62 cents a pound, while organic cotton has fetched up to $1.35.
One of the biggest problems facing organic farmers is a lack of marketing infrastructure for the product.
As soon as traditional farmers harvest their crop, they sell it to brokers, who then resell the product to mills and other buyers.
But organic farmers don't have a strong broker network.
Often they must find buyers piecemeal over many months.
"That's a big change for the average producer's mind-set," Ms. Pepper says.
To remedy this, about 40 High Plains cotton farmers in October formed the Texas Organic Cotton Marketing Cooperative.
Growing cotton without chemicals is only half the battle.
Cleaning, processing and spinning the cotton, as well as finishing and dyeing the fabric, all require heavy chemicals.
Researchers at Texas Tech University's International Textile Center are seeking ways to use natural products and have identified some substitutes.
But organic cotton is already finding some of the big customers it will need to succeed.
Apparel makers like Esprit de Corp. and Gap Inc., both of San Francisco, offer organic-cotton lines, as do some makers of furniture and baby clothes.
Brent Wiseman, coordinator of organic programs at the Texas Agriculture Department, predicts that as much as 25% of the organic-cotton supply will be shipped to Japanese brokers and manufacturers.
Katan House Japan Inc., a San Antonio trading house set up for that purpose by Japanese investors, plans to order 2,000 bales (480 pounds each) this year.
Mission Valley Textiles Inc., a New Braunfels textile maker, plans to buy one million pounds of organic cotton from Texas growers this year.
Don Compton, director of product development, says organics still make up less than 1% of Mission Valley's production and can pose a dilemma for manufacturers.
"You don't want to make too big a deal about the organics, because people might think the regular goods aren't any good," he says.
And though consumer demand now outweighs supply, even organic cotton's strongest supporters aren't sure how bigor lasting -- the market really is.
"I don't know whether it's going to be like the hula hoop and drop out next year, or if it's going to continue to grow," says Harvin Smith, assistant director for the textile center at Texas Tech.
