The unusually cold weather this winter pushed up the demand and prices for home heating fuel last month, but wholesale inflation overall appeared to be well-behaved.
The Labor Department said producer prices in February jumped 0.5% from January, when they rose a more moderate 0.2%.
It was the largest increase in 10 months, but much of it was due to higher energy prices, which soared 2.8%.
The price of fuel used for home heating, shot up 23.5%.
But food prices fell 0.4% during the month.
And excluding the volatile food and energy sectors, producer prices rose a far smaller 0.1%, a slower pace than January's 0.4% rise.
Analysts expect the department's consumer price index, scheduled to be released today, to show similar results.
In another economic report, the Federal Reserve said industrial production increased by 0.4% in February, following a 0.5% gain the month before.
Analysts said last month's increase was stronger than expected given the continued bad weather.
Much of the increase was the result of higher auto, light-truck and computer production at the nation's factories.
Utility output dropped from the big weather-related surge in January.
As a result of the overall increased output, industrial operations crept up to 83.4% of capacity from 83.3% in January, and were close to a five-year high.
Many analysts said the industrial production and producer price figures, taken together, show that inflation is still not a problem despite increasing economic activity.
While auto and truck output both increased by more than 8% during February, for instance, the price of cars moderated in February and light-truck prices actually fell at the wholesale level.
"There are no price pressures evident at the places where activity has been picking up," said Samuel Kahan, chief economist of Fuji Securities Inc. in Chicago.
There are still continuing price increases at the crude level, however.
While crude prices dropped 1.3% last month, when food and energy are excluded they jumped 2.0% after a 1.6% rise in January.
Crude prices make up very little of what consumers actually pay for goods, however, and many analysts don't expect the increases to get to the consumer level.
Intermediate goods minus food and energy, for instance, were unchanged last month despite continued increases in crude prices.
"I definitely don't see this bubbling up to the retail level," said Stuart Hoffman, chief economist of PNC Bank Corp. in Pittsburgh.
All figures have been adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
Here are the Labor Department's producer price indexes (1982=100) for February, before seasonal adjustment, and the percentage changes from February, 1993.
Here is a summary of the Federal Reserve Board's report on industrial production in February.
The figures are seasonally adjusted.
The industrial production index for February stood at 115.1% of the 1987 average.
