Congress is about to tackle the job of resolving a policy and turf battle between the Clinton administration and the Federal Reserve Board over how to consolidate regulation of the banking system.
The Senate Banking Committee will take up the controversy, scheduling four days of hearings on the consolidation, starting tomorrow.
And a senior member of the House banking panel, Rep. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.), offered a compromise plan last Friday.
The Treasury Department has been seeking an accord with the Fed, trying to modify and clarify the administration proposal of last November to meld the bank-overview functions of four agencies into a single Federal Banking Commission.
In an interview, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said that differences with the Fed have been narrowed and that the two sides are close on some issues, but he said no agreement has been reached.
Mr. Bentsen will flesh out details of the Treasury's newest position before the Senate Banking Committee tomorrow.
Those details include giving the Fed power to regulate jointly, with the new banking commission, 10 of the top 20 banking organizations, including holding companies, and a "cross-section" of the smaller, state-chartered banks that the Fed currently regulates, a Treasury spokeswoman said.
But the Treasury hasn't met the Fed's major concerns, John LaWare, a Fed governor who has authored a Fed counterproposal, said in an interview.
Among those concerns, the Fed contends that a single regulator would be too powerful and unresponsive to marketplace changes, and that the flexibility and innovation -- fostering of the nation's dual, federal-state banking system can't survive with only one federal agency.
Furthermore, the Fed says it must maintain a significant role, involving writing regulations and "hands-on" regulation of the 1,000 banks and 6,300 holding companies it currently controls.
Otherwise, it will be unable to carry out its economic responsibility to forestall or manage financial crises, Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan reiterated in a speech to the Independent Bankers Association of America a week ago.
Sen. Donald Riegle (D., Mich.) and Rep. Henry Gonzalez (D., Texas), chairmen of the Banking Committees, have backed the administration plan.
But Mr. Bentsen said he is willing to work with Sen. Riegle and his staff in hammering out a compromise with the Fed.
"We're ready and willing to work with anybody," added the Fed's Mr. LaWare, to resolve policy differences for fixing the current "Balkanized regulatory system."
New York Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, the ranking Republican on the Senate panel, said in an interview that he wants to retain some of the Fed's regulatory independence and doesn't fully support the Treasury position.
A compromise "is the only way you're going to get any legislation," he said.
The Schumer proposal seeks to strike a balance between the Fed and Treasury views.
Mr. Schumer said that after talking to both sides, "It seems to me that this is the kind of compromise that both sides can accept and that I think the center is going to congeal around."
Mr. Schumer's plan would make the Fed the sole regulator of large U.S. banks with a significant amount of foreign banking activity, and of the U.S. operations of foreign banks doing considerable U.S. business.
Those "internationally significant banks" pose the biggest risk "to the stability of the globally integrated U.S. financial markets," he said.
The new banking commission would handle all other bank regulation.
Under Mr. LaWare's Fed proposal, the Fed would supervise 8,500 state-chartered banks currently under the wings of the Fed or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., and would continue to supervise bankholding companies.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision, which regulate a combined 5,400 savings-and-loans and nationally chartered banks, would be combined.
Kenneth H. Bacon contributed to this article.
