Two Federal Reserve System officials gave conflicting signals about the burgeoning and controversial market for derivative instruments sold by banks.
In a conference in Miami sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Susan Phillips, a Federal Reserve Board governor, spoke out vigorously in favor of derivatives.
Ms. Phillips, who chairs the Fed's derivatives committee and is its leading expert on the subject, praised the scrutiny being given derivatives as forcing "a revolution in risk-management practices" that can significantly improve "the soundness and efficiency of more traditional trading and lending activities."
She took what an official of a large New York-based bank called a more pro-derivatives stance than either the Fed or any other nation's central bank has taken in the past.
He called the speech "a straw in the wind," and one that he welcomed.
But in the same forum, William McDonough, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said banks will face more intense government scrutiny if they don't take seriously the systemic risks that come with the fast-growing derivatives market.
Derivatives are complex financial instruments whose values are tied to stock prices, interest rates, currency rates or financial assets.
The officials' divergent tones reflect the dilemma facing financial regulators who generally recognize the value of derivatives as offering a new risk-management tool for bankers.
But there are also concerns that the instruments could pose dangers that lead to crises such as the junk-bond and thrift debacles.
The Fed board could well take a more favorable view toward derivatives than the New York Fed, which has consistently shown alarm.
Mr. McDonough said he believes there is a low probability of a systemic problem in the financial system, but that the low probability carries with it a high degree of danger.
He said it was actually more likely that a user -- rather than a dealer -- could face "a bomb going off" because of derivatives exposures.
But banks must take seriously the systemic risks or regulators will take actions that banks probably won't like, Mr. McDonough said.
The New York Fed official was responding to a comment playing down the risks of a systemic problem.
"If that attitude prevails it will bring regulators right down on banks and stifle the marketplace," he warned.
But even Mr. McDonough has seen benefits in derivatives.
At a Fed seminar last September, he said, "I have long been convinced that the extraordinary growth of derivatives activity over the past decade has provided real benefits in the form of more-efficient allocation and management of risk."
For her part, Ms. Phillips has long been familiar with farm and financial futures and options, another form of derivatives, as a former Commodity Futures Trading Commission chairman.
She said she regards wide skepticism concerning banks' use of derivatives as "symptoms of broader anxieties about changes in financial markets" and banks' roles in those markets.
Iowa Rep. James Leach, the ranking Republican on the House Banking Committee, is sponsoring legislation to tighten derivatives regulation, and other bills may emerge, Ms. Phillips noted.
But she said that as banking regulators decide how to treat derivatives in capital and financial reporting in coming months, "seizing these opportunities will not require any new legislation.
They will, however, require regulators to adopt new approaches to key regulatory issues."
She also said she is sympathetic to the pleas by many banks that they be allowed to use their own internal models to compute capital requirements in assessing derivatives' market risks.
But she said she expects regulators to be reluctant to follow that approach unless good methods are developed to validate such models.
