Now that the Clinton administration has established its free-trade credentials by championing the cause of reduced tariffs and lower trade barriers across North America and throughout the world, how is it going to frame the continuing dispute between the U.S. and Japan, its second-largest trade partner?
The worrisome answer is that the U.S. is coming dangerously close to ceding the moral high ground to Japan in the debate over the dubious merits of managed trade and numerical "targets" for selected industries.
Even worse, the Clinton administration seems prepared to undo much of its progress toward achieving an open global economy by reserving the right to change the monetary terms of trade whenever it deems a nation guilty of selling too many goods to American consumers.
Relying on exchange-rate movements to combat a trade surplus makes a mockery of the doctrine of free trade.
Does it make sense to have persevered through the wrenching Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade -- achieving a reduction in the average tariff among 116 countries to 2.8% from 4.7% over a period of several years -- only to see exchange rates move 15% or 20% in a matter of months, wiping out the rewards of legitimate competition with currency losses?
When a government acts deliberately to weaken the value of its money against other currencies, effectively raising prices on imported goods and punishing foreign competitors, it is practicing the most insidious form of protectionism.
We have already glimpsed that strategy at work behind the nuanced utterances and veiled threats issued by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen over the past year, aimed at reducing the value of the dollar against the Japanese yen.
Just three weeks ago -- no doubt with the scheduled Feb. 11 meeting between President Bill Clinton and Japan's Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa in mind -- Mr. Bentsen issued this purposeful warning to Tokyo: "Allowing the yen to slide is not an acceptable way out of recession for Japan."
Look who's talking: Mr. Bentsen has been the driving force behind the U.S. effort to manipulate the dollar-yen exchange rate so that Japanese goods are rendered more expensive for American consumers and U.S. products are made less expensive for Japanese consumers.
It was scarcely more than a year ago that it took 124 yen to purchase one dollar.
In December 1992, newly elected President Clinton, at his high-profile economic conference in Little Rock, Ark., declared, "I'm for a strong dollar."
(Well, you can hardly expect an incoming U.S. commander in chief to go on record as favoring a weak dollar.)
But just two months later, Mr. Bentsen made the White House's preferences quite clear.
Speaking before reporters at the National Press Club, he said, "I'd like to see a stronger yen."
Currency traders do not require much prodding; they acted quickly on this less-than-subtle hint that Washington wanted to see the value of the dollar slide against the yen.
Confident that the U.S. government would not intervene, currency speculators sold dollars and bought yen, pushing up the value of the yen to record levels against the dollar.
By April, Japanese officials were becoming alarmed.
The yen was approaching an exchange rate of 113 to the dollar -- which amounted to a 9% price rise on Japanese goods sold in the U.S.
The White House might just as well have slapped on an explicit tariff.
However, when Japan's then-Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa personally confronted Mr. Clinton with the high-yen problem stemming from Mr. Bentsen's injudicious remarks, the complaint was rebuffed.
Instead of condemning the practice of talking down the dollar, Mr. Clinton publicly condoned it.
Indeed, he cited the high yen as "No. 1" on a list of the "things working today which may give us more results" in shrinking the huge U.S. trade deficit with Japan.
Within two days after the meeting with Mr. Miyazawa, the yen hit a postwar high of 110 to the dollar.
Mr. Clinton was roundly chastised by the Bank of Japan for making what it considered highly inappropriate comments.
"There are some dangerous signs that there is too much toying around with exchange rates," explained a senior bank official.
Japan's trade minister asserted that he felt "extremely angry" at the way the Clinton administration had talked up the yen.
But the damage was done.
Construing the comments of the U.S. president as a market directive, currency traders furiously sold dollars for yen in international markets and refused to change course even when the U.S. Federal Reserve stepped in to attempt to halt the dollar slide.
In late May, Treasury Undersecretary Lawrence Summers, who had been a proponent of the strong yen strategy, was forced to concede: "The market has moved too far, too fast."
Even Mr. Bentsen felt compelled to insist that the U.S. didn't want the dollar to fall any further.
Still, the dollar would weaken to the shockingly low value of just over 100 yen to the dollar in August, an 18% drop from seven months earlier.
Since then, it has regained about half the loss, currently trading at about 112 yen.
For all the Japanese companies that based their planning on an exchange rate of 115 to 117 yen to the dollar, however, that is little comfort.
Japan's industry analysts calculate that, at 110 yen to the dollar, barely one in 50 of the nation's exporters are profitable.
Moreover, lest Tokyo grows hopeful at the prospect that a strengthening dollar might enable its exporting companies to become profitable once again, Mr. Bentsen fired a shot across Japan's bow with his stern lecture about manipulating the yen's value in exchange markets.
The problem is, Japan's ship has already started to sink.
With the staggering defeat last Friday of Mr. Hosokawa's plan to carry out electoral reform, Japan's coalition government has been plunged into political chaos.
Mr. Hosokawa may be forced to resign, perpetuating the lack of leadership that has compounded Japan's inability to deal with its pressing economic problems.
Plagued by recession for more than three years, the world's second-richest country is seriously hurting.
Stagnant growth is taking its toll on both the Japanese psyche and pocketbook as companies struggle to respond to the slump by cutting workers.
Japan's banks are weighted down with bad loans, and smaller Japanese firms are increasingly declaring bankruptcy; some of the business casualties are directly attributable to the yen's appreciation against the dollar.
Japanese consumers are displaying a gloomy reluctance to purchase domestically produced goods, let alone American imports.
Meanwhile, the stock market in Tokyo dropped an astounding 4.9% on Monday in response to the latest political debacle.
But Mr. Bentsen hasn't been deterred from engaging in dark innuendo about the consequences for Japan if it fails to reach "credible" agreements with the U.S. in time for next month's summit.
His latest tough remarks, coming two days after the Hosokawa government was devastated by the political reform crisis, suggest a "hit'em-while-they're-down" approach to gaining trade concessions and smacks of global economic bullying.
All of which brings to mind the response of Senate Finance Committee Chairman Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D., N.Y.) last spring to the assertion by Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky that Japan simply must reduce its trade surplus.
"Must?" asked Sen. Moynihan, exasperated.
"What will you do if it doesn't -- bomb Tokyo?"
Economics is not war.
Manipulating currencies can lead to war, however -- witness the devastating syndrome of competitive devaluations in the 1930s as nations sought to undercut each other's ability to sell products in world markets.
Instead of boosting global demand and employment levels, the exercise resulted in a downward spiral of increasingly isolationist economic policies that, in turn, fostered greater political tensions.
The combination of global stagnation and monetary nationalism set the stage for World War II.
Mr. Clinton needs to muzzle his treasury secretary and think through his own conceptual framework about the relationship between stable currency values and international commerce.
All the freetrade agreements in the world can't compensate for the damage inflicted by finance ministers and even chief executives who find it easier to fiddle with exchange rates than to take concrete measures to improve their nations' performance in the global economy.
Ms. Shelton, a research fellow at the Hoover Institution, is author of the forthcoming "Money Meltdown" (Free Press).
