A U.N. COMMANDER STEPPED UP pressure on Bosnian Serb forces.
The U.N.'s military chief for Bosnia told the Serbs they must give his forces in Sarajevo control of their heavy guns by Sunday or face NATO air strikes.
His statement effectively closed the gap between plans developed by the U.N. and NATO for ending fighting in Bosnia.
There had been speculation that the Serbs could exploit differences between the two plans to delay withdrawing their weapons.
The Serb forces turned in two more artillery pieces, bringing to 28 the total they have given up so far.
More than 500 heavy weapons are said to ring the Bosnian capital.
The U.S. is backing a plan that aims to restore democracy in Haiti but doesn't include a firm date for the return of ousted President Aristide.
In a widening breach with Aristide, the U.S. plan calls for his eventual restoration after he names a prime minister and a new government takes certain actions.
The Council of Economic Advisers said a widening gap between rich and poor in the U.S. is "a threat to the social fabric," and blamed technology, the decline of unions, a lagging minimum wage and immigration.
The report describes an administration philosophy that government must promote economic expansion.
Clinton pledged $396 million in new U.S. economic aid to Kazakhstan to help the ex-Soviet republic move to a market economy and dismantle nuclear arms.
Clinton said he promised the aid after Kazakhstan President Nazarbayev presented him with papers documenting that nation's decision in December to become a nonnuclear state.
The Russian navy announced it is mothballing three of its five aircraft carriers because it no longer can afford to keep the vessels afloat.
Each of the three carriers is in need of an overhaul but Russia lacks a big enough shipyard, or the resources, to repair them.
Their 620-foot-long flight decks can handle only vertical takeoff aircraft.
A trade group for HMOs is joining the Clinton administration's effort to boost vaccination rates among U.S. children to 90% by 1996.
The Group Health Association of America said that more than 250 HMOs will be participating in the nationwide project.
The PLO insisted that a final detailed accord with Israel on Palestinian self-rule must include full amnesty for Palestinian prisoners in Israeli hands.
After a day of PLO-Israeli talks in Egypt, the chief PLO negotiator emphasized the amnesty issue but predicted that details of an agreement could be wrapped up in less than a month.
Armed Mexican rebels agreed to release a former Chiapas state governor they have been holding since Jan. 2, a government peace envoy said.
The hostage, Gen. Castellanos, is to be freed tomorrow as a "gesture of goodwill," the government envoy said.
The move apparently would bring the two sides closer to long-awaited peace talks.
Clinton's health plan should be changed to ensure that gay people aren't discriminated against, either as doctors or patients, the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force said.
The group praised the president's commitment to universal coverage but said his bill should, among other things, add specific language barring discrimination.
Zulu demonstrators opened fire outside the city hall in a South African port, Durban, as their king met with President de Klerk and said his subjects were prepared to defy the government and proclaim their own state.
King Goodwill Zwelithini interrupted his talks to appeal for order after the violence erupted.
One man was killed.
Peru's Fujimori dismissed the possibility of negotiating with guerrilla groups and vowed to eradicate them before his term expires in 1995.
The president, speaking during an official visit in Colombia, said he would never offer negotiated freedom to the leader of the Shining Path rebels, Guzman, who was captured in 1992.
Ethnic fighting in Ghana has grown into a virtual guerrilla war over the past two weeks that has killed hundreds, and perhaps thousands, of people and destroyed dozens of villages in the north, military officials said.
The attacks have been carried out with poisoned arrows, machetes and automatic weapons, the officials added.
