London shares jumped 1%, finishing near their highs on improved sentiment about interest rates and strength in the futures market.
Frankfurt equities gained almost 1%, partly on a U.S.-based investment bank's recommendation to weight the German market more heavily in global portfolios.
Tokyo prices ended mixed Tuesday, as index-linked arbitrage buying couldn't overcome substantial profit-taking, bringing the market's three-day winning streak to an end.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 116.04, up 0.14, reflecting higher European and Asia/Pacific markets and lower American markets.
Water utility stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 124.22, up 3.08, or 2.5%, with Eaux of France posting a 5% gain in its local currency.
Casino stocks trailed at 198.65, down 3.21, or 1.6%, with Casino Municipal de Cannes of France sliding 4.5% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index surged 34.0 points to 3267.4, just 2.1 points off the session peak.
The FT 30-stock index advanced 23.1 points to 2569.3.
Volume was 616.3 million shares, compared with 556.3 million shares a day earlier.
The market was buoyed by hopes that European interest rates are poised to fall further and that any U.S. rate boost will be delayed.
New U.S. data on February producer prices showed little inflationary pressure in that economy, though U.S. industrial production figures rose more than expected.
In Britain, growing expectations that the base lending rate may be cut soon intensified following an industrial group's report indicating retail sales growth has slowed.
Meanwhile, the March position on the stock-index futures contract, which expires Friday, stood at a premium to the stock market for the first time in several weeks.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index climbed 20.42 points to 2165.59.
Momentum carried over from the previous day's afterhours trading, and prices jumped early yesterday on news that Morgan Stanley raised its recommended weighting on German shares.
Financial issues posted the largest gains, attributed to the investment bank's "overweight" recommendation for the sector, as well as to hopes the German Bundesbank, the central bank, will ease monetary policy tomorrow before breaking for a four-week holiday.
In Paris, stocks rallied 2% as broad and enthusiastic buying of financial issues led the broader market up.
Investors were increasingly optimistic about interest-rate reductions, led by the Bundesbank, which would give the French central bank leeway to follow suit.
In Amsterdam, prices gained solidly on a slightly firmer U.S. dollar in currency dealings and in line with strength on other European bourses.
In Milan, stocks rose in thin activity, influenced by improving Italian economic fundamentals and expected declines in European interest rates.
In Madrid, stocks finished higher for the second day in a row, encouraged by buoyant European stock and bond markets, though fairly low turnover indicated some jitters about a possible correction.
In Zurich, shares jumped 1.3%, though trading was quiet as buyers, including overseas investors, focused on blue chips in the banking, insurance, chemical and food sectors.
In Mexico City, the market tumbled 2.8% in busy trading, as investors continued to be unnerved by developments in Mexico's coming presidential election that could upset economic continuity.
Equities also were jolted by the reported kidnapping Monday of a Mexican financial executive; some investors feared this could signal a new wave of violence, following the peasant uprising in the south.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which surged 410.84 points Monday, slipped 17.30 to 20508.85.
In trading Wednesday, the Nikkei rose 203.12 points to close the morning session at 20711.97.
Tuesday's first-section volume was estimated at 550 million shares, up from 514.5 million shares a day earlier.
Gainers topped losers, 550-499.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which gained 19.97 points Monday, edged up 3.07 to 1642.94.
Despite the mixed showing, underlying strength was indicated by the Nikkei's ability to close above 20500 on the last day that many funds could sell shares before they close their books for the fiscal year ending March 31.
Analysts said the market had finally moved into a preferred pattern of wide-ranging participation, including individual, overseas and institutional investors and brokers dealing for their own accounts.
Shares scored early gains Tuesday, lifted by index-linked arbitrage buying on a rise in Chicago futures prices the previous day, but the Nikkei later met profit-taking, as many investors bowed out, following recent steady gains.
In Hong Kong, stocks sank 1.2% in extremely thin trading.
Prices opened higher but interest dwindled, despite signs that the U.S. and China managed to reach some minor agreements in Beijing talks.
Handy excuses for profit-taking emerged, including the possibility that the U.S. will revoke favorable trade status for China, which is closely linked economically to Hong Kong, and worries about higher interest rates.
In Taipei, the market slumped 1.1% amid talk of possible U.S. trade sanctions on China and the U.S. administration's political problems; turnover was light, as many investors sniffed for some direction.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
