ISRAEL SOUGHT to quell rising violence after Friday's massacre in Hebron.
The Israeli cabinet ordered the arrest of five leaders of a Jewish extremist group and said it would begin disarming radical settlers.
The action came as clashes broke out in the aftermath of the slayings of at least 39 Palestinians by a Jewish gunman.
The cabinet also moved to set up a panel to investigate the conduct of the Israeli army during the massacre in a West Bank mosque.
PLO leader Arafat accused Israeli soldiers of helping the assailant, and said witnesses reported the killings were the work of as many as 12 men.
Arafat stopped short of calling for an end to peace talks, but he said they can't proceed without protection for Palestinians in occupied lands.
YELTSIN'S AIDES RULED OUT any effort to revoke amnesty for his opponents.
The president's advisers said it was unlikely he would take legal steps to fight the amnesty granted by parliament to some of his jailed opponents.
Former Vice President Rutskoi, Parliament Ex-Chairman Khasbulatov and others involved in an October rebellion against Yeltsin were freed from prison on Saturday.
Russia's prosecutorgeneral resigned rather than accede to the president's request to block the release.
An aide to Rutskoi said he probably will run for president in the next election in 1996.
However, Khasbulatov declared that he was quitting politics.
A bomb exploded in a Maronite Catholic church in Lebanon, killing nine worshipers and injuring at least 60.
One Lebanese official charged that Israel carried out the attack to "cover up" Friday's killings of Palestinians in Hebron.
Lebanon's information minister said the blast may have been aimed at foiling a papal visit this spring.
The U.S. expelled Russia's top intelligence officer amid an unfolding spy scandal, after Moscow refused to withdraw him.
U.S. officials expect Russia to retaliate by expelling the top CIA official from the U.S. Embassy in Moscow.
A Muslim-Croat truce appeared shaky in Bosnia, prompting the U.N. commander to request more peacekeeping troops.
In Washington, Muslim and Croat officials opened peace talks on Saturday.
South Korea reportedly will contact North Korea to propose a resumption in talks tomorrow on the exchange of envoys, the first such exchange in four months.
The Pyongyang government on Friday agreed to allow inspections of nuclear sites.
Deputy Treasury chief Altman recused himself from matters relating to a failed Arkansas thrift.
Altman, the interim head of the government's savings-and-loan cleanup agency, said he will refrain from decisions involving the failed Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan.
The FDA said that there is growing evidence that tobacco companies deliberately maintain the level of nicotine in cigarettes at addictive levels.
The finding, if confirmed, might provide a legal basis for the agency's regulation of cigarettes as a drug.
A Texas jury acquitted 11 Branch Davidians of murder, rejecting claims they ambushed federal agents.
Five were convicted of voluntary manslaughter.
Saturday's verdict came almost a year after a botched raid by government agents that left four agents and six cultists dead in Waco.
An IRA leader again dashed hopes for an early end to violence in Northern Ireland.
Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, told a weekend party conference that a joint British-Irish peace plan doesn't offer enough British concessions.
The White House is considering seeking a waiver in the deficit-reduction law to pay for a new global trade pact, negotiated under GATT, because it would cost the U.S. an estimated $11 billion to $14 billion in reduced tariffs over five years.
Host nation Norway won 26 medals at the Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, followed by Germany with 24 medals and Russia with 23.
The U.S. collected 13 medals, its highest winter medal total ever.
Died: Jersey Joe Walcott, 80, ex-heavyweight boxing champ who knocked down Joe Louis three times in two title bouts but lost both of them, Friday, in Camden, N.J.
