In Hartford, Conn., Ava Bilbraut and her 16-year-old son bring in about $253 a week and spend about a third of that to rent a two-bedroom apartment.
The energetic 33-year-old mother hasn't any health insurance; indeed, she has been sued by a local hospital for failure to pay a bill.
In Berlin, Germany, Klaus Beilisch, a thin 30-year-old with wavy black hair, brings in the equivalent of $277 a week.
Next month, he, his wife and their 16-month-old son are to move into a rent-free apartment.
When Mr. Beilisch was hospitalized for six days last June with a circulatory problem, his health insurance picked up all but the $6.50-a-day tab for food.
One more thing: Ms. Bilbraut, the American, works seven days a week behind the counter at a Cuban bakery.
Mr. Beilisch, the German, has been unemployed since last May.
No one is likely to be so blunt at President Clinton's international "jobs conference" in Detroit today and tomorrow, but by many measures an unemployed worker in Western Europe is better off than an employed American who has few skills or little education.
Although there are poorly paid workers everywhere, only the U.S. tolerates having millions of its people accurately classified as "the working poor."
On the other hand, chronic unemployment is an enormous problem in Europe but less of one in the U.S.
Thus, in confronting a common problem -- waning demand for low-skilled workers -- the U.S. and Continental Europe have responded in very different ways.
The U.S. creates lots of jobs.
But by weakening unions and failing to adjust the minimum wage for inflation, it has allowed the wages of those at the bottom to fall.
The result is companies that are more globally competitive, but also a widening gap between rich and poor and an uncomfortably large number of workers living, like Ms. Bilbraut, in or near poverty.
Europe has been slower to restructure its companies and reluctant to endanger the social harmony that comes with a narrower gap between haves and havenots.
It has continued to increase wages for those who work and maintained generous government benefits for those who don't.
But the cost to government and business of maintaining this thick safety net, and related restrictions on European employers, is clear.
Employers don't create many new jobs, and unemployed workers don't have much incentive to seek many of the low-paying ones.
As a result, Europe is grappling with an army of people who have been unemployed so long they may never return to work.
"The choice in large measure is between being poor in America or unemployed in Europe," says Barry Bosworth, an economist at the Brookings Institution in Washington.
Both Ms. Bilbraut and Mr. Beilisch suffer from the weaknesses inherent in the two systems.
Both feel moments of hopelessness.
"If I had any money, I'd move somewhere else," Ms. Bilbraut says, with nowhere in particular in mind.
But she has given up ever finding "a nice job" like the $7-an-hour assembler's work she once had at a match factory in Massachusetts.
Mr. Beilisch goes a couple of times a week to look at "Mr. Micro," as a computerized job-listing is known, but shakes his head at offerings that pay as much as his unemployment benefits, which will last indefinitely.
In both the U.S. and Western Europe, political and economic elites are re-examining their countries' choices and casting envious, if sometimes ambivalent, glances across the Atlantic.
The main danger is that each side may end up adopting some of the worst features of the other: The U.S. may acquire more European-style benefits and discourage job creation, and Europe may get what are derided as "McJobs."
U.S. Labor Secretary Robert Reich argues that these aren't the only options.
"Are the citizens of advanced economies condemned to choose between, on the one hand, more jobs which pay less and less or, on the other hand, good jobs but high levels of unemployment?" he asks.
"We do not have to make that choice.
There's a third choice, . . . to combine the kind of investments in education and training and apprenticeship that we find in Europe and in Japan with the dynamic labor mobility and flexibility we find in the United States."
In Europe, businesses trumpet the benefits of the American flexibility, and conservative politicians flirt with change.
Flexibilisierung, or making the labor market more flexible, is the latest buzzword in Germany.
In the U.S., however, it is the liberals in the Clinton administration and academia who look longingly at Europe while businesses and conservative politicians issue ominous warnings that the liberals will end up with Euro-stagnation and bigger government.
Still, neither side is rushing to embrace the other's approach.
Veteran government and academic observers in Germany confidently predict that if the two systems converge, it will be the U.S. that moves more toward Europe, rather than vice versa.
Indeed, President Clinton wonders "how we can even explain to ourselves that all these advanced countries have found a way to guarantee basic health care to all their families" and the U.S. has not.
But he is running into trouble with his plan to force all employers to provide health insurance.
When Ms. Bilbraut gets sick, she goes to a hospital emergency room and worries about how to pay the bill -- or not pay it -- later.
"Thank God I don't hardly get sick," she says.
Mr. Reich talks a lot about Germany's pervasive on-the-job training and well-trod path from high school to apprenticeship to jobs as he promotes a plan to reorganize government training programs.
(Mr. Beilisch, it happens, didn't participate in Germany's.)
But such programs can be costly and, in the U.S. at least, often ineffective.
Rather than propose an unpopular burden on business, Mr. Clinton abandoned a campaign vow to force every employer to set aside 1.5% of payroll for training.
In Germany, the goals of the rethinking are simple: make the labor market more flexible and limit social spending.
Economists, at least, generally agree that the persistence of long-term unemployment in Europe is linked to the fact that jobless benefits can last nearly forever.
Nearly half the unemployed in Germany have been jobless for a year or more, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development; in the U.S., it's less than 7%.
"We have no incentives to accept a new job," says Heino Fassbender, a partner at McKinsey & Co. in Frankfurt.
Mr. Beilisch says jobs paying about $175 a week are plentiful.
But he reasons that trading his unemployment check for one of them would leave him worse off.
"I'd have to take home 2,000 marks a month $294 a week after tax.
Less makes no sense," he says.
German pollsters say that after two years of deep recession, the German public is increasingly aware that the country's world-leading wage levels are a problem.
Some are prepared to live with thinner wage increases.
However, Germans aren't as ready to accept stingier unemployment benefits.
"Expectations for companies are changing, but not those for the state," says Renate Koecher, director of the Allensbach Institute, a public-opinion research group.
"The political class knows that the welfare state is unviable at this level, but not much of the message is coming across."
Certainly, there's little support for a U.S.-style unemployment compensation system.
American workers currently are eligible for up to six months of benefits, but only half the unemployed actually collect.
(Congress usually extends the duration of benefits during recessions; currently, workers in Alaska and Puerto Rico are eligible for an additional 13 weeks.)
Benefits rarely exceed half of what a worker had earned.
Because of state ceilings on benefits ($317 a week in Connecticut, for example), checks average about one-third of that, the Labor Department says.
After jobless benefits run out, welfare can kick in, but in most states substantial aid is available only to single parents.
Unemployed single people and married couples are eligible, however, for food stamps and Medicaid health insurance.
Pressed by mounting budget deficits, German Chancellor Helmut Kohl sparked a bitter political battle last year by proposing to reduce jobless benefits.
He failed to cut their duration and managed to trim their size by an average of only 2%.
The compromise left workers with children receiving 67% of their last after-tax wage; childless couples and singles get 60%.
Those benefits typically last a year.
After that, the jobless receive "unemployment assistance," a means-tested benefit that lasts indefinitely and offers as much as 57% of the last wage for those with children and 52% for those without.
Mr. Beilisch earned about $7.65 an hour in his last job, labeling and packing gas canisters, taking home $287 a week after taxes.
Now he collects unemployment payments of $179 a week plus about $98 a week in child benefits, which are also meanstested to favor the unemployed.
After running into serious debt problems, the Beilisch family gave up their apartment last October and moved into a cramped house with Mrs. Beilisch's parents -- and her unemployed brother -- in a pleasant, leafy neighborhood on the outskirts of western Berlin.
"I've looked for jobs as a security guard, sales help, street cleaner, postal worker," Mr. Beilisch says, while conceding that he has avoided work that wouldn't pay as well as his government benefits.
On April 1, Klaus and Ramona Beilisch will move into their own 650-square-foot apartment, which is almost as large as the house they now share.
Until Mr. Beilisch finds a job, the government will pay the $353 rent; if he finds work, his rent subsidy will be based on his income.
Mr. Beilisch doesn't own a car but does have a monthly pass for Berlin's superb public-transport system; as an unemployed worker, he pays $29, a third off the regular price.
While he is unemployed, the government makes payments into the state pension program so that his unemployment won't reduce his retirement benefits.
It also pays his health-insurance tab.
Thus, a visit to a doctor for a minor foot ailment didn't cost him anything; the medicine cost him $3 a package.
Though taken care of materially, Mr. Beilisch finds disadvantages to his situation.
He is bored by the endless days spent sitting around home and by the sheer aimlessness of life without a job.
Studies show that after a year or so of idleness, some people conclude they lack basic skills and can't work.
Yet the German benefits sound good to Ms. Bilbraut, who came to Hartford from her native Puerto Rico when seven years old and made it through the 10th grade at Hartford's Bulkeley High School, where her son, Joseph, is a student.
(The surname comes from her second husband, from whom she is separated.)
Since losing a night job cleaning offices in downtown Hartford, she has been working for $5 an hour from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. or 5 p.m. on weekdays serving customers at the bakery and putting in another four hours or so on Saturdays and Sundays.
She takes home about $183 a week and lives on that plus the $300-a-month Social Security benefit that her son will receive until he is 18 because his father, her first husband, is dead.
She drives a 1982 Datsun and gets by -- barely.
"I smoke, and sometimes I can't even buy cigarettes," she says.
Ms. Bilbraut's $386-a-month rent for her simple two-bedroom apartment in a public housing project is based not on what she is currently making but on the $300 a week she was earning until recently by working five days a week at the bakery and five nights a week, from 6 p.m. to 10 p.m., cleaning offices in downtown Hartford.
She was fired from the cleaning job earlier this year for missing a day of work.
Her union protested and just last week got her job back; she returns to work next Monday.
With the bigger paycheck, Ms. Bilbraut once again will occasionally have an extra 50 cents for the only escape route she can contemplate: Playing the lottery.
