Dun & Bradstreet Corp. said it will take a $167 million charge for the 1993 fourth-quarter to close offices and consolidate several functions.
As a result, the big Westport, Conn., information services company said it expects to report fourth-quarter earnings of $26 million, or 15 cents a share, sharply lower than the $176 million, or 99 cents a share, it earned a year earlier.
But the company said that excluding the charge, earnings for the quarter would have risen 9.3% to $193 million, or $1.10 a share.
Revenue increased 2.4% to $1.32 billion from $1.29 billion.
D&B said the steps should produce annual savings of about $100 million within the next few years.
The changes include reducing the number of D&B data centers from 27 largely independent centers worldwide to "several" integrated processing sites able to handle the company's needs at lower cost, reducing real estate costs by sharing facilities in major cities in the U.S. and Europe, consolidating back-office accounting functions into one center, consolidating international accounting operations into several centers, and converting to a single accounting system.
Robert E. Weissman, president and chief executive officer, said savings from these measures will be used to "accelerate revenue growth" with development of new products, acquisitions and other expansion moves.
The charge, $256 million on a pretax basis, reflected $303 million for restructuring, partially offset by one-time gains of $26 million from a divestiture and $21 million from the initial public offering of its majority-owned Gartner Group.
D&B said the newest round of restructurings wouldn't include any new workforce reductions.
Last year, the company said it would cut "several thousand" jobs as part of a cost-cutting effort.
The company said the continuing effort to cut costs and improve performance is beginning to improve operating margins.
For 1994, the company anticipates pershare earnings will increase "more than 8.4%" from 1993's preliminary operating profit of $3.36 a share.
The operating profit excludes accounting charges and the fourth-quarter restructuring charge.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, D&B shares dropped 12.5 cents to $61.625.
