St. Petersburg, Russia -- The last time I visited St. Petersburg it was still Leningrad and I wouldn't be surprised if a call to spruce up the old signs brought out long lines of eager volunteers.
Even three days in this town can make you happy and depressed at the same time.
Just now I have eaten a perfect Bulgarian tomato purchased at the well-stocked indoor farmer's market near Dostoevski's house.
In 1984, the place didn't exist.
But to most shoppers it's about as real as "The Invisible City of Kitezh," which is playing at the Kirov's Rimsky-Korsakov Festival.
For Russians spending one-quarter of their monthly salary on a kilo of meat, the 500 ruble (about 30 cents) tomato is a fantasy.
"Can it be that my life under the communists was normal?" a friend wonders.
She ate more, but stood on line a lot.
Those lines that once circled Russia did seem a lot shorter as I walked through town revisiting some of the places I remembered from my last trip when this was a police state.
I saw just one military type yawning near the casual customs booths where the perplexing entry form warns against bringing in "slaughtered fowl" and surrealistic billboards welcome the traveler to a town of nightclubs and cellular phones.
The Astoria Hotel.
Then: Musty, surly ruin with thugs stationed at the door to keep locals from contaminating contacts with foreigners.
Hitler planned to hold his victory banquet at this landmark after the siege of Leningrad, but never got to mail the printed invitations.
Now: Wouldn't want to.
Hideously renovated with decorative doormen in operetta outfits now welcoming everybody, particularly local mafiosi with portable phones, taxi-driving racketeers, sleazy looking businessmen, newly minted plutocrats, speculators, pimps and prostitutes.
But some venerable traditions are carefully preserved.
The reception desk, for instance, maintains famed Soviet ability to ignore large people looming over them.
You want room?
You already have room!" she finally scowled as I tried to change from a suicidal single in the Angleterre section to the less ugly, older wing.
The minibar offered no solace.
Reaching for a little vodka bottle, I clutched thin air.
At the deluxe Astoria you are meant to go fill the minibar yourself.
Nevsky Prospekt.
Then: Just the architecture -- glorious even in its dilapidation -- reminded one of a shopping boulevard once so glittering Gogol wrote a short story about its sparkling displays, elegantly dressed women, spotless pavement.
Now: Ice-covered, fun-house sidewalks indicating a shortage of street cleaners (and liability lawyers).
A babushka goes down outside a fancy fur store, one of several new shops.
But the general look remains shabby with a few beggars braving 25-below temperatures and a starving German shepherd running circles in front of the gold-edged Admiralty building.
My friend is feeding 19 strays, most abandoned by newly impoverished owners.
Gostiniy Dvor.
Then: Falling down arcaded department store where one made desultory attempts to spend the rubles foreigners were forced to buy upon entering the Soviet Union and could not take back on pain of death.
Now: Still falling down, but jammed with boutiques selling everything from Boucheron perfume, Cinzano and Tampax, to baby carriages and cozy Italian boots.
The days when Russians bought shoes that didn't fit just because a truck dropped a load on the sidewalk and someone would want them, appear to be over.
Dom Knigi.
Then: Once picturesque bookstore, occupying former Singer Sew-ing Machine headquarters, that sometimes offered more than Paul Robeson's memoirs and "The Grapes of Wrath" in the English section.
Now: Dumbfounding.
Excepting one well-thumbed Agatha Christie mystery, the paltry selection seems chosen by someone with a disturbed sense of humor: "Russia: A Survival Guide," "English for Practical Management" (could this be sent to the Astoria?), "Automobilist in Saint Petersburg" (a city without much traffic, particularly in the arctic winter when most Ladas hibernate) and "Gilbert and George in Moscow" (the performance artists who would appreciate a conceptual minibar).
I would have thought it not impossible to profitably import a few cheap paperbacks, but even the German section offers just one hardback of a Judith Krantz bodice ripper in translation.
Then: Called Gastronom 1 in seductive Sovietspeak and filled with long queues thanks to Stalinist system of making people stand on line for so long they were too beat to rebel.
Now: Same three lines.
The man buying six pineapples first lines up to get the sales ticket from the woman who sells fruit; then he gets on a second line to pay; then back to the original line to pick up the pineapples.
Ex-comrades!" you want to shout.
"Think about it!
Install registers at every counter.
Fewer lines!
More profit!"
But the depressing pineapple purchase is one end result of decades of systematic murder of the smart Russians.
Kazan Cathedral.
Then: A favorite tourist stop for Americans escaping Bible Belters at home, since it housed the Museum of Religion and Atheism with its entertaining pictures of saints getting fried, virgins chopped to bits, decollated martyrs, and copulating nuns.
In earlier times, it was here by the tomb of General Kutuzov that Gogol's large, walking nose stopped in to pray.
Now: Nobody prays here, not even a nose, though the building itself has undergone a miraculous conversion into the Museum of History of West European Christianity and the Orthodox Church.
Hours seem erratic, but the new show apparently includes at least a few favorite treasures, like the manacles screwed onto stake-ready heretics (now viewed as martyrs, not dupes).
Then: My only memory is of waiters in some empty, hard to find establishment hidden behind cheap lace drapes doing their utmost to keep us from sitting down and eating food they wanted for themselves or for party officials who could cause pain and suffering.
Now: "Tasty Russian Food!
You Are Always Welcome!"
The hearty sign on the Nevsky is inviting, but I had lunch plans at a privately owned restaurant near the Kirov, one of many sprinkled throughout St. Petersburg.
A tough, tasty chunk of beefsteak topped off by an egg cost about $2 bucks.
But even here in this self-enterprising little place with a full bar and espresso machine, a group of four waited to be seated because the waitress could not grasp pushing together two empty smaller tables.
By contrast, joint venture restaurants, while better run, are often wildly expensive (about $70 for a three-course meal at the Grand Hotel Europe).
Kirov Opera.
Then: Dowdy sister of the famed ballet company which was presenting beefy men dancing with swords and farm equipment in a puzzling ballet unknown to the international repertory.
Now: An internationally acclaimed company far eclipsing the Kirov Ballet as well as the collapsing Bolshoi (opera or ballet), thanks to its bankable star conductor, Valery Gergiev.
His Rimsky-Korsakov festival last week confirmed that we must take a forgiving view of the man who wrote "The Flight of the Bumblebee."
Hermitage Museum.
Then: Overgrown, crowded, impossible to navigate museum with enormous collection including countless Rembrandts and, tucked away on the top floor, ideologically tainted paintings by Henri Matisse and Vassily Kandinsky appropriated from capitalist collectors but then hidden for decades.
Ongoing renovations under legendary director Boris Piotrovskij culminated in a $20 million restoration of Catherine the Great's court theater, the bill picked up by Moscow.
Now: Neither crowded nor subsidized.
Attendance hovers at 2.5 million, down a million (little travel from the republics).
Moscow pays salaries, leaving director Mikhail Piotrovskij, son of Boris, to forge alliances with Unesco and corporate sponsors like Coca-Cola Co. to shore up the waterlogged palace's foundations, create labs, new galleries.
English labels are on the way.
Grand Hotel Europe.
Then: Art nouveau wreck ready to topple any minute.
Now: Lavishly restored and modernized by a joint venture including the City of St. Petersburg and the Swedish RESO Hotels firm, which manages the Grand.
Expensive ($275 for a single), but the $20 breakfast with all you can eat caviar served in a lofty banquet hall with a dazzling stained-glass wall of Apollo racing towards the sun, makes me flee the Astoria.
No regrets.
Fast, efficient service, good food, health club, cheerful room, CNN, minibar (stocked).
Could RESO be asked to run Russia?
