In the spirit of tapping Joseph Kennedy to overhaul the Securities & Exchange Commission 60 years ago, who better to prescribe changes for the troubled institution of Congress than Tony Coelho?
The 51-year-old Mr. Coelho, after a meteoric rise, resigned as House Democratic whip in 1989 under a cloud of ethical suspicion.
He has gone on to achieve stunning success with Wertheim, Schroder & Co., a Wall Street investment firm; in the process he was cleared of any legal wrongdoing.
He still possesses enormous affection for Congress but brings a perspective that comes only from distance.
Sitting in one of his offices late last week -- surrounded by pictures and memorabilia of his earlier life -- the former California Democratic lawmaker zeros in on what's wrong: "Congress has become stagnant; it hasn't grown with the changes that have occurred in society . . . .
They have created more power centers and with them more opportunities for gridlock.
These are not only legislative centers but you then get the law firms, the lobbyists and all the industries that then fit in with them."
Just as Joe Kennedy was able to manipulate financial markets in the 1920s, Tony Coelho was able to manipulate this system in the 1980s.
He understood these power centers and how they thrived on what the late California politician Jesse Unruh called the mother's milk of politics: money or campaign contributions.
Here's how Tony Coelho would change the system he knows so well:
-- Limit service on congressional committees rather than impose term limits for office.
"A constituency has a right to elect their representative for as long as they want," says Mr. Coelho, who served for 11 years and has extolled the virtues of change and turnover to old congressional friends.
But congressional term limits would "eliminate much of the knowledge and experience in Congress and, in effect, turn over power to staff, to lobbyists and to the press.
I don't think that's where the power should be."
(The underlying case for term limits -- that Congress is dominated by long-serving professional politicians -- is eroding.
Charles Cook, the best independent election analyst, now calculates that in the next Congress at least 225 to 230 representatives, or over half the House, will have been elected in the 1990s.)
Instead Mr. Coelho wants term limits for committee service -- six years on a subcommittee and eight years on a full committee.
Then lawmakers would have to rotate committee assignments.
"When individuals have been subcommittee or committee chairmen for too long they are not as receptive to new ideas, new challenges."
A Sam Nunn or a Dan Rostenkowski, however, would retain expertise from his previous committees.
"You probably wouldn't see as many people staying as long, but you still would retain a lot of the knowledge and experience, and it would make for much more interesting floor deliberations," Mr. Coelho notes.
-- Automatically reorganize Congress every decade.
An oft-repeated myth is that congressional staffs and subcommittees have been mushrooming.
Yet, as last year's excellent study of Congress by the American Enterprise Institute and Brookings Institution reported, congressional staffing has been level for more than a decade and the number of subcommittees is declining.
Subcommittees did proliferate after World War II, reaching a peak in both bodies in 1975 -- 151 in the House and 140 in the Senate.
But they have dropped today to 115 in the House and 86 in the Senate.
Tony Coelho says the system still is out of kilter.
Staff and subcommittees could be cut some more, he believes, and there's an obvious need for rearranging legislative responsibilities.
Here Mr. Coelho shies away from specifics, but some are apparent.
Panels like the House Administration Committee and the Senate select committees ought to be eliminated.
And it's clear that the House Ways and Means and Senate Finance committees have too wide a jurisdiction.
Most congressional changes are done on an ad hoc basis, so the former House Democratic whip wants an automatic reorganization at least every 10 years directed by the Democratic and Republican leaders of both houses.
Combined with term limits for committees, that should help reduce both the special interest-driven paralysis and the prevailing let's-do-it-this-way-because-that's-the-way-we've-always-done-it syndrome.
(Mr. Coelho worries less about too much power shifting to Congress, noting that these executive-legislative balance-of-power equations invariably go in cycles.
He does, however, support a modified line-item veto -- for taxes as well as spending -- to give the president more leverage on budgetary matters.)
-- Reform campaign financing so legislators deal more with substantive issues and less with raising campaign money.
In American politics, there hasn't been a better political fund-raiser than Tony Coelho; nobody knows better what a debilitating process it is: "The problem is not so much that contributors think they own you or industries control you, although there are examples of that.
My concern is the amount of time it takes for individuals to raise money.
I had a very close friend in the Senate who told me that in the two years prior to re-election he spends as much as 70% of his time raising money.
That means he only spends 30% of his time on the country's problems."
There has been a real arms race in spending on congressional campaigns, soaring fivefold from $99 million in 1976 to $526.6 million last time.
Mr. Coelho would place a strict cap on overall spending, high enough not to disadvantage challengers; require full disclosure of all contributions; and provide partial public financing.
He would require that a significant amount of a candidate's overall money come from that particular district or state.
Total public financing -- as in presidential general elections -- is desirable, but Mr. Coelho doubts there's sufficient public support.
But he suggests more than a few members use public opposition as an excuse to oppose even partial public financing: "They don't want a competitive race, and public financing would create more competitive races."
And the man who assembled the Democrat's most effective fund-raising machine in the 1980s knows he helped create a monster: "Campaigns have now become a full-time business.
You set up the mechanism to have full-time pollsters, full-time media people and others.
They are engaged year-round; that means you raise enough money to pay them all year.
The cycle just goes on and on.
Also it's like health care in that every new fandangle thing that comes along politically your consultant wants to try.
You don't need it, but you're afraid the other side will have it.
And it just keeps driving costs up."
