It was a simple error, but a costly one.
A chart contained in a prospectus showing how well the stocks of privatized companies performed in recent years was an overstatement.
To be correct meant issuing a new prospectus.
To be correct also meant rescinding the $1.1 billion stock offering so investors could have the new information, which is what happened Friday to the Global Privatization Fund.
"I have never seen this before.
A billion-dollar offering and the trades rescinded?
It's incredible," said Thomas Herzfeld, a closed-end fund specialist based in Miami.
Although the error can be easily corrected, it isn't certain that investors will be as eager to buy into the offering of the Global Privatization Fund when it comes back to market in the next week or so.
And that, of course, would spell lower underwriting fees for Wall Street.
The New York Stock Exchange on Friday suspended trading of the Global Privatization Fund after four days of trading.
Trades made from Feb. 18, the date trading began, and Thursday will be canceled.
About 4.1 million shares had traded on the exchange.
Alliance Capital Management L.P., the manager of the fund, filed an amended registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission and expects speedy approval, a spokeswoman said.
New prospectuses will be mailed this week and a new pricing date could be set by Friday, she said.
But fund experts and syndicate officials said the offering suspension might have devalued the 74.5 million common share deal to the point where a new offering will need to be much smaller.
That in turn will affect the underwriter's fees, which totaled $78.2 million in the original offer.
Kidder, Peabody & Co. was lead underwriter.
Alliance Capital and its underwriters "are behind the offering and believe it is a very good investment," the Alliance Capital spokeswoman said.
"We are hopeful the size of the offering will be similar."
The closing of the initial offering was scheduled for this past Friday, meaning that investors were to get delivery of, and pay for, the securities.
The shares had been priced at $15 each and closed Thursday at $15.
An analyst at Alliance sometime last week noticed a miscalculation in a chart that compared several indexes.
The error occurs in a privatization composite index that is compared with composites from the Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index; the Morgan Stanley Capital International Emerging Markets Global Index; and the Morgan Stanley Europe, Asia and Far East Index.
The privatization composite "overstated" its returns of 170% between Dec. 31, 1988, and Sept. 30, 1993, the Alliance Capital spokeswoman said.
Although she declined to give the correct percentage, according to the revised prospectus filed with the SEC, the returns were 94% and the time period was stretched out to Dec. 31, 1993.
"It was our error," the spokeswoman said.
"We discovered the problem and immediately went into action to make sure appropriate steps were taken to correct it."
The S&P 500-Stock Index returns and the Morgan Stanley Emerging Markets Global index returns, by comparison, hover between 55% to 60% for the time period, while the Morgan Stanley Europe, Asia and Far East index returns are less than 10%, according to the chart in the old prospectus.
The privatization composite was compiled by Alliance Capital and comprises stocks of former state enterprises that are now private companies, the prospectus states.
These companies had conducted equity offerings from Jan. 1, 1988, and Dec. 31, 1992, and have available share price information.
The chart was designed to show that stocks of privatized companies have higher returns than both the stocks of established U.S. companies and those in emerging markets in Asia, Latin America and Europe.
The fund will invest 60% of its assets in businesses being privatized by governments in developed countries in Western Europe, Scandinavia, Australia and New Zealand and 40% of its assets in emerging markets such as Brazil, Argentina and Chile in Latin America and Asia and Eastern and Central Europe.
At least 65% of the fund's assets will be invested in enterprises undergoing privatization.
The balance of the fund's assets will be invested in companies already privatized.
As of Dec. 31, 1988, the privatization composite was composed of 22 issuers having a market capitalization of about $104 billion, the prospectus said.
By Sept. 30, 1993, the issuers increased to 128 and the market cap was about $292 billion.
A rescinded public offering might turn off investors when it comes to market for a second time, said Mr. Herzfeld, the Miami closed-end fund specialist.
Adding to the wariness will be the recent weakness in many foreign stock markets, especially those in emerging markets, he said.
In the past week, 19 of the 20 worst-performing closed-end funds were foreign country funds, thanks to declining markets, Mr. Herzfeld said.
The old chart was a selling point for the Global Privatization Fund, said Mariana Bush, a closed-end fund analyst at Kemper Securities.
"The old chart looked really, really interesting," she said.
The revised chart also shows the Morgan Stanley Emerging Markets Global index actually outpacing the privatization index through the end of December.
The Morgan Stanley index now shows a return of 121% compared with the privatization's 94% gain.
Ms. Bush said that now that the privatization stocks' returns are more in line with those of emerging markets, the fund will simply compete with existing emerging markets funds instead of being a shining star, because this is the first closed-end fund in the U.S. to invest in privatized companies.
"It's still a good fund with an idea that makes sense," she said.
In Europe, share prices of privatized companies are lower than fair value because governments are looking to attract investors.
They are privatizing enterprises in the first place to reduce deficits and inflation, she said.
The companies also are large monopolies with established markets that either have undergone restructurings or can become even leaner, she said.
The Alliance Capital spokeswoman said Alliance Capital and the underwriters are upbeat about the offering.
The original offering was increased from four million common shares to 74.5 million shares.
The error "does not change the attractiveness of this investment opportunity.
This is a market we're very excited about," she said.
