Ford Motor Co. executives say they want to bond with their customers.
But many Ford owners say they wish the company had bonded the paint to their vehicles.
The gray paint on Joseph Maichle's 1990 Ford F-250 pickup began peeling not long after he drove it off the lot.
A Ford dealership in his hometown of Frederick, Md., told Mr. Maichle that his vehicle was eligible for repair under Ford's "Owner Dialogue" program.
But the dealer wouldn't make a repair date for seven months, and then Mr. Maichle learned that while the repainting would take 10 days, Ford would only provide a loaner vehicle for four.
"So much for Owner Dialogue," fumes Mr. Maichle, who says he will soon be driving a new 1994 GMC Sierra pickup.
F-Series pickups are currently the best-selling vehicle in the U.S.
But peeling paint on 1985-91 models and on other Ford vehicles could cost the auto maker as much as $1.5 billion over two years, according to former employees, dealers and industry experts.
And while Ford says its Owner Dialogue program, instituted in 1992 to gauge customer satisfaction with F-Series vehicles, will fix some defective paint jobs, many customers say Ford's program is less than generous and results in some customers paying for repairs that others get for free.
A Ford spokesperson says that while the company has some disgruntled customers, most are satisfied.
Ford won't comment on what the company has paid to repaint vehicles, but says the $1.5 billion figure "is inaccurate."
Ford has traced the paint problem to a new process for eliminating corrosion, which caused certain exterior paint colors to peel if exposed to too much sunlight.
Ford says several years ago it reformulated the paint to provide greater protection against sunlight.
But sources say there have been complaints about peeling paint on recent-model vehicles.
Ford says repainting costs $1,500 to $2,000 a truck.
The company says it tried to reach the three million owners of 1985-91 F-Series pickups and full-sized Broncos by mail as part of the Owner Dialogue program.
Tom Wagner, Ford's vice president of customer communication and satisfaction, says about 50% of the complaints on returned surveys were paint related.
He adds that the final Owner Dialogue mailing is due to go out this month.
But the way Ford has handled the Owner Dialogue program apparently leaves many customers unsatisfied.
Customers complain of long waits to get their cars repainted, and of rude and unhelpful Owner Dialogue representatives.
Mr. Maichle and several other Ford-truck owners say they never even received a customer-satisfaction survey from Ford.
"Ford says that customer satisfaction is No. 1.
But at the same time they're doing their level best to make consumers pay for Ford's mistakes," says Clarence Ditlow, executive director of the Center for Auto Safety, a consumer advocacy group.
"What Ford is doing is a classic secret warranty," Mr. Ditlow adds, granted to customers who complain about the problem but not offered equally to all owners.
Customers may be even less satisfied to learn that as of Jan. 1, Ford changed the Owner Dialogue program to give customers just 60 days to claim a new paint job once they receive a customer survey.
The response time was formerly open-ended.
Industry analysts say Ford has good reason to put a cap on its exposure to claims on paint jobs.
The company has already spent $800 million repainting F-Series pickups and Bronco sport utility vehicles in the 1993 model year, individuals familiar with the program say.
That cut per-vehicle profits on the new vehicles Ford sold last year by an average of $231 each.
Ford is expected to spend at least another $800 million in the current model year for paint repairs -- more than it spent to develop the new Mustang, the sources say.
Mr. Wagner of Ford won't confirm these numbers.
"It's a case of wanting to be loved but at an affordable price," says John Schnapp, vice president of Mercer Management Consulting, which specializes in the auto industry.
"Ford may lose some friends along the way but they have to ask: How much is a friend worth?"
Ford executives say the company is going out of its way to make good with owners experiencing paint-peeling problems, or any other problem they may have with their F-Series.
But that may not be enough to hold off the competition.
Indeed, the J.D. Power & Associates Customer Satisfaction Study, widely followed in the auto industry, in 1993 rated Ford below the industry average, behind BMW, Chevrolet, Chrysler, Dodge and Eagle.
Ford remains the leading truck brand in America, but General Motors Corp.'s Chevrolet C/K pickup, the second best-selling vehicle in the U.S., overtook Ford's lead in the full-size pickup market during the first two months of the year.
Chrysler Corp.'s new Dodge Ram pickup is now a strong contender, too.
"We want to bond closer to our owner body," says Mr. Wagner.
"F-Series is a very important vehicle line and it's facing a lot of competition."
