The small-company stock rally ran out of steam, dragged down by falling Big Board issues and a drop in the price of the bellwether Treasury bond.
Small-capitalization issues sagged after opening higher.
The pace of the decline slowed at midday, but prices were unable to rebound significantly.
Key small-company indexes finished the day just off their session lows.
Traders said the market was hurt by comments by Elaine Garzarelli, Lehman Brothers' director of sector analysis, who repeated her view on cable-TV network CNBC that a 4% to 7% market correction is possible.
Although several traders noted Ms. Garzarelli originally made the comments last Friday, "the market didn't start to get nervous" until her CNBC appearance, said Jack Bayer, head of over-the-counter trading at Oppenheimer & Co.
Traders said investors also became jittery on news that the flow of money into stock mutual funds reversed itself following Friday's sell-off sparked by the Federal Reserve's tightening of monetary policy.
The Russell 2000 index, which tracks small-cap stocks, fell 1.08, or 0.4%, to 264.14.
The Nasdaq Composite index lost 3.11, or 0.40%, to 783.42.
On the Nasdaq Stock Market, decliners led advancers 1,667 to 1,408 on total volume of 339 million shares, up from 330 million shares Wednesday.
National Market volume was 284 million shares, up from 278 million shares Wednesday.
Harvard International Technologies, a Vancouver, British Columbia, maker of french-fried potato vending machines, plunged 3 3/8, or 56%, to 2 5/8.
The Amex-traded company said "certain quality problems" were discovered in many of its machines.
As a result, some franchisees have delayed payments to the company.
The payment delays might force the company to secure new financing by midMarch, Harvard said.
Pier 1 Imports fell 3/4, or 7.9%, to 8 3/4 in Big Board trading after the company said earnings for fiscal 1994 ending Feb. 26, could be 10% to 15% below analysts' estimates.
The Fort Worth, Texas, retailer said January profits were hurt in more than 60% of the company's 639 stores by severe weather, and that the pattern has continued this month.
The company also said 20 of its California stores were affected by the Jan. 17 earthquake.
News that Dime Financial will substantially boost reserves for loan losses and real estate-and as a result record a substantial loss for the fourth quarter and year-pushed its stock down 7/8, or 12%, to 6 5/8.
The Wallingford, Conn., company said it expects to report a fourth-quarter loss of about $5.20 a share, compared with net income of nine cents a year earlier.
NL Industries, a NYSE-traded Houston specialty chemical company, fell 1, or 10%, to 8 5/8 after reporting a fourth-quarter loss of 44 cents a share, compared with a 34-cents loss in the year-earlier period.
Liberty Technologies, a diagnostic systems company based in Conshohocken, Pa., fell 1, or 11%, to 8 after it posted fourth-quarter earnings of 12 cents a share, down from 15 cents a year earlier.
Broderbund Software rose 4 5/8, or 11%, to 45 7/8 on news that Electronic Arts will acquire the Novato, Calif., software company.
The buyout will involve a stock swap valued at $400 million.
Since small-company stocks began rallying in late December, one of the hallmarks of the market has been investors' focus on company fundamentals, rather than on broad industry or market trends.
Even after Friday's sell-off, small-company stocks were able to rebound smartly, driven by strong earnings reports and optimism about the economy.
Jerry Mullins, Dean Witter Reynolds' head of OTC trading, said that even though there were broad-based losses among small-cap stocks, and many issues ended the day near their lows, he sees underlying strength in the small-company sector.
"A lot of stocks were not coming in for sale," Mr. Mullins said.
He said the pace of selling didn't pick up momentum as the day went on.
"If people were convinced the market was going lower, there would have been more sellers," he said.
