Prudential Securities Inc. pushed some of its brokers to sell the firm's own mutual funds nearly as hard as its soured limited partnerships, according to internal brokerage-house documents.
In a Sept. 26, 1989, internal memo, for instance, a former Prudential sales manager in Atlanta appeared to suggest that his brokers excessively trade mutual funds in their clients' portfolios.
"Go to your accounts and tell them how the turmoil in the bond markets have set back most of the funds. . . .
This presents OPPORTUNITY!," says the memo, by Randy Cox, the former sales manager.
"Take your loss and swap the funds into Prudential Intermediate Income Fund," the memo says.
Then: "When you get a pop in the market for these funds and you get your principal back, sell the Prudential fund and move on."
The memo ended with the following mandate: "THIS MAKES SENSE!
DO IT!"
The memo "reflects a specific abuse -- you're not supposed to `flip' mutual funds -- but on a broader perspective it was just business as usual" at Prudential, says Marion Smith II, an Atlanta lawyer representing clients with claims against Prudential.
Mr. Cox couldn't be reached to comment.
Prudential says the memo didn't represent a company-wide strategy on selling funds and that it reflected the views of just one manager, who has left the firm.
"We're not going to say we like the conduct of that, but it isn't indicative at all of the firm's viewpoint," a Prudential spokesman says.
"It's a memo within a branch written five years ago by a manager who hasn't been here since 1990," the spokesman added.
As for any assertions that it was "business as usual" at Prudential, the spokesman said Mr. Cox had been hired from another firm in 1989.
"He wasn't one of our people," the spokesman added.
More recently, Frank Giordano, Prudential's mutual-fund general counsel, approved a controversial internal advertisement that appeared to urge brokers to focus on building commissions in selling mutual funds, as opposed to catering to the needs of clients.
The ad -- distributed to Prudential brokers last year -- showed that brokers could earn more than $130,000 in commissions over an 11-year period by opening just five new accounts a month.
In an Oct. 4, 1993, memo opposing the ad, Anita Whelan, Prudential's fund-compliance director, said: "I spoke to Frank Giordano today regarding why he approved the use of the `Open Just Five Accounts Each Month and Watch Your Commissions Add Up' section, when we. . . .previously agreed that this was an inappropriate piece."
Ms. Whelan declined to comment on her memo.
Prudential says additional language was included in the ad that adequately addressed client needs.
In an interview, Mr. Giordano said he was the one who suggested that the additional language be inserted, which read: "Of course, these long-term investments must continue to meet clients' investment needs."
Mr. Giordano said the reference to commissions was included to show that brokers could still make money, even when clients invested just $150 a month.
"The import of this whole ad is a very conservative savings plan," he said.
Nobody is suggesting that the sales of Prudential's mutual funds were tainted with the type of fraud alleged in the firm's partnership scandal, which has included accusations of kickbacks by former Prudential executives.
And the funds themselves were sound, unlike some partnerships.
Indeed, the performance of Prudential's mutual funds has rebounded recently, much to the delight of the big brokerage firm.
But the disclosures show that high-pressure sales tactics at Prudential weren't limited to peddling partnerships.
The disclosures come as some individual and institutional investors have filed arbitration cases accusing the brokerage arm of Prudential Insurance Co. of America of "churning" their mutual-fund accounts; that is, excessive trading to generate commissions.
One such case was filed last year against Prudential by a retirement trust of District 65 of the Bureau of Wholesale Sales Representatives, along with affiliated pension funds.
The case, currently pending before an arbitration panel of the National Association of Securities Dealers, accused Prudential and a former broker of churning the pension fund's account-partly through mutual funds -- and almost depleting it in the process.
Between 1986 and 1990, mutual-fund trading in the pension-fund accounts generated commissions totaling $882,898, with the funds themselves losing a total of about $240,000, says Mr. Smith, the Atlanta attorney who filed the case.
Adds Linda S. Pacer, a lawyer working with Mr. Smith at the Atlanta law firm of Smith, Howard & Ajax: "We believe that our clients' losses in mutual funds were consistent with the losses in their accounts."
The pension funds represent more than 12,000 current and former wholesale-apparel sales representatives.
William L. Kicklighter Jr., the former Prudential broker, couldn't be reached for comment.
Prudential disputes the allegations.
The pension-fund case isn't the first to accuse Prudential of churning mutual funds.
In 1991, Prudential was ordered to pay $1 million in punitive damages to an investor who said her broker excessively traded mutual funds.
It was one of the largest punitive damage awards ever levied against a brokerage firm.
The investor, a 74-year-old retired housewife, said her Prudential broker made fund purchases totaling more than $5.4 million and sales of more than $4.1 million in 280 separate transactions between 1984 and 1988, generating more than $220,000 in commissions and sales charges.
Meanwhile, Prudential -- like other big Wall Street firms and mutual-fund distributors -- has offered a variety of non-cash incentives to help prod brokers to push its funds.
Among them: tickets to Orange Bowl college football games; Tiffany champagne glasses; Russian Army watches; cappuccino/espresso makers, Irish whisky, New England lobster clambakes; Courvoisier cognac, and Godiva chocolates, according to a variety of internal Prudential sales sheets.
Prudential notes that most fund distributors offer non-cash incentives to sell various products and says the inducements don't lead brokers to sell one fund over another.
Brokers sell funds with solid performance, a Prudential spokesman asserts.
