The name Wells Fargo may not conjure up images of modern working women, but this bank is once again showing its pioneer spirit: It has a greater percentage of women in management than any other company in the Journal's list of 200.
In 1992, it had 66.1%.
Of course, Wells Fargo & Co., which owned the Pony Express, has certain advantages.
Of nine industries analyzed, finance has the highest percentage of female managers (41.4%).
The banking company is in San Francisco, and firms located in the West -- as in the Northeast -- have higher percentages than those situated elsewhere: 31.2% female managers compared with 27.8% in the Midwest and 27.6% in the South.
But Wells Fargo has a far greater percentage of women in management than many others banks.
In 1992, Banc One Corp. had 48.5%; Chase Manhattan Corp. 42.5%; Norwest Corp. 41.7%; and BankAmerica Corp. 61.2%.
Wells Fargo ascribes its score partly to its nontraditional promotion paths -- not just out of the lending area, but also out of operations management, systems management and marketing, says Kim Kellogg, a company spokeswoman.
With so many mergers and acquisitions in the 1980s, women were able to prove they can handle big projects, she says.
The company's decentralized, nonhierarchical structure also provides an atmosphere in which women seem to thrive.
At the loftiest ranks -- senior and executive vice president -- the percentage of women managers isn't as extraordinary, but at 18% it is higher than many companies.
Seven of the 38 executive vice presidents are females, as are 19 of the 108 senior vice presidents.
More than half hold core business jobs.
Because so many women are managers, diversity "is almost not a topic of discussion now," says Patricia Callahan, executive vice president in charge of personnel.
"It's a topic of pleasure."
And how is life for the men who find themselves in this corporate pleasure zone?
Not terrible at all.
Bob Byrne, a 39-year-old senior vice president for business services, is often the only man at meetings.
Having worked for women seven of his 10 years at Wells Fargo, he says he rarely thinks about the gender of his boss.
The only time he admits to preferring the company of men is when they are indulging in small talk, about sports.
He says he doesn't often listen to women talking among themselves, but when he does, they're talking about clothes.
