China's 1993 crime rate grew 6.2%, the same annual pace since 1982, but the government cited the economic boom for a 23% increase in the number of serious crimes reported.
Murders increased 7.8% to 32,000.
Police said they cracked 19,000 drug-trafficking cases, up 32% from 1992.
Thefts and robberies increased 20% to 450,000.
Authorities said they detained 780,000 gang members, up 56%.
Meanwhile in Shanghai, 90,000 bicycles were reported stolen last year.
Chinese refer to their country as the "Kingdom of Bicycles."
Shanghai alone has seven million bikes -- one for every two people.
Separately, China's industrial output in December surged a record 35% to $46.16 billion from the year-earlier month, reflecting Beijing's relaxation of curbs on loans to state companies that had forced them to lay off workers for lack of operating funds.
Kazakhstan was accepted for membership in the Asian Development Bank, which said it would treat the former Soviet republic as a "test economy" in moving away from state control.
The bank, based in Manila, said it intended to help the Central Asian country make a "gradual but smooth transition" to a market-oriented economy by restructuring state enterprises, supporting the private sector and attracting foreign investment.
Hungary's health agency signed a joint-venture agreement with a U.S. physician's Florida concern to set up the country's first private, for-profit hospital.
The Hungarian-born Dr. Stephan J. Wittmann, an anesthetist, said the 150-bed hospital, to be opened by 1996, will cost between $40 million and $75 million.
The government donated the land at a former Soviet army base in Szentendre, a dozen miles north of Budapest.
The hospital, with management, nurses and equipment to be imported from the U.S., is to serve about 200,000 Hungarians who can afford private health care in a country where most medical treatment is provided by the state.
A British investigation of the world's 12th-worst tanker spill blamed the ship's captain for the accident in the Shetland Islands.
The Braer spilled 24.6 million gallons of oil after running aground in a severe storm on Jan. 4, 1993.
The report said the Greek captain, Alexandros Gelis, was derelict for failing to prevent loose steel pipes from causing damage that allowed sea water to contaminate the fuel supply of the Liberian-registered tanker.
The main engine and generator failed, and the crew abandoned ship, which was driven ashore by hurricane-force winds.
Italy ratified an international convention on money laundering.
Participating nations allow confiscation of profits or goods gained from criminal activity, lift banking secrecy for inquiries, share police information and adopt common investigating techniques.
The accord, to take effect May 1 in Italy, is in force in Britain, Bulgaria, the Netherlands and Switzerland.
Ratification is pending by 15 other nations that have signed the accord.
Finnish opposition to joining the European Union shrank significantly in the past month, an opinion sampling by the Helsingin Sanomat newspaper found.
In a Gallup poll, 41% of the respondents favored Finland's membership in the former European Community and 27% opposed it; in December, a similar poll found 40% for and 43% against the EU application.
Those who were undecided increased to 32% from 17%.
Finns will vote on EU membership later this year.
The government applied to join in 1992 and hopes to be accepted by 1995.
The French fashion house Chanel apologized to the Muslim world, saying it unwittingly put verses of the Koran on dresses shown in its summer collections.
In the Paris show last weekend, Arabic words were embroidered in pearls on a torso-hugging bustier and other dresses.
Chanel designer Karl Lagerfeld, whose clientele includes Arabs, said he took the design from a book on India's Taj Mahal palace.
A German, Mr. Lagerfeld said he found the design aesthetically pleasing and wasn't aware of its meaning.
After a Muslim group in Jakarta protested, Chanel said it destroyed the dresses with the offending designs along with negatives of the photos made of the garments.
It also appealed to press photographers and television crews to do likewise.
Chanel denied that it feared reprisals from Muslims for desecrating the Koran, the sacred book of Islam.
In 1989, Iran's revolutionary Islamic leader, the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, ordered the death of the British writer Salman Rushdie for his novel "The Satanic Verses," considered blasphemous by many Muslims.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Russian coal output last year decreased 9.8% to 305 million metric tons from a year earlier, and exports to countries outside the former Soviet Union dropped 5.3% to 18 million tons. . . .
To shed its warring past and build its tourism appeal, Cambodia next month will stage events such as a pedicab race and performances of traditional dances and songs.
Other planned attractions include Mekong River boat races and a marathon near the ancient temples of Angkor Wat.
