The House Energy and Commerce Committee yesterday approved two key bills that, sponsors claim, will pave the way to the mythic information superhighway.
The legislation, generally supported by the Clinton administration, is supposed to enable American business to stay ahead of the rest of the world in the products and services that will define the information age.
As Vice President Al Gore said in his Jan. 11 speech before the Television Academy in Los Angeles: "By taking the lead in quickly employing these new information technologies, America's businesses will gain enormous advantage in the world-wide marketplace."
Unfortunately, a major provision of the legislation shows that some members of Congress are too busy looking in the rearview mirror to see the road ahead.
By requiring telephone companies to produce their equipment domestically, Congress is succumbing to its propensity to protect existing jobs while neglecting the prospect of creating new ones.
U.S. business is already using newer information and communication technologies to solidify its world-wide lead in manufacturing and service productivity.
We have, for instance, more than twice as many personal computers in use per worker as Germany and almost four times as many as Japan.
The deployment of the latest technologies, including computer networking, broader access to data bases, more mobility in personal communications, and new interactive information services -- which the legislation in Congress promotes -- will enhance the overall productivity advantages of our economy even further.
As Mr. Gore reported in Los Angeles, we also have a lead in producing the equipment and services of the new information age -- a lead that is translating into a rapid growth in our exports.
Even before the entry of potential manufacturing powers like the Bell operating companies, American producers of cellular equipment, satelite systems, sophisticated switching and transmission equipment, and mobile personal communicators have pioneered world-wide production of these new technologies.
We have, for example, increased our foreign sales of telephone equipment by 210% since 1989.
U.S. companies now account for 90% of the world market in video conferencing equipment, and sell about 70% of all their microwave radio systems in international markets.
The bills now making their way through Congress would advance the deregulation of the telephone industry even further by allowing the regional Bell operating companies to compete in areas like long-distance service and equipment manufacturing -- and newer services like video on demand and mobile personal communications.
The legislation would also allow cable and broadcast companies to offer more services to the home.
According to most knowledgeable observers, this would create more efficient companies, lower prices for the consumer, and facilitate quicker entry into the new age of the information economy.
Many in Congress, however, simplistically see telecommunications legislation as yet another means of reducing the merchandise trade deficit.
A bill changing the regulatory structure of a giant industry provides an ideal opportunity for trade hawks fired up by the continuing dispute with Japan.
So the leaders of the congressional effort to deregulate the telephone companies, most notably stalwart protectionists such as Rep. John Dingell and Sen. Ernest Hollings, have inserted a provision in their bills that would require the regional telephone companies to produce their products in the U.S. Foreign parts would be limited to 40%.
A close look at the data in the telecommunications field shows that Congress's concerns are misplaced and that the proposed solution would likely backfire by closing off opportunities for export expansion in the most dynamic parts of the industry.
It would also undermine the substantial benefits of other parts of the bill.
In 1993, the U.S. had an overall trade deficit of about $1.6 billion in "customer premises" equipment, such as telephone receivers and fax machines.
These are low-value-added and low-technology products.
On the other hand, we have a trade surplus in most of the high-technology products and services.
We had a trade surplus in 1993 in network equipment, such as central switches and multiplexing equipment.
We also had a surplus in cellular systems, microwave systems and transmission equipment.
We have about 70% of the world market in satellite communications equipment and 50% of the world market in ground systems to connect with satellites.
In other words, U.S. manufacturers are the technological leaders and suppliers of choice in the fastest-growing, best-paying and most-profitable sectors of the telecommunications market.
The problem with the protectionist provisions in the House and Senate bills is that they violate the rules of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the North American Free Trade Agreement.
If they are enacted, as congressional leaders insist, the U.S. will be subject to retaliation under the rules of these agreements.
The most likely targets of retaliation are the higher-technology segments of the industry, where the U.S. has superior products and significant market share.
Growth in the high-technology products and services is estimated by the Commerce Department at 15% or more per year, while shipments of customer pre-mises equipment are declining by more than 2% per year.
Undermining telecommunications liberalization is particularly unfortunate because the privatization of foreign telephone monopolies is providing an unprecedented opportunity for competitive U.S. suppliers.
It would be counterproductive in the extreme to give Japan, the European Union and literally dozens of developing countries an excuse to shut U.S. exporters of high-technology products out of their markets.
This story, unfolding as we try to facilitate the birth of the information age, is reminiscent of the industrial era.
Whenever politicians try to implement an industrial policy, they aid declining sectors.
Germany, often viewed as an exemplar for a new industrial policy, gives most of its subsidies to the steel, shipbuilding, railroad and coal industries, which is one reason the German economy is in such deep trouble.
Japan, too, has bet wrong in areas like high-definition TV and the early introduction of digital standards in telecommunications, and consequently lags behind U.S. producers in those areas.
Congressional advocates of the domestic telecommunications industry fall into the same trap by trying to rectify a trade imbalance stemming from the production of telephone receivers by endangering an incredible export growth opportunity in the more advanced segments of the industry.
To his credit, Trade Representative Mickey Kantor has signaled opposition to this provision in the Dingell and Hollings bills, even though the administration is often guilty of promoting protectionist industrial policy.
A more credible position would be for the White House to threaten a veto of this legislation if the protectionist elements remain.
Otherwise, the bills will undermine the efficiency gains of deregulating the telephone industry and undo the considerable progress of Nafta and the Uruguay Round agreements.
Mr. Duesterberg is director of the Competitiveness Center at the Hudson Institute in Washington.
He was assistant secretary of commerce for international economic policy from 1989 to 1993.
