The $80 billion California Public Employee Retirement System may be the best-known pension activist, but the $35 billion Wisconsin retirement fund has emerged to rival Calpers as the biggest hawk in the movement.
While Calpers relies heavily on ironing out differences with companies in closed-door meetings, the State of Wisconsin Investment Board waged low-budget proxy fights last year against seven companies it contends have treated shareholders badly.
Taking advantage of recently liberalized rules governing communications among shareholders, Wisconsin won four of the seven proxy contests, believed to be the best batting average of any activist.
"They are the cutting-edge fund," says Sarah Teslik, executive director of the Council of Institutional Investors, a group that promotes shareholder activism.
"Wisconsin is where the intellectual vigor is."
-- Wisconsin was one of the first investors to attack Paramount Communications Inc. for what it considered poor financial performance, leading a proxy campaign last year against directors nominated to Paramount's compensation committee.
Despite holding a mere 100,000 shares, Wisconsin faxed fliers to other Paramount holders grousing that Chairman Martin Davis's healthy bonuses weren't tied to the media giant's "absymal" results.
Wisconsin lost the fight, but its judgment was vindicated a few months later when Paramount became a takeover target.
-- While Calpers Chief Executive Officer Dale Hanson encouraged Time Warner Inc. in a private January meeting to adopt a takeover-defense plan to thwart Seagram Co., Wisconsin isn't pleased with Time Warner's new poison pill.
Approved without a shareholder vote, the pill was designed to prevent Seagram from gaining control without paying a "control premium."
But Wisconsin opposes "unilaterally adopted pills," says Kurt Schacht, the fund's general counsel.
-- Wisconsin filed suit to challenge the price paid in 1992 by Marvel Entertainment Group Inc. to acquire Fleer Corp., winning an extra $6 million, or 23% more per share than Marvel paid other investors.
Although Wisconsin was Fleer's largest holder with 9.8%, Marvel was no pushover: It is a unit of MacAndrews & Forbes Holdings Inc., controlled by savvy financier Ronald O. Perelman.
Wisconsin is now using the same tactic to oppose a share price recently approved by Corporate Software Inc. for its merger with CS Acquisition Corp.
Corporate Software, a reseller in Canton, Mass., maintains the approved price is appropriate.
Despite the success of its shareholder activism, which began in 1986, Wisconsin has remained relatively obscure compared with Calpers, partly because its professionals lack Mr. Hanson's colorful, fire-and-brimstone rhetoric.
Mr. Schacht, for one, calls activism "simply one alternative for dealing with an under-performing stock."
Others include simply selling the stock.
Patricia Lipton, the fund's executive director, a reserved British economist, adds: "It's part of a continuum of due diligence."
For the past 10 years, the fund's stocks generated a total return of 13.6% annually, compared with 14.9% for the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index.
Portfolio analysts and their managers are important Wisconsin players.
They comb company filings for signs of shareholder-unfriendly behavior, such as excessive executive pay plans, repricing of management stock options after a stock-price decline, or dilutive stock-option plans.
While Calpers targets about 10 poor performers annually, aiming for corporate-governance reforms that may boost their long-term earnings, Wisconsin typically reacts to some specific unwelcome corporate development, says John Pound, a Harvard corporate-governance expert.
Wisconsin's equity stakes of up to 10% may carry more clout with a target company than Calpers, which owns a wider universe of stocks mimicking a market index.
Two-thirds of Wisconsin's targets come from a $4 billion, internally managed portfolio of 300 medium-sized companies.
Wisconsin has enthusiastically taken to the 1992 proxy rules, which don't require cumbersome legal approvals for most communications with other big investors.
In a campaign last fall to veto lowering the price of executive stock options at Continental Medical Systems Inc., Wisconsin faxed fliers that screamed: "RAISE THE STOCK PRICE, DON'T LOWER THE EXERCISE PRICE!"
The rehab-hospital chain decried Wisconsin's "inflammatory" effort.
But, apparently faced with defeat, it yanked the proposal at the 11th hour.
Then Wisconsin wanted to inspect the ballots to determine its level of success.
The company initially balked.
As a result, Wisconsin is now prodding regulators to gain better access to such ballots.
What's on tap this year?
Wisconsin fund officials won't say.
Their practice is to keep mum until negotiations break down and a proxy fight is inevitable.
Wisconsin's heightened activism is all the more striking because many veteran activists have lowered their profiles.
Robert Monks failed to attract major institutional support for his tiny Lens Inc. fund.
And at year end, the seven-year-old United Shareholders Association closed its doors.
As Wisconsin has become more public, Mr. Hanson has devoted more energy to his fund's internal operations.
That's partly because some Calpers trustees believe he was giving short shrift to beneficiary services.
Mr. Hanson may become even less of a force soon; he acknowledges he's open to other job possibilities.
