A senior European Union diplomat this week announced plans to negotiate a compromise on a 50-nation treaty meant to spur Western investment in the former Soviet Union's rich oil-and-gas fields.
"The time is ripe for a decision," declared Dutch diplomat Charles Rutten, who said the rapid completion of the European Energy Charter Treaty would help convince Moscow that the West is serious about helping Russia develop economically.
Mr. Rutten, who is heading the treaty talks, said that in the next few weeks, he will hold high-level meetings in different capitals on the few remaining treaty obstacles.
He and his assistants plan to hammer out a compromise package before delegates of the 50 countries meet in Brussels for their next plenary session May 16.
At a plenary meeting last week, the delegates came close to tying up loose ends of the treaty, which would offer legal protection to Westerners investing in the former Soviet Union's energy sector.
But Mr. Rutten said negotiators were unable to overcome three "political questions."
These are Russia's desire to sell uranium in Western Europe; the EU's demand for special treatment for regional economic-integration organizations, such as the union itself; and exceptions to the principle that an investor from one treaty country putting money into another treaty country should be treated as well as a local investor.
The EU stands squarely in the middle of two of the disputes.
On uranium, the EU is resisting Moscow's request for strategic, as well as economic, reasons.
The idea of Russian uranium sales faces stiff resistance from some EU member states -- notably France, which depends on nuclear power for roughly 80% of its energy production.
Russian prices for enriched uranium sold on world markets are "well below" the prices of uranium produced in the EU, Mr. Rutten noted.
"This threatens the viability of the EU industry."
The EU also is blocking progress by insisting the treaty include an exception for regional organizations set up to liberalize trade and investment between members.
Commission negotiators have argued the treaty shouldn't oblige such groups to extend to nonmembers the preferences that members enjoy.
Non-European countries -- especially the U.S. and Japan -- fear the move represents an attempt to raise barriers to foreign investment in the EU.
Mr. Rutten said the demand threatens to introduce a "lack of balance" into the treaty, because "other delegates would have to accept very clear obligations, while the European Community could be vague."
Even so, he and other EU diplomats voiced confidence that the issue could be settled on the basis of the EU's Treaty of Rome, which states that any company established in the EU is considered an EU company.
In this light, Mr. Rutten said, U.S. and Japanese concerns amounted to "the fear of the unknown," because it is unclear how the EU would use the exception.
Mr. Rutten also expressed confidence that a solution could be found on the question of national treatment.
"Some delegates do not want any exceptions to national treatment," he said.
"But a number of industries in the ex-U.S.S.R. can't survive without subsidies."
Given the region's economic distress, Mr. Rutten said, delegates at last week's plenary session decided to change their procedures by asking him to negotiate a compromise directly with the governments that would sign the treaty.
"The general feeling is that the debate should be lifted to a political level and that governments should take responsibility."
Although the treaty negotiations have dragged on for 2 1/2 years, Mr. Rutten said they had taken on a new urgency in light of recent Western cooperation agreements with East European countries.
These agreements have given Moscow the impression the West wants to exclude Russia, Mr. Rutten said.
Rapid conclusion of the energy treaty, he argued, would send Moscow "an important political signal" that the West is determined "to include Russia in cooperation and to help Russia . . . develop economically."
Mr. Rutten voiced hope that the compromise text would pave the way for the disagreements to be resolved at the plenary meeting in May.
That would allow the treaty to be signed early this summer.
