The Internal Revenue Service's audits of hundreds of municipal bond issues may include reviews of the relevant books and records of underwriters and bond lawyers.
"The audit trail may lead to these places," said Marcus Owens, a senior IRS official involved in planning the muni audits.
He noted that bond issuance costs -- chiefly fees paid to underwriters and lawyers -- are limited by law on some types of municipal bond issues.
The IRS plans to conduct a host of municipal bond audits to get a statistically valid indication of the state of compliance with tax rules governing munis.
The IRS expects as many as 200 randomly selected audits in several different categories of bonds.
These audits aren't expected to start until next fiscal year.
The IRS muni audits in some cases also are expected to include a review of how bond proceeds are used.
"This is one of the areas where our concerns and those of the Securities and Exchange Commission are likely to overlap," Mr. Owens said in an interview.
The IRS and SEC have begun to coordinate their municipal bond enforcement efforts.
SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt recently pledged to enforce the securities laws vigorously with respect to munis, and cited among the areas in the SEC's sights "allegations about offerings that lack economic merit or that misrepresent the tax status of the bonds."
Such allegations also are of interest to the IRS.
Some market participants fear that if the IRS finds that a significant amount of bond proceeds are unaccounted for or weren't used for their intended purposes, it could create problems for other muni bonds.
The IRS also will be looking at a batch of specific bond issues that have been identified as having possible tax problems.
Mr. Owens said these cases appear to involve bonds where "people got a little too clever for their own good" and where pertinent regulations -- typically rules barring arbitrage -- may have been too complex for bond issuers to comprehend.
Arbitrage is involved when bond proceeds are invested in higher-yielding instruments and has been a leading IRS concern over the years, even after the 1986 tax reform act required that arbitrage profits be rebated to the Treasury.
To date, more than $800 million in arbitrage has been paid over to the federal government by municipal bond issuers.
