As he toured earthquake-damaged Kennedy High School here this week, California Gov. Pete Wilson walked into a room strewn with books and twisted metal shelving and shook his head.
"Well, it's a mess," he said, "but it can all get cleaned up."
That's also a pretty apt description of Gov. Wilson's political situation as he prepares to run for re-election this year following one of the costliest natural disasters in history.
Like Moses watching plagues descend on Egypt, Mr. Wilson has watched disasters rain down on California in his three years as governor: riots, wildfires, deep defense spending cuts, severe recession, the loss of 900,000 jobs.
As the problems have mounted, Mr. Wilson's popularity has sunk, until one pre-earthquake poll showed that 40% of those surveyed rated his job performance as "poor" or "very poor."
It's been, the Republican governor says with a dry smile, "a remarkable first term."
So the shock and cost of the giant Los Angeles-area earthquake should just drive another nail into Pete Wilson's political coffin, right?
But maybe not.
Gov. Wilson, a stolid but tenacious ex-Marine, has been underestimated before, only to rise up and slay two of California's Democratic heavyweights, Jerry Brown in a 1982 Senate race and Dianne Feinstein in his 1990 run for governor.
And now, along with all the problems, the earthquake also presents an opportunity for the governor to reinforce the central image he has tried to project, as a tough and unflinching leader capable of making hard decisions in turbulent times.
"What the rebuilding effort represents is a test," says Dan Schnur, Mr. Wilson's campaign spokesman.
"People will have to perceive Pete Wilson as somebody who has acted quickly and effectively."
How well the governor performs in that test has broad implications.
For if Mr. Wilson can conquer such substantial obstacles and win re-election in the nation's most populous and troubled state, he will automatically become a factor in Republican thinking in the 1996 presidential campaign.
In his quest for re-election, Gov. Wilson will have to face either Kathleen Brown, the telegenic state treasurer whose brother and father both served as governor, or John Garamendi, the energetic and blunt state insurance commissioner.
Both currently outscore the governor in pollsters' theoretical matchups, though before the earthquake the Wilson camp saw signs he was closing the gap.
"That tells me that the people of the state are intelligent and fair-minded, and they've finally come to the conclusion that the recession was no more my fault than the earthquake," Mr. Wilson maintains in an interview.
There's no doubt that the earthquake will complicate the task of making a political comeback.
For starters, earthquake costs imperil the governor's new and austere $38.8 billion budget.
That budget, which slices further into social services and the state bureaucracy, already has a $2.3 billion hole because it counts on money Gov. Wilson is demanding but may never get from the federal government to cover the cost of providing federally mandated services for illegal immigrants.
Now the earthquake will lay a whole new set of costs on the state's doorstep.
And that means Gov. Wilson, who has never fully recovered from pushing through a $7.5 billion tax increase in his first year, already is coming under pressure from Democrats to propose another tax increase of some kind to cover earthquake costs.
Gov. Wilson says he'll raise taxes only as a "last resort," and maintains it is foolhardy to be talking of doing so now, before the state's full earthquake costs are known.
Those pushing a tax package are "swinging in the dark," he complains.
"They don't know whether the ball's over the plate or over their heads."
The governor's strategy appears to be to hold off until he can squeeze as much assistance as possible out of federal coffers.
But that's already leading to some Democratic grumbling that he is responding too slowly to the disaster.
And there probably will be more overt criticism down the road, as Democrats begin asking why some available state bond funds hadn't been spent on projects to prepare roads and bridges to withstand an earthquake.
On top of those problems, the earthquake also has sidetracked temporarily Mr. Wilson's efforts to raise the profile of crime and immigration, issues where his tough-guy image has struck a deeper chord with voters than it does on economic troubles.
But perhaps the biggest danger of all is the possibility that the earthquake could stifle the signs of renewed economic optimism that had just started to pop up.
Mr. Wilson asserts that a package of investment tax incentives and an overhaul of the state's notorious workers compensation system, which he signed into law last year, were beginning to breathe some job-creating life back into the state's economy.
Now it's impossible to know how much of that business confidence might erode.
All told, Mr. Wilson is "cornered in almost every way you can be," asserts Democratic consultant and pollster Paul Maslin.
But disaster provides openings as well for the governor.
For one thing, the earthquake actually will have some positive economic effects, as billions of dollars in federal money pour into the state and create jobs rebuilding roads, bridges and apartments.
Some California civil rights leaders are even beginning to argue that process can salve some of the wounds left from an earlier disaster, the Los Angeles riots, if some of the jobs are funneled to unemployed urban workers.
What's more, a tragedy such as this naturally raises the profile of the state's chief executive.
Mr. Wilson has gotten lots of TV time commiserating with victims and dispensing disaster relief.
Roy Behr, policy director for Ms. Brown's campaign, acknowledges that may produce some short-term boost for Gov. Wilson as voters rally around the state's leader.
But Mr. Behr and other Democrats also maintain that such a boost is likely to be short-lived, because what they call Mr. Wilson's bland personal style isn't well-suited to the task of lifting Californians' spirits.
In the long run, Mr. Wilson's success may well turn most on his ability to get Washington to open its coffers wide to ease Californians' pain.
Strangely, he is wellpositioned to accomplish that.
Even though President Clinton may someday find Gov. Wilson a political rival, the president has every reason to be helpful to California now, because the state is central to the Clinton electoral coalition.
For his part, Mr. Wilson insists he's only interested in working through his latest plague so that he'll finally get a chance to lead his people into the promised land.
"Having seen this state through hard times, I have ideas about what we can do in good times," he says.
