Gather around all you who have been flummoxed by concepts like comparative advantage and purchasing power parity, puzzled about the difference between a tariff and a quota, or confused about which is better -- fair trade or free trade.
Gather around because in just 114 pages, Russell Roberts, a professor of economics at Washington University, explains these mysteries of global life in a heartwarming tale you won't soon forget.
An oddball parody of "It's a Wonderful Life," "The Choice: A Fable of Free Trade and Protectionism" (Prentice Hall, $11.95) concerns the early 19th-century British trade economist David Ricardo, whose soul has been sentenced to wander until he can prove to the heavenly authorities that his theories of comparative advantage are correct.
When the fable begins, in 1960, Dave has been drifting since 1823.
He has just requested permission to touch down on Earth and prove his worth.
And touch down he does, in Star, Ill., in the house of Ed Johnson, his wife and two children.
Ed is the president of the Stellar Television Co.
His company is successful, but that's because Ed has convinced his congressman, Frank Bates, to pass a law banning Japanese televisions.
Bates now hopes to get his party's nomination for president on a protectionist platform.
In the morning Ed is flying to Los Angeles to give one of the nominating speeches for Bates at the national convention.
Ed, who is eating chocolate cake and drinking milk while his family sleeps, is anxious because, although protectionism has been good for him, he's not sure if it's good for the country.
Enter Dave Ricardo.
Ed is suspicious -- is Dave related to Ricky? -- but he agrees to let Dave show him how the world looks in 1995 with free trade.
And it's a great world, filled with things Ed has never heard of: sushi, air bags, frozen yogurt, Hondas, Nintendo, Wal-Mart.
One problem however, the Stellar Television Company has disappeared, replaced by a Cineplex with an enormous parking lot.
Ed is upset.
"Who is making TVs?" he wonders.
So Dave takes him to Rahway, N.J., to Merck and Co.
Dave explains that Merck makes drugs and sends them to Japan, the Japanese buy the drugs with yen, and Americans exchange the yen for dollars, to buy Japanese TVs, which the Japanese then exchange for yen to buy more drugs.
Dave calls this the Roundabout Way to Wealth.
He tells Ed that this roundabout way results in cheaper, better TVs for Americans.
Ed is not impressed.
So Dave takes him to visit his son, Steven, who heads up a Palo Alto, Calif., computer company.
Ed's grandson Justin is doing his math homework in three dimensions on a computer screen.
Then it's off to Boston, where Ed's daughter Susan works for an international retail company.
It's not clear whether Ed is more surprised to see his granddaughter playing in the Little League or that she is playing with a metal bat.
Yet Dave has not managed to convince Ed.
So Dave shows him what the country would look like in 1995 under protectionism.
Back in Illinois, the first thing that Ed notices is that everyone is driving a Ford Fairlane or Chevy Impala.
Susan never went to graduate school but has become a homemaker with three children instead.
Steven too lives in Star, where he is selling expensive TVs.
Justin is doing math homework on a yellow pad.
Rahway still has a corn field because the Merck plant never got built.
Ed peppers Dave with questions.
Why not protect industries important to national security; what about shielding industries that are in their infancy; what about forcing competitors to play on an even field?
Ed and Dave have philosophical discussions about opportunity and happiness.
Dave admits that with or without free trade Ed's children and grandchildren seem happy, saying: "Money is not everything.
Wealth is not everything.
Nor is America with free trade a paradise.
Free trade leads to more opportunity, more wealth, and a more dynamic world.
But a more dynamic world does not benefit everyone."
Dave is evenhanded all right.
And he refuses to tell Ed what to do.
His final words are: "I hope you have learned tonight that the choice America faces is not between more jobs or fewer jobs.
The real choice is between a static world and a dynamic world.
A world of encouraging people to dream and encouraging them to acquire the skills to make those dreams come true and a world of encouraging people to be content with what they have and to dream less."
Then Dave disappears.
Ed spends a restless few hours on the sofa.
He flies to Los Angeles, still troubled.
He mounts the podium and begins reading his speech.
Will Ed make the speech favoring protectionism thereby consigning the U.S. to Ford Fairlanes, or improvise a different one?
In addition to this emotionally charged soul-searching conclusion, Mr. Roberts's little book has two wonderful pictures, one of Dave as a dandy and another of Ed looking at Dave with his eyebrows raised.
Ms. Lee is an economist.
