Irene M. Geschke was only 55 years old when she filed a lawsuit in a Chicago-area court; now she wonders whether she will outlive it.
In 1979, Mrs. Geschke sued a mortgage company that she claims had wrongfully forced her out of her real-estate business.
Since then, at least nine scheduled trial dates have come and gone -- and still no trial and no resolution are in sight.
The case remains mired in its seemingly interminable pretrial stage.
Meanwhile, the mortgage company has stopped operating, and its parent company -- a chief defendant in the case -- has long ago changed owners and names.
Mrs. Geschke has run through two lawyers and is now handling the case herself.
She claims she is owed more than $1 million for losses, including her business and her home.
"Somebody please tell me what it is I should do to go to trial," said Mrs. Geschke.
"I have done everything that the rules permit me to do to bring this case to trial."
Even critics of the federal judicial system say the case has had an extraordinary lifespan.
Most civil cases that reach trial do so within eight months, according to the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts.
Nonetheless, 18,500 federal lawsuits have been pending at least three years, the office reported in September.
Analysts blame most delays on unfilled judicial vacancies and urgent criminal-court dockets that keep judges preoccupied.
In the Geschke litigation, it appears that both the judge's behavior and the conduct of the parties involved conspired to add years to the proceedings.
The past 15 years are filled with every variety of delay.
In May 1988, for example, Mrs. Geschke and her husband and coplaintiff, Clarence, requested some documents from the defendant.
The company didn't deliver, various motions were filed, a magistrate got involved -- to little effect -- and three years later, U.S. District Judge John F. Grady finally held several hearings on the issue.
He then issued a partial summary judgment against the Geschkes.
They appealed, and a year later the federal appeals court in Chicago said the lower-court records were so confusing that it was unclear what the judge had ruled about the document request.
The appeals court also said Judge Grady had acted too hastily in making his ruling.
The case went back to Judge Grady, who ruled last summer -- five years after the original request for the documents -- that the company didn't have to produce any more papers.
Today, after more than 530 motions, hearings, memoranda and orders, pretrial wrangling continues over witness and exhibit lists for trial.
Judge Grady didn't return phone calls seeking comment on the case.
In court proceedings, however, he has chided the Geschkes for "unreasonableness" during pretrial discovery.
And in a recent order he wrote that he is eager to bring the case to trial, but "it would have accomplished nothing to try the case only to have the plaintiffs, if dissatisfied with the result, successfully assert on appeal that they had not received all of the documents."
Mrs. Geschke, a real-estate developer in Crystal Lake, Ill., nonetheless blames Judge Grady for failing to speed up the process.
But her own various appeals and motions certainly have done nothing to expedite the case either.
Nor has the fact that the Geschkes twice switched law firms, once for alleged conflict of interest.
Last August, Mrs. Geschke asked the judge to remove himself from the case because of his slow pace, among other reasons.
When the judge declined, she sought a review from the U.S. Supreme Court on the grounds that she was being denied her right to due process and a jury trial.
The high court last week declined to hear the case.
The lawsuit is now back before Judge Grady, who hasn't set a new trial date.
Mrs. Geschke, who has so immersed herself in the litigation that she can recite federal-court rules off the cuff, said, "They would never win the case if I could ever get before a jury."
Stephen B. Diamond, an attorney for the mortgage company's parent, LaSalle National Bancorp, an affiliate of LaSalle National Corp., calls the allegations against the company "completely wrong."
(LaSalle National Corp. is a subsidiary of ABN Amro Holdings NV of the Netherlands.)
Mr. Diamond has handled the litigation from the start and has no older case in his law practice.
"We welcome trial," the Chicago lawyer said.
CBS Inc. has filed a trademark-infringement lawsuit against two brothers who plan to open a chain of television theme restaurants called "Television City."
In a lawsuit filed in federal district court in New York, the New York-based television network contends that the proposed restaurants, which are being planned by David Liederman, the founder of David's Cookies, and his brother William, will infringe on its registered trademark in the name "Television City" and constitute unfair competition.
CBS says it has used the "Television City" name continuously since 1952, when it opened the first facility designed for producing television shows; and that it advertises and promotes services and merchandise under the name, which it registered with the U.S. Patent and Trademark office in 1988.
The two brothers, who own a number of other New York restaurants, intend to open the first "Television City" restaurant and accompanying retail store across from Rockefeller Center late this year or early next year.
Additional sites are planned for Las Vegas and Los Angeles.
Ronald H. Shechtman, an attorney for the Liedermans, said the CBS suit was unwarranted since CBS possessed the "Television City" trademark for the limited purpose of television production.
He said his clients are currently applying to the Patent and Trademark office to use the name for restaurant and retail services.
Negotiations between the two parties about a fee arrangement were unsuccessful, in part because CBS may want to open its own television-theme restaurant, said Mr. Shechtman.
Douglas Jacobs, deputy general counsel for CBS, confirmed that negotiations had failed but said that he was not aware of any plans for a restaurant.
The president of a payroll check-cashing company that collapsed in 1992 after allegations that it stole $25 million from clients was sentenced to six and a half years in prison for fraud and other crimes.
Robert Felzenberg, who with his wife owned the now-defunct Payroll Express Corp., pleaded guilty last July to charges that he diverted money that corporate clients gave Payroll Express to perform on-site check-cashing into his personal accounts or those of other companies he controlled.
Among Payroll Express's clients were local government agencies, New York hospitals and the New York Stock Exchange.
Judge Sonia Sotomayor, in federal district court in New York City, also ordered Mr. Felzenberg to make full restitution to his victims and pay a $12,500 fine.
