Like most maniacal gardeners, I slog through the winter knee-deep in a garden catalog bog.
I did not have to send for dozens of the 1,000-plus catalogs listed in Gardening by Mail (Houghton Mifflin, fourth edition, 400 pages, $18.95), Barbara Barton's latest, last word on garden sourcery.
But I did.
And now I feel obliged to do my bit for the Gross National Tilth and buy more plants!
Years of overindulgence in garden catalogs qualify me to help you master Garden Catalogorrhea.
1. Tune Up Your Hort-Hype Radar.
In "Catalog Creative 101," a catalog-writing tutorial offered to members of the Mailorder Association of Nurserymen (MAN) several years back, plant sellers were encouraged, adjectivally, to: "really let go and get wildly enthusiastic, even go way overboard.
You can always tone down excessive copy later."
Happily, for the amusement of readers, the "excessive copy" in many g-logs -- bold in-your-typeface claims in GiGanTIC!
EmPHaTIC! leaping letters -- never gets toned down.
Will "IMPERIAL TREE PEONIES" really throw "Blooms As Big As A Child's Head" and live "for a century or even more!"?
(Owen Nursery) What about "amazing . . .
ROOF-HIGH `CLIMBING TOMATOES'"?
Hype hype hooray!
"A SINGLE SLICE COVERS A SLICE OF BREAD!"
A single plant "CLIMBS AS TALL AS A HOUSE!"
(Gardeners' Choice) And what of "The Blue Rose"?
"Fully-double, rosette flowers in a shade of deep ocean blue" trumpeted as "NEW" by Burpee.
Don't "expect hundreds of thornless stems from a dozen of our vigorous `Blue Roses'" because Burpee's blue roses are not roses and not blue.
2. Resist Incitements to Record-Breaking Competitive Gardening.
G-logs that push the Guinness Book of World Records GIANT-SUPER-COLOSSAL competitive school of plant & seed merchandising make for entertaining reading -- not gardening.
"CHALLENGE THE WORLD RECORD OF A 6 1/4 lb.
(G.C.) Do you, a thin-obsessed American gardener, really want to grow a fatso tomato with an 18-inch waist?
Forget gardening as relaxation when you, gentle gardener, are egged on to "Challenge the World Record of a 600 POUND PUMPKIN" by purchasing seeds with "the genetic ability to set world records."
(G.C.) Before tilting your trowel toward the Vegetable Olympics, pause to ponder how many pecks of pudgy pumpkins your patch can possibly put up with.
3. Watch out for the Plant Possessed of "Easy Growability," "Thrives Almost Anywhere."
The plant so described, if you order it, will in no time quite likely obliterate all other vegetation in your personal paradise.
Exercise extreme caution if tempted, for example, by "easy to grow -- fast growing" willows.
(Owen) They will speedily engulf your yard in messy shade, while soundlessly sucking up all water on the premises.
(Easy slow-growing plants almost never get touted.)
4. Eschew Catalog Appeals to Veggie Sexism.
Examine your conscience.
When Owen declares "master gardeners have been known to pull the female plants from their asparagus patch," so as to favor "the bigger, more succulent male plants," dare you do the botanically incorrect and order all macho "JERSEY GIANT ASPARAGUS, a variety that grows only male plants"?
Will Veggie-Feminists insist on leveling the planting field by choosing to grow the "ALL-FEMALE GOLDEN ZUCCHINI {that} DOUBLES YIELDS!", fully cognizant that "ALL FEMALE ZUCCHINI MEANS MORE FRUIT"?
(G.C.) MORE ZUCCHINI?
By the Ides of August all zucchini-glutted gardeners are cursing the seed trade for a new development that is taking the zucchini in the wrong direction!
Pray for the much less fruitful Z!
5. To Avoid Accidental Mail-order Purchase of Wild-collected Plants: Study The Gardener's Guide to Plant Conservation (World Wildlife Fund, 187 pages, $12.95; P.O. Box 4866, Hampden Post Office, Baltimore, Md. 21211; 410-516-6951) by Nina T. Marshall.
Gardeners who would cultivate ecologically nondestructive plant-buying habits will use this invaluable book as a catalog cross-check on the provenance of Bulbs, Terrestrial Orchids, Insectivorous Plants, North American Wildflowers -- in the garden trade.
To buy, or not to buy, must turn on whence, ultimately, the plants came -- from the nursery propagation bench, or from the wild.
"By refusing to buy species whose status is unclear," Ms. Marshall writes, "gardeners can promote propagation as well as appropriate harvesting methods."
6. What Catalogs Don't Say Can Be as Telling as What They Do.
Don't be misled by such standard catalog boilerplate as "grown in commercial nurseries," "field grown" or "nursery grown."
(To decode: For every "nursery-grown," understand nursery-GROWN-ON -- then substitute "nursery-laundered.")
This deceptive language is not only sanctioned by the Federal Trade Commission but was actually cooked up for its 1979 Guides for the Nursery Industry.
Viz.: "It is an unfair trade practice to sell, offer for sale, or distribute industry products collected from the wild state without disclosing that they were collected from the wild state: Provided, however, That if collected plants are grown in the nursery row for at least one growing season before being marketed, such disclosure is not required."
So much for truth-in-marketing.
Ethical g-logs take this into account and give customers "precise descriptions of propagation methods."
(Marshall) Obviously, the moral hortperson should make every effort to do business with catalogs that "GUARANTEE all our bulbs are grown from seed or tissue culture or have been vegetatively propagated" (Robinett Bulb Farm); or explain "none of the plants we sell have been collected from the wild . . . you will not find those varieties, such as Trilliums and Lady Slipper Orchids, that are virtually always collected.
All of the wildflowers and hardy ferns listed in our catalog are nursery propagated."
(The Crownsville Nursery) To catalogs offering "Rare and Unusual Spring Flowering Bulbs" (Jacques Amand) or "The Beautiful and The Rare" (GreenLady Gardens/The A.J. Skittone Collection) and no info on Ultimate Sources, just say no!
7. Use the Multi-pix Slicks Mainly for Plant I.D.
While Studying the Nonpictorial Little Logs That Cannot Afford to Describe Their Offerings in Anything More Pricey Than Words.
Distinguish between mass-market commodities merchandisers of "plant product" and plantspeople who propagate and grow the plants they sell.
8. Heed the Personal Voice.
Just about nothing wrecks a good catalog read like the presumptuous easy familiarity of computer-personalized greetings to ME: "Ms. Patti Hagan, I'd like to extend a special invitation for you to enjoy a very delightful treat in The Hagan Garden . . . in Brooklyn, New York."
Au contraire, when hint of a thoughtful garden persona surfaces in a catalog's frontisnotes, the gardener delights to read, "These seeds are the greatest hits of the gene pool."
(Seeds of Change) "This catalog is a seed pod -- its contents are seed thoughts which, sprouted, can lead to more and more abundant life.
Seeds are pure information."
(Abundant Life Seed Foundation) "I have stressed open-pollinated seeds and the preservation of our genetic resources.
I support the free and unrestricted worldwide exchange of seeds and knowledge."
(J.L. Hudson, Seedsman)
9. Beware the Famous Name-Drop or Religious Exhortation.
Do not lose your self-control when cozied up to by "seeds suppliers to Monet and Charles Darwin."
(Thompson & Morgan) Keep your cool around the catalog that tries to turn horticulture into "faith in God . . . fellow man, and in the spiritual value of gardening," and includes a modified Lord's Prayer ending "Amen."
("The Park Creed" of Park Seed) Except for the occasional statue of St. Francis or modest acts of piety toward St. Gertrude Jekyll, St. Liberty Hyde Bailey or St. Luther Burbank, practicing plantspersons remain capable of distinguishing their quasireligious agony in the garden from the real thing.
Devout g-log evangelists do not confuse themselves with Matthew, Mark, Luke or John.
