"It's not a shot at Colosio's head; it's a shot at the country's head."
The choking voice on the telephone was that of an old friend of mine who had just heard about the shooting of Luis Donaldo Colosio, presidential candidate of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI).
This friend hadn't been a Colosio enthusiast.
In fact, he is a former leftist political activist who strongly opposes the policies of the Mexican government.
But the shock of Mr. Colosio's assassination has cut across party and political lines.
Mexico's political system has been criticized often for not being truly democratic -- and there are good reasons for this criticism.
But it has at least been successful at overcoming crises.
The death of Mr. Colosio, however, has taken place at a crucial time in Mexico's history -- precisely when the system is being forced to open up in order to become more democratic.
Mr. Colosio, 44 years old when he died Wednesday, had been selected as the PRI's candidate on Nov. 28.
In the past, the nomination would have ensured him the presidency -- the PRI has never lost a presidential election since it was created 65 years ago this month.
But Mr. Colosio vowed from his first speech that he would not accept a single illegal vote.
From the start, Mr. Colosio faced the toughest campaign ever encountered by a presidential candidate from Mexico's ruling party.
Manuel Camacho Solis, until then mayor of Mexico City and a close friend and adviser to President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, balked at the party's choice.
Moreover, the so-called Zapatista rebellion in Chiapas, which began on Jan. 1, shook the political system.
Mr. Camacho was chosen by the president to negotiate with the Chiapas rebels, a surprising decision that gave Mr. Camacho national exposure and generated rumors about a possible independent candidacy.
He didn't openly disavow his alleged intentions to run for the presidency until Tuesday, one day before the assassination of his political rival.
Mr. Colosio had a difficult time putting his campaign together.
Press reports claim that his first rallies were poorly attended and unenthusiastic.
A weekly public opinion poll conducted by the magazine Este Pais showed his support ranging between 27% and 40%.
He was ahead of his rivals, but not by much.
That was cause for serious concern in a party that has never gotten less than 50% in the official returns of a presidential election.
The death of the presidential candidate, however, makes the party's problems much more complex.
The PRI will have to go through the unnerving process of choosing a presidential candidate once again, and it will be extremely difficult to maintain discipline in the ranks this time.
While the death of Mr. Colosio could cynically be viewed as a boost for supporters of Mr. Camacho, it is more likely that the assassination will work against them.
Mr. Camacho is bitterly opposed by the Colosio supporters and by many party officials who feel that he betrayed them during the campaign by refusing to endorse Mr. Colosio.
That sentiment is likely to increase in light of Mr. Colosio's death.
President Salinas clearly still has confidence in Mr. Camacho, whom he has used many times for delicate political negotiations.
But it may be more difficult for him at this point to push a candidate without widespread support.
Many Colosio supporters, as well as outsiders, feel that Mr. Salinas had allowed Mr. Camacho to keep his presidential hopes alive, perhaps to keep a political option open.
If the president attempts to choose Mr. Camacho, the Colosistas -- who are clearly a majority within the party now -- would probably rebel.
This became clear the night of Mr. Colosio's murder, when a crowd of thousands gathered outside the PRI's Mexico City headquarters and began to chant: "Colosio si, Camacho no."
What are the alternatives among other previous presidential hopefuls?
The names of Pedro Aspe, the finance secretary, and Jesus Silva Herzog, a charismatic politician who was head of the same ministry during the administration of President Miguel de la Madrid and is now tourism secretary, have been mentioned.
However, Article 82 of the federal constitution makes their candidacies impossible.
A president must have resigned any top government position, either in the federal administration or at the state level, six months before the election.
This means that any presidential hopeful must have left the government on or before Feb. 20.
Of the various people who were initially mentioned as possible substitutes for Mr. Colosio as the candidate of the ruling party, only Mr. Camacho and Ernesto Zedillo, the former education minister who became Mr. Colosio's campaign manager, would be eligible.
Some people in the opposition may argue that Mr. Zedillo's position as campaign manager should exclude him from running.
By contrast, Mr. Camacho had the foresight when appointed peace commissioner to insist on not having an official government post and on not drawing a salary from the administration.
The ruling party clearly is going to have to abandon its established procedures to choose a new candidate.
It will have to do so when the hardest presidential campaign in its history is already well under way.
And it will have to do so when the party is publicly committed to having a clean election, even with the presence of foreign political observers.
With this bleak prospect, only one historical precedent offers a reason for hope -- and not so much for the ruling party but for the country as a whole.
On July 17, 1928, Gen. Alvaro Obregon, the country's president-elect, was killed by a religious fanatic in a southern suburb of Mexico City -- Obregon was only the last of dozens of revolutionary leaders who had been murdered over the previous years.
It was assumed after the Obregon assassination that the lame-duck president, Plutarco Elias Calles, would prolong his mandate or assume dictatorial powers.
Instead of doing that, Calles stepped down, gathered the country's various revolutionary leaders, and argued with them that they couldn't keep killing each other every time there was a presidential election.
From those meetings emerged, on March 4, 1929, the National Revolutionary Party, the PRI's forerunner.
Clearly, the new party was never an example of democracy.
But it did manage to offer peace and, later, economic development to a country that had lived under war and uncertainty since 1910.
Perhaps this new assassination will help the country move to the next stage -- to that open democratic system that Luis Donaldo Colosio claimed he was seeking.
That would be his most important legacy.
Mr. Sarmiento, editor in chief of Encyclopaedia Britannica Publishers Inc. (Latin America), is also a columnist for the Mexican newspaper El Financiero.
