The Federal Communications Commission, voting to clear the way for a new pocket-phone industry, gave the boot to police, fire and emergency medical systems from a portion of the airwaves.
In a related move, the agency adopted general bidding methods it will use to auction off the airwaves for so-called personal-communications services, including pocket telephones.
The auctions, expected to begin later this year, are also expected to raise $10 billion or more.
The agency said that safety agencies, which currently use microwave systems for both voice and data communications, will have five years to install equipment that uses fiber-optic links or operates at a higher frequency.
The FCC said public safety agencies won't be put at a disadvantage because companies that use the spectrum will be required to pay for planning and installing new systems that "fully meet" the public-safety agencies' communications needs.
Moreover, the commission said its rules may never affect some public-safety agencies, particularly in rural areas, where personal-communications services may not be economically feasible.
Nevertheless, the public-safety agencies are concerned.
"This is quite a shock," said John Lane, a Washington lawyer who represents the Association of Public Safety Officials.
"Some public-safety agencies can't be moved to higher frequencies," he said, because none are available, or transmission quality will suffer.
The FCC action, he said, "will present serious problems, particularly in heavily populated metropolitan areas such as Los Angeles," where the sheriff's department recently upgraded its extensive network of microwave links.
Personal-communications services will compete with cellular-telephone companies.
The new pocket phones, however, will operate at lower power than cellular telephones.
They are expected to work well for pedestrians but not on the open road.
Nevertheless, it is hoped the competition with cellular operators will force down fees for air time.
The new systems, which are expected to handle regular voice conversations as well as data transmissions to laptop and hand-held computers, could even become affordable for average telephone customers.
Reed Hundt, FCC chairman, also has emphasized that the new services will create many new jobs.
When the FCC begins auctioning radio spectrum for the new services later this year, bids are expected to be significantly higher if the new users don't have to share the airwaves.
Last year, the agency established a timetable for utilities, pipelines and others that currently use the frequencies in question to move to another part of the spectrum -- with new users picking up the tab.
At that point, it didn't require public safety agencies to move, but since then it has been lobbied heavily by pocket-phone interests.
The commission, voting 3-0, adopted a "menu of competitive-bidding methods" for different types of licenses.
The agency indicated, however, that it plans to auction many licenses at the same time, using multiple-round bidding, when licenses are expected to have a high value and when companies will get the biggest benefit from owning multiple licenses within the same area or adjacent areas.
That procedure would enable a company to try to win a block of licenses covering an entire region, and to adjust its offer with each round of bidding.
When values are expected to be low, the agency will use a simpler type of auction, perhaps sealed bids.
The FCC also adopted rules that would give small businesses, rural telephone companies and businesses owned by women and minorities an edge in bidding for the new licenses.
But the agency offered few specifics, and didn't specify how preferences would work in bidding for personal-communications services.
That's likely to disappoint small companies that had been pushing for early decisions on the types of preferences they would receive.
The commission also decided that small companies will be allowed to pay for licenses in installments over the lives of the licenses.
In a separate matter, the FCC decided that callers should be allowed to protect their privacy by blocking the transmission of their telephone numbers when they make interstate calls.
To that end, the commission ordered phone companies to let callers punch a code before dialing to stop the transmission of their number.
In recent years, many telephone companies have been offering Caller ID service, which displays a caller's telephone number on a telephone screen or a small device attached to the telephone.
While many businesses have found the service valuable in screening calls, providing some security for computer systems and reducing business fraud, privacy experts worry that consumers are unwittingly giving out their telephone numbers.
Under the FCC's new rules, which will take effect April 12, 1995, telephone companies must let callers punch *67 before dialing so as to block transmission of their telephone numbers.
Callers in many states already have that option for intrastate calls.
