London stocks staged a late turnaround to end only slightly lower, recouping most of the day's losses from profit-taking and economic worries.
Frankfurt shares, after falling more than 3% last week, posted small gains from bargain hunting.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 112.99, down 1.57, reflecting lower Asia/Pacific and American markets and higher European markets.
Casino stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 205.18, up 2.83, or 1.4%, with Resorts of Malaysia posting a 5.1% gain in local currency.
Fishing stocks trailed at 69.57, down 3.34, or 4.6%, with Taiyo Fishery of Japan down 6.3% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index edged down 2.8 points to 3481.4, after hitting a session low of 3462.3.
The FT 30-stock index rose 2.9 points to 2671.4.
Volume was 800.2 million shares, down from 979.9 million shares in the previous session.
Much of the late rebound was attributed to arbitrage trading between the stock and futures markets.
Stock prices fell on selling of baskets of stocks and buying of futures, but this then left market makers short of equities, and buying in turn pushed prices back up.
For most of the London session, stocks were down because of profit-taking, fresh evidence that the British government probably will defer cutting base lending rates, and political worries about higher taxes.
A British industry group said that orders and production in the past four months rose at their strongest pace in almost five years and that business confidence strengthened for the fifth quarter in a row.
This deflated hopes for reduced interest rates.
And the market was nervous about weekend news that taxes under the governing Conservative Party will be higher this year than expected.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index, which plunged 40.59 points Friday, rose 4.40 to 2080.01.
After the market's recent declines, prices were considered attractive once again.
Heavy volume in the DAX futures market also helped pull blue chips higher.
The bourse also may have been boosted by a Goldman Sachs buy recommendation for the German market.
In Paris, stocks not only managed an afternoon turnaround, reversing early losses, but ended with a sharp gain of 1.4%.
As yesterday marked the end of the January trading account, the early drop from profit-taking had been expected.
The comeback began after a western German state's inflation data fueled hopes that the German and French central banks will be less reluctant to cut interest rates.
The buying momentum caused investors with short, or oversold, positions to buy to avoid or cut losses.
A herd-buying mentality prevailed in the session's final two hours.
In Milan, shares strengthened, led by industrial issues, which won investors' focus in a continuing shift from banking and insurance stocks to cyclical plays on hopes for signs of corporate recovery.
In Madrid, equities dropped as the market took a rest from a recent bull run and investors reeled in profits.
In Stockholm, prices finished higher, recovering from a weak opening, with gainers paced by blue chips and forest-products issues.
In Sydney, shares dropped 1.2%, mainly because of weakness in the price of gold and the Tokyo market's free-fall Monday and fears it would sink further.
In Hong Kong, investors shook off the Tokyo debacle and stocks climbed 1.2%, though the key index failed to hang on to gains from an initial surge.
Corporate developments affecting the hotel and property sectors helped boost prices, led by buying by local and Japanese investors, though this masked sizable selling in many stocks.
In Singapore, prices ended mixed, though the main index jumped 1.6% on blue-chip buying; sentiment remained cautious, as technical factors continued to drive the market's direction.
In Kuala Lumpur, the benchmark gauge edged up but this support for blue chips didn't help the broader market, which was generally lower.
But in Seoul, equities advanced 1.2%, supported by solid liquidity, as investors' deposits with brokerage houses marked a record high 4.3 trillion won ($5.31 billion); institutional investors resumed making aggressive purchases, and prices rose across the board.
And in Bangkok, stocks rallied 3.8%, though turnover was sluggish; bargain hunters snapped up financial blue chips, leading to gains in other sectors.
Among corporate developments, in London, British Aerospace soared 15.75 pence, or 3.7%, to 443.75 pence ($6.62), on a weekend news report in Britain that the defense contractor and auto maker was considering selling an additional 20% of its Rover vehicle operation to Honda, which would double the Japanese auto maker's holding to 40% and give it effective management control.
But British Aerospace yesterday called that report "speculation."
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
Source: Morgan Stanley Capital Intl.
