Investors hungry for paper are ready to snap up the Republic of Colombia's first Yankee bond offering, which is set to be launched today in the corporate bond market.
Colombia is expected to sell $250 million of 10-year bonds.
Yankee bonds are securities sold by foreign investors in the U.S.
The bonds are being marketed with a yield spread of 1.5 percentage points over comparable Treasurys, through lead manager Merrill Lynch & Co.
The corporate bond market, which has had a dearth of new issues, seems ready and willing to absorb the deal.
"The lack of supply means you have to play," one mutual bond-fund portfolio manager said.
Meanwhile the price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dropped more than 1/2 point, or more than $5 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 97 9/32, partly in response to jitters over a possible trade war with Japan.
The yield, which moves in the opposite direction from the price, rose to 6.45% from 6.40% on Friday.
Investors seem to be turning to Colombia's debt as an alternative to similarly rated U.S. corporate bonds because it offers a much higher yield.
The paper is rated Ba1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and triple-B-minus by Standard & Poor's Corp.
"You're getting 50% more yield spread than similarly rated U.S. corporate bonds," said Ray Goodner, a portfolio manager at IDS Financial Services Inc.
For example, Black & Decker Corp.'s 7.5% bonds maturing in 2003, which are rated Ba-1 by Moody's and triple-B-minus by S&P, trade at 1.17 percentage points over Treasurys.
Colombia's debt is likely to be priced at a much narrower yield spread over Treasurys than the global bonds sold by Argentina in December.
That $1 billion bond offering was priced at 99.368 to yield 8.474%, or 2.8 percentage points over Treasurys.
The bonds have since traded up to 101.55 for an 8.14% yield, or 2.2 percentage points over Treasurys.
Because Colombia is considered more stable, the yield spread on its debt isn't expected to narrow as dramatically as did Argentina's debt.
Colombia's debt is being priced at a narrow yield spread, and the deal won't be as liquid as Argentina's jumbo debt offering, one trader noted.
Some narrowing will occur, one trader countered, because of the deal's scarcity value.
Colombia isn't expected to sell additional debt over the next six months.
Besides, investment-grade ratings, such as Colombia's, don't improve as rapidly as junk ratings.
Argentina's bonds are rated single-B-1 by Moody's and double-B-minus by S&P.
"We don't expect the rating for Colombia will move in the near term," said Lacey Gallagher, a director at S&P.
Colombia is considered one of the most stable Latin American countries.
"What separates it from other Latin American countries is the relative stability of its fiscal policies under economic and political pressure," noted Ms. Gallagher at S&P.
In addition, it was the only major Latin American country that did not default on its debt in the 1980s.
"That says something to their willingness to service their debt under pressure.
They get credit for that," she added.
"Here is a country with a clean debt record and an impressive history of economic growth," said Ray Goodner of IDS, who plans to buy the paper if it is sold at the yield spread where it is presently being marketed.
Yesterday Duff & Phelps Credit Rating Co. gave the issue a preliminary investment-grade rating of triple-B.
"Colombia's record as virtually the only Latin American country to meet all of its scheduled debt payments through the 1980s provides evidence of Colombia's commitment to maintain an unblemished payments record," said Duff & Phelps yesterday.
"Colombia has maintained steady economic growth at the highest rate for any Latin American country since 1980," said the rating concern.
Duff & Phelps said that guerrilla and drug-related violence in Colombia "raises some concerns, but these concerns are incorporated into the rating."
Yesterday's corporate new-issue market was sluggish, as only $890 million of debt was priced.
Issuers included Banque Paribas, which sold $300 million of debt out of its New York branch; ANR Pipeline Co., which sold $125 million of debentures; and Nortek Inc., which sold $190 million of junk bonds.
Trading in the secondary market was extremely light as the market shrugged off a plunging U.S. dollar.
Trading in the junk bond market was also light with prices closing unchanged.
Nortek, which makes building products and industrial and electrical products, sold $190 million of 10-year 9.875% senior subordinated notes at 99.214 to yield 10%.
The bonds traded up to par for a 9.875% yield.
Bear, Stearns & Co. was the lead manager for the deal, which was rated Caa by Moody's and triple-C by S&P.
Spooked by a plunge in the dollar against the yen, traders sent prices of longer-term Treasury securities moderately lower.
Securities maturing in five years and less, meanwhile, finished little changed.
The dollar touched a nearly six-month low against the yen yesterday.
Traders worried that in response to the dollar's steep decline, Japanese investors would unload Treasury securities.
But there was little evidence that took place, with most of the decline coming at the hands of speculators.
For most of the session, trading was listless, with dealers finding little reason to push the market significantly in either direction.
But at midafternoon, traders turned their attention to the developments in the foreign-exchange market.
In response to concerns that Japanese investors might begin unloading long-term securities, traders began selling Treasurys.
For Japanese bond holders, a weakening dollar and a strengthening yen would erode the value of their dollar-denominated holdings.
Despite the widespread talk, there didn't appear to be significant selling by Japanese investors.
"They really haven't been doing anything," said Tim Heaton, a bond trader at Nikko Securities Co.
The Treasury's 10-year note ended 1/8 point lower at 99 25/32 to yield 5.89%, up from 5.87% on Friday.
Separately, the Treasury sold 13-week and 26-week bills at its weekly auction.
Here are the results of the sale:
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon-equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year.
Both issues are dated Feb. 17.
The 13-week bills mature May 19, 1994, and the 26-week bills mature Aug. 18, 1994.
Investors were gearing up for what will probably be today's most closely watched deal, a $3.2 billion offering of revenue-anticipation warrants from the state of California.
The revenue-anticipation warrants are short-term securities that can mature in the following fiscal year, said a spokeswoman for California Treasurer Kathleen Brown.
They are to be repaid out of anticipated revenues, such as sales taxes.
Today's sale will be the largest ever of RAWs in California.
Included in the offering are $1.2 billion of Series A RAWs, which mature on Dec. 21, 1994, and $2 billion of Series B warrants, which mature on July 26, 1994.
Moody's Investors Service Inc. has rated the 1994 warrants MIG-1, Standard & Poor's Corp. has rated the securities SP-1, and Fitch Investors Service Inc. has as signed an F1-Plus rating.
Although California's 1994 revenue-anticipation warrants have received some of the highest short-term ratings given by the major rating agencies, concerns about the state's economic condition linger.
Still struggling after the recession, California has been hurt by a string of disasters including last month's earthquake in Los Angeles, fires and mudslides.
Last week, S&P revised its long-term rating outlook on California to negative from stable, saying, "Significant economic and fiscal pressures continue to hamper the state's efforts to maintain financial stability."
Proceeds from the Series A RAWs will be used to help erase California's budget deficit.
The shortfall stood at $2.8 billion last June, when the state's 18-month deficit-elimination plan was approved.
California has already wiped out $1.6 billion of the deficit, and the Series A warrants are expected to cover the remaining $1.2 billion, said Assistant State Treasurer Hal Geiogue.
Proceeds from the Series B warrants will be used for the management of California's cash flow during the rest of the state's 1994 fiscal year and the start of fiscal 1995.
California's fiscal year runs from July 1 to June 30.
"We're optimistic that the yields will be below 3%" for both series of RAWs, said Mr. Geiogue.
Meanwhile, many municipal bonds dropped 1/8 point to 1/4 point yesterday as the dollar tumbled against the yen in the foreign-exchange markets, pushing Treasury prices lower.
Prices of mortgage securities ended about even after a slow session.
Among the 6.5% securities for March delivery, Government National Mortgage Association issues finished 1/32 lower at 98 26/32.
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold issues and Federal National Mortgage Association issues ended 3/32 lower at 98 31/32 and 98 25/32, respectively.
Investors outside the dealer community weren't active at all yesterday, traders said.
The primary market, as expected, was quiet.
As spreads to Treasurys haven't widened significantly, if at all, in the past few sessions, underwriters aren't able to justify creating new real estate mortgage investment conduits because buying expensive mortgage collateral means less of a profit on the Remic.
Thomas D. Lauricella contributed to this article.
