After bragging about the strict quality controls it has imposed on its new Neon small car, Chrysler Corp. finds itself in the embarrassing position of recalling for repairs all of the 15,000 cars it has built so far.
This is the second recall in the car's short history.
The problem involves water leaks that affect the car's computer brain.
The result is that some Neons won't start -- a problem that Chrysler previously had identified as the No. 1 worry of potential buyers.
To correct the latest problem, Chrysler is replacing each computer unit -- a small circuit board and a chip packed in a zinc die-cast box called the engine control module -- in all the cars built so far.
It also is shutting down its Belvidere, Ill., plant for a week as it waits for Acustar, its own supply division, to produce engine controllers that won't leak.
The recall bill for parts alone could be $1.5 million; including labor, the cost easily could double.
As expensive and potentially damaging to the cars' reputation as that could be, Chrysler is looking for a silver lining in the situation.
Only 1,300 of the cars have actually been sold to retail customers, and now Chrysler is trying to use the recall to show customers that it will bend over backward to treat them well.
Chrysler has asked its dealers to pick the cars up, provide a replacement car, clean the Neons and fill them up with gasoline.
"Yes, we have a glitch," said Bob Marcell, the head of Chrysler's Neon production effort, "but everybody has glitches, and how quickly and how positively you react to the glitches is what is important."
Some analysts agreed.
"The most important thing at the end of the day is that the customer is never inconvenienced," said Joseph Phillippi, an analyst with Lehman Brothers.
"They're trying to pull a Saturn," Mr. Phillippi said, referring to the sterling reputation that General Motors Corp.'s Saturn unit has developed through its solicitous, straightforward handling of recalls.
The earlier recall of the Neon, which went on sale in early January, involved a flawed brake cylinder that had to be replaced on some models.
This week's plant shutdown is sure to further annoy Chrysler dealers who have been complaining that they can't get enough Neons.
