Western Digital Corp. expects earnings for the third quarter ending March 31 to exceed 55 cents a share, far above analysts' estimates, its chairman, chief executive officer and president, Chuck Haggerty, said.
Analysts had been forecasting earnings of between 28 and 42 cents a share for the maker of disk drives, computer storage devices.
Mr. Haggerty said in an interview that revenue for the latest quarter will be "north of $425 million," more than 30% above last year's $325.4 million in third-quarter revenue and well above analysts' revenue estimates for the period, which ranged from $353 million to $415 million.
In the year-ago quarter, Western Digital had a net income of $1.6 million, or five cents a share.
Western Digital is one of the five major makers of disk drives, an industry dominated by U.S. companies.
Like others in the business, it was hurt in 1993 by ferocious price wars.
However, those price wars have abated, and Mr. Haggerty said Western Digital is better positioned than rivals to capitalize on stable prices and current trends in the PC business.
Mr. Haggerty said PC sales remain robust, spurring demand for disk drives.
Moreover, Mr. Haggerty said the introduction of Intel Corp.'s new Pentium microprocessor and the pending introduction of PowerPC, a high-powered chip developed by Apple Computer Inc., Motorola Inc. and International Business Machines Corp., are driving much of Western Digital's improved performance.
Those chips and succeeding generations are more powerful than past top-end chips; machines that incorporate them will have significantly more storage capacity.
That in turn is pushing up demand for high-end, high-capacity disk drives, where Western Digital has an edge, Mr. Haggerty said.
He said the company expects to ship at least 1.8 million units in the March quarter, 50% above unit shipments of 1.2 million in the year-earlier quarter.
Mr. Haggerty said analysts' current estimates for the fiscal fourth quarter, which range from between 32 cents a share and 51 cents a share, may be too low.
