Improvements in nonresidential building, public works and utilities contributed to a 4% rise in construction contracts last month, offsetting declines in the housing sector, an F.W. Dodge survey reported.
Marking its first increase since October, the Dodge index of construction contracts grew to 107 in February from January's seasonally adjusted 103.
The index measures the seasonally adjusted rate of total construction using a 1987 average monthly rate as a base of 100.
The February total was $18.94 billion.
For the first two months of 1994, new-construction contracts rose 5% to $36.12 billion on an unadjusted basis from the year-earlier period.
"February's rebound was a reassuring sign that upward potential still exists for this construction recovery," said Robert A. Murray, vice president of economic affairs and chief economist for F.W. Dodge, the forecasting unit of McGraw-Hill Inc.
"Meeting that potential in 1994, the third year of recovery will require a greater contribution from categories besides housing -- just the pattern witnessed in February."
Nonbuilding construction in February jumped 30%, led by substantial gains in public works and utilities.
Public-works construction such as highways and bridges rebounded from January's weak levels, surging 17%.
Highway and bridge construction matched levels previously seen the year before as it benefited from increased funding through transportation legislation.
Utility building was boosted by the construction of several large power plants, including a $275 million project in Virginia and a $250 million project in California.
Nonresidential building was up 5%, thanks to a pickup in institutional building such as health-care facilities and schools, which gained momentum from January's levels.
Public administration and detention facilities, which posted their best results in more than a year, also aided the sector, the report added.
"The institutional sector lost momentum in 1992 and 1993, so its re-emergence as a source of expansion is a welcome event, particularly since it now comprises a much larger share of the nonresidential total than in the previous decade," Mr. Murray said.
Residential building continued to slide last month, falling 6% as single-family housing slipped for the second consecutive month.
"Even with the slow start to 1994, the near-term prospects for single-family housing remain good as more home buyers are spurred to action before further mortgage rate increase take place," Mr. Murray said.
Multifamily housing fell back from January's upturn, an indication that its performance will be sporadic in the future, the report added.
Regionally, the West led the country with a 23% increase in total construction for the first two months of the year, followed by a 15% improvement in the Midwest.
The South Central area showed a 6% improvement while the South Atlantic region gained 4%.
The Northeast, hit by a harsh winter, declined 29%.
AIRLINES GRAPPLE with conflicting tastes -- and dietery requirements -- of passengers.
UAL's United Airlines has nearly a dozen special meals, including low fat, low sodium, low cholesterol, high fiber and vegetarian.
There are also kosher, Muslim and Hindu meals.
The favorite is McDonald's Friendly Skies meal, consisting of a cheeseburger, apple sauce and cookies.
"Over half a million served," says a United spokesman.
Delta Air Lines's effort last year to shed its Deep South cuisine and go for lighter meals was met with a decidedly mixed reaction.
"We heard loud and clear from about half of our customers, `What happened to my steak and my stuffed chicken breast?'" says Denise Poole, Delta's system manager for food and beverage.
"Then we heard from the other 50%, `Thank God.
What took you so long?'"
The new offerings included salmon on lentils and Asian scallops on cous cous.
In response to comments, Delta retooled its menu again, ditching the lentils, cooking up a new cous cous and changing a rice salad to a pasta salad.
Northwest Airlines just began serving a la carte meals on domestic dinner flights, letting passengers select food from a cart rolled down the aisle.
The newest trend: food height.
On the theory that flat servings look too much like frozen dinners or, well, airline food, menu planners are shifting toward something more three-dimensional.
A United spokesman says, "Instead of putting the broccoli spears sideways, if there's a way to have them stick up, we do that."
AIRPORT PRICES ARE coming down out of the stratosphere.
The success of everyday, or "street," pricing at retail and food concessions at Pittsburgh and San Francisco airports is pressuring other facilities to follow suit.
Pat Boyle, deputy director of Allegheny County, Pa., Department of Aviation, says that at a recent marketing seminar for airport operators, an executive from a hub airport complained, "you're forcing everybody else to do what you're doing."
Atlanta's Hartsfield International Airport, where a five-stick package of Wrigley's spearmint gum costs 91 cents, nearly twice its street price, just published bid specifications for its new international terminal that calls for lower prices.
The Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority, operator of Dulles and National airports, is looking to do the same.
The change is the result of consumers' push for greater value and the increasing prevalence of savvy travelers.
While airports are seeking out brand-name food and beverage concessions to boost revenue, travelers know what a Big Mac costs at home -- and won't pay extra just because they're on the road.
"Airports today realize that they're in a more competitive environment than 10 years ago," says Victoria Pannell, a spokeswoman for Airports Council International-North America, an industry group for airport operators.
Baltimore/Washington International Airport compares prices at its Pizza Hut and Roy Rogers franchises to those at nearby malls.
Chicago's O'Hare Airport has put lower prices in effect at its international terminal.
The model is still Pittsburgh, where Allegheny County Controller Frank Lucchino audits the airport annually to ensure the low prices are enforced.
Last year's audit found 55 of 170 items that cost more than they should, including a yogurt float for $2.99 instead of $1.69 and a Kodak FunSaver Camera for $10.99 that should have been priced at $8.89.
(To be fair, 82 items were selling at street prices and 33 were below.)
"There's no reason why an airport has to gouge you," says Mr. Boyle.
"Why pay three times as much for a cup of coffee?"
So many Pittsburgh residents drive to the airport to shop that airport authorities have a hard time keeping passenger counts.
THE GLUTTED HOTEL market discovers a new growth opportunity: golf.
Three of the nation's largest hotel chains are beefing up their offerings for duffers, as Hyatt Hotels and Resorts hires its first chain-wide director of golf operations, and Hilton Hotels spins its resorts into a single operating unit and begins a marketing program for golfers.
A study on Golf and the Business Executive, commissioned by Hyatt Hotels last year, found that playing golf frequently leads to business contacts and that a golf game is a good judge of corporate character.
The study's other findings: More than half of those surveyed admit to having thrown or broken a club after a bad shot, 55% say they've called in sick to go play golf and 12% believe golf is more important than sex.
"It's one of the few market segments to grow and grow and grow over the last several years," says a Hilton spokeswoman.
Marriott Golf, a unit of Marriott International, claims 18 straight years of profitability, with a 20% return on investment, a record hotels are hard-pressed to match.
"Golf is much more than a leisure exercise in the '90s . . . it's truly a business activity," says John Easterbrook, Hyatt's new golf operations director, himself a PGA-rated pro with a zero handicap.
"There are 30 million golfers in the U.S., and there will be 20 million more by 2000."
Hyatt has 14 facilities with golf courses and is pushing to develop "a total golf product."
It has installed a special toll-free reservation line for golfers, whose operators are trained in golfing lingo.
BOTH CONTINENTAL Airlines and USAir Group Inc. in April say they'll start strictly enforcing the two-bag carry-on limit, the better to accommodate quick turnarounds for their new East Coast short-haul services. . . .
The Sunset Marquis Hotel & Villas in West Hollywood installs what may be the ultimate guest amenity, a recording studio.
