Inspector Morse of the Oxford police returns to "Mystery!" in this two-parter about an apparent suicide that soon comes to look more and more like murder.
That's not all, for this is the season in which passion blooms -- however briefly -- in the lives of various ascetic police-inspectors peopling the public-TV screen.
First it was Inspector Dalgliesh, and now it is Inspector Morse who has found love.
Called to the scene of the alleged suicide, Morse commences to fall all over again for a woman he was once engaged to marry -- and who turns out to be the victim's wife.
All of this works itself into a fine dramatic brew, thanks to a sharp script by Daniel Boyle -- to say nothing of the riches of John Thaw's performance as the chief inspector whose mind has become addled by romance.
-- 9-10 p.m. EST, on PBS.
PBS air dates and times vary so check local listings.
Court TV's "Trial Story" series reports on a sex-discrimination suit filed against Goldman Sachs & Co. by Joanne Flynn, a vice president in charge of sales training.
Ms. Flynn contended she was refused a promotion and dismissed because she was a woman, while Goldman Sachs maintained that the plaintiff's problem was her inability to get on with others -- in particular, the woman boss who fired her.
A fascinating case, neatly packaged by Court TV, and one whose outcome is the best part of the story.
-- 9-10 p.m. EST, on Court TV.
"Nova" presents a three-part mini-series on our earliest ancestors, beginning with the discovery of the Lucy fossils in 1974.
Lucy's discoverer, paleoanthropologist Donald C. Johanson, is the host of this splendid series -- if one not without flaws, repetition prime among them.
It's hard to keep track of the number of times Mr. Johanson rhetorically asks, "So how did we get from our primitive ancestors to modern life?" -- following which, we are informed that the answer is not so easy.
The somewhat flaccid focus aside, these are three riveting hours, no doubt about it -- not least the last, on the life and times of the lively Neanderthals.
-- 8-9 p.m. EST, on PBS.
Parts two and three air following nights, same time.
The subject of this tale of endurance is Dennis Byrd, the New York Jets defensive end who suffered a neck-shattering injury that paralyzed him.
It isn't easy to say exactly why this made-for-TV film seems superior to so many similar sagas of grit and triumph that hit the screen.
It is nonetheless a fact that this immensely watchable film somehow manages -- despite a hopelessly predictable story line -- to sustain its drama to the end.
This is in no small part due to an enterprising script -- one enterprising enough, anyway, to have paid some attention to the delivery of social detail on the hero's background -- and to Peter Berg, who portrays Mr. Byrd with style.
-- 8-10 p.m. EST, on Fox.
This four-part series on trains and the coming of rail travel, an A&E-BBC production, encompasses something like a short history of the modern world.
The first hour deals with the railway industry in its post-Civil War boom period, when speculators sold railway stock on Wall Street -- literally on the street, that is.
The third and perhaps most fascinating hour chronicles the ways in which the railways transformed the transportation of armies and the conduct of wars generally.
Compelling stuff.
-- 8-10 p.m. EST, on A&E.
The series continues Monday and Tuesday, same time.
Meredith Baxter has the role of a pioneer woman in this film based on the story of Margaret Reed, who set out, in 1846, along with her husband and children -- and, for a time, the ill-fated Donner party -- as members of a wagon train following the emigrant trail to California.
As Ms. Baxter portrays her -- intrepidly enough -- Margaret Reed is a well-to-do woman accustomed to the finer things of life who learns, on the trail, to boil animal skins for food and to ignore her chronic headaches.
Her husband is banished by the others for having killed a fellow pioneer, leaving Margaret and her children to travel without him with what is left of the train, enduring snow, cold and starvation, as the winter storms close the mountain passes.
Such history and drama notwithstanding, the script throbs with a dull simplicity -- a fact that may account for the pervasive flatness of this film, shot on location in Calgary.
-- 9-11 p.m. EST, on ABC.
