New Internal Revenue Service rules show that while it may be very tough to convince the IRS to let you deduct the costs of your office at home, it may not be quite as hopeless as you fear.
But it can be devilishly complicated.
An advance copy of the ruling "confirms that if the most important part of your business is meeting and greeting clients or customers face-to-face and delivering personal services (outside the home), the likelihood you will be able to get a home-office deduction is slight to nil," says Stephen R. Corrick, tax partner at Arthur Andersen in Washington.
"But if you're in retail or manufacturing or creative businesses, then at least you have a chance," Mr. Corrick adds.
The new IRS rules are designed to interpret a controversial Supreme Court decision handed down more than a year ago.
That decision made it much tougher for many people to qualify for the homeoffice deduction.
The court's 1993 decision mainly affected salespeople, consultants, teachers and others who do some work at home but also provide services or see customers elsewhere.
Other examples: freelance writers, lawyers, home decorators, caterers, computer repairers, house painters, personal trainers -- and even some doctors.
The court rejected an anesthesiologist's attempt to deduct the costs of using the spare bedroom of his home as an office to keep records and to telephone patients and colleagues.
Even though he argued his home office was his only office, the court decided his "principal" place of business was at the hospitals.
The court cited two main factors: the relative importance of work done at each location, and the amount of time spent at each place.
That decision raised many questions.
In reply, the IRS now says taxpayers "must first compare the relative importance of the work done at each business location, considering the particular characteristics of the business."
It also says "great weight" must be given to such factors as where you deliver goods or services to customers and any "special facilities" required by the job.
If all this doesn't turn up a principal place of business, then compare the amount of time spent at each business location.
In its eight-page ruling, the IRS provides four new hypothetical examples.
Here are the two cases from revenue ruling 94-24 in which the IRS officially blesses a home-office deduction:
-- A self-employed author spends 30 to 35 hours each week writing in his home office.
He spends another 10 to 15 hours at other locations doing research, meeting with publishers and attending promotional events.
The IRS says "the essence" of his work is writing.
Research and other activities, though essential, are "less important and take less time" than his writing.
Thus, the home office really is his "principal" place of business, and he may deduct costs of business use of his home.
The IRS example doesn't specifically address what happens with authors who spend far more time on research away from home than on writing at home.
But Mr. Corrick of Arthur Andersen and Sidney Kess, a New York lawyer and accountant, agree the deduction generally should be allowable.
An IRS spokesman concurs, noting that the ruling considers the essence of the author's work to be writing.
-- A self-employed retailer of costume jewelry orders the jewelry from wholesalers and sells it at craft shows, on consignment and through mail orders.
She spends about 25 hours a week at home filling and shipping orders, ordering supplies and keeping the business's books.
She also spends about 15 hours of work time each week at craft shows and consignment-sale locations.
She gets a "substantial" amount of income from each type of sales activity.
This is a tricky one.
Because the retailer's most important activities (selling to customers) are done in more than one place, her principal place of business can't be determined solely on the relative importance of the work done at home compared with other places.
Thus, the IRS concludes the amounts of time spent at various places "assumes particular significance" and allows the deduction.
Remember, though, that taking a home-office deduction "is a red flag that has often led to an audit" by the IRS, warns Donald Alexander, a former IRS commissioner and a lawyer at Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld in Washington D.C.
-- A teacher is required to teach and meet with students at school, as well as grade papers and tests.
He has an office at home as well as a small shared office at school.
The teacher spends about 25 hours a week at school and an additional 30 to 35 hours working at home.
The IRS says the "essence" of the job is teaching and meeting with students at school.
The other work, "although essential and more timeconsuming," is "less important" than the work at school.
Thus, the home office doesn't count as the "principal" place of business.
-- A self-employed plumber installs and repairs plumbing in customers' homes and offices.
He spends about 40 hours a week there and about 10 hours at his home office talking to customers on the phone, deciding what supplies to order and reviewing the business's books.
He also employs a full-time unrelated worker in his home office to do such jobs as answer the phone, schedule appointments, order supplies and bookkeeping.
Sorry, the IRS says, the essence of the plumber's work is performing services and delivering goods at the homes or offices of his customers.
The other activities are less important and take less time than service calls to customers.
Thus, no home-office deduction.
These complexities don't apply to many other people, such as those fortunate enough to have their home office in a separate structure not attached to their home, such as a garage, notes Mr. Corrick of Arthur Andersen.
For many people, though, the subject now is so complicated and controversial that it may spur more efforts in Congress to rewrite the law completely.
Several lawmakers have proposed legislation to overturn the Supreme Court ruling.
The ruling is to be published in Internal Revenue Bulletin 1993-15, dated April 11.
