SMALL OHIO FIRMS put an environmental crusader on the defensive.
Last August, state Attorney General Lee Fisher unveiled an "environmental crimes" bill that would have toughened penalties for polluters.
But furious opposition from small businesses and farmers forced Mr. Fisher and his legislative allies to water down their proposal.
The weakened version, expected to be introduced early next week, would sharply narrow the basis for prosecution and give companies an "audit privilege" that rewards them for good-faith reviews of their environmental practices.
Critics aren't mollified.
They claim that even the revised measure would turn minor environmental infractions into felonies.
"It basically criminalizes every environmental offense, from littering to improper waste disposal," says Roger Geiger, state director for the National Federation of Independent Business.
He says a coalition of mostly small-business associations will continue to lobby against the revised initiative.
Fred Circle, owner of Blackhorse Services Co. in Springfield, frets that the latest bill would increase the paperwork at his small company, which sprays herbicides along roads and under power lines.
He says each of his crew leaders currently spends an average of one and one-half hours a day filling out government regulatory forms.
"There are already adequate laws and adequate enforcement" of polluters, Mr. Circle says.
Not so, the bill's backers contend.
The proposal "is aimed at the 'midnight dumpers' who dump arsenic into a water supply" or commit other environmental atrocities -- rather than at business owners who make honest mistakes, asserts Kate O'Malley, Mr. Fisher's chief of staff.
She says the attorney general has consulted with business interests in rewriting the bill.
Jerry Tinianow, a Columbus lawyer active in Ohio's environmental movement, says that "honest businessmen have nothing to fear" from Mr. Fisher's revamped bill.
He says opponents have "decided to make this a campaign issue" to unseat Mr. Fisher next fall and replace him with Republican Sen. Betty Montgomery of Perrysburg.
Sen. Montgomery says, "I'm as opposed to this as I've ever been opposed to any legislation."
ATLANTA'S LIMOUSINE FEES were a stretch, the legislature decides.
Suburban limousine-service companies were outraged by a December city ordinance imposing annual fees of more than $600 on each of their vehicles operating in Atlanta.
That compared with a $30 a car renewal fee for Atlanta concerns.
Several nearby towns and counties threatened to retaliate by imposing similar levies on Atlanta limousines.
But the suburban limousine owners found their solution in the state legislature.
Under a law passed overwhelmingly this month, the state Public Service Commission will take over regulation of the limousine industry from localities, starting May 1.
"We encircled Atlanta," boasts Jon Harrer, owner of the VIP Limousine Service in Roswell, Ga. and president of the Georgia Limousine Association.
Atlanta officials defend their ordinance as a way to force outside firms to pay their fair share for access to one of the nation's richest tourist markets.
The city contends the fees also permit monitoring of an industry rife with abuses such as price gouging and the use of vehicles for questionable purposes.
But Ney Lawson, director of the Atlanta Bureau of Taxicabs and Vehicles for Hire, concedes, "The legislature has spoken."
Atlanta is the latest battleground in a war between cities and their suburbs for more revenue, says Wayne Smith, executive director of the National Limousine Association in Washington, D.C. Revenue-hungry big cities find it easy "to tax ground transportation where the people involved -- the drivers and their riders -- don't vote," he says.
Other states, including Illinois and Washington, also have recently taken over the regulation of limousines to settle similar disputes, Mr. Smith says.
But he believes more skirmishes are inevitable in the fast-growing industry.
The number of full-time limousine companies tripled to 1,800 in 1992 from 600 a decade earlier, he says.
ACT NOW to convince Uncle Sam you're serious about your baseball cards.
If you kept the right records, you have until April 15 to prove that your hobby has become a part-time business -- and therefore eligible for important tax advantages.
If you didn't keep the right records before, it isn't too late to start behaving like an entrepreneur this year.
But the Internal Revenue Service often questions whether a hobby really is a business and has set strict standards to test such claims, tax specialists say.
"The question is whether an activity is being conducted with the intent of making a profit," says Jacob Weichholz, a tax partner at accounting firm Ernst & Young.
An enterprise almost always passes that test if it has been profitable in three of the past five years, Mr. Weichholz says.
So, it makes sense to hold down your pastime's expenses and sell inventory toward year end if such moves will turn a losing year into the black, he says.
An activity that doesn't meet the profitability test still can be considered a business if it meets certain criteria.
For one thing, it should "conduct itself as a business," especially by keeping "appropriate books and records," Mr. Weichholz says.
He says the IRS also considers a range of other factors, including "the element of personal pleasure of recreation."
In other words, you shouldn't appear to enjoy the activity too much.
Some popular hobbies whose practitioners have attempted to reclassify as businesses include collecting (everything from antiques to farm tractors), car racing, sewing and embroidery, boating, farming and greyhound racing, says Mark Battersby, publisher of Hobby/Business World, a newsletter in Ardmore, Pa.
But forget about luxury yachts, Mr. Battersby advises.
"You can't buy a $100,000 boat and hope to make some money chartering it," he says.
"The IRS got wise to that long ago."
SMALL TALK: Regulations still rank No. 1 on the entrepreneurial hate parade.
Of 100 medium-sized companies surveyed by consultants Arthur Andersen last month, 52% cited government regulations as their "biggest challenge." . . .
A new federal regulation was too much for David Fusco of Schenectady, N.Y. Police in Guilderland, N.Y., outside Albany say they arrested Mr. Fusco Wednesday after he rammed a town hall building with a back hoe.
The attack culminated a dispute with the town supervisor over her demand that he widen sidewalks at a local business development to comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act.
