The interest-rate bogeyman finally struck last week and knocked the stock market for a loop.
Don't worry, many analysts say.
Despite Friday's big sell-off, few analysts think the Federal Reserve's move to raise short-term interest rates will derail the bull market.
Stock prices plunged Friday on news the Federal Reserve boosted the federal-funds rate, the overnight rate banks charge each other, to 3.25% from 3%.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average tumbled 96.24 points, or 2.4%, to 3871.42.
David Shulman, chief equity strategist at Salomon Brothers, notes that investors haven't experienced a rate increase since 1989.
"The market has assumed for five years that the Fed would provide the liquidity to push stocks higher," Mr. Shulman says.
"This is a sea change.
It's the end of the market relying on the Fed to provide that liquidity."
But other analysts contend that stocks will bounce back after investors realize the interest-rate increase will do little to harm the economy.
"There's always a knee-jerk overreaction," says Peter Canelo, chief investment strategist at NatWest Securities.
"The rate hike will probably help the economy because people will speed up interest-rate-dependent purchases such as large consumer durables and houses."
Lehman Brothers' Elaine Garzarelli, one of Wall Street's most-bullish forecasters, says the sell-off didn't faze her.
"Everybody should be buying right now; it's just a gift," she says of Friday's plunge.
She says the market was due for a pullback, and that the worst she anticipates from here is a 6% decline to 3650, a typical, temporary reaction to a Federal Reserve rate increase.
"This is very normal.
The market is doing exactly what it should," Ms. Garzarelli says.
"The Fed is just doing this to make the bond market happy, and the bond market doesn't know it yet."
Mickey D. Levy, chief financial economist at NationsBank, applauds the Fed for eliminating the uncertainty and speculation about a rate increase that swept through the market last week.
"I find this quite positive for stocks because the Fed action is a clear sign it means business about keeping inflation low, and low inflation paves the way for sustained economic growth," he says.
Mr. Levy adds that the sharp stock market reaction Friday came because many investors think the Fed's move is the beginning of a series of rate increases, a notion that he rejects.
Even if this is the start of a classic pattern of rate increases, the stock market should be able to weather a modest rise in short rates, some analysts say.
Easton Ragsdale, chief quantitative analyst at Kidder Peabody studied the 13 periods of Fed tightening since World War II and determined that in the 12 months after the federal-funds rate begins to rise the stock market still turns in healthy gains.
He found that the total return for the Standard & Poor's 500 during the period was 11.6%.
Admittedly, stocks performed better in the 12 months prior to a Fed tightening, with the S&P returning 18.7%.
But the historical average gain of 11.6% argues for continued high exposure to stocks even after rates start rising, Mr. Ragsdale says.
He adds that the usual relative outperformance of stocks to bonds remains consistent during the period of rising rates.
Some analysts contend the stock market will continue to push higher as long as increases in the federal-funds rate are small and gradual, with the rises being no more than a quarter of a point at a time.
But federal funds are one thing.
A rising discount rate -- the rate the Fed charges member banks for short-term loans -- is another matter.
When it begins to rise, Mr. Ragsdale says, stocks tend to run into trouble.
His study shows that prices turn marginally lower in the months immediately following a discount-rate increase and manage only a small gain of 1.5% after 12 months.
Still, a discount-rate increase isn't likely anytime soon, some analysts say.
It usually comes a considerable time after the Fed's initial tightening, providing stock market investors a chance to rack up further gains before it happens.
For example, Mr. Ragsdale says, the Fed began a tightening in December 1986 but didn't raise the discount rate until September 1987.
Not everyone thinks the stock market can shrug off rising rates.
The Chicago Mercantile Exchange last week raised margin requirements on stock index futures in an effort to head off a possible stock market tumble as a result of rising rates.
Salomon Brothers' Mr. Shulman adds that investors should watch closely what effect the rate rise has on money flowing into mutual funds.
If individual investors trim back on mutual-fund investments, "then we're going to have that longawaited correction," he says.
Robert J. Barbera, an economist at Lehman Brothers, contends that because the economic recovery is self-sustaining now, artificially low interest rates are no longer necessary.
He predicts the federal-funds rate will be at 4% by the end of the year, with adverse implications for the stock market.
He expects that sometime between now and year end stock prices will experience a 10% to 15% decline.
"I don't think anyone would argue that a fed-funds rate of 4% wouldn't cause a correction," he says.
Moreover, Mr. Barbera contends that the longevity of the stock market's advance makes it ripe for a downturn.
He studied the stock market's performance as the economy worked through the five recessions since World War II and found that the average length of the market's advance was 12 months and the average gain was 47%.
The current stock market rally has lasted 41 months and pushed prices up 60%.
"It's tough to say that with rising short rates we'd still have a rising market, because in this circumstance we've had an extended climb," Mr. Barbera says.
"I'm looking for the rise in rates to be the cap on the market's advance."
The Dow Jones Industrial Average plummeted 96.24 points, or 2.4%, to 3871.42.
It was the Dow's largest one-day point decline since Nov. 15, 1991, when it plunged 120 points.
Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index fell 10.90, or 2.3%, to 469.81, and the New York Stock Exchange Composite Index sank 5.97, or 2.2%, to 261.21.
The Nasdaq Composite Index slid 20.51, or 2.6%, to 777.28.
The American Stock Exchange Market Value Index lost 8.89, or 1.8%, to 478.29.
Volume on the Big Board climbed to 377,770,000 shares from 318,000,000 Thursday.
Declining issues swamped advancers 2,037 to 316.
For the week, the Dow lost 74 points, or 1.9%, the S&P 500 dropped nearly nine points, or 1.9%, and the Nasdaq Composite fell more than 19 points, or 2.4%.
World-wide, stock prices fell Friday in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index lost 1.63 to 116.64.
Economically sensitive stocks and financial issues were the hardest hit.
Profit-taking clobbered the cyclicals, which have led the market's advance during the past several months.
Among the most actively traded issues on the Big Board were cyclical giants such as General Motors, which dropped 1 3/8 to 61 5/8; Ford, which lost 1 3/8 to 68; and Disney, which declined 1 7/8 to 45.
Citicorp plunged 2 1/4 to 40 1/4, Merrill Lynch skidded 2 7/8 to 41 3/8 and Chase shed 1 1/2 to 33 3/4 -each on volume of nearly two million shares or more.
Among the biggest decliners was Information Resources, which plunged 8 7/8, or 24%, to 28 3/4 on Nasdaq volume of 4.7 million shares.
The Chicago retailing market research company estimated its fourth-quarter earnings will reach only 15 cents to 17 cents a share, far below expectations.
Analysts had forecast earnings of 32 cents to 34 cents in the period.
American depositary receipts of Telefonos de Mexico declined 2 1/4 to 73 on heavy Big Board volume of 6.3 million.
The Mexican telephone services provider said its 1993 net income rose just 4.5%, somewhat below analysts' expectations.
The plunge in the Dow industrials was the eighth-greatest one-day move on record on a point basis, just below April 15, 1988, when the Dow lost 101.46.
But on a percentage basis, the slide was barely notable, not even making the top 100.
The Dow's decline activated the New York Stock Exchange's "collar," which slows computer-aided program trading whenever the industrial average moves up or down 50 points from the previous day's close.
It was the first time the collar was activated this year.
William Power contributed to this article.
