In a move that may send a mixed signal to China, the Clinton administration is reconsidering sanctions imposed last year that prevent Beijing from launching a U.S.-made satellite.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said that as a result of certain technical changes made by Hughes Aircraft Co., the U.S. may allow the company to sell a communications satellite to an Australian-owned company.
China would then launch the satellite.
Mr. Christopher, who arrived in Australia on the first leg of a trip that will bring him to China Friday, said the issue was now under review by an interagency group.
The decision to reconsider the satellite ban comes as Mr. Christopher is prepared to warn Beijing that unless it improves its human rights behavior, it risks jeopardizing its commercial ties with the U.S.
But the lucrative satellite sale illustrates the trade-off between the moral commitment of the U.S. to human rights and the economic opportunities in China, one of the world's fastest-growing economies.
Mr. Clinton must decide by June 3 whether there has been sufficient overall progress in Beijing's human-rights behavior to renew China's trading status with the U.S.
China threatens to retaliate if the U.S. revokes Most Favored Nation trading status, which allows China to pay the same duties on shipments to the U.S. as most other U.S. trading partners.
In defiance of an anticipated human-rights lecture from Mr. Christopher, Beijing in recent days has arrested or briefly detained several prominent pro-democracy dissidents.
The incidents provoked sharp criticism from President Clinton, and the secretary of state said it "redoubles my determination to make sure that they understand the seriousness of our concern about that."
But the U.S. is separating those efforts from the satellite sale.
Mr. Christopher said the administration would move "briskly and promptly to consider" the sale, adding that, "It will be handled that way, according to our law.
And I would hope, but without predicting, that there can be a positive outcome."
Winston Lord, the State Department's assistant secretary for Asian and Pacific Affairs, insisted that the review of the satellite sale has "got absolutely no policy significance."
Mr. Christopher said the satellite transaction is being reconsidered because Hughes said it would remove certain sensitive encryption technology.
U.S. officials said that, based on the changes, Hughes applied for a new export license last week.
The administration imposed sanctions on China last August after accusing Beijing of violating international nonproliferation guidelines by shipping M-11 missile components to Pakistan.
China denies it violated the guidelines.
U.S. officials estimated that the sanctions would bar up to $1 billion in U.S. exports to China over two years.
The ban hurts U.S. satellite sales because many customers prefer to have the satellites launched by China, which charges far lower rates than European competitors.
After the ban was imposed, Hughes Aircraft, a unit of General Motors Corp., intensely began lobbying the administration, claiming that the ban would cost thousands of American jobs.
The sanctions originally covered seven U.S.-made satellites, but were lifted for two of them in January, when the administration decided that neither contained certain sensitive technology.
