Canon Inc. has agreed to become International Business Machines Corp.'s first partner to develop a line of PowerPC products, which could extend beyond desktop computers and into "subnotebook" computers, personal digital assistants and office products.
The relationship, announced yesterday by IBM, provides the Armonk, N.Y., computer giant with a major Far East endorsement of the new PowerPC chip at a time when other Japanese companies have embraced chips made by IBM's competitors.
Canon also becomes the third large product manufacturer, after IBM and PowerPC partner Apple Computer Inc., to commit to using PowerPC in "end-user" products.
PowerPC is the jointly developed chip design of IBM, Apple and Motorola Inc. that seeks to challenge the dominance of Intel Corp.
IBM's separate pact with Canon, however, is an indication that Big Blue is looking beyond traditional partners for new ties that could expand the possible uses of its PowerPC offerings.
"It's an indication of where IBM is planning to go with the PowerPC," said William Bluestein of Forrester Research Inc., Cambridge, Mass.
For Canon, best-known in the U.S. for its copiers and cameras, the PowerPC could help it gain entry into a new niche of the PC market, where so far it hasn't had much of a presence.
Richard Guarino, general manager for IBM's Power Personal Systems division, said IBM is actively seeking other Far East partners.
Even though companies such as Japan's Sega Enterprises Ltd., Nintendo Co., and Hitachi Ltd. have made early commitments to rival microprocessors, including Silicon Graphics Inc.'s MIPs chip and Sun Microsystems Inc.'s SPARC chip, Mr. Guarino contends that most manufacturers are taking another look.
"No matter what they say publicly, everyone is a candidate to re-evaluate their architectural designs," Mr. Guarino said.
"They're looking for lowest cost, largest bandwidth to last through this decade."
As part of the agreement, Canon will invest in the development of PowerPC and promote it as a "strategic direction" for its computer and office products.
Canon has also agreed to join IBM and Motorola as they plan future directions for the PowerPC chip, such as extending its use to consumer-oriented products.
Canon has a head start in developing PowerPC products because it purchased the hardware-design center of Next Computer Inc. about a year ago.
Next, formed by Apple co-founder Steven P. Jobs, had been working on products that would use PowerPC but eventually left the hardware business to focus on software.
Canon, in fact, recently established PowerHouse Systems Inc., a California venture that includes former Next hardware officials, to design PowerPC products.
Mr. Guarino said IBM and Canon together will develop a low-end desktop personal computer that would sell for less than $4,000 and could be available by the end of this year.
Other development will be expanded "up and down the line," Mr. Guarino said.
For example, Canon may use a personal digital assistant design that IBM has crafted, or the two companies may cooperate on a new one.
Canon will be able to buy IBM computer components and parts of machines and sell them under the Canon trademark.
IBM will also use Canon printer and digital-imaging technology in some of its designs.
Already, Canon and IBM have produced an IBM ThinkPad that contains a Canon "bubble jet" printer.
