The Abu Dhabi government agreed to pay the liquidators of BCCI Holdings (Luxembourg) SA $1.8 billion as part of a revised accord to try to settle billions of dollars of creditor claims against the defunct bank.
The Persian Gulf sheikdom also expects the new accord to head off potential BCCI-related legal suits.
BCCI's liquidators and Abu Dhabi hope that their revised agreement now will be approved by a committee of BCCI's creditors, and then by the courts that originally appointed the liquidators.
If it is, the liquidators might be able to start making some payments to BCCI's creditors later this year.
The Abu Dhabi government owned more than 70% of Bank of Credit & Commerce International, or BCCI, which was seized and closed by bank regulators in Britain, the U.S. and several other countries on July 5, 1991.
Regulators cited an extensive history of fraud and criminality at the bank to justify its closure.
Abu Dhabi is eager to settle the BCCI matter in part to remove the threat of legal suits from BCCI's disgruntled creditors.
"It would have been quite easy for us to walk away from the situation," a spokesman for the Abu Dhabi government claimed late yesterday.
"But Abu Dhabi is a soverign state and behaves accordingly," the spokesman added.
A court in Luxembourg last year threw out an earlier proposed settlement between Abu Dhabi and the rogue bank's liquidators, because that accord would have allowed Abu Dhabi to share in funds recovered by the liquidators, and also because the pact didn't treat creditors equally.
The earlier proposal had said that only creditors who agreed not to sue Abu Dhabi could receive funds from the settlement.
In the new provisional agreement, which was concluded last week in Zurich, there is no requirement that creditors agree not to sue Abu Dhabi.
BCCI's liquidators, however, would give an undertaking not to pursue claims against Abu Dhabi in the courts, a spokesman for the Abu Dhabi government said.
Under this new proposed accord, as under the previous one, Abu Dhabi is waiving its claims against BCCI for funds it had invested or deposited at BCCI.
Abu Dhabi says that these "significantly exceed $2 billion."
