Gallup Organization Inc. said it will enter the $30 million movie-research market, a field dominated for 15 years by National Research Group.
NRG, a unit of Saatchi & Saatchi Co., became the subject of controversy when The Wall Street Journal reported in December that numerous former employees claimed to have doctored research data, sometimes at the request of Joseph Farrell, the company's chairman and founder.
Mr. Farrell denied the charges.
NRG supplies three major services to moviemakers.
Through telephone polls, it tracks audience awareness and "want-to-see" for films that haven't yet opened.
It tests trailers and other ad materials.
And at preview screenings, it gauges how much audiences liked a movie, how they'd change it and whether they'd recommend it.
Gallup, a unit of closely held Gallup Inc., Princeton, N.J., is the largest survey-research and polling firm in the U.S.
Although Gallup will provide all the services offered by NRG, it faces obstacles in trying to crack the market.
Mr. Farrell has longstanding relationships with executives at every studio.
He also has a database of thousands of films from which he can draw historical conclusions about specific types of movies.
Moreover, NRG has contracts with all the major studios, except MCA Inc.'s Universal Pictures, for which it nevertheless does some work.
How much exclusivity those contracts actually contain is a subject of debate.
"We've got an `out,'" said one studio marketing chief who is an NRG supporter.
"And if Gallup has a better way of doing things, we'll listen. . ."
Said another top studio executive: "We like competition, and we'll take a look at it."
Gallup executives said their interest in Hollywood market research predated the Journal article.
The allegations, however, "enhance the likelihood that people will be willing to listen to what we have to offer," said Michael C. Ginn, Gallup senior vice president.
Thus far, Gallup hasn't held any contract talks with the major studios.
And although the firm has conducted some 20,000 interviews with moviegoers since January, it has yet to conduct a preview screening.
The company, however, said it has the resources to wait for possible contracts.
Even without the studios, Gallup hopes it can do work for independent film companies and individual filmmakers, who already provide business to a handful of small competitors to NRG.
While Gallup will try to convince studios that its methodology is superior to that of NRG, the basics of the two services don't seem to vary.
Gallup said it will offer an "800 Number Interactive Movie Poll" to provide exit-polling information slightly sooner than NRG has been offering.
And Gallup said it will hold more preview screenings outside the immediate Los Angeles area, where some industry observers have complained that preview audiences attend so many screenings that they're professionals at filling out questionnaires.
Many studio executives and filmmakers, however, like to attend such screenings -- and they like them close to home.
Gallup said its tracking studies will sample audiences from around the nation, rather than from 16 markets, as NRG does.
But the size of its sample -- 400 on each of three nights -- is the same.
Gallup also said it won't emulate NRG's practice of testing ad materials at shopping malls around the country with hand-held video displays.
Instead, it will test TV ads and trailers in auditoriums, using invited audiences.
NRG's Mr. Farrell didn't return phone calls seeking comment on Gallup's plans.
