The dollar moved lethargically against other major currencies, as an 11th-hour settlement by German metal workers inspired only a faint rally against the mark before a downward drift took hold.
The dollar gained against the mark and other European currencies in Asian trading on weekend reports that Germany's IG Metall union accepted a modest 2% wage increase effective June 1.
That settlement, which was below Germany's 3% inflation rate, gave the market reason to expect the Deutsche Bundesbank to return to its policy of easing, and thus pushed the dollar higher.
But the less-than-impressive gains were given back during European trading, when the labor settlement boosted German stock and share prices, drawing capital away from the U.S. and weakening the dollar.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7195 marks, up from 1.7190 from late Friday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 105.55 yen, down from 105.65.
Sterling was trading at $1.4900, up from $1.4895.
In trading late Tuesday morning in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 106.63 yen and at 1.719 marks.
"People see it is a good time to buy German stocks and bonds, that makes for buying pressure in the mark," said Hidetoshi Yanagihara, assistant vice president at the Industrial Bank of Japan in New York.
"But if German interest rates do go lower, people in foreign exchange markets will buy U.S. dollars against the mark because the dollar will be a more attractive currency," he added.
Indeed, in a statement yesterday, Bundesbank President Hans Tietmeyer termed the settlement a "positive development on the wage front."
That, combined with another comment by Mr. Tietmeyer that "there is no specific reason for concern" over Germany's high money supply growth in January, signaled to traders that the Bundesbank was back on an easing track -- albeit a cautious one.
Following Mr. Tietmeyer's statement, the dollar once again pushed higher from its intraday lows.
But the gains were limited because of perceptions that any Bundesbank easing will be hesitant.
"Prospects are for higher interest rates in the U.S. and lower rates in Germany," said David Gilmore, a foreign exchange analyst for MCM Currencywatch.
"Ordinarily that spells higher dollar and lower mark."
But he added the market's recent attention to capital flows, and obsession over inflationary signs that have dragged down bond and stock markets, has appeared to overwhelm arguments based on interest-rate fundamentals.
"I think the dollar will go lower based on money going into Europe," Mr. Gilmore said.
Trading was also quiet on a lack of major U.S. economic data due out this week, and because many players have taken to the sidelines after four weeks of high volatility, traders said.
Another factor that appears to cast a cloud over the dollar is the political controversy surrounding Whitewater Development Co., a failed land deal in which Bill and Hillary Clinton were investors while he was governor of Arkansas.
Analysts believe that if the Clinton administration is weakened by the investigation into Whitewater, dollar weakness is likely in the longer term.
