It was once the most controversial thing on Wall Street, with a popularity rating just this side of Ivan Boesky.
Program trading -- the quick, computer-aided trading of many stocks at once -- accounted for a record 11.9% of overall New York Stock Exchange volume last year, the most since the exchange started releasing program-trading numbers six years ago.
Traders say program trading continues to accelerate market movements both up and down, such as yesterday morning's sharp declines.
But there isn't a big public outcry anymore.
One reason: This is a bull market, and on most days, the market recovers before the end of the day (as it did yesterday, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average closed just 1.68 points lower after being down 25).
Some traders even say program trading has helped to keep the market in a trading range by quickly stifling rallies and mitigating declines.
It has been a long time since there was a hair-raising market debacle that could be blamed on program trading.
Stock market officials have noticed the record amounts of program trading.
James Cochrane, a Big Board senior vice president and chief economist, says: "We continue to monitor program trading as carefully as we ever have."
But he says that people just aren't as interested in the topic as before.
Mr. Cochrane says that three or four years ago, when he would be on the road giving a speech, "right out of the box, you'd get: `Tell me about program trading!'
Now, we rarely get a question."
Executives at major brokerage firms say it's a similar story with them.
"When program trading is going on the upside, people don't complain," asserts Dale Holzen, a Dean Witter, Discover & Co. broker in Cocoa Beach, Fla., who has been a critic of program trading.
He says program traders are still controlling the market, albeit within a tighter trading range than before.
But if the market declines sharply in coming months, as some analysts fear it might, "people will clamor that it's bad" again, Mr. Holzen says.
The average 31.6 million daily shares traded in program-trading strategies last year was double the amount that was being done daily in the aftermath of the 1987 market crash.
Back then, investment manager Neuberger & Berman attacked the practice in full-page ads as "the Numbers Racket on Wall Street," and an American Stock Exchange survey showed that most investors blamed program trading for "ruining" the stock market.
Brokerage firms doing a lot of program trading no longer are the object of ridicule and scorn.
Asked if Nomura Securities International Inc., which did the second-largest volume of program trading last year, is ever abused for program trading, a spokesman says: "No, the controversy was in the 1980s."
Nomura is the U.S. unit of Japan's Nomura Securities.
Joseph Schmuckler, Nomura Securities International's head of equity derivatives-products trading, adds: "Package trading and derivative trading, which was so controversial in the '80s and into the '90s," has become a "more mainstream product."
The biggest program trader on the Big Board last year, with an average 4.6 million program shares traded a day, was Morgan Stanley Group Inc.
The securities firm pulled back from program trading for its own account amid the post-crash uproar.
Chairman Richard Fisher says the program trading the firm does is for clients, not the firm's own speculation.
"That's all customer business," Mr. Fisher says.
"The customer business was the important business anyway."
He adds that program trading is "very technologically based. . . .
What this proves is we have a very competitive technology."
The Big Board defines program trading as the buying or selling of a basket of 15 or more different stocks with a market value of $1 million or more.
The most controversial form of program trading is stock-index arbitrage, in which traders try to profit from brief price swings in stocks and the futures markets.
But it's tougher to make money doing that these days compared with the 1980s; for most firms, including Morgan Stanley, program trading is mainly used for other strategies now.
Mr. Fisher says his firm regards program trading as a "customer service" that allows customers to assemble or liquidate multistock portfolios rapidly.
It isn't any longer a way for his firm to make a lot of money on market swings, he adds.
"The big gains have been arbitraged out," says Mr. Fisher.
Program trading "is an integral part of the market today, but it's not something that lends itself to very large gains or losses, and therefore doesn't have the large market impact it had before."
With the increased role of mutual funds and other institutions in the market, the traders say that program trading is used routinely by most brokerage firms to buy and liquidate multistock positions quickly on the exchange.
Program trading has become "terrifically routine," as one Big Board floor broker puts it.
Professional traders "prepare themselves for it.
They've been able to attenuate the blips.
It has become just another strategy the market adjusts to."
Index arbitrage used to account for about half of all program trading (for example, 51% in 1991).
But last year, index arbitrage accounted for just 38% of such trading.
A typical program trade these days, says the Big Board's Mr. Cochrane, involves a portfolio manager's buying a global package of utility stocks -- "and it comes out as a program," he says.
Whatever the type, program trading appears set to grow even more.
The Big Board has been pushing to attract more program trading from big investors that used to be done in London, where rules about disclosure are looser.
A new Big Board after-hours trading session was set up -- with slacker rules about disclosure -- and about half of that London trading has now been "repatriated," the Big Board says.
Indeed, of the record 11.9% of overall trading that program trading accounted for in 1993, about a percentage point reflects this newly absorbed trading, the exchange adds.
At the same time, new rules put in at the Big Board after the crash appear to be helping to keep program trading under control -- at least for now.
Program trading is effectively stifled any time the Dow Jones industrials rise or fall 50 points.
This "collar" was activated 16 times in 1992, but only nine times in 1993 -- a reflection of how rare it is for the market to even attempt a big swing.
Critics say all that means is that program traders are adept at pushing the market around within a trading range that is plus or minus 50 points.
The market could still decline sharply over time, of course, "but a single day like in '87 probably wouldn't happen," says Mr. Cochrane, referring to the industrial average's 508-point crash on Oct. 19.
He cites the 50-point collar and other new rules that would kick in during bigger market declines.
"The whole philosophy has been: Throw some sand in the gears.
Give people a chance to catch their breath."
Brokers like Dean Witter's Mr. Holzen aren't convinced that all is well.
They say program trading still causes headaches even when the market isn't rising or falling 60 points a day as often as it once did.
Mr. Holzen says he constantly has to assure small-investor clients that quick, 20-point or 30-point declines in the market aren't necessarily important.
Yesterday morning, for example, the program-propelled decline in the market "had people really concerned.
They were saying: `Is this the beginning of the correction we are looking for?'"
And some investors probably sold when they shouldn't have, he says.
Program trading, concludes Mr. Holzen, "influences people for the wrong reasons."
