Beer drinkers are thirsting for new brands and low prices, and brewers are serving them just what they want.
As consumers embrace some of the new beers the nation's big brewers are producing, their penny-pinching is forcing the industry to keep a lid on prices and to look for more lucrative markets overseas.
The past year's pressure on prices "was as tough as I've ever seen," says Bill Henry, president of Detroit's Stroh Brewery Co.
It may not have seemed possible, but the beer market got worse last year for the industry's big players -- who predict 1994 will be just as bad.
What growth there has been -- the total U.S. beer market increased only 0.2% in 1993 after years of little or no growth -- has largely gone to imports and microbrewery beers.
As a group, the biggest brewers have lost market share.
(Frank Walters, research director of Impact, an alcoholic-beverage industry publication, estimates that wine sales last year were down between 3% and 4% and that sales of distilled spirits declined between 1% and 2%.)
Consumers, meanwhile, are continuing to switch to light beer.
They are also buying cheaper beer, much of it from discount supermarket chains.
In California, even popular-priced labels, like Busch and Old Milwaukee, are suffering.
Corporate responses to the tough marketplace have included lowering prices, intensifying bar and store promotions and mimicking one another's price promotions.
The brewers' strategy, says Jerry Steinman, publisher of Beer Marketer's Insights, is "kill the others.
Don't give any other company any room to maneuver or cut into your volume."
Brewery executives say their top strategy for 1994 is to introduce new brands.
"Today's consumer is interested in new experiences," says Tom Sharbaugh, vice president of brand management at Anheuser-Busch Cos., the nation's biggest brewer, whose market share fell slightly last year despite record sales.
"They have a new-found curiosity about new tastes, and they demand variety."
Miller Brewing Co., the No. 2 brewer and a unit of Philip Morris Cos., has been the most aggressive in introducing new products in the past few years, perhaps taking a lesson from its highly successful rollout of Miller Genuine Draft in the late 1980s.
Last year, the company added extensions to its Miller Reserve specialty-beer lines and introduced Icehouse, an "ice" beer.
(Ice beers, promoted as smoother brews, are produced by chilling beer until it forms ice crystals and then removing those crystals.)
New products will continue to be "an important aspect of our future growth," says Richard Strup, vice president of marketing at Miller.
Miller was the only big brewer to increase market share last year, a feat company officials attributed to the acquisition of rights to distribute Canada's Molson in the U.S., the successful repositioning of Miller High Life as a lower-priced brand and new-product introductions.
But the company's flagship brand, Miller Lite, lost ground.
Miller says a marketing plan aimed at "making Miller Lite relevant to a new generation," is on track.
Anheuser's only new beer in 1993 was Ice Draft from Budweiser, a brew the company thinks will compete as much in the "clear-bottle packaged draft" segment (led by Miller Genuine Draft) as in the ice segment, Mr. Sharbaugh says.
The company will introduce another new brand in mid-1994 and has "a number of promising new products percolating," he says.
Coors Brewing Co., which last week announced plans to launch its own ice beer, Coors Artic Ice, intends to introduce this year a spring bock beer, a summer wheat brew and an Octoberfest beer.
And its clear malt product, Zima, continues to add sales.
Bob Joanis, vice president of new-product marketing for the Golden, Colo., unit of Adolph Coors Co., says new brands give the brewer a chance to introduce higher-priced beers to balance out the price promotions on older products.
But for Coors, the nation's third-largest brewer, new brands may also be a matter of survival.
Sales of its top brew, Coors Light, grew 2.4% last year and now account for 66% of the company's total volume.
As a result, Coors is the most vulnerable should consumers' love affair with light beer begin to fade.
"It's the `all your eggs in one basket' problem," says Mr. Joanis.
"A multiplicity of brands is what the future is all about."
Stroh, the U.S. industry's fourth-largest player, intends to continue introducing seasonal brands under the Augsberger label and will also launch Bull Ice, a new malt liquor ice beer.
Stroh's sales volume dropped 9.3% last year as its popular-priced brands, such as Old Milwaukee, suffered from undercutting by even lower-priced brands such as Anheuser's Natural Light.
"We hope that things will stabilize this year and we won't see as much of that going on," says Stroh's Mr. Henry.
The major beer companies say their No. 2 priority is to increase foreign sales.
The international beer market is 3 1/2 times bigger than the U.S. market, says Jack Purnell, chairman of Anheuser-Busch's international unit.
U.S. brewers, nonetheless, say international sales amount to only a couple of percentage points of their business.
"There's not a lot of opportunity for growth in the U.S.," adds Mike Marranzino, vice president of international operations at Coors.
"The beverage business world-wide is virtually undeveloped.
If you can participate in just a few places, you have real growth opportunity."
Anheuser has been developing partnerships with brewers in other countries for 12 years, and in 1993 the company closed four new international deals: a $477 million equity investment in Mexican brewer Grupo Modelo SA; a joint venture with Japan's Kirin Brewery Co., which will sell Budweiser in Japan; a 5% equity investment in Tsingtao Brewery Co., China's largest brewer; and an agreement with SpA birra Peroni Industriale of Italy for distribution of Budweiser in that country.
Stroh already sells in about 50 countries, where its brands have been growing at double-digit rates for the past seven years, says Mr. Henry.
He sees Mexico as a difficult market because of distribution problems but one with the greatest potential for American beers.
This year, Coors will complete the purchase of a brewery in Spain and the construction of a brewery in Korea.
In 1993, the company entered Italy, Ireland and expanded its business in the United Kingdom, bringing its international markets to 20.
Mr. Marranzino sees India, China and South America as the greatest potential markets for expansion.
At home, beer prices aren't expected to rise.
The big brewers, while hopeful that the severe price cutting of 1993 is indeed a thing of the past, nevertheless say they will meet competitors' prices in 1994.
Miller's Mr. Strup pledges: "I'm going to make sure we maintain price competitiveness across the country."
Source: Impact, M. Shanken Communications Inc
