Investors are yanking their money out of junk-bond mutual funds: $730 million flowed out in the latest week, according to AMG Data Services of Arcata, Calif.
That outflow is among the largest ever in a single week.
And it sharply reverses a four-month pattern of weekly inflows into the nation's $50 billion or so of high-yield junk-bond funds.
So far, most of the departing investors are money managers of the trigger-happy variety known as market timers, and not small investors.
But the scope of the timers' withdrawals has pressured high-yield junk-bond prices across the board.
Yesterday was another bad day in the bond market and junk was no exception: Junk prices failed to sustain an initial rally, and many fell 1/2 point, or $5 for each $1,000 of bonds.
Among junk bonds, "everything is being hit," said Martin S. Fridson, a managing director at Merrill Lynch & Co.
Junk-bond prices are down this week as much as three points, or $30 for every $1,000 of debt, while the benchmark 30-year Treasury has fallen this week about 2 1/8 points.
Among the biggest losers are RJR Nabisco Inc. 9.25% senior notes due 2013, off 8.5 points to 96.
Even some bellwether junk issues have taken a beating.
Fort Howard 9.25% senior notes due 2001 have fallen to 100.5 from 102.5 a week ago.
Owens-Illinois 11% senior debentures due in 2003, a $1 billion issue, closed at 113.25, off from 115 a week before.
It's the second time in less than a year that money managers trying to "time" their investments have rattled the junkbond market.
Last summer, rapid-fire traders yanked hundreds of millions of dollars out of junk mutual funds even though interest rates were falling -- only to plow the money back into the funds within weeks.
Again the timers seem to be fleeing at an odd moment.
They pushed the alarm button largely because the price of U.S. Treasury bonds had slumped.
They ignored their usual premise that a strengthening economy is good news for junk-bond issuers, companies with much to gain from an economic rebound.
"The sense overall is that there may be more to go" in the way of junk-bond price declines, said Mr. Fridson.
"It all depends on Treasurys."
Meanwhile, some mutual funds are unloading junk-bond holdings into a falling market.
Three of Kemper Securities' eight high-yield funds were among the hardest hit by the market timers.
They pulled out $425 million in the past week, reducing assets in those funds to about $3.5 billion.
According to Michael McNamara, a Kemper fund manager, less than $100 million of money controlled by timers remains in Kemper funds: The timers' pullout is "largely finished," he said.
Because the timers can swing in and out so violently, Kemper has been keeping as much as 15% of the assets of those funds in high-yield bonds that are relatively easy to trade, such as government bonds of less-developed countries known as Brady bonds.
"We keep that much in liquid names," said Mr. McNamara, "so it's easy to raise the money" in order to pay departing shareholders.
"If they came back in they'd be just as trigger-happy," he said.
"That's not anything we're looking forward to -- especially since their threshold for moving out has gotten much more sensitive."
Fred Quirsfeld manages a $2.5 billion bond portfolio at IDS Fixed-Income Advisors, Minneapolis.
Based on recent withdrawals from the fund, which holds everything from government bonds to junk, the outflow is running at a monthly rate of 1/2% or so of total assets.
He said he hasn't sold any junk holdings to meet withdrawals but believes much of the recent sell-off in junk comes from fellow mutual-fund managers.
"What's going on is pretty classic," he said.
"Money managers worry that there will be mutual-fund redemptions and forced selling down the road.
Managers of some of the funds have gotten so accustomed to experiencing the effects of the market timers that they try and anticipate the redemptions by doing some selling in advance of a difficult period."
But the managers face an additional problem as they try to raise cash: Many Wall Street bond dealers don't want to hold big inventories "so they bid down" prices.
"You get kind of an illiquid market where things get marked down," Mr. Quirsfeld said.
Because bonds lose market value as interest rates rise, Wall Street firms have been reluctant to hold bond inventories, including junk bonds.
As a result, traders have been low-balling bids to sellers, to discourage them from selling, say people in the market.
In fact, traders say that the dealers themselves have been unloading into the market.
"There are no trades without a buyer on the other side," said Kingman Penniman, executive vice president at Duff & Phelps Investment Research Co., an institutional research firm.
That's kept volume low, so far.
But, Mr. Penniman said, "the market is still fragile, and there's still room for prices to drop" as much as three more points if selling pressure increases.
"There's been a dramatic change since last Thursday, when people couldn't find anything to buy, to now, when they can't find anyone to sell to," he said.
Some market participants are heartened by the prospect of two coming high-yield conferences in Puerto Rico that will keep some people out of the market.
At mutual-fund company T. Rowe Price, spokesman Steve Norwitz said it's not surprising that higher withdrawals plague Price's $1.7 billion junk-bond fund, "because there's no doubt that the high-yield area attracts more trading-oriented types."
He said the fund has kept enough cash on hand to satisfy recent withdrawals.
At Vanguard Group, managers are bracing for more junk redemptions because "there are more risk-takers in the high-yield sector, and they're more apt to move on market news and lock in gains," spokesman John Worth said.
But company officials are hoping that an exit-fee strategy put in place last year will mean fewer withdrawals than on previous occasions when the market soured.
Like T. Rowe Price, Vanguard now levies a 1% fee on junk redemptions within the first year of investment.
The prices of U.S. Treasury bonds fell still further when fears of a trade war were added to the market's list of woes.
The White House spooked the jittery bond market by announcing that President Clinton would reinstate a trade provision allowing the U.S. to use sanctions against any country seen having unfair trade practices.
Among the worrisome implications for bondholders: Fewer competitively priced foreign goods might make their way into the U.S., raising the likelihood of "imported inflation."
Bondholders, who fear inflation because it reduces the value of their fixed-income investments, drove the price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury down 26/32 point, or $8.125 for every $1,000 of debt.
It closed at 92 16/32 to yield 6.83%, up from 6.77% Wednesday.
While most trade analysts expected this kind of move, it still took bond prices lower, even after Treasury Undersecretary Lawrence Summers said, during a television interview, that reinstating the rule wasn't the first strike in a trade war.
"Is it the start of a mini trade war? . . .
Yes," said Michael Strauss, economist at Yamaichi International America Inc.
Added Steve Wood, an economist at BA Securities Inc., "Any sort of trade retriction tends to lead to higher prices on the domestic side."
Meanwhile, news that sales at the nation's chain stores were up in February from the year-earlier period added to bearish sentiment.
Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.'s composite index of sales at stores open at least a year showed sales up 6.5%.
Yamaichi's Mr. Strauss said it was an impressive gain given that February was one of the worst winter months in years.
While trading volume was light, traders said they saw more selling by international accounts and some large hedge funds.
Most money managers, like many desks on Wall Street, are waiting to see today's report from the Labor Department on February employment.
Most economists think the report will show non-farm payrolls up about 140,000 from the previous month.
As soon as the number is released, bond players will start betting on whether the Federal Reserve will raise short-term rates again.
(The first rate boost was Feb. 4, the day of the January employment report.)
The wait for another move by the Fed is a key reason for the recent sell-offs, traders say.
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return, while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year.
The bills are dated March 10 and mature March 9, 1995.
The volatile Treasury market continued to keep issuers on the sidelines.
Only $494 million of debt was sold during the session, all from federal agencies.
Federal Express Corp. was to sell $390 million of pass-through certificates, but the deal was postponed because of the market conditions, said Kevin Kelly, head of debt syndicate at Goldman, Sachs & Co., which will manage the offering.
Similarly, MCI Communications Inc. was looking at selling a two-part, $500 million debt offering, but a weak market pushed that deal back also, a person close to the deal said.
Meanwhile, a road show for $750 million of global bonds from the Bank of China ended Wednesday.
In the investment-grade market, spreads were slightly tighter in anemic trading.
Prices followed Treasurys down.
The yield on the 6 5/8 s notes maturing in 2003 of Ford Motor Credit Co., a unit of Ford Motor Co., dropped slightly on news that General Motors Corp. and Chrysler Corp. had improved sales in February.
California stole the show in the municipal bond market with news of its plan to list $3.3 billion of bonds outstanding on the New York Stock Exchange.
California will be the only muni issuer with bonds traded on the exchange.
In the secondary market, munis continued to weaken before the release of the February employment data, set for this morning.
The data are expected to give further clues about the near-term path of U.S. interest rates.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, June municipal-bond futures settled 26/32 lower.
Prices in the cash market were down about 3/8 point in late dealings, traders said.
Munis fell well over a point in cash trading Wednesday as they continued to decline in the aftermath of the Federal Reserve's rate tightening last month.
For a second day, yields on mortgage-backed securities widened to government benchmarks.
That's unusual, because mortgages tend to do well when interest rates rise and prepayment fears ease.
In secondary trading, Ginnie Mae 7s for March delivery fell 21/32 at 98 31/32, Freddie Mac Gold 7s were off 18/32 at 99 8/32 and Fannie Mae 7s were off 18/23 at 99 1/32.
The Treasury's 5 7/8% 10-year note, a benchmark for current coupons, was off 17/32 at 96 19/32 to yield 6.34%.
Sellers swept into the market, mainly from the mortgage-banking community.
Mortgage bankers sometimes sell securities in a falling market anticipating that rising rates may cause refinancing homeoners to rush to lock in a desirable rate.
They sell essentially to make room for new business.
Major institutional investors with large holdings in mortgages also have been sellers, traders say.
In the primary market, the Federal National Mortgage Association announced a $217.7 million Remic backed by multifamily mortgage securities, led by Daiwa Securities America.
Also, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. announced an $800 million Remic backed by 30-year 6.5s and also announced increases to three previous issues totaling $700 million.
In the asset-backed market, Advanta Corp. unit Advanta Mortgage Corp. issued $174.5 million of home-equity-loan asset-backed certificates through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers Inc.
Gene Colter contributed to this article.
