For the past six years or so, investors speculating about the current or future value of the Mexican market have taken little heed of Mexico's political risks.
Even after the Jan. 1 armed uprising in the southern state of Chiapas, the international market for Mexican securities, debt instruments and direct investments quickly rebounded and has remained relatively steady since.
But as Mexico approaches an August presidential election with a dizzying array of possible outcomes, a degree of discounting for political risk may be in order.
This is not to say that the Chiapas uprising will end in disaster.
In fact, there are signs that the disturbance is on the wane.
On Wednesday Zapatista guerrillas released an ex-governor, and yesterday the government's chief negotiator in Chiapas -- the once and future presidential hopeful Manuel Camacho -- announced that the guerrillas would at last join him at the negotiating table.
A satisfactory resolution of that conflict and a recognizably fair electoral outcome in August's presidential contest could increase the potential value of the Mexican market.
However, so varied are the possibilities in the Mexican political arena today that no outcome is guaranteed, least of all the one that used to be a sure bet: that the next president of Mexico will be from the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI).
If you were writing a script for President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's remarkable six-year term, the most attractive finale would be for Mr. Salinas to become the first president in modern Mexico to pass executive power over to a member of the opposition, while the bulk of his revolutionary economic changes remained intact.
That scenario disqualifies the man chosen by President Salinas as the PRI's standard-bearer, Luis Donaldo Colosio.
It also rules out opposition candidate Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, whose populist economic platform clashes with President Salinas's open market program.
The candidate of the conservative National Action Party (PAN), Diego Fernandez de Zevallos, shares many of the president's economic convictions, but he is far down in the polls.
The most appropriate choice for this ideal final scene would be the man President Salinas passed over as PRI candidate but chose as peace commissioner in Chiapas, Manuel Camacho.
The undeclared battle between Messrs. Colosio and Camacho is the talk of the town in Mexico and has turned conventional political thinking upside down.
I had a chance to catch up with Mr. Camacho in San Cristobal, where he is working around the clock negotiating terms of peace with Zapatista guerrillas.
Expecting to play a Pinteresque word game about his presidential aspirations, I was surprised at how forthright he still is about wanting to be president of Mexico.
Mr. Camacho will not deny that he is running for president.
In fact, he suggests that his bargaining position with the guerrillas is improved if he is perceived as a candidate.
That's not a resounding commitment to run.
But in the case of Mexico -- where PRI political aspirants are expected to immediately drop their bid once a candidate has been chosen -- this is a much clearer indication of intent than the old Mario Cuomo soft-shoe.
The question that lingers deliciously on the tongues of Mexico's political conspiracy theorists is why President Salinas chose the ever-ambitious Mr. Camacho for the high-profile position of peace commissioner.
Of course, since Mr. Camacho is a master of political negotiation with strong connections to Chiapas (his deceased wife's father was a governor, and San Cristobal Bishop Samuel Ruiz is a good friend), he was an ideal candidate.
But Mr. Camacho's job has been an enormous boost to his visibility at the expense of Mr. Colosio.
While Mr. Camacho has been on the front pages from the beginning of the Chiapas crisis, Mr. Colosio has been stuck on the inside of most newspapers since the day his campaign began (ironically, the same day President Salinas chose Mr. Camacho as peace commissioner).
Some seasoned veterans of the Mexican political scene see the situation differently.
"The longer this thing drags on, the worse it will be for Camacho," says columnist Adrian Lajous.
"People in Mexico are like folks everywhere; they get tired of a story.
Unless the Chiapas thing really blows up again, attention will eventually veer away from Chiapas and Colosio can take center stage again."
On the other hand, if the Chiapas revolt is resolved soon, Mr. Camacho can register for the presidency by the March 30 deadline and get on with the race.
There has been some talk of a coalition between the conservative PAN and Mr. Cardenas's Democratic Revolutionary Party, with Mr. Camacho at the helm.
But Mr. Cardenas would not be enthusiastic about being bumped from the top slot, and a new election law rules out electoral coalitions.
Probably Mr. Camacho would be forced to campaign under the banner of a new or revamped party.
"If Camacho had to do that," says one Mexican diplomat, "he would never win.
An election is won at the polls, and a minor party doesn't have the infrastructure to monitor the 100,000 polling booths."
While the candidacy of Mr. Camacho is fraught with uncertainties, the alternatives are not tremendously appealing.
If Mr. Colosio wins with just the slightest hint of electoral fraud, the forces that brought the Zapatistas to the fore are likely to turn up the heat again.
And a President Colosio may not be as adept at handling a crisis larger than the one that tested the skills of President Salinas.
If Mr. Cardenas wins -- a possible outcome considering his excellent showing in 1988 -- investors would likely flee Mexico en masse.
This would probably force an increase in interest rates to forestall a run on the peso.
And that would depress an economy just beginning to recover.
Despite the dangers, there is a visceral excitement in Mexico.
This is the first election since the revolution that's turning into a real horse race.
The press has become openly critical.
Even the usual house organs, like Excelsior and other newspapers that usually print all the news the PRI wants them to print, are now taking far more independent positions than before.
Others, like the new Reforma and La Jornada are having a field day reporting critiques of government policies that would have invited government reprisals in years past.
What is clear is that Mexico's economic opening can no longer be sustained if guarantees of political openness and unconditional respect for the political will of Mexicans are not forthcoming.
Without such guarantees, political stability can no longer be assured.
And without political stability, investments in Mexico cannot be secured.
Mr. Asman edits the Americas column.
