You published Stuart Creque's editorial-page piece "We Must Respect Police Officers" on Dec. 29.
It was reprinted in the Oakland Tribune on Jan. 12.
Within a week, these headlines appeared in two Bay Area newspapers: "Officers Face Discipline in Injury of Two Latinos," "Cops Kill Man in Search of House" and "Cop to Stand Trial in Assault Case."
Yet Mr. Creque cannot grasp why "there exists a segment of population that has no concept of the rule of law or social order -- it regards the police as an implacable enemy."
Perhaps a place to start looking for answers lies in the facts of the case Mr. Creque discusses: the so-called "pit bull incident" in which my son Luke, my husband Raphael Grinage, and Officer William Grijalva and our dog were all killed.
It would be interesting to know the source of the information he cites with authority, for it is clear he did not interview the family or the neighbors.
Mr. Creque claims the police department's animal control section had attempted to pick up Chewy, our dog, on the day prior to the shooting.
This is not true.
Animal control called Luke two days before the tragedy to discuss the validity of the dog's rabies shots, but did not come to the house before Dec. 15.
The article says Chewy had bitten a neighbor the day before.
This is not true.
Chewy had bitten a trespasser who had entered the house five days earlier.
The article say Chewy's vaccination had expired.
The shots had been given by animal control in October 1991 and rabies shots are valid for three years, according to the ASPCA.
The rest of the "facts" recited by Mr. Creque continue to reflect the "selected events" reported by the police.
Some of the omissions include the fact that eyewitnesses report that Luke was beaten to the ground by at least two officers with billy clubs.
Luke's first response was with his fist, not with a gun, and it is not clear who was the first to draw a weapon.
Mr. Creque concludes: "There you have it: three men killed senselessly."
He might have gone further and speculated as to why it happened, and who was in a position to have avoided this tragic ending to a civil dispute over paperwork.
When people like Mr. Creque start realizing that police officers will be respected when they respect the citizens they are employed to serve, we will begin to see some positive change in the outlook of that "segment of the community . . . that regards the police as an implacable enemy."
Commenting that the Oakland Police Department was once noted for its excessive vigor in enforcing the law, Mr. Creque claims that "in the past 26 years, the city has been successful in reforming the police department."
It is obvious that he has no idea of the number of families whose members have been insulted, physically abused, injured and killed by police officers in recent years.
If it's respect we must have, then let it be respect for justice, for fairness and for those who seek to attain it through their behavior.
Let us never respect a uniform and a badge when those become symbols of abusive power.
Let us respect police officers when they represent members of the community, protect citizens from danger and promote peace in our neighborhoods.
Oakland, Calif.
