Fleet Financial Group Inc. plans a three-year, $8.5 billion loan commitment to low and moderate-income borrowers and minority-owned businesses, according to people familiar with the initiative.
Community activists said the program, expected to be unveiled tomorrow, is one of the largest bank initiatives aimed at such borrowers and represents an effort by Fleet to mitigate federal regulatory pressure on fair-lending concerns.
Fleet, which is based in Providence, R.I., has settled state probes in Georgia and Massachusetts alleging unfair lending practices in minority and low-income communities and is expected soon to seek federal clearance for the acquisition of Sterling Bancshares Corp. of Waltham, Mass.
Such federal reviews have been widely used by consumer groups and regulators to raise community-lending concerns.
People familiar with the initiative, to be called Fleet In-City, said it primarily will make mortgages available for low-income people and also will loosen lending criteria for minority-owned and women-owned businesses.
Although the program will include past commitments made by Fleet to low-income and minority lending, one bank insider said it represented a "very significant" increase in such pledges.
A Fleet spokesman declined to comment.
Andrew Frishkoff, housing director for the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now, in Philadelphia, said Fleet's program is one of the largest ever.
While other banks also have committed funds, "a lot of other agreements were smaller and focused primarily on housing or business," not both, he said.
It wasn't clear how many low-income mortgage and minority-business loans the company currently has outstanding.
Although Fleet employees said the initiative will include some loan programs already created, the majority of the $8.5 billion will be additional money, they said.
The initiative comes at a time federal regulators have shown a new insistence on lending to low-income and minority borrowers.
Last November, the Federal Reserve Board rejected an application by Shawmut National Corp., one of Fleet's biggest competitors, to acquire New Dartmouth Bank of Manchester, N.H., citing Shawmut's poor record in supplying fair-lending data.
Shawmut, Hartford, Conn., later settled charges of lending discrimination with the Justice Department.
Fleet has received its share of lending complaints.
The company recently agreed to make about $30 million in refunds and other concessions and $70 million in loans to prevent the Georgia attorney general from filing unfair-lending charges against Fleet's Atlanta-based consumer-finance unit.
Community activists say Fleet's settlement in Georgia and the new lending plan stem from fear that regulators may not otherwise approve its proposed acquisition of Sterling and other possible acquisitions in the future.
Fleet announced the purchase of Sterling in October but has yet to submit an application for federal approval.
"Shawmut saw that when the Fed rejected its purchase, the Fed went after its jugular," said Bruce Marks, executive director of the Union Neighborhood Assistance Corp., a Boston advocacy group that has been critical of Fleet.
"I think Shawmut, Fleet and all the other institutions out there are nervous."
NCNB Corp. and C&S/Sovran Corp. announced a similar lending program in 1991.
The banks, which later merged, committed $10 billion in loans for community development over 10 years.
In preparing to launch its initiative, Fleet submitted a letter to the U.S. Treasury Department, a Treasury spokeswoman said.
While Treasury approval or involvement isn't required for such a program, Fleet may have made the notification because "it's clear the administration has been actively encouraging banks to take their . . . community development responsibilities seriously," the spokeswoman said.
