The new contract with the Communications Workers of America, moreover, practically eliminates the regional Bell telephone company's ability to impose outright layoffs of unionized workers.
And it calls for Nynex, which has a reputation in some markets for poor customer service, to pay annual stock bonuses valued at as much as $700 apiece to employees who meet certain service requirements.
The union, which represents 35,500 of Nynex's almost 50,000 unionized workers, hailed the pact and expressed the hope it might influence negotiations at other Baby Bells seeking to reduce their payrolls.
"We hope this has set a precedent for providing job security for other Bell operating company employees across the country," said Elisa Riordan, an assistant vice president at the C.W.A.
Nynex in January took a charge of $1.6 billion for restructuring, including a $700 million charge to cut 16,800 jobs by 1996.
But the new union contract forces Nynex to add $1.3 billion for early-retirement benefits as it makes the cutbacks.
Had the Baby Bell wanted to dig in its heels and refuse to sweeten the severance plan, it could have resorted to outright layoffs under the existing contract.
But that requires an exhaustive process and tough union negotiations.
"In a company like ours, if we try to ramrod something like that through, the repercussions would be so great and so severe that in the end you really haven't saved anything," said one Nynex executive.
By sweetening the job-cutting terms, Nynex has essentially raised the cost of getting rid of workers by an extra $77,000 a person, above and beyond the almost $42,000-a-person cost of the original plan.
Nynex has at times cited union rules as a hurdle as the company, which provides local phone service to the Northeast, tries to reshape itself for the competitive, multimedia future.
But the accord unveiled yesterday ensures that the union will grow along with Nynex as it enters new businesses.
Nynex agreed that any new businesses it moves into will start out with union workers.
Downsizing has become a critical issue for Nynex, whose New York market is one of the most attractive in the nation.
At least a half dozen cable companies have asked state regulators for permission to provide telephone service in New York, putting pressure on Nynex to shore up its competitive defenses.
It is one of the flabbier of the seven Baby Bells, employing 45 people for every 10,000 phone lines compared with 35 at lean potential rival Bell Atlantic Corp.
"If they don't get lean and mean, competition is going to take share away from them.
They had to do this," said analyst Steven R. Yanis of Kidder, Peabody & Co.
The new contract, which basically extends the current pact by three years, pays the union employees a base-wage increase of 10.5% over the three-year period.
It also offers Nynex employees with at least five years of service the chance to take a two-year educational leave and receive $10,000 a year for education expenses, retaining full benefits, seniority and the guaranty of a job when they return.
The new $1.3 billion charge will be spread in varying chunks over the next 12 quarters, with each quarterly sum reflecting the number of people who decide to leave during the period, said Jeffrey S. Rubin, Nynex's chief financial officer.
Like the $1.6 billion charge, the latest charge will be financed out of Nynex's pension plan rather than coming out of operating results.
Therefore, it won't affect annual cash flow, Mr. Rubin said.
The agreement, subject to ratification by union membership next month, offers a retirement incentive, dubbed "6,6 and 30," that adds six years to the age and service of workers who take early retirement to boost their benefits.
It further provides a 30% Social Security pension supplement, or $500 per month, until age 62.
Nynex shares closed yesterday at $36.625, up 75 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
