VIDEO VIEWING is work, some find as more unsought tapes cross their desks.
Videotapes sent to offices touting new products, workshops and even venture-capital deals are proving useful, especially in such fields as advertising, cable TV and pharmaceuticals.
Walt Farneth of Medical Arts Pharmacy in Pittsburgh usually watches all 15 or so business-related videos he gets a year.
Ted Sann of ad agency BBDO New York says, "I look at videotapes as much as I do paper."
But other reactions are mixed.
Joan Steuer of Chocolate Marketing Inc. in Los Angeles says videos can be useful and time-saving, if they are "under three minutes."
Edmonia Evans, a Houston pharmacist, likes videos showing how medical devices work, but doesn't always have time to watch on the job and often must take them home.
Charles Wilson, a Houston veterinarian, shuns video mail, likening it to "a commercial you have to sit through."
Richard Kelly of Cambridge Associates in Connecticut advises clients mailing tapes to label them with shorter-than-actual running times.
MERLOT BY MAIL: Wineries look to serve up wine -- and more -- via catalogs.
Mail-order wine becomes more prevalent as more states allow interstate shipments to individuals.
Sutter Home, St. Helena, Calif., started a mail-order business just over a year ago, while Kendall-Jackson, Santa Rosa, Calif., uncorked its catalog last fall.
"It keeps their name in front of the customer," says Rich Cartiere of the Wine Business Monthly.
Sutter Home's catalog features more selections than vino, with goods like pasta sauces and jams proving popular.
Less than 10% of its orders, which average $75, are for wine.
Adam Strum of Wine Enthusiast magazine says small wineries also resort to direct mail as attrition among distributors means fewer channels for their wine.
Since 1986, 12 states have signed reciprocal pacts allowing shipments to each other, says the Wine Institute, a San Francisco trade group.
A few more, like Iowa, don't have such pacts but permit direct mailing.
THE PRICE IS RIGHT, some graduate schools say, after cutting tuition.
This fall, the tuition for the M.B.A. program at Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pa., will drop 22% to $15,750.
"We've found a really high degree of price sensitivity" among students, says James W. Schmotter, dean of the business school.
Clark University, Worcester, Mass., offers a tuition-free fifth year for those in its five-year combined bachelor's and master's degree programs if students have a B+ average.
Fifth-year tuition is usually $17,500.
Tuition-cutting is unusual for graduate schools, says David Merkowitz of the American Council on Education, Washington.
But he expects "to see more experiments like these," given schools' concerns over costs and student retention.
For business schools, ebbing company funds for workers in parttime programs adds to the problem.
In 1992, 70.5% of first-year M.B.A. students received company support, down from 86% in 1985, according to surveys from the Graduate Management Admission Council.
The council launches a loan program for part-time M.B.A. students.
HOW MUCH FOR THE LUCK of the Irish?
Exactly $20.95 at Emerald Enterprises, a New Jersey floral shipping firm.
It will ship a three-inch pot of clover bred to sprout leaves of four leaflets on 39% of all the stems in its lifetime.
The clover was developed by a University of Florida breeder.
PRINT PUBLICATIONS about computers post strong circulation gains, says magazine auditor BPA International, New York.
Circulation for 32 computer magazines was up 23% at year-end 1993.
The category had gains of 11% and 9% in 1992 and 1991.
NAFTA HOUSING can be pricey, relocating U.S. executives find.
PHH Homequity, a Wilton, Conn., relocation firm, says the average rent paid by a transferee for a three-bedroom home in Mexico City is $3,500, compared with $1,800 in Toronto and in the New York metropolitan area.
LARGE WINTER BILLS put the heat on utilities to aid strapped customers.
With the average residential bill this winter 50% higher than in 1993, Baltimore Gas & Electric lets customers pay 70% of their February tab and spread the rest over the next few months.
Applications to this and its budget-payment plan more than double.
In January, Kentucky's Louisville Gas & Electric waived late fees.
Consolidated Edison in New York says 10% more consumers are seeking deferred payments than last year.
Meanwhile, funding for private low-income aid plans is sluggish.
The Energy Assistance Foundation, funded partly by Illinois Power, posts a 1% rise in donations, while Virginia Power says donations fell 3%.
"People already gave to other disasters," like the Midwest floods, says the utility's Virginia Board.
But "the winter is a plus for utilities," despite overdue bills, says Gloria Quinn of Edison Electric Institute.
In the first nine weeks of 1994, electricity usage rose 5% over the same period last year.
For fiscal 1995, funding for the federal energy aid program faces cuts of $225 million to $745 million from $1.48 billion.
BRIEFS: Maps off the beaten path: Professor Higbee's Stream Map of New York charts more than 65,000 miles of streams and over 1,200 inland lakes. . . .
For terra not-so firma, the New England Governors' Conference readies Sand and Gravel Resource Maps for the region's six states.
