Canada's new Liberal Party government, which won last fall's election on a promise of jobs for Canadians, intends to carry through on its pledge by giving "the highest priority to job creation and economic growth."
The government's objectives were set out in a speech from the throne at the opening of a new session of Parliament.
The speech, written by the government, was read to Parliament by Governor General Ray Hnatyshyn.
Within days of taking office Nov. 4, the government moved to strengthen the job market by launching a six billion Canadian dollar (US$4.55 billion) public works program in collaboration with provincial and municipal governments.
The program is designed to reduce unemployment, currently 11.2% of the work force.
The government's declaration to Parliament had been expected to give greater emphasis to its serious debt problem.
The federal government's debt yesterday reached C$500 billion, or C$17,389 for each Canadian.
The debt burden is proportionately heavier than that of most other major industrial countries including the U.S.
The throne speech said the new government's first budget, to be announced in February, "will include measures to bring the federal debt and deficit under control in a manner that is compatible with putting Canadians back to work."
But the speech didn't highlight the seriousness of the country's debt problem or set out measures for dealing with it.
These omissions made the speech sound "like a travelogue on Los Angeles that forgot to mention the earthquake," said Preston Manning, leader of the populist Reform Party.
The Liberal government reaffirmed that it will replace an unpopular 7% value-added tax, introduced in January 1991 by the previous Progressive Conservative Party government.
But the statement didn't give any indication of what form the replacement tax would take.
The policy document also said the government plans to undertake a "major reform of the social security system to be completed within two years."
The reforms are expected to tighten the rules of the country's unemployment-insurance system, which is much more generous than that of the U.S. "Studies indicate that our unemployment-insurance system contains important disincentives to work," a Finance Department report said.
The Liberals took over the government as the economy was gaining momentum, led by strong exports to the U.S.
The government has predicted that the economy will grow 3% this year.
