U.S. pension funds may not be globe-trotters yet, but they're moving quickly in that direction.
In the next three years, the share of U.S. pension assets invested abroad will rise by an average of 50%, according to the latest annual survey by Greenwich Associates, a pension consulting firm.
By 1996, the funds -- including corporate pension funds, public retirement systems, endowments and foundations -- expect to have $379 billion, or 12% of total assets, invested in foreign stocks and bonds, up from $210 billion, or 8% of assets, today.
The increase in foreign investments will come mainly at the expense of U.S. bonds, which are expected to drop to an average of 30% of total assets in 1996 from 33% today.
U.S. stock holdings, meanwhile, are expected to remain steady at slightly more than 44% of assets, on average, the data show.
In 1993, the foreign holdings of U.S. pension funds increased by $53 billion -- an amount equivalent to two-thirds of the entire capitalization of Singapore's stock exchange.
A substantial amount of the 1993 increase came from new purchases, rather than price appreciation of existing holdings, says Phillip Maisano, president of Evaluation Associates, a pension consultant based in Norwalk, Conn.
While emerging markets delivered stunning double-digit returns last year, Mr. Maisano figures that about three-quarters of pension funds' foreign investments are in the larger, more-developed markets of Europe and Japan.
And because the developed markets' overall performance has lagged behind that of the U.S. stock market for several years, "you would have lost ground with these holdings" as a percentage of total assets, he says.
The big motivation for the pension funds' global push is their desire to buoy investment returns -- and thus lower the amount of new cash that must be set aside for retirees at the expense of taxpayers and company shareholders.
With U.S. stock valuations at lofty levels and interest rates abysmally low, funds must look farther afield -- and shoulder extra risk -- to try to maintain the double-digit gains to which they've grown accustomed, consultants say.
The dizzying volatility of some foreign markets, such as the Malaysian stock market's sudden 20% plunge in recent days, is sometimes hard for pension funds to stomach.
But that hasn't deterred the funds from wading deeper into international waters.
The risks of some emerging markets "make me a little nervous," says Ralph Layman, who oversees international stock investments for General Electric Co.'s $27.5 billion pension plan.
Even so, he says he "feels comfortable" edging the trust's overall foreign stock holdings up to 15% this year, from 13% in 1993.
"Short-term you have to be prepared for volatility, but long-term, the {potential} growth still merits interest there," he adds.
In fact, GE, eager to be among the global avant garde, is looking to invest in emerging markets through less-conventional means than exchange-listed stocks.
GE has had "substantive discussions" with Julian Robertson's Tiger International hedge fund, about private investment opportunities in developing countries, Mr. Layman says.
"You cannot go and sit down with any pension-plan sponsor today without talking about emerging markets," says Kenneth Rogers, a managing director at pension Darien, Conn., consulting firm Rogers, Casey & Associates Inc.
"Emerging markets is the fastest asset class to be legitimized by pension funds."
Even traditionally conservative public-sector funds are moving with the global trend.
For instance, Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority's $1.1 billion pension fund will raise its foreign-stock holdings to 13% of assets by March 31 -- from 8% in 1993 and just 5% in 1992, says John Gallahue, the fund's executive director.
Global bonds, absent before June 1992, now represent 6% of the MBTA's portfolio.
The fund also plans to trade foreign stock-index options to further "tweak our performance," he adds.
Such moves aren't "anything radical," Mr. Gallahue says.
But they aren't free from risk either.
"If something goes wrong and it's a new idea, you'd be looking for employment elsewhere," he says.
Despite the ups and downs of individual investments, many funds expect that loading up on foreign securities will lower, not raise, their portfolios' risk over time.
The reason: Returns on foreign investments have historically shown little correlation with U.S. investments.
In other words, because they tend to zig when U.S. markets zag, such holdings help stabilize returns on a fund's overall portfolio.
However, achieving the benefits of such diversification "requires relatively high allocations be made to a given market for it to have a meaningful impact on the overall portfolio," says Timothy Cunningham, editor of the Trustee's Journal, a publication for pension executives.
What's more, those expected benefits will only materialize if the old correlations persist.
There's no guarantee that they will, especially with U.S. pension giants increasingly dominating the behavior of many smaller foreign markets.
Meanwhile, the Greenwich survey figures may understate the exposure of U.S. pension plans to foreign markets, because they may not fully account for "derivatives" -- financial arrangements designed to track the returns of international stocks, bonds and other assets.
For instance, the Michigan Retirement System's $24.9 billion plan last year used "equity swaps" to gain $700 million of exposure to foreign stocks.
Under the swap agreements, the plan will receive returns linked to the performance of European and British stock indexes, in return for a more stable stream of payments linked to short-term interest rates.
The arrangement allows the Michigan plan to reduce transaction costs, while avoiding the hassles of hiring a foreign-stock manager and worrying about international custodial arrangements, according to deputy director Gordon Linsday.
