Buying advertising time on the Academy Awards telecast is almost as difficult as wangling a ticket to the glitzy awards show.
But this year, some media and entertainment executives are wondering whether Oscar may lose some of his luster on Madison Avenue.
Advertisers love the Oscars show because it has reliably delivered an enormous upscale audience, more than 60% of whom are women.
An exclusive cadre of nine advertisers -- including American Express, Coca-Cola, Eastman Kodak and Revlon -- regularly locks up Oscar advertising time well in advance; a waiting list of buyers for any unclaimed time starts forming in August.
This year, 30 seconds of advertising during Monday night's broadcast on the ABC network fetched $630,000, a 5% increase from last year.
But the Oscars' track record hasn't stopped some entertainment executives from fretting that this year the show could be a disappointment.
Last week, the front page of the Hollywood trade paper Variety blared "TV Gets Oscarcast Jitters"; TV Guide put this year's new Oscar emcee, Whoopi Goldberg, under the headline "Why Whoopi Makes 'Em Nervous."
Media executives say a number of factors might conspire to keep viewers away.
Just one of the nominees for Best Picture -- "The Fugitive" -- had a big-name leading man and mass-market appeal.
Some say the results seem like a foregone conclusion, with Steven Spielberg's "Schindler's List" the heavy favorite.
"The tension isn't there," complains Werner Michel, senior vice president of national broadcast at Bozell, whose client J.C. Penney is an Oscar regular.
"There is a general feeling we better hold our breath."
In addition, Ms. Goldberg isn't believed to have as much appeal as her predecessor, Billy Crystal.
"She could cost a rating point or two," Mr. Michel says.
And a number of awards shows, including the recent Grammy and American Music Awards broadcasts, flopped in the ratings, perhaps signaling that hypeweary viewers don't have much of an appetite for awards shows this year.
ABC, a unit of Capital Cities/ABC, which has the broadcast rights to the Oscars until 2000, dismisses such concerns.
"It's the silliest thing I've ever heard," says Bob Cagliero, ABC executive vice president overseeing national ad sales.
Last year's show set an Oscar record in the post-cable era by reaching 31% of homes with TV sets.
Even if Monday night's broadcast doesn't match that, "It will still deliver major, major numbers," he says.
But even if it beats last year's record, the audience for the Academy Awards won't come close, in sheer size, to matching that of the Super Bowl or, for that matter, the showdown on ice between Tonya Harding and Nancy Kerrigan, during the first night of women's figure skating at Lillehammer, Norway, this year.
Still, the Oscar audience is exceedingly tempting.
Compared with the average prime-time TV show, the Oscars last year delivered more than three times the number of households with income over $60,000, according to ad agency BBDO, which doesn't have a client on the show this year.
One in four women between the ages of 18 to 64 watched last year.
Plenty of viewers groan through the three-hours plus of windy speeches, ill-fitting fashions and scripted chit-chat, but still the Academy Awards show is one of the few must-watch programs of the year.
"It has that water cooler factor," says Steve Sjoblad, managing director of Fallon McElligott, whose Lee jeans won a regular sponsor's place last year.
"The following morning, people are standing around talking about it."
To be sure, not every advertiser returns like clockwork.
PepsiCo's Frito-Lay used the Oscars to launch Doritos Tortilla Thins last year and tied the ads in with a sampling program in movie theaters; this year the company is staying home.
And Reebok International, which has used the Oscars to launch major spring advertising assaults for the past two years, won't do so this year.
"We opted for the Winter Olympics instead," says David Ropes, Reebok's vice president of advertising.
The Reebok campaign starred Nancy Kerrigan.
But the Oscars won't be Kerrigan-free.
Revlon is unveiling a new corporate campaign in which the ubiquitous Ms. Kerrigan appears, sans skates, to answer the question, "What makes a woman revolutionary?"
Her response: "It's having a dream that never leaves you."
Other big advertisers launching new campaigns include Coca-Cola, for its tiny Fresca brand, and General Motors, with new ads themed "Genuine Chevrolet."
Advertisers new to the Oscar telecast will include Serta mattresses and Monsanto's Ortho and Roundup lawn and plant products.
Serta, the Des Plaines, Ill., mattress maker, squeaked into the show a month ago.
ABC notified Serta that a spot had opened up and gave the company exactly two hours to decide whether to buy the 30 seconds.
"It's not cheap, but we were thrilled to be able to secure a spot," says Susan Ebaugh, vice president of advertising.
Prudential Insurance Co. of America has been pushing its Oscar connections for two weeks now.
The company, with the permission of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, has been running vignettes of "Oscar's Winning Moments" next to its regular commercials, in effect promoting the show at the same time.
But the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences has no intention of giving advertisers free rein.
"The event has an elegance and class we're going to maintain," said Ric Robertson, executive administrator, at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
In fact, the Academy gets to approve of all advertisers in the telecast and even excludes entire categories.
Movie companies aren't allowed, he said, "to avoid even the appearance of any impropriety"; neither are alcoholic beverages, to preserve "the relatively conservative, family-conscious image that the academy wants the show to project."
