Ocean Spray, the cranberry-juice king, is feeling squeezed.
Although the runaway leader in the growing juice-drink category, Ocean Spray's lead is being eroded by cheaper private-label juices as well as brand-name beverages from such companies as VeryFine Products.
Ocean Spray also believes its drinks suffer from an unhip image at a time when selling to the grunge generation and baby boomers is essential for sales success.
Ocean Spray's remedy: a new, more youthful advertising campaign with a media budget of more than $35 million.
For the first time, the entire line of Ocean Spray juices is being advertised together under the slogan, "Crave the Wave."
The new campaign, from Rotando Partners Advertising in Stamford, Conn., is the first that leverages the brand name in a way that de-emphasizes individual drinks and instead prominently features the familiar blue-wave logo.
Some of the eight different ads feature a drum beat reminiscent of rock group Queen's "We Will Rock You."
"We defined our business as an all-family business, meaning Mom would buy a large-size bottle and the family would drink it," says Kevin Murphy, senior vice president of business operations at Ocean Spray Cranberries in Middleboro, Mass.
"That worked for us for decades, but we're now in a more complicated competitive environment.
We need to define the family differently.
Mom still goes shopping, so do the kids, usually on the run."
Ocean Spray, says Mr. Murphy, "has to communicate to the consumers that the brand is relevant."
It wants to increase its share in the juice-drink category, which grew 2.5% last year to an estimated $4.1 billion, according to Beverage Marketing.
A.C. Nielsen supermarket sales data show that Ocean Spray had a commanding 65.8% market share for the 52-week period ended Sept. 11, 1993, a drop of 3.3 percentage points from the year-earlier period.
In comparison, Tropicana Twister's share rose 1.7 percentage points, although its share is still only 6.9%.
Ocean Spray isn't competing just with others in the fruit-drink category (defined as beverages that aren't 100% juice), but also with brands in the 100% fruit-juice arena.
Companies may differentiate between the two, but consumers may not, says Hellen Berry, vice president of market research at Beverage Marketing.
Beverage giant Coca-Cola entered the fray last week, introducing Fruitopia, a noncarbonated drink containing 10% to 25% fruit juice.
On top of that, other so-called alternative beverages, including flavored teas, sparkling waters and clear colas, are vying for a young audience.
"Everything is Ocean Spray's competition," says Jonathan Iafeliece, vice chairman and chief creative officer at Rotando Partners.
Ocean Spray's most recent ads were a tad goofy and it's doubtful they appealed to young people.
One featured a gentleman who resembled Herb the Nerd, the ill-fated Burger King ad character from the late 1980s, weaving across the screen holding a tiny red cranberry.
No more.
New ads are slick and geared to different demographics, including Generation X and yuppies.
Commercials include joggers, sweating military personnel, a young professional woman gabbing on a pay phone while trying to reach an Ocean Spray drink on a nearby table, kids playing soccer, and an overheated topless male construction worker (a different actor from the model in a new diet Coke ad).
Ocean Spray also wants to get the word out that it is available in single-serve bottles that are sold in convenience stores, a popular venue for teenagers.
Ocean Spray's distribution system vastly improved when it signed an agreement with PepsiCo in late 1991.
A series of ads shows a parade of individuals, ranging from a young businessman to teenagers, popping into a convenience store.
The camera's point of view is from the cooler looking out into the store as the Ocean Spray is snapped up.
"These commercials show Ocean Spray with an attitude," says Mr. Murphy.
Some of the ads will be placed on equally hip shows, including "Late Show with David Letterman" on CBS and throughout the schedule on MTV.
"We never spent a lot of time advertising to consumers under 25 years old," Mr. Murphy says.
"But for us to grow, we have to change that."
Miller Brewing Co., a unit of Philip Morris Cos., has unexpectedly thrown the Lite Ice account into review, inviting all four agencies on its roster to pitch the business little more than a month after assigning it to Leo Burnett, Chicago.
Estimated billings are $20 million to $25 million, according to industry executives.
Miller's three other agencies -- Saatchi & Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates, WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson, and Young & Rubicam -- are expected to present ideas for a new campaign next week, executives said.
A Miller spokesman said, "We work with all of our agencies to move our business forward," declining to comment further.
A spokesman for Leo Burnett wouldn't comment.
The review came in the same week that Miller revised advertising for another ice beer, Molson Ice, which had prompted an investigation by federal regulators.
The Molson Ice ads, created by Young & Rubicam, had conspicuously featured a close-up of the Molson Ice label and its alcohol volume, which is higher than regular beer.
The Miller spokesman said print ads for Lite Ice, which had also contained a label close-up, were similarly revised.
The snafu is the latest trouble for Burnett and Miller.
After winning the big Miller Lite account, Burnett struggled for close to a year to come up with a campaign that pleased the client.
Now, the agency must repeat that feat on Lite Ice, less than two months after winning the business and with its work on the air less than two weeks.
Burnett is believed to have sold several Lite Ice spots to Miller.
The one that made it on the air brought back Bob Uecker, a veteran pitchman for Lite beer from the days of the old "Tastes Great.
Less Filling" campaign.
The spot also introduced a new spokesman, the Generation X comedian Dante, who bursts through a paper wall and sticks his face in the camera, saying, "New Beer.
New Rules.
How ya doin'?"
Much is riding on the Lite Ice ads: Miller is counting on the line extension to pump up its ailing Lite brand, whose sales declined 3.6% last year, according to the newsletter Beer Marketers' Insight.
New television ads for CNBC, a unit of General Electric Co., rely on humor to lure viewers to the business and talk cable network.
Two spots, produced by CNBC's new ad agency, Kirshenbaum & Bond, New York, poke fun at other television fare.
In one, a vapid woman attending a cocktail party crashes into a conversation on gun control.
She says she thought that after the shooting of J.R. (a fictional character on the old CBS Inc. series "Dallas"), handgun control would be strict.
In another ad, a yuppie makes a serious recommendation that someone should hire Matlock, a fictional attorney on the Capital Cities/ABC Inc. network.
The ads are scheduled to run on cable networks Arts & Entertainment and Discovery and may appear on the NBC network.
The commercials use the tag line, "When you're tired of tuning out, tune in."
Why did CNBC's new television ads deliberately exclude the network's roster of talk show hosts, including Tom Snyder and Geraldo Rivera?
Lewis Goldman, CNBC's director of advertising and promotion, says, "We wanted to create an overall positioning for the network.
If we throw in the personalities, it would distract from the message that CNBC is intelligent TV."
Ad Notes. . . .
ACCOUNT: Konami America tapped Grey Advertising, New York, to create ads for its estimated $5 million video game account, the agency said.
Incumbent Michael Meyers & Associates, Chicago, will remain active on the business.
WHO'S NEWS: Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson named Jonathan B. Cranin, 39 years old, to the post of executive vice president and deputy creative director.
Mr. Cranin was previously executive vice president and group creative director at Wells Rich Greene BDDP.
