In his March 1 editorial-page article "Triumph of Textbook Trendiness," Gilbert T. Sewall characterizes the latest edition of a classic American history text, "Todd and Curti's The American Nation," as "a big step backward, a case of `dumbing down' and revisionist folly in search of a larger audience."
Mr. Sewall shows that the text's allegiance is to multiculturalism and political correctness, not to historical fact.
The "disturbing trends in social studies publishing today," as he puts it, have a sad parallel in social studies curriculum development in Ohio.
Many Ohioans who have read the Nov. 2, 1993, draft of a model "Competency-Based Social Studies Curriculum" (developed by the State Board of Education and by the Ohio Department of Education) will recognize the same influence of PC-Think and the same absence of dependable, factual content that Sewall found in Todd and Curti.
In the Ohio social studies curriculum, now being considered for adoption as a model for all Ohio public schools, content is replaced with very broadly defined "performance goals," such as "the learner will demonstrate curiosity, openmindedness, skepticism, and ethical behavior in inquiry based upon the social studies."
From grades K through 12, the curriculum is organized around six "strands," or concepts, that will be addressed each year, including "Pluralistic Society," "Resource Allocation" and "Global Connections."
These concepts/strands are designed to "develop the ability to make informed and reasoned decisions for the public good as citizens of a culturally diverse, democratic society in an interdependent world of finite resources."
As a conservative and taxpayer, I prefer that our kindergarteners not be taught that the proper role of "persons in authority" is to "provide fair distribution of resources and opportunities," but rather to know who Abraham Lincoln was, to recognize our current president, and to find Ohio on the map.
I believe the majority of parents and business people would agree in desiring a solid, academic, fact-based curriculum in social studies; yet it is difficult for parents to have an impact on unresponsive bureaucracies like the Ohio Department of Education.
As a Republican, it is also difficult for me to understand why Gov. George Voinovich appears to be supporting the education establishment responsible for this "big step backward" in social studies education.
Mary Jane Brown, Ph.D.
