Walt Disney Co. agreed to spend about $750 million to bail out its 49%-owned Euro Disney SCA affiliate, apparently ending the threat that the gates of the troubled Magic Kingdom in France would close forever.
A preliminary deal struck with representatives of Euro Disney's lead banks will cut the park's debt in half and is aimed at making Euro Disney profitable in its fiscal year ending Sept. 30, 1995, far earlier than many analysts had expected.
The banks would kick in about $500 million and make other concessions.
The plan substantially increases Disney's financial ties to the park.
Its initial investment in Euro Disney was just $160 million.
The rescue package was settled just minutes before the start of Euro Disney's annual meeting, after talks over the weekend by Disney, Euro Disney and a bank steering committee headed by Banque Nationale de Paris and Banque Indosuez.
Following months of sometimes contentious negotiations, and working against a Disney-imposed deadline of March 31, the parties agreed to a package similar to one proposed by Disney last fall, but rejected at the time by the banks.
The plan calls for a rights offering of six billion francs, or about $1.02 billion.
Such an offering consists of rights to purchase shares, usually at below-market prices, to existing shareholders in the same proportion as their present ownership.
Disney will spend three billion francs, or about $508 million, to buy 49% of the offering.
The company also agreed to buy certain Euro Disney park assets for 1.4 billion francs, or about $240 million, and lease them back on terms favorable to Euro Disney.
The plan would halve Euro Disney's debt to about 10 billion francs, or $1.69 billion, from the current 20 billion francs.
The banks agreed to forgive 18 months of interest payments on the debt and will defer all principal payments for three years.
Analysts estimated that the elimination of the interest payments will save Euro Disney about 1.9 billion francs.
The banks also will underwrite the remaining 51% of the rights offering that Disney isn't buying.
The offering is structured to maintain Disney's existing ownership interest in Euro Disney.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Disney shares fell $1.125 apiece to $45.875.
Despite the announcement of the rescue plan, Euro Disney's shares fell 7.9% to 33.5 francs a share on the Paris Stock Exchange.
Analysts estimated that the rights offering could eventually swamp the market with as many as 700 million new Euro Disney shares.
Euro Disneyland opened in April 1992.
Despite hitting its attendance targets, it immediately began bleeding cash as strategic and financial missteps resulted in lower-than-expected revenue.
On top of those problems, the park found itself holding onto a large portfolio of real estate, in particular hotels, as the French property market collapsed from excess capacity and high interest rates.
Through Dec. 31, Euro Disney had posted a cumulative loss of 6.04 billion francs.
"This will ensure that this resort, which has been the best-received park ever in Europe, will operate on a sound financial basis as well," said Disney Chairman Michael Eisner, who called the restructuring plan "fair and economically sensible."
The agreement, endorsed by Euro Disney's lead banks, now must be accepted by all 63 creditor banks and the public shareholders.
As part of the package, Disney said it would eliminate for five years the lucrative management fees and royalties it receives on the sale of tickets and merchandise.
The royalties will be reintroduced at lower levels gradually over an unspecified period of time.
Disney will still receive an "incentive fee" based on any profits made by the Euro Disney resort, which cost $3.68 billion to build.
Analysts said that Disney, with its massive cash-generating powers, won't have much trouble absorbing the blow of its $750 million outlay.
"It will have an impact on their cash flow, but the impact on their income statement should be negligible in our view," said Jill Krutick, an analyst at Salomon Brothers Inc. in New York.
She said she viewed the restructuring as a positive for Disney stock, adding that Salomon is maintaining its "buy" recommendation on Disney shares.
Even with the rescue pact, Euro Disney said it expects losses to continue in last half of fiscal 1994.
Under equity accounting rules, Disney's planned new investment in Euro Disney will obligate the U.S. company to include its 49% share of the losses in its financial statements.
Disney stopped recording Euro Disney losses last November after writing down its investment in Euro Disney to zero.
Disney and the banks said that prior to the rights offering, there will be a reduction in the capital of Euro Disney by reducing the par value of the company's shares.
While the price of the offering will be set later, the parties said it is currently estimated to be close to the present par value of Euro Disney stock, or about 10 francs a share.
The new agreement also calls for the banks and Disney to subscribe to bonds with 10-year warrants to purchase Euro Disney shares at 40 francs a share.
That could raise up to 2.8 billion francs for the resort company.
Disney also agreed to arrange for a 1.1 billion franc standby line of credit at market rates to provide for Euro Disney's liquidity.
At least one official familiar with the restructuring talks said he believed Disney may have cut the better deal, since it is sacrificing royalties and fees that would have dried up if the park had closed.
Other analysts, however, argued that the parent company will be giving up money it previously planned on receiving, just as the banks are doing.
Also, some analysts argued, by putting off its royalties for several years, Walt Disney is showing its commitment to the park's long-term success.
"If the markets are strong enough to absorb three billion francs of new equities, then it is a good long-term fix," said Jack Hersch of MJ Whitman in New York.
But officials close to the talks say the real work starts now in persuading creditor banks to agree to the deal.
And approval by Euro Disney shareholders isn't a foregone conclusion.
One group representing individual shareholders said that while it welcomed progress on the restructuring, it felt the plan unfairly hit shareholders, who paid as much as 160 francs a share for their Euro Disney stock, harder than Walt Disney, which paid 10 francs a share for its holding.
The shareholder group, Deminor SA, promised to put forward some of its own proposals.
Even if the rescue plan is approved, the park's future development remains in doubt.
Morgan Stanley International analyst Rebecca Winnington-Ingram says that Euro Disney needs the critical mass of a planned second park to make its investment a major success.
The rescue plan only resolves the problems affecting the park's current business.
