While preparing to become the Beijing correspondent for a Canadian newspaper in the mid-1970s, I stumbled across "Prisoner of Mao."
When I told U.S. sinologists that my preparatory reading had included this chilling, firsthand account of a Franco-Chinese man's seven years in the Chinese gulag, they contemptuously dismissed it as unimportant.
In those days, America's foremost interpreter of China, John King Fairbank, had only recently declared that "the Maoist revolution is on the whole the best thing that happened to the Chinese people in centuries."
Only after Mao's death did the winds of intellectual fashion shift amid a flurry of books by Chinese telling of the horrors of everyday life during the chairman's reign.
But not since "Prisoner of Mao" was published in 1973 has a voice from the Chinese prison camps spoken out with such compelling immediacy as Harry Wu's.
Since coming to the U.S. in 1985, Wu has been instrumental in exposing the vast system of profit-making prison farms and factories that manufacture products, often for export.
He seized the media's attention after he secretly returned to China in 1991 and courageously bluffed his way into labor camps and into meetings with officials trying to sell labor-camp products to U.S. customers.
His first book, "Laogai -- The Chinese Gulag," was widely and justly praised for its pioneering attempt to document the detailed workings of the prison-camp system.
But its dry and scattershot style turned away all but the most committed readers.
His second book, "Bitter Winds: A Memoir of My Years in China's Gulag" (John Wiley & Sons, 290 pages, $22.95), is different.
This time, his collaborator Carolyn Wakeman has coaxed him to speak from his heart and give us his very human story.
In 1957, Mr. Wu was an independent-minded university student who naively accepted Chairman Mao's exhortation that all Chinese should point out the Communist Party's shortcomings.
Born into a "reactionary" middle-class Shanghai family, Mr. Wu was a perfect fall guy when Mao suddenly reversed course and denounced the party's critics.
Along with literally hundreds of thousands of fellow "rightists" and "counter-revolutionaries," Mr. Wu soon found himself entrapped and sentenced without trial to "reform through labor."
In the prison camps for almost the next two decades, Mr. Wu was caught in a nightmarish microcosm of Maoist China.
Political campaigns that Mao launched on the outside to terrorize opponents both high and low were faithfully replicated inside the camps.
Like offices, schools and factories, prisons were ordered to come up with their quota of political enemies.
The worst physical suffering resulted directly from the Great Leap Forward, Mao's manic attempt at accelerated economic development that ended in widespread famine.
Many among the millions of common criminals and political prisoners who inhabited the gulag did not survive.
The wardens set up separate death camps where they dumped prisoners whose health had been destroyed by overwork and starvation rations, which included food substitutes such as wheat chaff and fermented corn cobs.
Miraculously, Messrs. Wu and Jean Pasqualini, author of "Prisoner of Mao," survived the same death camp just one year apart.
Afterward, Mr. Wu stayed alive by getting food any way he could: fighting over a raw wilted turnip with a fellow inmate, eating field snakes after biting off their heads, and even scavenging grain from a rat's burrow.
He does not portray himself as a hero.
He describes how he curried favor with guards and supervisors while often assuming a cold indifference toward his fellow inmates.
Conditions in the labor camps began improving within weeks of the death of Mao and the subsequent arrest of his widow and other radical leaders in the autumn of 1976.
The authorities gradually reduced their restrictions on Mr. Wu and he was released in 1979.
He later sought out some of the petty Chinese officials who persecuted him and set him on the road to the labor camps -- not so much to confront them as to let them know he had survived despite them.
Their reaction produces one of the book's most troubling sections.
They make no apologies.
Instead, it's obvious that they're working hard to blot out the memory of their vicious contributions to the injustice of those years.
Nor has China's top leadership ever repudiated, let alone eliminated, the labor camps.
While the hundreds of thousands of political prisoners in Mao's day have shrunk to probably a few thousand, the gulag today remains an important part of Chinese society and a source of cheap labor.
Hard labor is still the fate of those convicted of crime under China's dubious legal system.
Thanks to Harry Wu, these people are not forgotten and the darkest days of the Chinese gulag have been recorded for history.
Mr. Munro, Coordinator of the Asia Program at the Foreign Policy Research Institute, Philadelphia, was the Beijing correspondent for The Globe and Mail, Toronto, in the mid-1970s.
