Consider what has happened at Diebold Inc.
The maker of automated-teller machines closed an antiquated factory in Ohio in 1991 and laid off a number of workers.
About the same time, it opened two more-efficient plants in the South and then rolled out an upgraded teller machine.
The result: Business is up, and Diebold just hired 100 factory workers to fill its growing number of orders.
The reason, in part, is productivity.
Economists have long argued that corporate America's bloated payrolls and inefficient manufacturing methods often made U.S. products uncompetitive -- particularly on price and quality -- at home and abroad.
But several years of slimming down in many industry sectors has raised productivity, or the value of output produced per hour worked.
That has helped make many businesses newly competitive: Sales are up, and so too the companies' need for line workers and professionals.
"Productivity gains usually mean short-term losses in employment, but ultimately, those gains help our position internationally so we export more goods and create more jobs," says Ross DeVol, senior economist with the WEFA Group.
"U.S. manufacturers' positions vs. Japanese and German competitors have improved immensely."
Though the uptick in demand for manufacturing workers isn't expected to come close to levels of five or 10 years ago, it should help nibble away at the nation's stubbornly high unemployment rate, which stood at 6.7% in January.
It should also partly offset some of the layoffs that companies such as Westinghouse Electric Corp. and Scott Paper Co. -- still trimming the fat -- continue to announce, and that the service sector is expected to undergo as it improves productivity.
Indeed, labor economists and industry executives believe there will be some overall job growth this year on the shop floor and management offices of the manufacturing sector -- for the first time in four years.
About 40,000 jobs were added in the fourth quarter of 1993 and an additional 26,000 jobs in January, bringing the size of the manufacturing work force to about 17.8 million.
Much of that is a reflection of an economy in recovery.
But it's also due to improving productivity.
"I think we've gotten stronger over the last few years," says Doug Otto, chief operating officer of Hardigg Industries Inc., a maker of shipping containers and battery-cell jars in Columbus, Ind.
"Everyone talks the talk about re-engineering but not everyone does it."
Hardigg used to make both shipping containers and industrial battery-cell jars on one production line at its South Deerfield, Mass., plant.
Workers spent half the week making one product, and half the week making the other, a process so awkward that deliveries were chronically late and the company's market share shrank.
So a few years ago Hardigg separated the operations, outfitted a more modern battery-jar plant in Columbus and began involving workers in more decision-making-efforts that lately have paid off.
Overall business is back up, and so too is the company's total employment.
Improved productivity, and some job growth, is evident at companies big and small.
For a time, Biomet Inc., a maker of orthopedic implants, wasn't doing any hiring at all.
But the company says its computer-assisted manufacturing process resulted in improved output and higher product quality.
Demand grew, which in turn prompted Biomet in recent months to add 50 employees to its production line and other parts of the company.
Similarly, Adaptec Inc., which makes microcomputer parts in California's Silicon Valley, has been adding workers lately, thanks in part to higher productivity that has helped the company keep its prices competitive.
Improvements on the production line, and a "concurrent engineering" system that moves products more quickly from the laboratory to production, have over three years cut the time needed to produce a new computer chip by half.
"The only way to attract the top people and pay them what they're worth is by giving them a chance to keep productivity high," says John Adler, Adaptec's chairman.
"We try to get the best equipment for our engineers, for example."
Gordon Richards, chief economist for the National Association of Manufacturers, isn't as convinced as other economists that gains in productivity eventually lead to additional hiring, albeit from a lower total employment base.
He believes the companies with the biggest productivity gains will stay intently focused on improving productivity further.
That means they'll be more inclined to cut jobs, rather than hire more workers, producing what he calls a "dampening effect" on manufacturing employment in the long term.
In the 1980-1982 economic downturn, he notes, manufacturing lost 2.6 million jobs.
But the sector recovered one million of those jobs during the rest of the decade.
After the bloodletting in the manufacturing ranks in the past three years, employment in the sector is now down 3.2 million jobs from 1979.
Mr. Richards doesn't foresee anything close to the recovery that occurred in the 1980s.
That said, a significant number of the jobs that are recovered will result from increases in productivity, insists Gail Fosler, chief economist of the Conference Board.
Unlike Mr. Richards, she foresees both job growth and "new frontiers" being reached in manufacturing productivity.
Notably, she adds, the improvement in productivity is leading to the creation of jobs that require greater skills, and thus pay higher wages.
"Where we have all the productivity in manufacturing is where we have all the compensation growth," says Ms. Fosler.
"For the first time wage growth in manufacturing is outpacing wage growth in services."
She believes that jobs in the manufacturing sector will emerge as some of the most desirable of the 1990s.
John Bussey contributed to this article.
