Shimano Inc. is exporting its way to record profits just as Japan's blue-chip manufacturers are reeling from a strong yen.
Through its aggressively independent strategy, Shimano -- which is best known for its bicycle gear systems -- has successfully targeted and exploited a niche in the booming global mountain-bike business.
In the process, Shimano has overcome an economic downturn that has hammered some of Japan's biggest manufacturers.
Shimano's lean, family-run operation has gobbled up an estimated 70% to 80% of the global market for high-technology bicycle parts.
And the strong yen hasn't eaten into Shimano's business because there isn't a whole lot of competition in its niche.
Shimano on Wednesday reported that consolidated pretax earnings rose 48% to a record 23.57 billion yen ($209.4 million) for the year ended Nov. 20.
Global sales rose 18% to 167.98 billion yen.
And even in the group's self-described "conservative" forecast, pretax profit is expected to climb 10% to 26 billion yen in the new fiscal year, on slightly higher sales of roughly 168.5 billion yen.
Shimano shares have been gaining ground, but still trade at roughly half their record highs of a few years ago.
With Shimano's shares at 2,920 yen -- up 40 yen in Wednesday's trading in Tokyo -- many analysts believe the stock is cheap, considering a growing global interest in mountain biking as a healthy, pollution-free way of having a good time.
Shimano is "producing a product that is right on the current of a strengthening global trend toward leisure and health," said Hiroshi Yamashita, managing director of Fidelity Investments Japan Ltd., which holds an undisclosed stake in the bike-parts maker.
Foreign investors are taking notice.
The stake in Shimano owned by non-Japanese investors has grown to between 14% and 15%, estimates Jonathan Dobson, an analyst with Jardine Fleming Securities in Tokyo.
Shimano officials attribute their success to lessons learned several decades ago.
When the three Shimano brothers -- currently chairman, president and executive vice-president -- inherited the company from their father in the early 1960s, bicycles were quickly becoming an outdated means of transportation.
As the brothers sought new markets, they found in the U.S. a whole generation of bikers peddling for the sake of peddling, not as a method of getting to work or the market.
Shimano headquarters, in an area of Osaka known for its blacksmiths, soon turned into a highly efficient center for research and development in an effort to keep the company ahead in the market for ever-improving gears, brakes and derailleurs.
Today, Shimano is cashing in.
The vast majority of mountain bikes sold in Europe and the U.S. now come fitted with increasingly sophisticated Shimano brakes and gears that offer the precision of touring bikes, but can withstand the pounding of mountain roads.
Recently, Shimano developed index gear changers that allow the biker to switch between dozens of gear choices by pushing a button mounted on the handle bars.
The next target is China, where Shimano racked up 11 billion yen -- or roughly 6% of world-wide sales -- in the most recent fiscal year.
The company already is building a parts factory outside Shanghai.
"There is tremendous momentum now," says Yoshizo Shimano, executive vice president and one of the three brothers who run the firm.
Ken Maruyama, an analyst with UBS Securities Ltd., says demand for Shimano's cutting-edge, speed-regulating products already is growing strongly in China, where only 10% or so of bikes have sophisticated gears.
As national wealth increases, China will increasingly loom large as a market.
Moreover, Mr. Maruyama says that the start of Chinese production will help Shimano's cost-cutting efforts because Chinese labor costs are only 1/20th that of Japan.
