It has taken three years, but Richard Johnson can finally say he's glad he got that traffic ticket.
Inspired by a dull defensive-driving course he took after getting nabbed for speeding back in September 1990, the apparel executive, then 31 years old, was determined to come up with a better alternative.
The result: Three weeks ago, he and two friends launched U.S. Interactive Inc., a business that uses state-of-the-art technology to allow traffic offenders to complete classwork at home.
But reaching this milestone has been a lot tougher than any of them could have imagined.
Not only did they face a debilitating lack of capital, but they also had to wage a bruising lobbying battle in Austin against entrenched driver-safety businesses in order to get state approval.
It's easy to see why the existing operators kicked up a fuss.
Capitalizing on a state law that allows traffic violators to get tickets dismissed or avoid increases in insurance premiums by attending defensive-driving school, hundreds of small businesses have sprung up around the state, charging $15 to $35 per student.
After his own brush with the system, Mr. Johnson, at the time a vice president of a Houston fitness-apparel manufacturer, decided to try to funnel some of that revenue his way.
He and a friend, Scott Owens, an executive at a local venture-capital firm, came up with an idea for a six-hour video course that would allow customers to take the video home for three days and watch at their convenience.
To verify participation, users would have to log on to a computer at home, signal when they were starting to watch the video, and then answer questions, by computer, at specified intervals.
The would-be entrepreneurs were so enamored of their idea that they both quit their $30,000-a-year jobs.
Then came the hard part.
One of the first steps: an oral presentation to the Texas Education Agency, which certifies defensive-driving courses.
Unfortunately, agency officials also requested a written proposal.
Short of cash, Mr. Johnson hadn't paid his utility bills, so they had to string an extension cord from his neighbor's house to turn on his computer.
A financial reprieve came in January 1991, when the father of a childhood friend invested $25,000.
Most of the money went for food, though Messrs. Johnson and Owens also began buying the rights to film clips.
They also hired a technology company to develop necessary software.
In the spring of 1991, disaster struck.
A group of driving-safety schools got an amendment added to a new driver-safety law stating that all courses must have "an instructor who is physically present in appropriate proximity to the student for the type of instruction being given."
The Driving School Association of Texas, a trade organization, says it was concerned that the video course would undercut the industry's credibility, particularly if students could beat the system by having a friend take it for them, or even fast-forwarding through the tape.
Messrs. Johnson and Owens felt they could foil cheaters.
But because their system is proprietary, they were reluctant to give details to their opponents.
And because of their political naivete, the amendment was passed before they could muster the resources to fight it.
The entrepreneurs, however, believed that they could get around the law by having an instructor available through a toll-free line.
They continued to push their idea.
As they did, though, they realized they had a more fundamental problem: They knew nothing about teaching driver safety.
So, they arranged a demonstration meeting with industry executives, hoping to find a partner willing to sell them an existing course to adapt to video.
It was another disaster.
"The driver-safety mob is a blue-collar group," explains Phil Ward, head of Austin-based USA Training Co., which provides course material to schools around the state.
"These guys came in wearing what looked like $600 suits.
They were young, hip, slick, cool, and they had a better mousetrap.
It scared the hell out of us."
Nobody volunteered to help.
But in subsequent meetings, Mr. Ward was impressed with the entrepreneurs' tenacity.
And he was soon transformed from key opponent to business partner.
The agreement allowed U.S. Interactive to adapt his course to video, in return for a $3 cut on each rental -- and the right to distribute it through the 200 businesses in Texas that offer USA Training's classroom program.
Some wealthy investors also chipped in capital.
Meanwhile, the entrepreneurs sought to shave costs.
They shot much of the video themselves, using friends as actors.
Michael Curran, a friend who had been a free-lance television producer in New York, became the third general partner.
In October, the TEA approved their program.
But the fight isn't over: The Driving School Association then sued the TEA in Austin state court, charging that the course was approved illegally.
If the entrepreneurs are worried, they aren't showing it.
Though they have taught only 89 students in their three weeks in business (at $40 apiece), they have already obtained approval to begin operations in New Mexico, and hope to expand to other states.
The lawsuit "is just one more thorn in our side," shrugs the 30-year-old Mr. Owens.
"After a while, you just get used to it."
