Southwestern Bell Corp. agreed to acquire Associated Communications Corp.'s domestic cellular business for $552 million in stock, significantly boosting the presence of its cellular operations in upstate New York.
Despite the doubts raised by the breakup of the proposed Bell Atlantic Corp.-Tele-Communications Inc. merger, Southwestern Bell's definitive agreement indicates that regional phone companies are still willing to make big investments outside the traditional telephone area, notably in the fast-growing cellular field.
Regional telephone companies have seen their traditional local phone service business stagnate over the years.
Indeed, telephone companies continue to snap up independent cellular operators in a bid to consolidate their holdings in key geographic regions.
Such consolidations were set off by American Telephone & Telegraph Co.'s pending acquisition of McCaw Cellular Communications Inc.
"Wireless is an important lane on the information highway," said Jeffrey Hines, a PaineWebber Inc. analyst, noting that the number of cellular subscribers grew a remarkable 40% to about 15 million in 1993.
"The Bells realize they've got wireless competition coming and they've got to build a larger geographic presence."
Southwestern Bell's acquisition, which includes the assumption of $128 million in Associated debt, will give it access to four New York markets, including Buffalo, Rochester, Albany and Glens Falls, and mainly pose a challenge to the cellular operations of another Baby Bell, Nynex Corp.
Southwestern Bell had previously agreed to acquire cellular properties in Syracuse, Ithaca and Utica.
"We really like wireless and are not a casual acquirer" of cellular operations, said John Stupka, president and chief executive officer of Southwestern Bell Mobile Systems, the wireless unit of the phone company.
He said Southwestern Bell will continue to troll for possible acquisitions to add to its cellular operations.
Shares of Southwestern Bell rose $1.25 to $38.75 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading; shares of Associated Communications, based in Pittsburgh, fell $2.125 to $24 in heavy trading on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
Analysts consider Southwestern Bell's cellular operations the strongest among its Baby Bell siblings, largely due to an aggressive low-pricing policy.
In 1993, for instance, the company charged about $90 for 250 minutes of cellular use in Dallas and Chicago, compared with an industry average of about $117 in the top 10 markets, says Herschel Shosteck, a wireless communications analyst.
Southwestern Bell also dropped a $3 fee it used to charge to customers who carried cellular phones outside their calling region.
These efforts have generally paid off.
The company's penetration of the cellular market in its region is about twice the industry average.
Although the company won't disclose its cellular revenue, a spokesman said that nontelephone operations, including wireless, yellow pages and cable holdings, made up about 29% of the $10.7 billion in total 1993 revenue.
Southwestern Bell said Associated will spin off a unit that will own Associated's other assets, including about 16.3 million shares held in TCI; about 3.3 million shares in Liberty Media Corp. and other marketable securities; its stake in Portatel del Sureste, a non-wireline cellular system in southeastern Mexico; and its stake in specialized mobile radio throughout Mexico.
Southwestern Bell said it also will acquire Associated's 35.7% stake in a Pittsburgh cellular property and its 3% stake in Bay Area Cellular Telephone, a cellular system serving San Francisco and San Jose, Calif.
Associated said its shareholders would receive for each share $14.50 in Southwestern Bell stock and a pro-rated common stock interest in the spun-off company.
The transaction still requires shareholder and regulatory approvals, and is expected to close by the end of 1994.
