R.H. Macy & Co., as expected, said it would reduce staff in its San Francisco-based Macy's West unit by 700 positions, or about 3.5%.
Macy's, which has been operating under Chapter 11 federal bankruptcy-law protection since 1992, has periodically laid off small groups of employees.
But Friday's announced job cuts were the largest single reduction so far, and are part of Macy's five-year plan to lower expenses and raise operating profit.
The firings don't affect any Macy store salespeople, but reach a wide range of store staffers from stock people and gift wrappers through the executive ranks.
About 50 employees in the Macy's West divisional office will also be laid off.
Before the cutbacks, more than 20,000 were employed in the Macy's West division, which included 32 Macy's department stores and 20 Bullock's stores in Texas, California, Arizona and other states.
A Macy's spokeswoman Friday said the chain has "no current plans" for similar reductions in the Macy's East division.
Macy also confirmed it will close the Bullock's store in Northridge, Calif., that was damaged in the Los Angeles earthquake, and that it plans to rebuild it.
Macy said it "hopes to be able" to rehire many of the Northridge employees when the replacement store is built, but meanwhile 250 full and part-time employees will be out of work.
Macy's declined to estimate when the store would reopen.
Separately, in a matter that could have a bearing on its remaining independent, Macy filed a motion in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in New York to preserve the right to sue Federated Department Stores Inc. over the Cincinnati-based chain's sale of Bullock's and I. Magnin stores to Macy.
Should the courts award Macy a refund from the 1988 purchase, the retailer could use it to offset claims of Federated, which recently bought a chunk of Macy's secured debt and wants to use it as leverage to merge with the chain.
In the motion, filed Jan. 26, Macy and committees of its unsecured creditors claim that since it appears, after preliminary review, "that Macy's overpaid Federated for the I. Magnin and Bullock's divisions, Macy's did not receive fair consideration from Federated for the payment of the purchase price . . ."
In 1988, Macy paid $1.04 billion, much of it borrowed, for the California-based chains.
Debt from the purchase helped push Macy into bankruptcy proceedings.
But Macy's motion claims the "Bullock's/Magnin purchase may constitute a fraudulent conveyance."
Federated's claims in Macy's bankruptcy includes a secured $449.3 million claim recently bought from Prudential Insurance Co. of America, and earlier unsecured claims of $68.25 million.
With such a large secured claim, Federated intends to play a deciding role in how Macy emerges from Chapter 11.
Should Macy be awarded a refund on the purchase, "any claim of Federated against Macy may be offset by any damages recovered" by Macy.
But, Macy may not pursue the motion for now, and in fact filed the motion to preserve its legal rights, which would have expired last week.
Macy said it hoped that as a result of continuing review of the Bullock's/Magnin purchase, and approval of Macy's bankruptcy-law reorganization plan, "all issues . . . will be resolved."
