Two Baby Bells yesterday took steps toward opening up their local telephone monopolies to competition, part of their separate efforts to gain entry into the $60 billion long-distance market from which they are now banned.
Ameritech Corp., the regional telephone company based in Chicago, said it will submit a blueprint to Illinois state regulators next week that spells out how the Baby Bell plans to open up its facilities to competitors -- but will do so only if it can win federal approval in Washington to enter the long-distance market on a limited basis.
San Francisco-based Pacific Telesis Group, meanwhile, asked California regulators to step up their plans to open the local market for telephone service to competitors.
Its Pacific Bell unit asked the Public Utilities Commission to remove formal barriers to competition, expanding an initiative begun by state regulators last spring.
Under state law, competition for dial-tone service isn't permitted.
The Pacific Bell filing apparently doesn't offer specifics on how to allow new competition, instead asking regulators to examine the issue and come up with a game plan.
Ameritech's proposal, by contrast, is more detailed.
As previously reported, Ameritech's plan is contingent on winning approval from the U.S. District Court in Washington to offer long-distance service for calls heading out of Illinois, one of five Midwest states where Ameritech now has a virtual monopoly on local service.
If that approval is granted, Ameritech would throw open its facilities to any and all competitiors, said Ameritech Vice Chairman Richard Brown.
"This will bring full competition to 3.5 million customers in Illinois," Mr. Brown said.
At Pacific Bell, vice president Bruce Jamison said the company is willing to open up the market, but only if it can compete on equal footing.
If competitors are allowed to interconnect with Pacific Bell's equipment, for example, then Pacific Bell wants permission to interconnect with competitors, Mr. Jamison said.
That is exactly what some proponents of competition at the local level are afraid of.
Consumer advocates fear that robust competition won't develop if the Baby Bells are free to compete unfettered by regulations.
Indeed, an as-yet unreleased study by Economics & Technology Inc., a Boston-based telecommunications research firm, contends that the total revenue of the current roster of possible competitors is less than 1% of the total revenue of the Baby Bells.
The study, funded in part by American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and MCI Communications Corp., concluded that the Baby Bells could be expected to retain a virtual lock on the local market "for the forseeable future," though competition in some "significant components" of the market will likely develop over the next decade.
The report points out that markets where the Bells have been prohibited from entering, like long-distance and manufacturing, have seen robust competition in recent years, while markets where the Bells have been allowed to tread have not.
