United Parcel Service of America Inc. and the International Brotherhood of Teamsters reached a settlement to end a scattered walkout that hobbled deliveries throughout the nation yesterday, especially in the Northeast.
Under terms of the settlement reached last night, UPS has agreed not to penalize the workers who defied a court order to strike, and not to sue union locals for damages.
UPS said, however, that it would still consider seeking damages from the international leadership.
But UPS granted no real concessions on the core issue of its new weight limit for packages, which jumped to 150 pounds from 70 pounds yesterday.
The company said it didn't change any of its safety precautions, and would not in the future.
The Teamsters still claimed victory in the strike, which shut down UPS operations throughout the Northeast and other parts of the country.
Many Teamsters, fearing arrest and financial liability, ignored the Sunday night strike call by their president, Ron Carey.
UPS said roughly 80% of the 165,000 Teamsters who work for the company reported for work yesterday; the union estimated that about half of the members honored the strike.
The financial damage from the strike is uncertain, and the real fallout has yet to appear.
Analysts and consultants said the appearance of labor strife could spook the large shippers that UPS is banking on for contracts.
"This scares us," said Philip Schaecher, senior vice president of operations at Lands' End Inc., a large customer.
Executives at Federal Express Corp. and Airborne Freight Corp. said they won a sizable number of customers from UPS yesterday, using the strike as a tool to lure away business.
"I'm sure they have won business," said a UPS spokesman.
UPS said the strike shut down most of its operations in the Northeast, halting deliveries of packages and express letters from Boston to Washington, D.C. Operations also were jammed in Seattle, Pittsburgh, Atlanta, Chicago and Orlando, Fla.
The UPS air operation was largely unaffected.
Businesses throughout the country were affected by the strike.
American Telephone & Telegraph Co.'s Basking Ridge, N.J., operations center, for instance, didn't receive its usual load of internal reports and company deliveries.
Large users had to reroute packages or make contingency plans.
Lands' End, for instance, which ships 75% of its packages with UPS, said its deliveries to Chicago, New York, Boston and Pittsburgh were frozen.
The company said it may pull some of its business from UPS permanently.
To keep keep the stream of goods moving, UPS managers drove trucks and delivered packages throughout the country yesterday.
Prior to the settlement, UPS had claimed the workers were breaking the law and threatened to hold the local unions liable for damages.
On Friday night, following threats of a strike, the company won a temporary restraining order barring the Teamsters from a walkout.
The Teamsters leadership has taken a hard line on the new package-weight limit.
The 150-pound packages, they say, will pose serious health risks to workers and should have been negotiated during recent contract talks.
UPS disputed the claims.
The union said that as part of the settlement, UPS will negotiate its safety measures.
UPS said it will only "clarify" its existing measures to the union.
The Teamsters also said no worker will be forced to carry a package of more than 70 pounds alone, although that provision was already in the UPS manual.
Separately, a senior Labor Department official who declined to be named said the agency's Occupational Safety and Health Administration plans to take a look at UPS's new rule forcing workers to carry 150-pound packages.
"It's potentially unsafe" for workers to be hauling packages of that weight without devices similar to those used by UPS competitors, including Federal Express, the official said.
UPS says its measures are safer than those used by competitors.
Labor Secretary Robert Reich held phone conversations over the weekend and yesterday with Mr. Carey and UPS President Kent Nelson.
Kevin G. Salwen in Washington contributed to this article.
