Continued cold weather in the U.S. and bullish data on fuel supplies led the rally in world oil markets into a second day.
Fuel prices surged again in futures trading in both New York and London in the wake of the American Petroleum Institute's latest weekly report on U.S. oil inventories.
The API report, issued Tuesday after the close of trading, showed a drop of 7.4 million barrels last week in U.S. inventories of distillate fuels.
Distillates include home heating oil, and prices of that fuel rose sharply yesterday in heavy trading.
That helped to firm up markets for other fuels and for crude oil.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, heating oil for March delivery, which had jumped more than two cents a gallon Tuesday, gained 1.75 cents a gallon to settle at 53.58 cents.
On London's International Petroleum Exchange, futures prices of gas oil (heating oil) closed as much as $4.75 a ton higher.
Alan H. Levine, an oil economist and oil trader with Smith Barney Shearson, had told his clients after the late-Tuesday API report that supplies of distillates were tight and that higher heating-oil prices were likely, possibly rising as high as 54 cents a gallon.
Yesterday's high in intraday trading was 53.8 cents.
Still, Mr. Levine said, "I was somewhat surprised by the velocity of the heating oil move."
Some of heating oil's strength continued to spill over into other petroleum markets.
Although crude oil for March delivery failed to match its Tuesday run-up of 73 cents a barrel, it broke through the psychologically important level of $16 a barrel in early trading yesterday.
The March crude settled at $16.04, up 12 cents for the day.
That was the first time the near-month futures contract had settled above $16 since late November -- just before the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries decided not to cut output to trim the world oil glut.
But has the weather-related rally brought only a temporary respite -- or an end -- to the bearish sentiment that drove world-oil prices to the near-collapse of recent months?
There is debate among traders, analysts and oil economists over the answer.
Mr. Levine of Smith Barney Shearson looks for a pricing pullback "once the weather thaws."
But Edward Krapels, president of Energy Security Analysis, estimated that the cold weather already has had an impact of as much as 500,000 to 600,000 barrels a day on the previous surplus of world supplies.
Except for possibly "a little weakness" after the next week or so, "the worst is over" for the oil markets, Mr. Krapels said.
"I don't think OPEC will have to cut output when it meets in March."
COTTON: Cotton-futures prices fell after setting new contract highs for 14 of the past 15 trading sessions.
At New York's Cotton Exchange, cotton for March delivery was down 1.69 cents to 75.65 cents a pound.
"This is nothing more than a correction after the explosive up move that we've had," said Sandra Kaul, senior analyst for Smith Barney Shearson.
"Throughout this move, the U.S. has remained competitively priced with other world groves."
Cotton prices have risen because global supplies of high-quality cotton are extremely limited.
The U.S. is one of the few traditional suppliers of cotton that still has high-quality stocks to offer.
And cotton prices overseas have been rising faster than U.S. prices.
Thus, Ms. Kaul said she expects the market to resume its upward trend as soon as fabric companies and other consumers begin to buy U.S. cotton.
GRAINS & SOYBEANS: Prices of wheat-futures contracts rose amid continuing speculation that China is interested in buying 18.4 million bushels of subsidized U.S. wheat.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the wheat contract for March delivery rose 4.5 cents a bushel to settle at $3.7475 a bushel.
Soybean prices slipped as beneficial rain in Brazil and Argentina increased the prospects for a bumper soybean crop in South America.
