Groupe Videotron Ltee unveiled an ambitious plan to provide interactive television to 34,000 Canadian homes by 1995.
The new system, which will provide home banking and shopping services, will be run by a consortium that includes Hearst Corp.
Investment in the system is expected to total $750 million Canadian dollars (US$572 million) during the next five to eight years.
About C$250 million would come from consortium members, with the rest to be generated by the consortium's operations.
Project partners say what distinguishes their effort from other announced experiments is its size and price: the service will be free to consumers.
Costs will be borne by the companies that provide the services and by advertisers.
The service will begin in Quebec province in the area near Chicoutimi and expand to 1.4 million homes in the Quebec City and Montreal areas between 1996 and 2002.
Videotron, Canada's second-biggest cable operator, already has more than 220,000 subscribers for its Videoway interactive system in Quebec province.
The system, launched in 1990, enables viewers to play video games or control camera angles for sporting events by manipulating data fed into a decoder box.
The new system, which initially will be mostly in French, will enable users to pay bills, browse through video catalogs, or buy goods and services.
The service will provide a magnetic-card reader and printer.
Users eventually may be able to use the system to program their home heating and lighting.
Consumers generally won't pay hook-up or usage charges for the system, though there could be a minimal fee to cover servicing of terminals.
The founding partners include National Bank of Canada; Hydro-Quebec, the province's electric utility; the Canadian postal service, and Quebec's lottery authority.
Hearst, with a 10% stake, said it will provide an electronic yellow-pages directory and a transaction service for restaurant reservations and theater-ticket purchases.
More than 75 companies have signed up to sell products and services, a Hearst spokesman said, including Coca Cola Co., Avon Products Inc. and Sears Canada, a unit of Sears, Roebuck & Co.
Viewers at home will be able to look at photographs of merchandise from Sears or Avon, for example, and order merchandise directly.
A receipt will be printed out immediately by the set-top box.
The project is an important one for closely held Hearst, marking the company's first major venture in the emerging multimedia market.
Hearst, which publishes newspapers, books and magazines and owns radio and television stations, formed a New Media group less than a year ago, headed by Alfred C. Sikes, former chairman of the Federal Communications Commission.
Frank A. Bennack Jr., Hearst's chief executive officer, made it clear at a New York news conference that Hearst's downside risk is limited.
As a 10% owner in the new venture, it is putting up about $20 million.
It will spend additional money to develop the electronic-business directory, said Mr. Bennack, though he declined to estimate the cost.
Mr. Sikes said that Hearst's directory will be similar to "a yellow pages, but businesses listed in it can update information daily, provide images and deliver coupons on a printer" available as part of the hardware.
