For generations, historians and self-proclaimed observers of the American scene have held the conviction that the West -- not only the actual rugged vastness beyond the Mississippi but also the very idea of all that space -- was one of the defining elements of the American character.
Now comes the argument that Siberia -- more vast, more rugged and quite a bit colder -- played the same role for Russia.
This argument is at the center of "The Conquest of a Continent: Siberia and the Russians" (Random House, 512 pages, $30), W. Bruce Lincoln's latest volume on Russia.
Mr. Lincoln, who has written on the Romanovs and the Russian Civil War, has produced something of a Russian analogue to "How the West Was Won."
The short answer is: with difficulty.
The real answer is: not completely.
The size and scale of Siberia are almost unimaginable.
It stretches from the Urals to the Bering Sea and encompasses some two million square miles of space -- more than the entire U.S. Mr. Lincoln delights in noting, for example, that Lake Baikal, dropped in the middle of Siberia, is bigger than Belgium.
The region includes a third of the world's iron, a quarter of its timber.
"Diverse and monotonous, sinister and romantic, rich and impoverished, Siberia to this day remains a virtual continent unto itself, in which nature and history have juxtaposed an endless array of contradictions and opposites," he writes.
This story includes Genghis Khan, who sent the Mongols warring into Russia; Ivan the Terrible, who conquered Siberia for Russia; Peter the Great, who supported scientific expeditions and mining enterprises; and Mikhail Gorbachev, whose glasnost policy prompted a new sense of "Siberian" nationalism.
It is also the story of millions of souls who themselves were conquered by Siberia.
Vast riches and great misery, often intertwined, mark this region.
The wealth of Kolyma, whose gold fields created legends, was mined by slave laborers, untold hundreds of whom died digging with their hands.
Today, Siberia still has the minerals, but is no longer a vast prison yard.
Nothing about Siberia has ever encouraged anyone to think small.
The land was so big and the distances so great that early fur traders could count on only two Siberian trips a decade, or about half a dozen a lifetime.
Later, the central planners of the Kremlin established collective farms in Siberia that were so big -- they averaged 250 square miles -- that workers had to camp out for weeks at a time so they could be within a day's walk of their crops.
The construction of the Trans-Siberian Railroad involved 70,000 men who pushed around 77 million cubic feet of earth.
Even the industrial disputes were outsized.
The Lena Goldfields workers, who lived in icy squalor while mining some 40 tons of gold a year, courted tragedy in their 1912 strike for better working conditions.
Some 250 men were killed, another 270 wounded.
Public-health officials looking in on the Trans-Siberian Railroad found that it was "impossible to live under such conditions and retain any shred of human dignity."
Peter the Great and Stalin, Khrushchev and Brezhnev envisaged Siberia as a base for building a huge industrial machine.
Czars and commissars saw it as the perfect prison.
The price proved horrifying: Environmental scars, sick children, millions of tons of industrial pollutants and a standard of living that was scarcely better than in the days of the czars.
The price of Siberia's role as prison to a nation is harder to quantify, yet probably immeasurably higher.
Banishment to Siberia usually meant death sooner or later.
In czarist days, prisoners, some of whom were branded on their faces, were beaten with whips outfitted with lead-weighted lashes.
Their numbers included a small percentage of women, often abused and raped.
Dostoevski, himself a veteran of the camps, wrote that they produced "complete moral degradation, absolute depravity and insolent baseness."
Mr. Lincoln estimates that one adult male in 10 in the old Soviet Union was in labor camps during the Stalin years.
Some prisoners were worked to death, some simply vegetated.
Minerals were pulled from the earth, trees felled and roads sculpted, but men died at astonishing rates.
There was, and is, something about the land of Siberia that brings out the brutal in men.
Perhaps it is the cold, perhaps the emptiness, perhaps even the feeling that it is so very far from civilization.
It was always this way.
Officers of the czars delighted in torturing natives "as a matter of course," according to Mr. Lincoln; one military governor of Iakutsk hanged 23 chiefs.
Russia today remains an unfinished country; a look at the newspaper will prove that.
And Siberia is so important to the Russian psyche that the nation will not be finished until Siberia is brought to heel, the scars of the prisons removed, the environmental ravages healed.
Mr. Lincoln is right in believing that Russia's greatest battle is not yet over, nor is it close to being won.
Mr. Shribman is Washington bureau chief of the Boston Globe.
