The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. found no evidence that the Rose Law Firm, where Hillary Rodham Clinton and several administration officials were partners, violated conflict-of-interest rules in its dealings with a failed Arkansas thrift.
Separately, President Clinton repeated assertions that the current controversy over an investment he and Mrs. Clinton made through Whitewater Development Co. will die down.
"It's an investment I made 15 years ago . . . that lost money, because the property market turned around at home," Mr. Clinton said on the syndicated radio program, "Imus in the Morning."
"It's a simple, straightforward thing, and it'll be shown to be."
Asked if Whitewater will evolve into another Watergate -- the scandal that spun out of control and brought down President Nixon -- Mr. Clinton said firmly, "No."
The FDIC examined just one part of Republican allegations and a number of news disclosures about Whitewater Development and Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan.
Allegations have linked Madison, which failed in 1989, to helping the Clintons finance their investment in Whitewater, a North Arkansas land-development venture, and to helping raise money for Mr. Clinton's gubernatorial campaign debts.
Mr. Clinton has denied any impropriety.
A special counsel is currently investigating these claims.
After Madison failed, the FDIC, which was managing the liquidation of the thrift's assets, hired the Rose Law Firm in Little Rock to complete litigation against Frost & Co., Madison's former accounting firm.
Claims have been made that the Rose firm was guilty of a conflict of interest because it had represented Madison several years earlier before the Arkansas Securities Commissioner and because the father-in-law of Webster Hubbell, the partner in charge of the Frost case, was invovled in litigation against Madison.
Mr. Hubbell, a former Mayor of Little Rock and a close friend of the Clintons, is currently the third-ranking official in the Justice Department.
In an eight-page report, the FDIC's legal division "found no basis to conclude that under the then applicable rules either situation involved a conflict of interest."
As a result, the staff said that "we recommend no sanctions against the firm."
Alan Whitney, the FDIC's spokesman, said that FDIC acting Chairman Andrew Hove has reviewed the report and agreed with its conclusions.
If the agency had found conflicts of interest, it could have barred the Rose firm from further FDIC work.
Mr. Whitney said the firm isn't currently doing any work for the FDIC.
The finding is good news for Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Hubbell and other Rose alumni in the administration.
The conclusion could have a bearing on investigations into the circumstances that led to the suicide of Vincent Foster, a Rose partner who became deputy White House counsel and handled Whitewater issues before his death last July.
Mr. Foster wrote to the FDIC the day Madison failed, soliciting S&L work.
However, the agency said his letter wasn't a factor in the FDIC's decision to hire the firm.
The Rose firm negotiated a $1 million settlement with the accounting firm for the government, and took a $400,000 fee, according to reports.
The FDIC finding may also ease pressure on the agency, which has been trying hard to stay out of the charges swirling in Congress and the press about Madison and Whitewater.
Ricki Tigert, President Clinton's nominee to chair the FDIC, has said she will remove herself from any matter that comes before the agency about the Clintons' involvement with Madison or Whitewater.
Ms. Tigert, a Washington banking lawyer, is a Clinton acquaintance.
But the report probably won't end Republican claims about a possible conflict of interest by the Rose firm.
For one thing, many of the findings in the report are based in part on Mr. Hubbell's recollections.
Secondly, it's not clear how forthright the firm was in disclosing potential conflicts to the FDIC.
Thirdly, the FDIC staff said that, while the Rose firm didn't violate conflict-of-interest standards in 1989, today's rules would require clearer disclosure of potential conflicts to the FDIC.
Rep. James Leach of Iowa, one of the Republicans who has pushed aggressively for a full investigation of all the circumstances surrounding the failure of Madison, has said that "there is a potential civil liability of the Rose Law Firm."
He couldn't be reached for comment yesterday.
The White House had no comment on the FDIC staff report.
Any further investigation will be conducted by Robert Fiske, the special counsel who is looking into charges that have arisen about Madison, Whitewater and Mr. Foster's suicide.
Yesterday, as expected, the Justice Department issued a new indictment against David Hale, a former county judge and Little Rock businessman who has been charged with conspiracy to defraud the Small Business Administration.
Mr. Hale has asserted that Mr. Clinton and James McDougal, Madison's former owner and a Clinton partner in Whitewater, asked him to arrange a $300,000 loan backed by the SBA to clean up problems at Madison.
Such a loan was made to a company owned by Susan McDougal, Mr. McDougal's wife at the time.
Mr. Clinton has denied any role in the loan.
But Mr. Clinton told reporters yesterday that he has been meeting regularly with his personal attorney on Whitewater issues.
Their latest meeting was Wednesday, he said.
"He basically just gives us a regular update, oh, every few weeks," Mr. Clinton said.
On the Imus show, the president continued to maintain that he and his wife lost about $69,000 on the Whitewater investment.
"We lost it over a long period of time.
Most of it {the loss} was when we paid the bank loans back with interest and we never got any money on the interest," he said.
"I'm amazed by all the twists and turns of interpretation it's been given, but there's-that's about what happened," Mr. Clinton said.
"Apparently that's part of being president in the latter half of the 20th century in a highly competitive environment."
