Standard & Poor's Corp. said it placed the ratings of this major banking company and its units on CreditWatch with positive implications "in light of the positive trends that have developed in several fundamental aspects of the company's financial condition."
About $18 billion in long-term debt is affected, S&P said.
"The large quantity of bad loans is beginning to be worked down," S&P said.
"In addition, cost cuts have helped the company return to profitability and generate retained earnings to rebuild its capital base."
Ratings under review include S&P's single-A-minus senior debt ratings of Citicorp and Citicorp Finance PLC, and its triple-B-plus ratings on subordinated debt of Citicorp, Citicorp Banking Corp. and Citicorp Person-to-Person Inc.
KROGER Co. (Cincinnati) -- Moody's Investors Service Inc. placed its Ba2 rating of this supermarket chain's long-term debt under review for possible upgrade, citing the company's successful efforts to refinance debt with lower interest rates.
About $2.6 billion in debt is affected.
The ratings agency said the company could benefit from higher capital-spending plans for new stores and renovations.
Moreover, Moody's said, Kroger's private-label and cost-containment efforts have translated to "significantly" higher earnings.
MCI COMMUNICATIONS Corp. (Washington) -- Moody's Investors Service Inc. upgraded the debt ratings of MCI.
Among other upgrades, Moody's raised the rating on the company's senior unsecured notes, debentures and medium-term notes to A-2 from Baa-1, citing the company's strong financial position and a proposed alliance with British Telecommunications PLC.
About $1.8 billion of debt is affected.
SHELL CANADA Ltd. (Calgary, Alberta) -- Moody's Investor Service Inc. lowered its long-term rating on $900 million of this petroleum company's Eurodebentures and notes to A1 from Aa3, citing poor prospects for increasing its core assets.
Moody's predicted that Shell Canada's returns from natural gas production and petroleum refining and marketing will be limited by external factors, and warned that spending cuts and declining oil reserves could erode its asset base.
However, it said Royal Dutch/Shell Group's 78% ownership of Shell Canada is a "stabilizing factor."
A Shell Canada spokesman said the downgrade won't affect the company because it doesn't plan to borrow money for several years.
