Most Asian stock markets continued to fall Thursday, with the brunt of the selling hitting Taipei, where prices plunged 5.9%, and Hong Kong, where equities lost 5%.
Many European markets also took a drubbing.
London stocks' decline extended into a second day.
Shares slumped 2% in Frankfurt and 1.3% in Paris.
But across Asia, bargain hunters tempered the declines in several markets and analysts predicted some would rebound today.
"When you see markets fall so fast, you expect them to bounce and bounce hard," said Paul Schulte, vice president at CS First Boston (H.K.) Ltd.
Analysts agreed Asian markets have been ripe for a sell-off after surging last month but blamed emotion for the slump's acceleration.
Mr. Schulte said the heavy selling "isn't a function of fundamentals, it's a function of the herd mentality."
Taipei succumbed Thursday in what was considered a delayed reaction after resisting the selling stampede for several days.
The market is off 8.8% from the current rally's peak on Jan. 5.
More than 100 stocks fell 7%, the daily limit for price movements permitted by the Taiwan exchange.
The panic selling was spurred further by the rumored death, later denied, of the chairman of Formosa Plastics Group, an industrial conglomerate.
Shipping stocks were badly hit when the Taiwan government wouldn't budge from its refusal to allow direct shipping links with China, which a Taiwan official proposed last month, helping to fuel buying in the latest rally.
But the Taipei market could get a lift: Late Thursday, Taiwan's Finance Ministry said 16 banks that have set up in the past three years may trade shares starting tomorrow.
And most companies are about to pay bonuses for the lunar new year, a traditional market-boosting holiday.
Some international investors already have begun buying back into Hong Kong's market and London-traded shares of Hong Kong companies.
Thursday's sell-off, the third in a row, pushed Hong Kong's loss to almost 17% from a Jan. 4 peak; blue chips are off 20% or more from their highs.
Continued rumors that Hong Kong banks will tighten residential mortgage lending kept pressure on property stocks, the market's largest sector.
But analysts dismissed the effect such an action would have on the profitability of property companies.
Investors are simply looking for an excuse to unload shares, analysts said.
CS First Boston's Mr. Schulte said the Hong Kong market's price/earnings ratio has collapsed to around 15 from 18 before the selling began.
That makes Hong Kong look inexpensive, compared with other markets in the region, and puts Hong Kong on par with the U.S., where the economy is growing much more slowly.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which surged 308.63 points Wednesday, skidded 216.62, or 1.2%, to 18577.26, as profit-taking snapped a six-session streak of gains.
In trading Friday, the Nikkei index rose 78.51 points to close the morning session at 18655.77.
Thursday's first-section volume was estimated at 430 million shares, down from 451.1 million shares a day earlier.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which gained 10.59 points Wednesday, slipped 7.96 to 1503.47.
Singapore shares skidded 2.9% as weak buying to correct the excessively oversold market failed again and again, and a free-fall was prompted by bouts of forced sales, such as margin calls on positions bought on credit.
In Kuala Lumpur, the main index dived 3.5%, for the third consecutive loss, even after a rebound from the day's lows when bargain hunters did some buying.
In Manila, shares stumbled 2.3%, that market's fifth straight decline.
In Bangkok, prices retreated for the second day, plummeting 3.3%.
In Sydney, shares fell heavily on continued profit-taking.
In Seoul, stocks advanced 1.4% on rallies by blue chips and issues with low price/earnings ratios, though once again, more stocks fell than rose.
As for reports that foreign fund managers have soured on Asia, Mr. Schulte said, "There are still billions of dollars in the U.S. and Europe waiting to get into these markets."
London shares ended near the day's lows, as the British government was expected to tend economic recovery cautiously and stay tough on inflation, delaying cuts in interest rates.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 111.82, down 0.89, reflecting decreases in markets in all three regions -- Americas, Europe and Asia/Pacific.
Industrial technology stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 99, up 0.99, or 1%, with Advantest Corp. of Japan posting a 10% gain in its local currency.
Plantation stocks trailed, at 210.51 down 27.51, or 12%, with Asiatic Development Bhd. of Malaysia sliding 18% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index shed 12.0 points to 3360.0, near the session low.
The FT 30-stock index added 3.2 points to 2577.4.
Volume was 896.2 million shares, up from 808.9 million shares a day earler.
The FT 100 has lost 86 points this week.
Yesterday, stocks opened strongly on reports of good corporate earnings and Christmas business.
But the British pound's strength in currency dealings suggested a lending-rate cut isn't likely soon.
Weakness on Wall Street also added to the gloom in London, where the current trading account closes Friday, timing that generally prompts price declines from selling of holdings to settle new purchases.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index sank 44.52 points, or 2%, to 2164.66.
The plunge came on corporate news, including growing uncertainty about a major rescue plan and a poor earnings outlook.
In Paris, the market tumbled 1.3% as prices continued their correction, with the decline gaining speed and breadth as the French central bank decided against cutting interest rates.
In Stockholm, after a weak opening, stocks rallied to end with small gains in heavy trading.
The recovery was attributed to a boost for the real estate and construction sector from Swedish government action indicating a bridge linking Sweden and Denmark would be approved.
But in Zurich, equities tumbled 1.7% on profit-taking.
And in Brussels, shares were driven down 1.1% by profit-taking, jitters about a potential Belgian political crisis in connection with a bribery scandal, and higher interest rates.
In Mexico City, stocks dropped 1.2% on profit-taking following the previous day's rise up near record territory.
The threat of a drawn-out confrontation with anti-government rebels also pressured stocks.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
