Caterpillar Inc.'s recovery accelerated as brisk sales of construction equipment in the U.S. led to stronger-than-expected sales and earnings in the fourth quarter.
The report bolstered the contention by some money managers and analysts that Caterpillar, of Peoria, Ill., has begun what could be a long period of improving results.
That view has helped send Caterpillar shares to new highs in recent months after years of underperforming the overall market.
But Friday's report was even better than the optimists expected.
It caused analysts to boost their profit forecasts and the stock to surge to yet another high.
Caterpillar shares closed at $98.625, up $4.625, or 5%, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading, providing a boost to the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
Caterpillar, which is also seeing increased demand for its big diesel engines, said it earned $119 million, or $1.17 a share, for the quarter.
That included a $29 million charge for early retirement of debt.
Before the charge, the company earned $148 million, or $1.46 a share, for the latest quarter.
That's well above securities analysts' estimates, which were a mean of 86 cents a share, according to First Call, a unit of Thomson Financial Services.
In the year-earlier quarter, Caterpillar had a loss of $2 million, or two cents a share.
John McGinty of CS First Boston said the report shows that Caterpillar is "incredibly profitable, and if they get top-line sales growth, earnings will come tumbling on down" to the bottom line.
The sales performance was as surprising as the earnings turnaround.
Boosted by the rebounding U.S. business and price increases, sales jumped 16% to $3.07 billion from $2.64 billion a year earlier.
Many analysts had expected a single-digit increase in sales.
For 1993, Caterpillar earned $652 million, or $6.43 a share, including a gain of $300 million from a settlement with the Internal Revenue Service.
A year earlier, the company had a loss of $2.44 billion, or $24.12 a share, including a charge of $2.22 billion for new accounting standards.
Sales rose 14% to $11.24 billion from $9.84 billion.
Barry Bannister, an analyst at S.G. Warburg, said he'll probably increase his recent estimates that Caterpillar would earn $4.94 a share in 1994 and $8.02 a share in 1995.
"I believe the outlook for sustained earnings growth for several years is in place," he said.
Even as they praise Caterpillar for its strong cost-cutting and efficiency moves in recent years, some analysts remain concerned about the lack of a labor contract with the United Auto Workers, which represents most of the company's U.S. production employees.
While they question the UAW's contention that its so-called work-to-rule campaign has affected production, analysts worry about another strike.
In November, a three-day walkout was called in protest of the company's suspension of a union officer at Caterpillar's engine plant in Mossville, Ill.
As the company released its results, UAW Secretary-Treasurer Bill Casstevens was touring union halls to rally members who work at the company's plants in Illinois and Pennsylvania.
"Imagine how much better Cat could do if they were not at war with their own workers," Mr. Casstevens said in a statement.
