Health-maintenance organizations received generally high marks in a new study evaluating the quality of prenatal care at health plans.
The report, based on more than 24,000 births covered by six large HMOs around the U.S., found, for instance, that 87% of expectant mothers in the participating plans had their first visit with a doctor in their first trimester, an important step in preventing delivery of low-birth-weight babies.
The national rate is 76%.
But researchers also found significant variation in the overall performance of the participating plans.
The study is the latest example of a burgeoning effort to develop valid tools for comparing health plans based on the quality of their services.
Kaiser Permanente, the big Oakland, Calif., HMO; United HealthCare Corp., Minneapolis; and U.S. Healthcare Inc., Blue Bell, Pa., for instance, each recently released report cards on its performance across a variety of measures.
The efforts reflect growing demands from employers for comparative data to guide their health-benefits purchasing decisions.
The Clinton administration's health-reform plan, as well as several competing proposals introduced in Congress, call for such data to help consumers choose plans.
"With increasing competition among health plans, people are really focused on bottom-line premium costs," said Elizabeth A. McGlynn, health-policy analyst at Rand Corp., a Santa Monica, Calif., think tank, and an author of the current study.
"If you don't have systematic, countervailing information on quality, you might drive the wrong providers out of the market."
But most reporting efforts are in their infancy, and many questions remain over what data and measures truly reflect quality.
The current study looked at how well HMOs performed in providing routine screening tests and other measures of the process of prenatal care, such as whether an expectant mother's blood pressure was taken on each visit.
Done by Rand and partly funded by a group of HMOs called the HMO Quality of Care Consortium, the study appears in the January issue of Archives of Family Medicine, a journal published by the American Medical Association.
"We found quite good quality of care in these HMOs, but there was variation," Dr. McGlynn said.
Aggregate compliance with most of the criteria was over 75% in the six plans, but there was wide variation in some individual cases.
For instance, one plan screened only 7% of patients for gonorrhea on the first visit, while another tested for the disease on 96%.
HMOs weren't compared with traditional fee-for-service care in the study.
But researchers said 5% of births in the study were considered low-birth-weight, compared with a national average of 7%, and just one infant was born at a "very low birth weight" at the six HMOs, well under a national average of 1%, the study said.
The HMOs also bettered the national average on blood-pressure testing and matched national rates for testing for anemia.
Many HMOs offer comprehensive prenatal programs, in part to attract young adult members who value such services and in part because the benefits, both in quality of life and in cost-savings, are well-documented.
Lead author of the study is Paul J. Murata, a doctor now in private practice in Torrance, Calif.
