Just before being mobbed at a gathering of fans in mid-1992, newly minted superstar Billy Ray Cyrus threw his arms around Tracy Storey, the programming manager for Country Music Television.
"Thank you," he gushed.
"CMT has changed my life."
Mercury Records had released Mr. Cyrus's "Achy Breaky Heart" to the 24-hour country-music cable network weeks before giving it to radio stations.
That created tremendous pent-up demand.
When the song finally did hit the charts, the compact disk that contained it became the fastest-rising album debut in Billboard magazine's history, eclipsing even the Beatles' 1963 launch.
"We put the booster rockets under country music," says David Hall, CMT's president.
It has been some liftoff.
Country record sales climbed to 17% of the total market in 1992 from about 9% in 1990, according to the Recording Industry Association of America.
CMT's majority owner, Gaylord Entertainment Co., has had a similar surge.
For years, the company, which owned Nashville's Grand Ole Opry, the adjacent hotel and theme park and assorted media properties, seemed little more than a backwater media outlet catering mostly to a working-class crowd from the South.
But recently Gaylord, like a glittery rhinestone, has attracted attention in both Hollywood and Wall Street.
In the past several years, it has become an influential media and entertainment empire -- and very profitable.
Its net income soared to $29 million in 1992 from nearly $2 million in 1991; its revenue rose to $643 million from $601 million.
For 1993, analysts expect a profit of about $38 million, before extraordinary items, on revenue of more than $700 million.
Gaylord's huge Opryland Hotel has an occupancy rate, running about 85%, that is the envy of the industry; its theme park is a mecca for country-music fans from Tuscaloosa to Tokyo.
Partly because of Gaylord's businesses, Nashville has become an even more powerful magnet for such stars as Garth Brooks, Dolly Parton and the Judds.
And largely because of them, the city has become a major tourist destination.
But the properties that have really put Gaylord on the map are its two cable-television networks.
CMT, a kind of MTV for country music, is one of the fastest-growing networks on cable TV; its subscribership has nearly tripled to 25 million homes since 1991.
And The Nashville Network is a country-lifestyle station whose prime-time ratings now top those of MTV.
The two networks are the main reason Gaylord's stock has more than doubled and split once since its initial public offering in 1991.
They are also why the company is rumored to be a takeover target -- if the Oklahoma billionaire who controls most of its stock would ever part with it.
Gaylord's success may be mostly due to serendipity.
As the brawl for Paramount Communications Inc. attests, the market for choice programming assets has never been hotter.
Moreover, the country-music audience has swelled to 42% of the U.S. adult population, roughly tripling in the past decade, according to industry estimates.
That may have as much to do with aging baby boomers and their disenchantment with rock music as with any clever marketing moves by Gaylord.
But Gaylord did provide the genre with the media exposure it needed to get out of the backwoods.
"These people really know what they are; whether they are smart or lucky, they have achieved a position in a market that is exploding world-wide," says Larry Haverty, a money manager at State Street Research, a big institutional shareholder.
This marks a big switch from the early 1980s, when country music was still considered largely redneck.
Then, a major hit by a well-known performer such as Willie Nelson might sell a million records, compared with Michael Jackson's "Thriller" album of 1983, which sold 40 times that.
The Grand Ole Opry and its radio show were owned by an insurance company, NLT Corp., partly as vehicles for advertising insurance policies.
In the early 1980s, when the Opryland holdings were put on the block following a buyout of NLT, Walt Disney Co., Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts & Co., and members of the Rockefeller family all took a pass.
But not Edward L. Gaylord, an Oklahoma billionaire who had made a fortune in the newspaper business and happened to be an unabashed devotee of "Hee Haw."
He bought the Opryland holdings and also bought into the vision of its president, E.W. "Bud" Wendell, for a country music and lifestyle cable network.
"All of a sudden, we woke up to the fact that we had an opportunity to promote country music nationally as opposed to regionally," says Mr. Wendell, who, despite propping an acoustic guitar near his desk, still dresses more like an insurance executive than a country-music mogul.
He is now president and chief executive of Gaylord.
At first, The Nashville Network got a tepid reception from advertisers; it lost tens of millions of dollars before turning a profit in 1987.
But Gaylord executives knew they were on to something as soon as they walked into the Savoy Hotel in New York City for TNN's rollout party.
"We went up there with our pin-stripe suits on trying to impress everybody," recalls Mr. Hall, who began his Opryland career as a janitor 28 years ago and is now Gaylord's vice president for cable networks as well as CMT president.
"Don't you know, all these Madison Avenue people showed up in cowboy boots and hats.
I thought, `This is going to work out great.
Everybody's in the closet -- they love country music.'"
The new network played to the hardcore country audience, a conservative, blue-collar group that tends to spend weekends fishing, hunting or cheering on drag racers.
Gaylord rolled out country-music variety shows such as "Nashville Now," which made its host, Ralph Emery, the Johnny Carson of the pickup-truck circuit and catapulted Mr. Emery's autobiography to No. 2 on the New York Times bestseller list.
On weekends, The Nashville Network was dominated by outdoorsports shows ranging from swamp-buggy racing to more mainstream activities like bass fishing and auto racing.
The network became a hit with advertisers by delivering the "heartland" audience, a huge group particularly loyal to American-made products.
"It's not that they have something that can't be gotten elsewhere; it's that they have it concentrated," says David Martin, chief executive officer of PentaCom Inc., a Detroit-based media planning and buying agency for Chrysler Corp., a big TNN advertiser.
TNN also began to change the dynamics of country music.
Before, "it would take artists five to seven years of playing county fairs and school auditoriums before they could break nationally," says Ed Benson, executive director of the Country Music Association.
TNN considerably shortened that time frame.
But even as Gaylord was playing to the heartland, country music was beginning to move way beyond that.
It was slowly attracting a much younger, hipper crowd, lured in part by younger country stars who had shed the Dolly Parton flounces and the Porter Wagner spangles and were being groomed by wardrobe consultants and media coaches.
Even more surprisingly, it was going more upscale and mainstream, as baby boomers, with babies of their own, turned off to grunge rock and heavy metal in favor of country's more traditional themes.
Between 1988 and 1990, sales of country records jumped 56% as sales of rock-and-roll records slumped 5%.
Gaylord was somewhat ambivalent about the newcomers.
It didn't want to do anything to turn off its core followers, but it wanted a piece of the action.
In 1991, it acquired a 67% stake in a country-music network that had been launched by local entrepreneurs and was called Country Music Television (Group W Satellite Communications, a Westinghouse Electric Corp. unit, owns the rest).
Gaylord quickly transformed the network into CMT, with splashy graphics and round-the-clock music videos of chart-toppers such as Reba McEntire and George Strait and sexy young country stars such as Dwight Yoakam and Alan Jackson (who got his start as a TNN mailman).
The new channel attracted a whole new crowd, some industry executives believe, as TV viewers, scanning the channels, were often fooled into thinking they were watching MTV.
"Suddenly, they see it's not so unhip to like country," says Scott Borchetta, a vice president of MCA Records in Nashville.
Many believe CMT helped accelerate the market's growth.
By 1993, the 18-to-34 age group and people earning more than $60,000 a year had become the fastestgrowing segments of the country-music audience.
And the genre was gaining popularity outside the South, the country-music stronghold; the Northeast showed a 48% jump last year in country-music fans, CMA says, while the West had a 19% increase.
"Video has played a huge role" in those gains, Mr. Borchetta says.
The overseas market has been surprising, too.
When Gaylord launched CMT Europe in October 1992, its Nashville executives prepared a million-dollar marketing campaign, hoping to slowly cultivate a following and reach a modest goal of one million homes by the end of last year.
They found, to their astonishment, a readymade international audience long enamored of America's cowboy culture.
CMT Europe has signed up more than eight million subscribers, with some in such unlikely places as Israel, Russia and Scandinavia.
Perhaps the only cloud on the company's horizon is the fickle taste of most consumers, who often drop fads as fast as they can say "disco."
But country-music proponents contend that the music, which predates virtually all other forms of popular music, is no passing fancy and will gain momentum as cable channels and radio stations penetrate more markets.
Another question is what is to become of an enterprise whose leaders are getting on in years.
Mr. Gaylord is 74 and Mr. Wendell 66, and partly for that reason the company is frequently mentioned as a takeover candidate.
Partly to put such talk to rest, Gaylord brought in a younger but seasoned chief operating officer, Richard H. Evans, who has run both Madison Square Garden and Radio City Music Hall.
The 49-year-old Mr. Evans says his job is to help plan a changing of the guard.
The reclusive Mr. Gaylord, whose family controls 60% of the voting stock and 45% of the equity in the company, declined to be interviewed.
(Dow Jones & Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal, has a minority interest in an electronic-publishing subsidiary of one of Mr. Gaylord's private companies.)
Mr. Wendell says he himself plans to be around for at least three more years.
The company has given him the financial incentives to do so, and besides, he says, "I really would like to see us get country around the world."
Mr. Wendell says the company hasn't attracted any significant acquisition attention.
"I guess we're too small," he says.
"If we are a target, I'm not aware of it."
So, for now, the executives say they plan to concentrate on growth and generate a 15% average annual increase in operating cash flow.
To do that, Gaylord will further its push overseas.
CMT's international arm "could ultimately be bigger than anything we're doing here," says Terry London, chief financial officer.
But Gaylord isn't ignoring Nashville.
In the largest construction project in the city's history, Gaylord is expanding the Opryland Hotel, which already has 1,891 rooms, adding a thousand more rooms plus convention space and building a waterway that will allow water taxis to ferry hotel guests downtown.
Gaylord is also trying to bring National Basketball Association and National Hockey League teams to the city.
The company also intends to capitalize on its country franchise in many ways.
It will continue to boost marketing of the Acuff-Rose music catalog it bought in 1985, which includes the work of Hank Williams Sr., the Everly Brothers and Roy Orbison.
It plans to launch a restaurant/music-hall chain called the Wildhorse Saloon.
It hopes to expand in TV home shopping and would like to acquire more tourism and sports concerns -- possibly including operations on the scale of Radio City Music Hall or the Daytona 500 Nascar races, Mr. Evans says.
It is also working to develop new cable networks -- possibly in the outdoor sports area -- to roll out when cable operators open up more channels.
To finance some of these projects, the company is trying to sell the 27 cable systems it operates in California, North Carolina and South Carolina, a move that it says could raise as much as $500 million.
For now, at least, Mr. Wendell disclaims any interest in diversifying outside the country-lifestyle market.
"We've pretty well defined our direction," he says.
"We've tried to stick to our knitting."
