Japan is entering a period of political instability that could hinder policy making, weaken the economy, frustrate the U.S. and play havoc with Tokyo's markets.
The stunning rejection by parliament Friday of legislation to reform the nation's political system will aggravate the turmoil.
In immediate terms, the rejection has wounded the fragile coalition government of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, perhaps fatally.
But in a wider perspective, the vote wasn't the cause of the chaos, only the most vivid symptom of Japan's collapsing postwar political order.
One early effect of the turmoil was a sharp fall in Tokyo stock prices Monday morning.
The parliamentary vote had been taken after the market closed on Friday, and analysts said over the weekend that they expected shares to tumble on Monday as investors lowered their expectations for Japan's future.
At the close of the morning session, the benchmark Nikkei 225-stock index was down 4.3%.
The defeat in parliament "is an example of how, when a system unravels, it's very hard to hold any of it together," said Gerald L. Curtis, an expert on Japanese politics at Columbia University.
"In the near future, this is going to characterize Japanese politics: lots of surprises, lots of unsettling developments."
The outlook for political uncertainty is new for Japan, which has been governed by one party for nearly four decades.
It could hamper the nation in everything from achieving budget surpluses to managing economic growth.
Already, the political situation has delayed the timetable for additional economic-stimulus measures, an income-tax cut and the budget.
With the political situation in such flux, even the nation's powerful bureaucrats, who Japan-watchers flippantly say can run the country even while the politicians squabble, seem unusually adrift.
"I don't know what to do," a Finance Ministry official said glumly after the vote.
"It will be difficult to talk with the politicians."
It will be harrowing all around, especially for Prime Minister Hosokawa.
While still tremendously popular, Mr. Hosokawa is fighting an uphill battle to salvage his job and the legislation, which is designed to curb Japan's endemic political corruption and overhaul the electoral system, before the current session of parliament adjourns Saturday.
Mr. Hosokawa could decide to dissolve parliament and call for the nation's second elections in seven months.
Even if Mr. Hosokawa ultimately pushes through reform and hangs on to power, politicians and analysts said that this week probably will end with deeper strains, such as a shuffling of the coalition, or splits in the two biggest parties.
Those strains reflect Japan's divided political world, a precarious combination of old forces that are broken but not crushed, and new forces that haven't fully matured.
"This is a necessary instability," Satsuki Eda, the leader of one of the small coalition parties and a member of Mr. Hosokawa's cabinet, said in a weekend interview.
"The old parties have lost ground.
The new parties were born quite accidentally and have to change their shape."
Such convulsions couldn't happen at a worse time.
High-stakes trade talks between the U.S. and Japan are entering their final phase.
Mr. Hosokawa is scheduled to meet President Clinton in Washington Feb. 11 to sign a new trade agreement.
U.S. government officials, frustrated with the pace so far, had counted on top-level political attention in the next three weeks to push the negotiations along.
Washington had been hoping that a favorable vote would "leave the Japanese government free to concentrate" on the trade talks, according to U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor.
However, with Japan's cabinet now concentrating on survival, that isn't likely.
An early indication of the Clinton administration's concern came on Sunday in Tokyo, when visiting Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said Mr. Hosokawa "obviously has his work cut out for him."
The prime minister, for his part, told Mr. Bentsen that Japan wants to reduce trade tensions with the U.S.
Mr. Bentsen met with Mr. Hosokawa and Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii on his way back from China to highlight Washington's disappointment with the lack of progress toward shrinking Japan's trade surplus.
In July the U.S. and Japan reached a so-called framework agreement that includes specific steps to open Japanese markets to U.S. products and services.
Japan also agreed to stimulate its economy, which would boost demand for imports.
So far, Japan has done little to meet its commitments.
Although Mr. Bentsen received no specific promises, he said Mr. Hosokawa told him that "I'm telling my people that we want to bring this to a successful conclusion."
According to Japan's Kyodo news service, Mr. Fujii said Japan is committed to spurring its economy, "so please trust us."
The political turmoil means that fiscal measures to lift the Japanese economy, which previously were expected as early as this week, will be delayed further.
"We had hoped to start discussing economic measures once reform had passed," said Kozo Yamamoto, a parliament coalition member working on the fiscal plan.
"That will be delayed."
"If they leave the turmoil as it is, it's really going to aggravate" the economy, fretted Shoichiro Toyoda, chairman of Toyota Motor Corp.
The pitched political battle seems odd in Japan, a largely conservative nation with little ethnic, economic, or ideological diversity.
Moreover, the political clash is largely an obscure, procedural debate about the merits of replacing Japan's unique multiseat districts with a combination of single-seat districts and seats allotted by proportional representation.
But such technical changes strike at the heart of how politics works here, and who ultimately holds power.
Such a shake-up is a dicey task, since the incumbent politicians must agree to change the very rules that put them in office.
"How would you like to try to pass a bill through a legislature in which one-third of its members were instantly doomed?" asks a senior U.S. government official.
How long the uncertainty will last is anybody's guess.
Optimists said Mr. Hosokawa could simply reshape his coalition this week by kicking out the dissidents who voted against the reform bills and luring some opposition parliament members, and that a stable array of new parties could emerge in weeks or months.
Pessimists fear years of weak, short-term prime ministers atop rapidly shifting coalitions, as a sweeping realignment takes shape.
Still, there seems no going back.
Supporters of political reform insist they are steadfast in pushing their agenda, whatever the cost.
Opponents are divided.
They are strong enough to block change but too weak to take power and quash it.
Despite the costs, the business community, for now at least, appears steadfastly behind the reformers.
Big business helped forge the old, stable political system in 1955, urging conservatives to unite and contain the very real Socialist threat.
Now, many executives view political reform as the first step in a chain of bureaucratic and economic reforms necessary to revitalize the nation's stagnant economy.
"If we do not do political reform, we will not be able to do deregulation and so forth," said Kazuo Nukazawa, managing director of Keidanren, Japan's big business lobby.
"If we don't do that, our economy will be suffocated by regulations and political corruption."
A delay in economic stimulus "is a great loss for the nation," Mr. Nukazawa said.
"But we are sticking to our position."
Tokyo's political roller-coaster ride started last summer, with the split of the Liberal Democratic Party after 38 years in power, and the ascendance of Mr. Hosokawa's seven-party coalition, which is a curious alliance of conservative LDP defectors, Socialists, progressives, and a party backed by a Buddhist sect.
The new government was unified mainly by its opposition to the LDP and a commitment to political reform.
The reform package passed the lower house of parliament in November, but then stalled for two months in the upper house before Friday's defeat.
Since the coalition's formation in August, analysts warned it was fragile because it depended heavily on the unpredictable Socialists, a party one wag labeled "the roundworm in the belly of the lion."
The reform bills were defeated by a vote of 118 to 130 Friday because 17 of 73 Socialists in the upper chamber voted against them, joining the LDP.
That vote was, in essence, a battle between the old and new political guards.
While the reform movement began in response to political corruption, the reformers said their goal is broader: to change the way politics is done in Japan.
Under the old system, the Socialists thrived as the permanent opposition to the LDP.
So for all their differences, the old enemies are now joining hands to keep that structure alive.
One weekend press report said the dissident Socialists even fed the LDP an advance list of those planning to vote "no," without sharing the information with Socialist Party leaders.
Mr. Hosokawa will spend this week trying to cobble together enough support to push through some reform package before this Saturday's final parliamentary session.
But it will be tough to craft a new proposal that can draw majority support in both houses.
While the LDP and many Socialists are united in opposition to the current reform plan, they are diametrically opposed on the reforms they would support.
Any concession Mr. Hosokawa makes to win LDP backing will cost him more Socialists.
Besides, it's not clear that the LDP leadership will agree to compromise.
Mr. Hosokawa is pushing for talks, but as of Sunday, the LDP was noncommittal.
"It's getting very complicated," LDP secretary-general Yoshiro Mori said on one of many heated political talk shows yesterday.
He suggested the coalition might consider dropping reform plans for now and work on next year's budget, which is already a month behind schedule.
"As of April 1, after all, Japan does run out of money," Mr. Mori noted dryly.
If no reform package passes by Saturday, Mr. Hosokawa could dissolve parliament and call new elections; resign and let the shaken coalition choose a new prime minister; or somehow try to stay in office and push for reforms in the next session of parliament, which starts next Monday.
Even success this week, however, won't guarantee political calm.
The whole point of the reforms is to unleash a political restructuring.
The old party system, reformers said, reflects divisions such as liberalism vs. socialism that are no longer relevant.
The controversial bills, by changing the basic electoral rules and redrawing the electoral map, are supposed to create a new party structure.
"The Japanese political party system has been the reflection of the Cold War," said Mr. Eda.
"The Cold War ended."
Indeed, whatever happens this week, analysts foresee new rifts in the two pillars of the old structure, the Socialists and the LDP.
Socialist leaders over the weekend weighed punishment, including possible expulsion, for their dissenters.
The current fight over political reform may just be the first example of a deeper series of conflicts as Japan tries to build a new political landscape.
Over the next few years, many analysts expect a general realignment and a Japanese political scene dominated by three major parties: a smaller LDP; the moderate-progressive wing of the coalition; and the conservative wing of the coalition.
Yet major systemic transformations are rarely easy or predictable.
As parties fall apart and rebuild, a prolonged, ugly mudfight is possible.
"Until there is a consolidation of the existing parties and groups, you'll see a lot of irresponsible behavior by politicians who see the opportunity to bring down a government or embarrass a cabinet minister," predicts Columbia's Mr. Curtis.
In that environment, routine legislation such as a budget could get stalled for months.
The elite bureaucracy can, of course, continue to micromanage affairs.
But the bureaucrats are also divided, with each ministry jealously protecting its own interests.
And, in the end, the bureaucrats need political support.
Longer term, the Clinton administration thinks the political reforms will be good for the U.S., which has long been frustrated by Japan's closed ways.
"Society is changing, it's opening up," a senior U.S. government official said hopefully yesterday.
But in the past, the U.S. found strong LDP politicians helpful in solving trade disputes because they could be persuaded to force difficult decisions on the bureaucracy.
In recent years, a favorite U.S. choice was LDP power-broker Ichiro Ozawa, who cut bilateral deals in telecommunications and construction.
Mr. Ozawa quit the LDP last year and is now Mr. Hosokawa's chief strategist.
Friday's defeat raises serious questions about Mr. Ozawa's ability to get things done.
In this new, uncertain world, it's not clear anyone can.
Kenneth H. Bacon contributed to this article.
Republic Waste Industries Inc. said it expects to take a $20 million to $25 million pretax charge against earnings for its fourth quarter ended Dec. 31.
The Atlanta waste-service company said the move will result in a loss for both the quarter and year.
The company disclosed its plans after markets closed Friday.
In Nasdaq Stock Market trading, Republic closed at $3.3125 a share, up 12.5 cents.
A spokesman said the charge stems largely from Republic's plan to reduce the size of its hazardous-waste division, a move that the concern says should produce "substantial" savings in operating costs in 1994 and beyond.
For the 1992 fourth quarter, Republic earned $1.9 million, or seven cents a share, on revenue of $29.9 million.
For all of 1992, Republic had a loss of $14 million, or 53 cents a share, on revenue of $110 million.
The 1992 results include a loss of $20.2 million from discontinued operations.
