JAPAN UNVEILED a package of market-opening initiatives intended to persuade the White House to call off its trade offensive, but the plan isn't likely to bring U.S. negotiators back to the table anytime soon.
Tokyo's measures are largely a repackaging of proposals made in the framework talks that failed last month.
Grumman set up a process for Northrop and Martin Marietta to submit final bids for the defense company by Thursday afternoon, but Northrop criticized the new rules as essentially forcing it to "bid against itself."
Kodak plans to seek alliances with major computer companies and recruit new talent in an effort to restructure its core imaging business to emphasize electronic technology.
Insurance losses from winter storms, the Los Angeles earthquake and other catastrophes are expected to exceed $7 billion for the first quarter, one of the worst periods ever for U.S. property and casualty insurers.
World oil prices plunged as a result of OPEC's decision this weekend to leave production levels unchanged.
A price drop was expected, although the fall of more than $1 a barrel for some crudes was sharper than anticipated.
Slumping oil stocks set the stage for what looked like yet another round of broad selling in the stock market.
But the Dow Jones Industrial Average battled back from a 46-point deficit.
Turner Broadcasting and Home Shopping Network have met recently to discuss a possible combination, people close to the companies said.
Kemper set up a rich compensation plan for its top 13 executives if they leave due to a change of control, according to Kemper's proxy statement.
A Kemper spokeswoman said the plan didn't stem from GE Capital's unfriendly $2.2 billion takeover bid.
Horsham agreed to acquire 43% of Trizec, a debt-plagued real-estate concern, for $436 million.
The move would place Horsham, a Toronto holding company, in control of one of North America's biggest portfolios of shopping centers and office buildings.
U.S. Surgical expects a profit this year as a result of cost-cutting and a $200 million new securities issue.
Pilgrim Group is taking the unusual step of refunding $205,000 to one of its mutual funds, at the urging of fund directors.
The reimbursement includes a consultant's fee for which the fund shouldn't have been billed.
TWA named the chief executive of upstart Reno Air to be its president and chief operating officer.
The High Court seemed skeptical of a challenge to California's aggressive tax rules on multinational firms.
A jury found that a hospital that ventured into other health-care businesses gained monopoly power.
The decision is a warning to other hospitals making similar moves that they risk violating antitrust laws.
Six Spectrum Information board members quit, including former chairman Peter Caserta.
The company said a seventh member will soon leave.
The wireless communications firm's stock rose 12.5 cents, or 4.7%, to $2.8125.
Atlantic Richfield said Mike Bowlin was elected chief executive, effective July 1, succeeding Lodwrick Cook, who will remain chairman until his expected retirement in June 1995.
Bowlin will retain his titles as the oil firm's president and chief operating officer.
Construction contracts rose 4% last month, reflecting improvements in nonresidential building, public works and utilities, which offset declines in the housing sector, a survey showed.
Stocks: Volume 287,313,980 shares.
Dow Jones industrials 3762.35, off 12.38; transportation 1710.89, off 3.97; utilities 205.44, up 3.29.
Bonds: Lehman Brothers Treasury index 5252.69, up 18.84.
Commodities: Oil $14.08 a barrel, off $1.05.
Dow Jones futures index 144.24, off 0.92; spot index 132.42, off 0.20.
Dollar: 104.05 yen, off 0.75; 1.6715 marks, up 0.0072.
