Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. filed a $300 million lawsuit against John Sculley, charging him with breach of contract, mismanagement and theft of trade secrets.
The suit also alleges that Mr. Sculley quit on Monday only after first seeking to oust Spectrum management, then deciding to go into business for himself.
Mr. Sculley insists he resigned as chairman and chief executive because he was misled about the company's troubles.
The complaint, filed late yesterday in federal court in Bridgeport, Conn., portrays Mr. Sculley as a double-dealer who tried to use Spectrum to his own private business advantage before quitting.
As expected, Spectrum's counterpunch to Mr. Sculley's abrupt resignation claims that he was fully informed about a Securities and Exchange Commission probe of the tiny Manhasset, N.Y., wireless datacommunications company and about Spectrum's accounting problems, which last week forced a restatement of earnings.
It further states that Mr. Sculley commissioned an independent "due diligence" review of Spectrum's finances before signing on in October, and that the report outlined the accounting problems.
The new lawsuit, which is separate from a suit that Mr. Sculley has filed against Spectrum's president, Peter Caserta, also suggests that Mr. Sculley was at odds with Spectrum's managers almost from the time he joined the company, and that he soon turned to an outside consultant, Arjun Gupta, to plot the company's future.
A spokeswoman for Mr. Sculley labeled the Spectrum lawsuit "a complete work of fiction," and said his attorney hadn't even been served with the legal papers.
She also contended that the complaint is "tacit admission" that Spectrum insiders had material nonpublic information -- the existence of the SEC probe -- when they cashed in options and reaped a $13 million-plus combined profit weeks after Mr. Sculley joined the firm.
Mr. Sculley's suit against Mr. Caserta is filed in federal district court in New York.
The lawsuit argues essentially that Mr. Sculley shopped for company acquisitions, decided he could make more money doing the deals for himself, and then set a plot to resign yet escape liability for shareholder damages.
Weeks after taking over, Mr. Sculley indicated he wanted to impose his own board and management team, the suit states.
But he quickly dropped that effort and tried to quit in early December, relenting after the company told him he would be liable for damages if Spectrum's share price plunged on his departure.
So he adopted a "secret strategy" to drive the share price down and hire a new accounting firm to "find fault with the company to give him a pretext to feign disgust and resign," the suit contends.
Mr. Sculley did, indeed, cite the accounting problems and other matters when he quit on Monday, sending company shares plummeting -- but he has now been included in shareholder lawsuits anyway.
