The legal arrival in the U.S. of RU 486, the controversial French abortion pill, appears to be getting close.
After a protracted negotiation, the French pharmaceutical concern Roussel Uclaf SA and the nonprofit U.S. research organization known as the Population Council are saying they hope to reach a final agreement in a few weeks to bring RU 486 to the U.S. for clinical trials.
"If everything goes well, we hope that by the end of February or early March we ought to have an agreement," says Lester Hyman, an attorney with the Swidler & Berlin law firm in Washington, D.C., which is representing Roussel Uclaf.
Sandra Waldman, a spokeswoman for the Population Council in New York, says the organization hopes for an agreement by the end of February "at the latest."
Contract negotiations have taken far longer than expected.
When the preliminary agreement to grant the Population Council the U.S. rights to RU 486 was announced last April, the drug was expected to be available for testing in pregnant American women within a few months.
But Roussel Uclaf continued to consider alternatives presented by other companies and groups interested in bringing the drug to the U.S., Mr. Hyman says.
That review took about six months and ended with the company's decision to go ahead with the Population Council, he says.
Even now, some people are skeptical an agreement will be reached between the company and the research group.
"I never thought this was locked in concrete.
Every step of the way, they're going to have impediments," says Richard Glasow, education director of the National Right to Life Committee.
Even RU 486 advocates have their doubts.
"We're very worried these delays will be endless," says Jennifer Jackman, director of policy and research at the Feminist Majority Foundation.
After an agreement is reached, the Population Council will begin setting up the clinical trial, which it plans to use to seek Food and Drug Administration approval, Ms. Waldman says.
The specific regimen for the clinical trial hasn't been finalized, Ms. Waldman says, but the council expects to test RU 486 in about 2,000 women seeking abortion in the early stages of pregnancy (up to 63 days after the last menstrual cycle) at 10 to 12 sites across the country.
Dozens of clinics have asked to participate in the trial, but the final selection hasn't been made, Ms. Waldman says.
One medical center that wants to participate in the clinical trial is Oregon Health Sciences University in Portland, which would test about 10 women a week if it is selected, says Mark Nichols, an associate professor of OB-GYN at the university.
About two dozen physicians across Oregon have volunteered to participate, he says.
Women who are judged suitable for the testing will be given RU 486, then a prostaglandin 48 hours later, Ms. Waldman says.
RU 486, a synthetic steroid, causes the uterus to shed its lining and the embryo.
The prostaglandin causes uterine contractions to help complete the expulsion.
In a study published last year, French researchers found the RU 486/prostaglandin regimen was 97% effective in inducing abortions.
Patients will probably remain in the clinic for up to four hours after taking the prostaglandin, Ms. Waldman says.
In the French study, abortions occurred within four hours in 61% of the cases.
The patient will return to the clinic two weeks later for an examination.
If the abortion hasn't occurred, a surgical abortion will be performed, Dr. Nichols says.
(Once the pill has been taken, it isn't recommended that a pregnancy come to term.)
The trial won't have any problem finding women to participate, Dr. Nichols says.
Since the Oregon university made public its interest in participating in the trial several months ago, it has received regular phone calls from women asking for RU 486, the doctor says.
One woman who thought the clinical trial was already under way flew up from California in November hoping to get the drug, he adds.
The university's interest in RU 486 has also made it a target of protest from anti-abortion groups.
The president's office received 1,400 letters of protest, Dr. Nichols says, and about 200 demonstrators protested RU 486 at the university several months ago.
"It's wrong for a hospital to be killing unborn babies," says Dr. Glasow of the National Right to Life Committee.
As the anti-abortion group learns of institutions that will be involved in the clinical trial, he says, it plans to "discourage them from participating."
He adds that the National Right to Life Committee board is considering a boycott of products made by Roussel Uclaf and its parent, Hoechst AG.
Despite the threat of a boycott, about 30 companies -- both American and foreign -- have expressed interest in manufacturing or distributing the drug in this country, according to the Population Council, which won't identify them.
The organization is waiting until it has a contract with Roussel Uclaf before holding serious discussions, Ms. Waldman says.
If the council and Roussel Uclaf fail to reach an agreement soon, Democratic Rep. Ron Wyden of Oregon says he will try to put public pressure on the parties by holding a hearing.
"Given the fact that the trials were supposed to start in 1993," he says, "American women have waited long enough."
