Two teams of scientists said they had found another mutant gene that can cause colon cancer.
The new-found gene could account for a third of the cases of a type of colon cancer, known to be hereditary, which strikes about 23,000 Americans a year.
Last December some of the same researchers reported finding a mutant gene that is thought to cause about half these hereditary cancers, known as hereditary nonpolyposis colerectal cancer or HNPCC.
The mutant genes might also be involved in 20% to 30% of the more common, nonhereditary colon cancers that develop in 125,000 other Americans annually, the scientists said.
Discovery of the gene could lead to a diagnostic test within a year and may open the way to new therapies for colon cancer, the researchers suggested.
One of the research teams included scientists at Human Genome Sciences Inc., which said it has applied for a patent on the colon-cancer gene.
A competing patent application on the gene also has been filed by three universities whose scientists comprised the other research team.
Human Genome, based in Rockville, Md., is a fledgling biotechnology company that uses a short-cut technique for isolating human genes.
The company already has built up a library of more than 40,000 fragments of human DNA that it knows to be genes or parts of genes.
Britain's SmithKline Beecham PLC has committed $125 million of research funds to Human Genome for first rights to its gene discoveries but didn't take rights to the colon-cancer gene, according to Human Genome's chief executive officer, William Haseltine.
The discovery of both the first and second colon-cancer genes was a triumph of basic research, in which scientists were able to relate human genes to genes discovered years ago in bacteria and yeasts.
Last year the discovery of the first gene was reported at about the same time by two research teams, one of which included molecular biologists Richard Fishel at the University of Vermont and Richard Kolodner at Dana Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, and the other led by geneticist Bert Vogelstein at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions.
The researchers suspected that the human cancer was caused by the failure of the colon cells' ability to repair "spelling" mistakes, called mismatches, made in DNA.
DNA, of course, carries the genetic message of a cell, and mistakes often are made when the DNA is being copied so that a cell can divide.
Cells normally have a mechanism for repairing these spelling mistakes.
Years earlier, scientists had found the genes that bacteria and yeast use to repair such DNA spelling mistakes.
Using one of these bacterial/yeast genes as models, the reserchers last year were able to pluck a similar gene out of DNA of patients with HNPCC.
This gene "is a kind of proofreading gene; it goes along the DNA looking for mistakes," explained Dr. Fishel at the University of Vermont.
At the time, the researchers knew that another defective gene was causing colon cancer in other families and suspected it also was a defective DNA-repair gene.
To find this second gene, each research team used a different method.
One approach was reported in this week's issue of the journal, Nature, by R. Michael Liskay at Oregon Health Sciences University in Portland and his colleagues at Dana Farber, Yale University and the University of Vermont.
As they did with the first gene, the researchers used the bacterial/yeast genes as models for devising DNA fragments that would grab hold of similar human genes.
The fragments were used to pinpoint a gene in a family haunted by HNPCC.
It turned out that mutant versions of the gene were found only in those members with cancer and not in those free of cancer.
The other research team, reporting in this week's issue of Science, also suspected that a DNA-repair gene was involved and that it would resemble the DNA-repair genes in the bacteria and yeast.
The Johns Hopkins researchers, Drs. Vogelstein and Kenneth Kinzler, called researchers at Human Genome and asked if any of the company's 40,000-plus human genes resembled the bacterial/yeast genes.
The company had already been scouring its inventory for such genes and had found three, said Dr. Haseltine of Human Genome.
Within a matter of hours after Dr. Vogelstein came to the company's Rockville laboratories, he and company scientists determined that one of the genes was the one the Johns Hopkins team was looking for.
The Johns Hopkins researchers, working with physicians in Finland and Creighton University in Omaha, Neb., then confirmed that the mutant version of the gene was linked to cancer in 10 different families that had the inherited colon cancer.
This second gene, said Dr. Fishel at Vermont, is "a kind of flag-waver."
When the first proofreading gene finds a mistake, the second gene signals the repair mechanism to come over and correct the mistake.
The scientists theorize that most mistakes during the copying of DNA are of little import if they go unrepaired.
But occasionally an error is made that, if not repaired, can lead to cancer.
This would explain why people who inherit either of the defective DNA-repair genes often don't get colon cancer until they reach middle age.
