Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen launched a campaign to open financial markets in emerging economies to U.S. brokers and banks.
He also gave the second strong hint in two days that the U.S. may be on the verge of lifting its trade embargo against Vietnam.
"A strategy of engagement with Vietnam may be the most effective way to promote our goal of accounting for" missing soldiers from the war, he said in a speech Tuesday to the Thai Bankers Association.
"I'm optimistic that we'll finally get that behind us," he said, declining to be more precise.
The effort to win full business rights for U.S. financial-service companies will focus on about a dozen rapidly growing countries around the world, with half the countries in Asia.
The biggest potential prize of the program will be China, which has huge capital needs and many companies and individuals clamoring to invest, but no investment-banking system to help match investors with opportunities.
The non-Asian countries the U.S. will focus on include Turkey, Hungary, Argentina and Brazil.
To help improve market access in Asia, the Treasury is considering boosting its staff in the area, to push more effectively for change.
"Financial services make a major contribution to economic growth," Mr. Bentsen said.
"The sector is like the nervous system.
It sends signals to the industrial muscle, directing capital and investment to the projects that promise the highest return."
Because the U.S. has the biggest, most creative capital markets in the world, its banks, brokers, insurance companies and associated accountants and lawyers have a large advantage over competitors from other countries.
Or, at least they do when they're allowed to compete.
In 1992, the U.S. had a $61 billion trade surplus in financial services, compared with a $96 billion merchandise trade deficit.
The goal of the U.S. program is that all countries treat foreign financial-service companies the same way they regulate their own companies.
For instance, Indonesian law allows foreign companies to be only minority owners of banks in Indonesia.
Thailand, which is in the process of liberalizing access to its financial markets, doesn't let foreign firms be members of the Thai stock exchange.
Japan restricts access to foreign insurance companies.
During the recently completed effort to rewrite world trade rules, the U.S. tried and failed to open financial services globally.
But the agreement provided a two-year window to negotiate new financialservice rules.
If that effort fails, the U.S. will be able to act against countries that don't give equitable treatment to U.S. firms.
Congress is expected to pass this year the Fair Trade in Financial Services Act, which embodies this approach.
Mr. Bentsen acknowledged that opening closed financial markets can be politically and economically tricky.
He said the U.S. wouldn't demand immediate change, as long as nations move consistently toward more-open markets.
South Korea, for instance, is adept at delaying the enactment of announced plans to open its financial markets.
While in Bangkok, Mr. Bentsen met with a group of 11 U.S. bankers, investment bankers and insurers operating in Asia to hear their concerns.
John Wadsworth, Morgan Stanley Group Inc.'s representative in Hong Kong, said the group urged him to assign a full-time Treasury attache in Asia to work on market-opening measures.
Mr. Bentsen said he would look into it.
The stakes are high.
Mr. Wadsworth said the market value of stocks traded on Asian stock exchanges outside of Japan is $1 trillion, up from $180 billion in 1988.
He predicted that the market capitalization of stocks traded on the Shanghai stock exchange will be $2 trillion in 2000.
Mr. Bentsen's next stop is China.
