The mutual-fund industry, responding to scrutiny by legislators and regulators, has set up a panel to examine fund companies' rules on personal trading by fund managers.
The group, comprising six high-level fund industry executives, will "review and evaluate the adequacy of current codes of conduct" for personal trading by mutual-fund employees.
It may also "develop recommendations" for changes in those standards, the Investment Company Institute, the national mutual-fund trade group, announced.
"We will assess the adequacy of current standards, with an eye toward any needed changes in mutual funds' codes of ethics," said Ronald P. Lynch, managing partner of Lord, Abbett & Co., and chairman of the ICI.
The issue of fund-manager personal trading broke into public consciousness when John Kaweske, a well-known fund-manager, was fired in January by Invesco Funds Group, Denver, for allegedly violating Invesco rules by failing to report 10 to 20 personal trades.
Mutual-fund managers are allowed to trade for their own account.
But they are prohibited from engaging in self-dealing in their trades, and fund-management firms are required to enforce codes of conduct supervising personal trading.
Last week, the Securities and Exchange Commission asked 30 fund groups to provide sweeping details of personal trading by their fund managers.
The SEC request was in part a response to inquiries by legislators such as Rep. Edward Markey, (D., Mass.), chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Finance.
Many fund-industry executives gripe that their money managers are already held to stricter standards regarding personal trades than money managers in different industries.
"We remain committed to any enhancement of those standards that seems advisable," Matthew Fink, president of the ICI, said.
In an apparent attempt to deflect some of the heat the industry has been getting on the issue of fund-manager trading, Mr. Fink wrote to Rep. Markey, "It is my hope that the work of the advisory group also will assist in the formulation of recommendations regarding other, unregulated or less regulated, money managers" outside the fund industry.
Rep. Markey has also expressed concern about personal-trading standards among other money managers.
The members of the ICI advisory group are Mr. Lynch of Lord Abbett; Charles A. Fiumefreddo, chairman and CEO, Dean Witter InterCapital Inc.; Jon S. Fossel, president and CEO, Oppenheimer Management Corp.; Robert H. Graham, president, AIM Advisors Inc.; Robert C. Pozen, managing director and general counsel, FMR Corp., manager of the Fidelity funds; and James S. Riepe, managing director, T. Rowe Price Associates Inc.
The group hopes to finish its work by May 13, when it will make its findings and recommendations public.
