Prudential Securities Inc. is close to an accord with the state of California, the lone holdout in an October agreement settling partnership-fraud charges against the big brokerage firm.
The state settlement, expected within 10 days, would cap more than five months of negotiations between California and Prudential.
Prudential has been eager to completely sign off on the broad "global" settlement, which had been worked out with the Securities and Exchange Commission and the 50 states.
Under the accord, Prudential agreed to apply a "liquidity discount" of as much as 50% in determining the so-called residual value of partnerships sold to 42,000 investors in California, said Gary Mendoza, California's securities chief.
This means that Prudential essentially will lop off as much as half the asset value of partnerships in determining their current value.
Residual value -- what the partnerships are really worth -- plays a major role in determining the damages investors ought to receive from their soured investments.
It is significant because many partnerships, unlike stocks or bonds, are illiquid, and thus can't easily be resold in the secondary marketplace and converted to cash.
For its part, the brokerage arm of Prudential Insurance Co. of America says the liquidity discount now will be applied to partnership investors in all 50 states.
The agreement -- reached with the help of the SEC and an independent claims administrator -- effectively means that investors will be able to receive more in restitution for their Prudential partnerships than they otherwise would have.
It isn't clear how much more money Prudential will end up paying out, but Mr. Mendoza estimates that California investors will receive an additional $30 million to $50 million as a result of the agreement.
Still, the California settlement is far less onerous for Prudential than one set with the state of Texas, another holdout.
In that accord, reached in January, Prudential agreed to be temporarily suspended from opening new brokerage accounts in Texas, and to pay the state $1.5 million.
As part of the negotiations, California also had threatened to temporarily suspend Prudential from doing new business in the state.
"They took that possibility very seriously," Mr. Mendoza said, before agreeing to the residual-payment matter.
California still has "a few nits" to be ironed out in the settlement papers presented yesterday by Prudential, Mr. Mendoza said.
But he added: "I'd be very very surprised if this deal falls out of bed."
A Prudential spokesman said: "We're happy that we're about to reach final agreement with the last of the 50 states as well as federal regulators concerning our past problems."
Federal and state regulators had accused Prudential of misleading investors on the risks and returns of $8.15 billion of partnerships sold in the 1980s.
As part of the global settlement, Prudential agreed to pay at least $330 million in a reparations fund for defrauded clients.
