India, reducing its role as promised in the largely state-owned mining business, amended laws to let foreign investors set up wholly owned ventures for prospecting and mining and to open these activities to the domestic private sector.
The new rules turn over to India's state governments the licensing for operations involving all but 11 minerals, which require central government approval.
Since India last March said it planned to open up the industry, companies from countries such as South Africa, Australia, Canada and the U.S. have expressed interest.
India recently opened petroleum, natural gas and coal to private and foreign investment through joint ventures.
Opening the mining monopoly was prompted by technology needs, growing demand for minerals and the government's inability to finance stepped-up prospecting and mining.
About 55,000 of the IG Metall union's 3.7 million members in western Germany's metal and engineering industries staged short warning strikes over employers' proposed wage freeze and benefit reductions.
Bavaria was hit hardest by walkouts of 35,000 workers at 80 companies.
Negotiations with the Gesamtmetall employer group broke down last week, but both sides indicated willingness to resume the talks.
IG Metall seeks pay increases between 5.5% and 6%, or less in return for job guarantees; 600,000 jobs have been lost in the sector since spring 1991.
Eastern German workers have separate negotiations.
Barcelona's Gran Teatre del Liceu, Spain's leading opera house and one of the world's largest, was destroyed by fire.
The neoclassical theater, which opened in 1847, was scheduled for a $28 million restoration.
Officials said it would be rebuilt.
The theater's director said a spark from a repair workers' blow torch ignited a curtain.
Flames spread from the stage to engulf the 3,000-seat auditorium, causing much of the roof to collapse.
The theater survived a fire in April 1861 and an incident in 1893 when an anarchist dropped two bombs from the upper gallery during a performance, killing 20 people.
The launching of the first all-Japanese-made satellite-lofting rocket was postponed Monday because of stormy weather.
Japan's space agency said it could try again no sooner than Wednesday to send up the H-II from the southern island of Tanegashima.
The H-II, the country's first rocket capable of putting big satellites into orbit, will carry equipment to test re-entry heat shields of spacecraft.
Purchasing power in 11 of the 12 European Union nations lagged behind that in the U.S. and Japan in 1992, the EU said.
The data reflect gross domestic product per capita, based on prices for comparable goods.
Only Luxembourg exceeded Japan in purchasing power but it still trailed the U.S.
Next in the ranking were France, Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Britain, Spain, Ireland, Portugal and Greece.
The EU also said its GDP grew a revised 1.16% to $6.05 billion in 1992, compared with 2.38% to $5.12 billion in the U.S. and 1.31% to $3.16 billion in Japan.
A Darmstadt court granted prosecutors' request to acquit three Germans of helping Iraq make chemical weapons in violation of export laws on sales of technology and chemicals.
Prosecutors couldn't prove the defendants knew Iraq would use the technology to make chemical arms.
The three, who had argued that the equipment was meant for making pesticides for civilian use, were among 10 people charged in one of Germany's biggest post-Gulf War cases of exports linked to Iraqi arms programs.
Three defendants remain charged with selling Iraq equipment for filling bombs and shells with poison gas.
Four others were acquitted.
President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada said Bolivia would sell to private investors as much as 50% of the largest state-owned companies.
He said proceeds could total $8 billion to be allocated to social spending, including housing, health and education.
The first stakes are to be sold in communications, oil, power, railway and steel companies, and the national airline Lloyd Aereo Boliviano.
Mr. Sanchez de Lozada said the plan would provide the engine for continued economic growth and create as many as 500,000 jobs during his four-year term.
Congress had passed a bill allowing the program, which the president termed "capitalization, not privatization" of enterprises he said the government couldn't afford to operate efficiently.
Bolivia's biggest labor federation opposes the sell-offs but a one-day general strike it staged last week to protest the program won only limited support.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Cuba, which has made tourism a priority to help rescue the economy, said the sector was growing at least 30% a year with improved service.
The number of foreign visitors in 1993 jumped 43% to 700,000 from 1992 and generated revenue of more than $660 million. . . .
A survey of British women by Good Housekeeping magazine found that almost half preferred a delicious restaurant meal to making love.
