As news rolled in this past weekend of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries' woes and a likely tumble in oil prices, Atlantic Richfield Co.'s Mike R. Bowlin took a moment to reflect.
Working at home, the man who will become Arco's new chief executive officer pored over reports of oil prices and company stock prices from almost a decade ago, when his predecessor Lodwrick M. Cook took over at Arco.
Then, as now, prices tumbled.
And Mr. Cook, then barely known beyond company doors, surprised analysts by slimming Arco, producing more with less and seemingly moving the company from strength to strength.
Once again Arco faces considerable uncertainties with a new leader.
And again, Arco seems poised to slim down.
But beyond that, the strategies are very different.
This time the 51-year-old Mr. Bowlin and Arco -- which has the strongest U.S. focus of the major oil producers -- are moving away from the U.S. roots and into less costly international exploration and production, a change that's increasingly important as oil prices dwindle.
Under Mr. Bowlin, currently president and chief operating officer, Arco will in effect attempt to seesaw from a domestic focus to large foreign investments without a bruising bump.
Mr. Bowlin was elected Monday to the CEO's post, effective July 1.
He will continue to hold his current positions.
Other major oil companies have for some time boosted their exploration and production efforts abroad, where costs are lower and chances of a major find often are thought to be higher.
But Arco has a special need.
The Alaskan oil resources that support the Los Angeles-based company's strong hold on gasoline markets west of the Rocky Mountains are declining.
Where will petroleum and profit flow from next?
Mr. Bowlin, who until recently headed the company's growing investment efforts overseas, said that effort will continue to expand.
"I'm convinced that, if you look at Arco five to 10 years from now, you'll see much more of our operations overseas," he said.
His goal is to boost overseas investments to the point where they are making a profit contribution roughly equal to Arco's return from Alaska.
That's a tall order, calling for about $500 million a year in profit.
Last year, Arco's overseas oil and gas business produced a $17 million after-tax loss.
Under Mr. Bowlin's direction, Arco's international operations, starting in the late 1980s, turned to the North Sea and then to Indonesia and China.
The result so far has been lots of natural gas, but crude-oil finds have been wanting.
"We would have been much happier if we had had a major grass-roots discovery in international," Mr. Bowlin said.
But he added that major developments in the northwest Java and Pagerungan regions, off Indonesia, and the Yacheng field off China, are expected to boost the company's international results.
Analysts speculate that Mr. Bowlin is likely to accelerate things overseas.
"Over the last several years, Arco has been trying to grow the international side on its own," said Michael Young, an analyst at Smith Barney Shearson Inc.
"My sense is that somewhere down the road Arco is going to want to grow that side at a faster pace -- which means acquisitions."
Arco flirted with this approach in 1988, the year Mr. Bowlin took over responsibility for international operations, with a $700 million acquisition of Tricentrol PLC, a British-based oil and gas producer.
That followed a brief and failed run at another British producer.
Since then, however, Arco has focused on exploration.
It renewed efforts in Alaska, but by last year the results proved disappointing.
Of 13 wells drilled last season, only one found commercial quantities of oil.
"Those dry holes have clearly tempered Arco's enthusiasm as to how they should proceed in Alaska," said Frederick Leuffer, an analyst at Bear, Stearns & Co.
Arco slated a mere four exploratory wells in Alaska this year and slashed the exploration budget there to $90 million from last year's $210 million.
Now, with newly weak oil prices, those numbers too likely will be reduced.
In a swift reaction to falling prices earlier this week, Arco said it plans soon to temporarily suspend development drilling in most of its northern Alaskan oil fields.
On Monday, crude oil prices tumbled world-wide, and in New York the nearterm May contract closed at $14.08 a barrel, off $1.05 from its Friday close.
Yesterday, prices rallied slightly, recovering by 24 cents to close at $14.32 a barrel.
OPEC failed to reach agreement on plans that would have curtailed production world-wide and would have thus boosted prices.
Arco's stock price slid 62.5 cents a share yesterday, closing at $97.375, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange after falling $3 a share on Monday.
For the moment, Arco is looking for other ways to pare its $1.9 billion capital spending budget for this year, Mr. Bowlin said.
A companywide appraisal is under way, and some investments may be slowed.
Staff reductions are likely to be a part of the process, both at operating and corporate levels, said Mr. Bowlin, declining to elaborate.
Such reductions would fall on an already-trimmed work force and would follow cuts of some 1,300 employees in the company's non-Alaskan, U.S. operations.
Arco currently has about 25,000 employees world-wide.
Under the pressure of lower oil prices, the attractions of overseas operations are considerable.
Average prices last year for crude oil and natural gas sold by Arco's foreign operations averaged about 40% higher than the company's average domestic prices.
Where potential U.S. exploration acreage for the most part has been drilled, attractive areas remain in other parts of the world.
And, as Mr. Bowlin noted, discoveries such as Arco's in Indonesia and China put it at the doorstep of "some of the world's fastest-growing markets."
As Alaskan production declines in coming years, however, Arco and Mr. Bowlin will have to work hard to retain investor faith that new reserves and new business will be found.
For the moment, "there has been some concern about the company's dividend, and that has hurt the stock price" noted Mr. Leuffer of Bear Stearns, who is recommending purchase of Arco shares, whose price has drifted from a high of $127.75 about a year ago.
Mr. Leuffer thinks the dividend, a hefty $1.375-a-share quarterly payout, will be maintained.
However, at some point company earnings will have to catch up, he said.
In the soon-to-be-completed first quarter, Arco's profit is again expected to fall short of its dividend.
"We'd be delighted if they made as much as their dividend, but they won't" said Mr. Young of Smith Barney.
Mr. Young forecasts that Arco's first-quarter net income will total about 95 cents a share.
First-quarter net income last year was $260 million, or $1.60 a share, on $4.51 billion in revenue.
A company spokesman said Arco's board makes a dividend decision each quarter.
However, the spokesman said, "clearly we have the financial resources to continue the dividend through a sustained period of low oil prices."
