President Clinton endorsed the United Nations secretary general's call for authority to order Western air strikes around besieged Sarajevo, as the U.S. raised the prospect of other steps to punish and discourage Serb aggression.
The U.S. and its European allies began mobilizing -- at least rhetorically -- following last weekend's shelling of a Sarajevo market that killed 68 civilians and wounded hundreds more.
Mr. Clinton said "I very much welcome" U.N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's request for authority to order North Atlantic Treaty Organization air strikes on Bosnian Serb artillery or mortar positions.
European Union foreign ministers, meeting in Brussels, urged NATO to use all means necessary to end the siege of Sarajevo.
And Secretary of State Warren Christopher, noting that Mr. Boutros-Ghali was asking for authority for future air strikes, said that "we're also looking at other possible steps to respond to Saturday's attack," as well as "the larger problem of the Serbs' unacceptable actions against the civilian population" of Sarajevo.
U.S. officials said the North Atlantic Council, NATO's political arm, is expected to meet tomorrow and discuss whether to grant Mr. Boutros-Ghali's request.
Anthony Lake, national security adviser, traveled last evening to Shreveport, La., to brief President Clinton, who is on a trip to promote his domestic agenda.
But given the West's record of tough talk and scant action, it isn't clear what steps will be taken.
A U.S. official said the European Union's action was "a nice overall statement, but we'll see what it means," noting that nations such as Britain, Canada, Spain and Portugal remain leery of air strikes.
And Europeans consider Washington's credibility on Bosnia to be extremely low.
U.S. officials left vague what other steps might be taken to punish the Bosnian Serbs and promote a peace settlement in the former Yugoslavia.
Defense Secretary William Perry, referring to those peace efforts, said yesterday that, "to the extent any use at all of air strikes furthers that strategic objective, then it is worth consideration."
The U.S. is expected to bring a package of military and diplomatic moves to tomorrow's meeting.
Among the measures U.S. officials want to discuss is setting a deadline for the Bosnian Serbs to withdraw their artillery from around Sarajevo, or using the threat of air strikes as a deterrent to Serbian aggression.
According to a military officer attached to NATO, an idea under discussion by military planners is bombing Pale, the Bosnian Serb headquarters a short distance southeast of Sarajevo.
"That's a tempting option," the officer said.
Some of the air strikes NATO planners considered last summer involved turning the Bosnian Serb quarters in Pale into what another NATO officer called "a gravel pit."
At the same time, senior U.S. officials, meeting at the White House twice yesterday, discussed new diplomatic steps that the U.S. might take to help end the fighting.
Some moves talked about included having Washington play an honestbroker role in negotiations, as well as dispatching a special envoy to help the Bosnian Muslims redraw a peace settlement map, which they could take to the negotiating table.
A senior U.S. official said that the U.S. didn't expect to scrap the partition map that has been under discussion for several months.
Instead, the U.S. could help finetune the map to meet the Muslim-led government's security and political concerns.
As part of that process, the official said, the U.S. might have to persuade the Muslims to give up some of their battlefield gains from recent weeks.
"We are continuing the search for ways to reinvigorate the diplomatic efforts aimed at achieving a political settlement at the conflict in Bosnia," Mr. Christopher said during a news conference yesterday.
A senior official emphasized, however, that the U.S. wouldn't get involved in "brow-beating the Bosnian government into accepting a bad decision."
Previously, Washington has refused European calls to join the negotiating effort, saying it wouldn't participate in forcing a settlement down the Bosnian Muslims' throats.
Meanwhile, Lord Owen, the EU peace envoy, said that Bosnian Serbs agreed to negotiate a separate peace for Sarajevo, according to wire service reports.
He said: "It was an agreement to negotiate a U.N. administration and demilitarization of Sarajevo separate from an overall peace settlement."
However, under previous threats of air strikes, Bosnian Serbs have made similar promises, which they later discarded.
Although U.N. officials haven't definitively placed the blame for Saturday's mortar attack, Mr. Christopher said that "the strong presumption in my mind is that it was by the Serbs."
In any case, U.S. officials said, the West could retaliate for an attack last Friday by Bosnian Serbs in which 10 civilians were killed while waiting to receive food in a Sarajevo suburb.
But the use of air strikes may meet resistance from some nations.
Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev warned in Moscow yesterday that U.N. air strikes would be the "least successful way" to resolve the conflict in Bosnia and would lead only to an escalation in violence.
