A growing number of criminals are outsmarting law-enforcement agencies in a new game of telephone tag.
They have found that call forwarding can thwart wiretaps, at least temporarily.
"Criminals can go to any phone, call the `intelligent network' and route calls anywhere," said James Kallstrom, special agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
When they do, it often takes law-enforcement officials a day or two to figure out what is happening.
And it takes some time after that for the authorities to get a court order to tap the number to which the calls are being routed.
Even then, a clever criminal can merely forward calls to yet another number.
In one state, Mr. Kallstrom told reporters at a news briefing at FBI headquarters, 25% of all wiretaps "are adversely affected" by such telephone hide-and-seek.
This isn't something law-enforcement officials like to talk about publicly, he said.
But Mr. Kallstrom discussed the issue as part of the FBI's intensified effort to win lawmakers' support for controversial legislation that would require communications companies to make sure calls can be tapped.
FBI Director Louis Freeh is expected to tell lawmakers at a joint Senate-House hearing this morning that law-enforcement agencies need the legislation to maintain effective electronic surveillance.
But the proposed bill -- the FBI still hasn't found a lawmaker willing to introduce it despite at least three years of lobbying -- gives phone-company executives the willies.
The legislation has a number of substantial problems, including a price tag that could top $2 billion and a provision that could thwart new technologies, said Roy Neel, president of the U.S. Telephone Association, an industry group.
Mr. Neel, who formerly was President Clinton's deputy chief of staff, also is scheduled to testify today.
"It took crooks 20 years to figure out they can use call forwarding to thwart law enforcement, and it took law enforcement another two years to figure out they had a problem," one phone executive said.
"Their solution is a law that would have prevented us from offering call forwarding."
If the legislation passes, "no company in its right mind would develop any new service for the electronic superhighway until the Justice Department had given its Good Housekeeping seal of approval," Mr. Neel said.
He said the Justice Department isn't equipped to evaluate telecommunications equipment.
He also argued that the proposed legislation "is a solution seeking a problem," adding: "There has been no documented case where a telephone company has refused to deliver on a wiretap order."
Mr. Neel complained that the FBI proposal would affect telephone companies, mobile-phone companies and other "common carriers," but would exclude private-line services and office switchboards.
"It potentially carves out large holes that could be safe harbors for criminals," he said.
The proposed bill also concerns privacy advocates, who say it would give federal, state and local law-enforcement officials access to sensitive personal data.
As communications networks evolve, they will be able to deliver video entertainment, information and shopping services.
Law-enforcement agencies could obtain that data without meeting the stringent requirements of a court-ordered wiretap, said Jerry Berman, executive director of the Electronic Frontier Foundation.
