H.J. Heinz Co., moving to revive its troubled Weight Watchers Food Co., is planning a major shake-up at the unit, naming a new president and slashing employment by at least 9%.
Brian Ruder, the unit's 39-year-old president, has accepted a top post with international duties in Heinz's growing baby-food business.
An outsider from a competing food company already has been recruited with the task of regaining market share lost to rival frozen-food brands, according to people close to the situation.
Heinz, which is based in Pittsburgh, and Mr. Ruder declined to comment.
An announcement is expected next week.
The moves include cutting more than 100 jobs at Weight Watchers Food, which employs about 1,100 in Pennsylvania, Ohio, Connecticut and Idaho, said people close to the situation.
Weight Watchers Food makes low-calorie frozen entrees and desserts, as well as dry goods and dairy products.
This isn't the first recent executive change at Weight Watchers Food.
Jay J. Abraham, who had been vice president of marketing, left six months ago.
Heinz recruited Mr. Ruder in 1988 from PepsiCo Inc., where he was a marketing director and, in June 1991, named him president of newly formed Weight Watchers Food, severing the diet-food category from Heinz's Ore-Ida frozen potato unit.
Mr. Ruder, who had worked for Heinz before joining PepsiCo, was handpicked by David W. Sculley, a senior vice president.
Mr. Sculley has been considered a candidate to succeed Chairman Anthony J.F. O'Reilly, whose contract expires in two years, and needed to shore up the laggard Weight Watchers to strengthen his bid.
Weight Watchers frozen foods had been a major contributor to Heinz earnings in the 1980s.
Last year, Weight Watchers Food had domestic sales of about $450 million, representing about 10% of Heinz's overall domestic sales.
John M. McMillin, an analyst with Prudential Securities, said the brand's profitability has declined about $35 million to $40 million in the past few years, and is now "approaching breakeven levels."
"Brian Ruder has not been its savior," Mr. McMillin said.
"I don't know how much is his fault and how much is that they've got a name -- Weight Watchers -- which is not contemporary for today's health-oriented person who's more interested in total fitness than dieting."
Mr. McMillin added that Heinz's Weight Watchers diet program has seen attendance drop, cutting into sales of Weight Watchers food products.
The two businesses are separate.
Mr. Ruder wasn't in charge of Weight Watchers International, the weight-loss unit.
