As President Clinton prepares to lift the economic embargo against Vietnam, many U.S. companies are eager to enter the markets there.
But several more diplomatic and bureaucratic steps are needed before some U.S. businesses can take full advantage of the opening.
Mobil Corp. is poised to exercise an option that will permit it to begin offshore oil exploration.
Caterpillar Inc. is studying an expected $7 billion in development projects that should yield sales of as much as $700 million in heavy earthmoving and other equipment.
And Microsoft Corp. says Vietnam is the next logical step in its plan to move into emerging markets.
But when the initial euphoria fades, obstacles may loom for some U.S. companies.
For instance, the Overseas Private Investment Corp., the U.S. government agency that provides U.S. companies with loan guarantees and political-risk insurance for long-term investments in developing countries, won't be operating in Vietnam soon.
OPIC can't sign agreements with nations that don't have diplomatic relations with the U.S.
While Mr. Clinton is expected to lift the 19-year-old embargo soon, the U.S. doesn't plan to open diplomatic ties with Hanoi at this time.
An OPIC official says that hundreds of U.S. companies use its programs.
The U.S. Export-Import Bank, which makes loans and provides insurance and guarantees for U.S. exports, needs to go through its own bureaucratic process before it gets involved with exports to Vietnam.
An official says there is a two-step process to determine how much risk the bank would be exposed to in Vietnam.
The official couldn't estimate how long the process might take.
The initial lack of such U.S. support could have a twofold impact on some potential trade with Vietnam, a growing market with 70 million consumers.
"I would expect them U.S. companies to be quite dependent on OPIC for loan guarantees and also for political insurance," said OPIC President Ruth Harkin.
Participation by agencies such as OPIC "also sends a signal that the federal government is willing to put its full faith and credit behind a deal," she adds.
Still, many U.S. companies are bullish on Vietnam.
A recent survey of 110 U.S. companies by the private U.S.-Asean Council for Business and Technology Inc. found that the companies expect the business opportunities to total about $2.7 billion in the first two years after the embargo is lifted and reach $8.2 billion by the fifth year.
"We do see Vietnam as having potential, solely because of the volume of consumers who would use the products that we manufacture day in and day out," said a spokesman for Procter & Gamble Co., the Cincinnati-based household-products maker.
And once the embargo is lifted, Westinghouse Electric Corp. said it is poised to sell power plant equipment, refrigeration units for containers, and process-control systems to distributors.
Nearly all European and Asian business competitors ignore the U.S. trade sanctions, and U.S. companies are eager to catch up.
Boeing Co. finds that archrival Airbus Industrie of Europe has slipped in and leased to Vietnam Airlines five A-320 narrow-body airliners.
Boeing managers, who have wanted to place 737s, their smallest jetliners, in Vietnam, feel that "part of the door is closed," but they plan to move aggressively nonetheless as soon as the sanctions are lifted, a spokesman said.
The company still has high hopes for placing larger wide-body jets, such as the 767, there.
They said that demand in Vietnam should range from 60 to 80 jets in the next decade or so, numbers that look pretty attractive given the depressed state of the airliner market.
Chevron Corp. also finds that European competitors such as Elf Aquitaine of France and Royal Dutch/Shell Group of the Netherlands have soaked up much of the business in Vietnam.
"We're always interested in new opportunities," a spokesman said.
"However, our competitiors from outside the U.S. have been in Vietman for some time pursuing the prospects, so we'd have to evaluate our interest very carefully."
The U.S. has taken a series of small steps towards what is expected to be Mr. Clinton's lifting of the trade embargo.
In December 1992, former President Bush permitted U.S. companies to open officies and hire staff, but not sign contracts to do business.
And in September, Mr. Clinton authorized U.S. companies to bid on projects financed by international financial institutions.
Digital Equipment Corp. has been among the U.S. companies taking advantage of each little opening along the way.
It set up an office in Hanoi in November, and has been signing up prospective customers with contracts that become effective as soon as the embargo lifts.
The computer maker also named a Vietnam market development manager, currently based in Tokyo, who spent 20 weeks in the country last year.
"We have been building business relationships that will spring into life as soon as the embargo is lifted," said Thomas Ehrgood, international trade counsel.
Still, the explosive increase of Vietnam's population and the nation's relative lack of resources makes some experts bearish about its long-term growth prospects.
They dismiss assertions that it will rival neighboring Thailand's meteoric growth.
"Vietnam is starting from an incredibly low base," says Terry Rambo, director of the Indochina Initiative at the East-West Center, a think tank in Honolulu.
"Even if it grows 10% a year, which is highly unlikely, it won't even be at Indonesia's level for 10 years."
