Some 82% of Americans are at risk for coronary heart disease, despite some lifestyle changes that were expected to yield a lower number of people at risk overall, according to a federal study.
Even more disturbing, federal researchers say, their findings indicate that once someone becomes at risk for coronary heart disease, no amount of treatment can undo the damage and put them back on par with someone who was never at risk.
For example, researchers say, people who effectively control their high blood pressure -- one of the six major risk factors -- will remain at a higher risk for coronary heart disease than do people who never develop hypertension, according to the study by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
"This really points out the need for primary prevention," said Drue Barrett, an officer with the Epidemic Intelligence Service division of the CDC's Cardiovascular Health Studies Branch.
"It means we need to keep people from even developing the risk factors."
Doctors cautioned that the study doesn't mean that those at risk need not bother trying to make lifestyle changes to reduce their risk.
(The six established risk factors are: obesity, lack of exercise, high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, diabetes and cigarette smoking, defined as having smoked at least 100 cigarettes in one's lifetime).
Physical activity and diet changes, for examples, do help to reduce one's risk, medical experts maintained, but don't erase it altogether.
"The emphasis needs to be that you never develop the risk factors rather than what to do once you have," Dr. Barrett said.
That means more preventive programs need to be targeted to healthy young people who are not at risk at all, doctors said.
Men and women between the ages of 18 and 34 were least likely to be at risk for heart disease.
On a state by state basis, Utah, Colorado and Washington reported the lowest percentages of people at risk, while South Dakota, West Virginia and Mississippi reported the most people at risk.
The results of the study, conducted on 91,000 people, surprised researchers, who expected that supposed lifestyle changes nationwide would translate into fewer people at risk for heart disease.
There was no previous federal study of this size for comparison, but researchers still expected a lower risk group than 82%.
Generally, cholesterol levels are lower now than in prior decades, researchers said, and many fewer people smoke.
In 1991, the percentage of U.S. adults who smoked cigarettes had dropped to 26% from 40% in 1965; while the percentage of adults with high cholesterol levels decreased to 20% from 26% in 1970.
