France's student and labor unions are planning demonstrations across the country today to protest the government's plans to boost employment by effectively cutting the minimum wage for young people.
The rare alliance of disenchanted students and workers has raised the specter of possible 1968-style rioting in the streets of Paris and could pose a major threat to the government's ability to fight unemployment by loosening up the rigid labor market.
At the same time as the demonstrators start to file through Paris streets this afternoon, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur will be meeting union leaders at his central Paris office in an attempt to convince them that France must accept major reforms if it wants to create new jobs, especially among youths.
Although France is suffering record unemployment, with more than 12% of the work force out of jobs, both the labor unions and students say they are determined to prevent the government from tampering with the nation's near-sacrosanct minimum wage, known as the SMIC, which is set at 5,886 francs ($1,012) a month for a 39-hour week.
The government's controversial new measures, which were unveiled last week, will allow companies to pay young recruits only 80% of the legal minimum, provided they also supply some form of professional training.
Labor unions fear that the measures could encourage employers to lay off older, more expensive laborers in favor of cheaper, untrained youngsters.
Student leaders say they think the measures will devalue existing diplomas.
Although Mr. Balladur insists that this time he will not back down, he has shown repeatedly since coming to office last year that he is wary of fanning the flames of social unrest in France and so tends to adopt a conciliatory attitude when faced with widespread protests.
His first major retreat came late last year when he wanted to appease angry airline workers.
This was followed by his withdrawal of a controversial educational reform.
Most recently, he offered a substantial appeasement package to disgruntled fishermen after they went on the rampage in a number of French coastal towns last month.
