The Business Roundtable's overwhelming vote against supporting the Clinton health care proposal deserves some attention, for what it says about this issue and more generally about business's dealings with Washington.
Up to now, there's often been a demarcation line between big and small business on issues like this one.
The National Federation of Independent Business, the small-business lobby, has come to be viewed as the main opponent of government expansions, while the Business Roundtable historically has been suspected of an instinct to cut a deal, absorb the costs and let their smaller competition figure out how to survive the added burdens.
The Clinton Administration seems to have been surprised to discover that the Roundtable's normally round heels are suddenly dug in.
We know the Clintonites dislike the 1980s, but maybe they should have been paying closer attention to what was going on then in corporate America.
Better yet, rather than giving off the impression that they're too smart to talk to businessmen (we're thinking of the eyes-only White House health care task force), they might have spent some time with the CEOs now running these companies.
The key, though, would have been to talk to them about business, not the blue sky of public policy.
They'd have learned that the old-style corporate empire-builders are largely gone.
During the 1980s, corporate America was forced to restructure, downsize and adopt some new ways of doing business.
The new breed of CEOs who've gone through those wrenching changes are obsessed with controlling costs.
President Clinton and Hillary Clinton both made personal appeals to the Roundtable.
So did superwonk Ira Magaziner.
They apparently didn't shift a single vote.
One big reason, we suspect, is that the pitch had no credibility on the cost side.
One of the most important lessons business leaders have been forced to learn the past 20 years is: Mandates conceal costs and so tend to proliferate like mushrooms.
State and local governments have long been burdened by federal mandates that drive up budgets and restrict flexibility.
They also know that the feds largely turn a deaf ear to complaints about enforcement absurdities; and they rarely suffer politically for the damage mandates cause.
Members of the Roundtable and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which also declared its opposition to the Clinton plan yesterday, say they are convinced the employer health-insurance mandate in the Clinton plan would work the same way.
Business would become, in effect, the tax collector for the health care state.
When the system's financing proved inadequate, price controls would be tightened and the plan's insurance "alliances" would start rationing some types of care.
There's another significant shift evident in the Roundtable outcome.
On most such issues, it's often the corporations' Washington reps who shape their public posture.
These folks are Beltway lifers.
Many are ex-Congressional staffers, and historically few executives were willing to ignore the road maps the reps drew to steer firms around legislative road hazards and other arcana.
But we're talking here about repaving one-seventh of the economy.
Ira Magaziner told the Roundtable's Washington reps that the center of the health care debate lies between between the Cooper bill and Canada, namely Clinton.
That's the kind of "compromise" reps have sold to CEOs in the past, but it appears this issue's implications are too vast to "absorb" the costs of another Beltway deal.
We hope that now the Roundtable's members will put the health care plan drafted by Democratic Rep. Jim Cooper under the same glass they used to flyspeck the Clinton plan.
Some members privately agree that Cooper contains provisions that could expand bureaucracy and mandates, though it avoids the one-size-fits-all Clinton approach.
It looks, though, as if folks on both sides of the issue learned a few things this week.
It'd be nice to think that a lot of Beltway folks learned what the business community discovered in the '80s: You get punished for trying to hide or ignore your real costs.
