DIPLOMATS PRESSED for a settlement in Bosnia after a Serb pullout in Sarajevo.
Serbs withdrew or gave up nearly all of their big guns near the Bosnian capital, ending the immediate threat of NATO air strikes.
Western nations shifted their focus toward diplomacy, hoping that a mixture of new proposals, combined with threats, will restrain the Serbs.
The U.S. also is expected to pressure the Muslim side to come up with a "bottom-line" peace proposal.
Washington officials, meanwhile, expressed doubts about extending NATO's ultimatum to other towns, citing insufficient U.N. ground forces.
French President Mitterrand called for Sarajevo to be placed under U.N. control.
But U.S. and Muslim officials believe the idea could rob momentum from the broader peace effort and lead to an ethnic partition.
The Justice Department plans to announce criminal charges today against NASA contractors in connection with the undercover investigation "Operation Lightning Strike."
The investigation, which began in the spring of 1992, has centered on allegations of kickbacks and overbilling in the U.S. space program.
Nuclear inspectors must begin work at North Korea's seven declared nuclear sites before Washington will set a date for resuming high-level talks with Pyongyang, the State Department said.
The IAEA told North Korea last week that the agency's inspectors would start work as soon as visas were ready, but the visas haven't been issued.
Labor unions are debating how fast to spend funds that have been set aside to push for health-care reform and how tough to make the campaign.
Some unions are pressing AFL-CIO President Kirkland to release more of the funds earmarked for advertising.
The drug AZT can be used to significantly reduce transmission from mother to child of the virus that causes AIDS, according to a study sponsored by NIH.
The study found that infants born to women infected with HIV were one-third as likely to contract the virus if they and their mothers received AZT.
Face-to-face negotiations began between the Mexican government and rebels, but the talks initially dealt with procedural issues and are expected to drag on for some time.
The start of the talks was tense because the guerrillas have broadened their demands for reform, saying they might not disarm even if peace is achieved.
An author may proceed with a suit alleging that a harsh book review published by the New York Times ruined his career, a federal appeals court said.
The ruling in the libel case was a procedural victory for the investigative journalist, Dan Moldea, that may encourage other authors to sue over negative reviews.
Conservative blacks and whites spurned the African National Congress's latest proposal aimed at getting them to drop a boycott that threatens to disrupt April's elections.
The rejection by the Freedom Alliance came after at least 40 people were reported slain in weekend political violence.
FCC rules on indecent broadcasts face further scrutiny in court.
The full federal appeals court in Washington is planning to reconsider two decisions that struck down the federal restrictions on indecent broadcasts and cable-television programming.
The Clinton administration scaled back its proposed increase in grazing fees in response to pressure from Western politicians and ranchers.
A regulation being prepared by the Interior Department would recommend an increase substantially less than what was proposed last August.
Pakistani commandos stormed the Afghan Embassy in Islamabad, freeing five schoolboys and a teacher and killing three Afghan gunmen who had held them hostage for 40 hours in a demand for money and food.
The gunmen earlier had released most of the 73 children and teachers seized when they hijacked a school bus Sunday.
Colombia's Marxist rebels stepped up their attacks in advance of next month's congressional vote, kidnapping candidates, setting up roadblocks, and blowing up police posts and politicians' offices over the weekend.
Defense officials said 13 people died in the clashes.
