Medical Care America Inc. signed a definitive agreement to sell its struggling home-infusion unit to Caremark International Inc. for $175 million, said Jonathan Bond, Medical Care's executive vice president.
Medical Care opened its books to acquisition-minded competitors last month amid shareholders' protests over its rejection of an earlier takeover bid.
Mr. Bond said that, in response to those concerns and to enhance shareholder value, Medical Care would use the proceeds of the unit's sale, along with existing reserves, to buy as many as seven million of its 36.6 million common shares outstanding for between $26 and $29 a share in a modified "Dutch auction."
In a Dutch auction, the buyer sets a price range, and holders give a price at which they are willing to sell shares.
The buyer then picks a price and buys shares at that price from holders who offered to sell at that price or lower.
Mr. Bond said that the boards of each company, the two largest competitors in the $4 billion home-infusion industry, had approved the transaction and that Medical Care hopes to complete the sale in early April.
But the agreement with Caremark, Northbrook, Ill., won't guarantee that Medical Care's recent troubles are ended.
The Federal Trade Commission must still examine the proposed transaction for possible antitrust implications and Medical Care's board's stock-buyback plan still must satisfy previously disgruntled shareholders.
Medical Care's board voted unanimously to sell its infusion unit during a meeting here last Thursday.
According to people close to the situation, it chose Caremark's all-cash bid over one submitted by W.R. Grace & Co., the Boca Raton, Fla., specialty chemical and healthcare-services concern.
Details of Grace's bid couldn't be learned.
At Thursday's meeting, the board also rejected bids for the entire company from American Medical Holdings Inc., a Dallas-based hospital concern, and Surgical Care Affiliates Inc., Nashville, Tenn., operator of outpatient-surgery centers, which offered to acquire Medical Care for almost $1 billion in stock last October.
Medical Care's rebuff of Surgical Care's earlier offer triggered a revolt by major shareholders, led by members of the Bass family of Fort Worth, Texas.
In December, their lobbying forced the company to open its books to competitors interested in acquiring part, or all, of Medical Care.
The combination of the two infusion networks would create broad cost-cutting opportunities for Caremark, a primary Medical Care competitor in many markets.
It also would free Medical Care from a line of business that it hasn't been able to operate successfully.
The $175 million selling price is far below the projections of some industry analysts, who had estimated the business could fetch as much as $250 million.
But in recent months, the infusion industry has faced intense cost-cutting pressures from managed-care providers and insurers.
And Medical Care's infusion business, which it acquired in late 1992, has been plagued by a high-cost structure and its failure to market effectively to managed-care providers.
Medical Care is the nation's largest operator of outpatient-surgery centers and, behind Caremark, the second-largest provider of home-infusion services, which allow patients to give themselves intravenous medications at home.
Mr. Bond said that the home-infusion business accounted for about 35% of Medical Care's revenue for the first nine months of 1993, but only about 7% of its operating profit.
In composite trading Friday on the New York Stock Exchange, Caremark stock closed at $19.50, up 50 cents; Medical Care stock, also listed on the Big Board, fell 12.5 cents, to $24.
Originally, Surgical Care offered to trade 1.35 shares of its common stock for each Medical Care share.
In its latest bid, Surgical Care is said to have increased the number of shares it was offering, but not sufficiently to make up for recent declines in its stock price.
On Friday, Surgical Care closed at $15.375, off 12.5 cents, in composite trading on the Big Board.
Surgical Care was trading at about $19 when its October bid was made.
A Surgical Care spokesman declined to comment on the situation.
People close to Medical Care's recent deliberations said that American Medical's bid wasn't sufficiently large to rate serious consideration by the board.
Shrinking profit margins in the home-infusion industry, led Caremark, spun off by Baxter International in 1992, to diversify broadly into other areas of business.
It expanded its prescription-drug services and acquired additional physician practices and free-standing dialysis centers.
Still, home care, which includes infusion, represents about 25% of Caremark's business.
In 1992, it had revenue of about $1.5 billion, and some industry observers said that the additional Medical Care outlets could be folded into the Caremark network at a minimal cost.
For the nine months, Medical Care reported a net loss of $112.2 million, or $3.07 a share, compared with net income of $31.4 million, or 84 cents a share, the year earlier.
Revenue increased 5.5% to $468.8 million, from $444.3 million.
For its 1993 nine months, Caremark reported a 31% increase in net profit, to $55.5 million, from $42.5 million the year earlier.
Revenue rose 23% to $1.3 billion, from $1.1 billion.
