As a 10-year-old, Kevin Robbie was the envy of every kid in America: a ballboy for the undefeated 1972 Miami Dolphins, a pal of the legendary Larry Csonka and Bob Griese.
As a 31-year-old, he is caught in the living nightmare of a battle within the family business: a brother fired, a mother sued, a never-ending, no-pads scrimmage among siblings.
Mr. Robbie has known the two extremes for one and the same reason: He is the son of Dolphins founder and longtime owner Joe Robbie.
Upon his death in 1990, Joe Robbie left behind one of the National Football League's strongest franchises, coached by Don Shula to most of his record-setting 327 wins.
He also left a will that would drag the team down into a quagmire.
When the Robbies sold the Dolphins to video-store mogul H. Wayne Huizenga for $138 million this week, the team fetched less than an NFL expansion entry.
Indeed, because the transaction netted $4 million less than another bidder's offer and was rushed to completion, it may spark yet another intra-family legal war.
"It's possible," says Kevin Robbie, speaking for his faction.
"We feel like we could have gotten more."
The Miami Dolphins' story is a reminder that, for all the grandeur of Sunday's Super Bowl, pro football is really a collection of small businesses.
A typical NFL team grosses $50 million to $60 million annually.
With the exception of the Green Bay Packers, they are privately held, and thus subject to being run in highly quirky ways.
The Dolphins are also typical of an endangered species throughout pro sports: the family-run, mom-and-pop franchise.
Joe Robbie, for whom the Dolphins were a livelihood, stood for yesterday.
Wayne Huizenga, for whom the Dolphins are just another piece of show-biz "software," stands for tomorrow.
This is the third pro sports franchise he has acquired in the past three years, though his control of the Florida Marlins (baseball) and Florida Panthers (hockey) may run him afoul of the NFL's rules against cross-ownership.
Meanwhile, Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., of which he is chairman and chief executive, has gone from just renting movies to making them -- via its acquisition of Republic Pictures -- and his sights are now set on developing a 2,300-acre theme-park and sports complex just north of Miami.
In addition, Blockbuster has agreed to merge with Viacom Inc. and joined in Viacom's bid for Paramount Communications Inc.
"Wayne is a big believer in the power of entertainment programing, and he's deeply committed to South Florida," says Russell Goldsmith, Republic Pictures' chairman.
"You put that all together and it gets very interesting."
The wrenching changeover from yesterday to tomorrow was perhaps inevitable from the moment of Mr. Robbie's death.
Until then, there had been no doubt about the Dolphins' boss or course.
From the moment he put up $65,000 for the team in 1966 to the day he died in January 1990, at age 73, Mr. Robbie was an autocrat.
Don Shula once threatened to punch him out for humiliating him in front of friends.
"Very few people loved him, but everybody respected him," says Norman Braman, the Philadelphia Eagles' owner and a Miami resident.
"He was the ultimate winner."
But like many seat-of-the-pants entrepreneurs, he was an over-reacher.
Mr. Robbie's last major act, building a $110 million stadium with private financing, saddled him with huge debts.
He reached out for an investor in Joe Robbie Stadium to share that load, and found Mr. Huizenga.
Even on his deathbed, however, Mr. Robbie was a tough customer.
He refused to give Mr. Huizenga more than a 49% interest, and their talks collapsed in December 1989.
Mr. Robbie died soon thereafter, left control of the team to a trust, and named three of his nine children as trustees: Tim, then 34; Dan, then 28; and Janet, then 43.
They promptly made the deal with Mr. Huizenga that their father wouldn't: a 50% stadium interest and a 15% stake in the team.
Mr. Huizenga, in addition, got an option to buy another 10% of the Dolphins, based on their 1990 valuation of $100 million, and the right to match any future offer for the Robbies' stock.
"They panicked," says Deborah Olson, one of the other siblings.
"The team was heavily in debt and this was quick cash, but it was done without analysis."
Mrs. Olson, three other siblings and their mother, Elizabeth, tried to block the transaction.
But it went through, and the family's blood feud was on.
By July 1990, the three controlling children had fired a dissident brother, Mike, from his executive vice president post.
Elizabeth Robbie publicly scolded the three, via faxes to reporters.
Then, in March 1991, she did a lot more.
She filed her "widow's election" to claim the 30% of her husband's estate that she was due under Florida law.
The aim was to break the trust and the trustees' hold on the Dolphins.
The war of the "ins" vs. the "outs" escalated, with the family evenly split: four children siding with their mother and two others siding with the three trustees.
When the Dolphins threw social events, Mrs. Robbie wasn't invited.
While the Dolphins played one game in a downpour, dissident sibling Diane Truly was barred from the comfort of the Robbies' owners box and had to watch, soaked, in the stands.
"When dad died, the three trustees became a closed society," says Ms. Truly, 50, the eldest Robbie child.
"Power and glory and money went to their heads and corrupted their values."
Tim Robbie, the Dolphins' president, denies it.
"When you come from a big family, there are a lot of differences of opinion and it's inevitable," he says.
"I think there was simply resentment that we were chosen and they weren't."
Whatever the basic origins of the feud, it escalated.
Mrs. Robbie cut Tim and sister Janet out of her will and reduced bequests to her other estranged children.
The "ins" sued their mother to try to eliminate her as a beneficiary of Mr. Robbie's trust.
She died in November 1991, at age 69, but the problems went on: Now an estate tax of more than $30 million would be assessed.
To pay it, the Dolphins' sale was inevitable.
But by now, despite a 1991 ranking by Financial World as sport's second most valuable franchise ($205 million, by the magazine's calculation), they were damaged goods.
The "ins" who ran the team had inherited their father's hardheadedness without his business acumen.
The Dolphins lost $3.6 million in 1992 and, according to one person knowledgeable in NFL finances, about $7 million in 1993.
Tim Robbie asserts that the team was profitable in 1993.
One factor was a spiraling player payroll.
Joe Robbie had fought constantly with Coach Shula, who forever pressed to spend big on players.
Mr. Shula won a lot more games on the gridiron than arguments in the owner's office.
But the coach utterly overran Mr. Robbie's offspring.
"Don goes, `I want this player and I want that player,' and the kids can't stand up to him," says one NFL insider familiar with the dynamics.
Miami's signing of a raft of high-priced free agents like tight end Keith Jackson and receiver Mark Ingram put the Dolphins' payroll at about $40 million, this season, in the upper tier of the NFL's top-salaried teams.
Also hurting finances were the terms of the team's lease, which divert major revenue streams like luxurysuite rentals to the separate company that owns the stadium.
That didn't make so much difference when the Robbies owned both.
But when they put the team up for sale on a stand-alone basis, it diminished the market value.
The lurking presence of Mr. Huizenga did, too.
Anybody who bought the Dolphins would have to reckon with him, both as the 50% owner of the stadium and as principal owner of its other occupant, the Marlins.
The baseball and football teams have had an uneasy relationship as co-tenants.
If that didn't give a prospective Dolphins owner pause, Mr. Huizenga's talk of moving the Marlins to his proposed entertainment complex did.
The baseball team's presence cut the Dolphins' rental bill; its absence would ratchet it back up.
To some knowledgeable Dolphins watchers, Mr. Huizenga was trying to jawbone down the team's market value.
(Mr. Huizenga was unavailable for comment.)
This was certainly in his interest.
Under the part-ownership terms he negotiated in 1990, he had the right to buy the rest of the team by matching the highest offer anyone else made.
It had a depressing effect on the market for the Dolphins.
"If you let somebody take control of the process on the buy side, you can't get up a head of steam from other outside bidders," says an investment banker who has handled sports transactions.
The Robbies, as even some non-family neutrals see it, didn't manage the Dolphins' sale very well.
When the New England Patriots were up for sale, for instance, the owners hired a top-flight investment bank to manage the transaction, and it orchestrated an auction that fetched $160 million.
The Robbies retained a regional bank holding company, called many of the shots themselves, and stumbled through a long, disjointed selling process.
The Robbies had two near-agreements fall through in 1993.
Then came a $142 million bid early this month from John Henry, a Boca Raton commodities trader.
The Robbies, deciding the offer carried too many conditions, rejected it.
Then telecommunications magnate George Lindemann got a two-week exclusive negotiating period, starting Jan. 10.
He came in at $138 million.
The three "ins" called a meeting of the combined stadium and team boards (which included one of the "out" siblings) to consider the offer.
But between the time the meeting was scheduled last Friday and when it was to be held on Tuesday, Mr. Huizenga swooped in to match Mr. Lindemann's bid.
The three controlling trustees accepted it Sunday, to the screams of the "outs."
"It's easy for anybody sitting on the sidelines to question any deal," says Tim Robbie, the team president.
"But we talked to at least 20 people who had interest in buying, and we're very comfortable with this transaction."
Other Robbie siblings sought competitive bidding, and didn't think Mr. Huizenga would make a pre-emptive strike.
"It was done around the rules; it wasn't a validly called meeting to approve the sale," says Mrs. Olson, a board member who learned of the transaction only after the fact.
"I respect Wayne Huizenga; he just jumped in at a good time to get a good deal.
He looked out for his interests, and I'm just trying to look out for mine."
Indeed, Mr. Huizenga has probably swung a very good deal.
The NFL stands to be flush, over the next four years, with $4.4 billion worth of TV money gushing in and labor peace finally at hand.
The control of both teams using Joe Robbie Stadium also gains him operating efficiencies.
For Mr. Huizenga, sports is emerging as great fodder for the evolving media and entertainment age in which he is a player.
"Wayne views these properties as software for the bigger picture," says Dean Jordan, broadcast chief for the Marlins and marketing chief for the Panthers.
"The Marlins make Joe Robbie Stadium go for 81 games a year, and that makes merchandising, concessions, TV and other things go.
And all of that is part of a bigger picture that's still being defined on a daily basis."
The Robbies will probably not be part of that future, a development they view with mixed emotions.
"It's hard," says Kevin, the onetime ballboy.
"It's been my life."
But his sister, Ms. Truly, looks forward to the end of having to deal with her estranged siblings.
"I'll be grateful I don't have them in my life."
