Businesses often grumble when the government slaps them with regulations, but not so the seafood industry, which welcomed new safety procedures proposed last week by the Food and Drug Administration.
Under the regulations, seafood processors and importers would have to analyze the safety of their operations using a procedure -- called the Hazardous Analysis Critical Control Point system -- that was first developed in 1959 for the space program.
FDA inspectors then would check for adequate safety measures at various "critical points" where products are most likely to spoil or encounter bacteria.
Donna Shalala, Health and Human Services secretary, said the new, systematic approach represents a "sea change" from the current regulatory system in which the FDA inspects high-risk operations annually and other operations once every three years.
"We will be reviewing whether the safety system is in place, rather than taking a snapshot," she said.
Complying with the regulations would cost, on average, between $1,000 and $5,000 per company, but will vary from company to company, depending on their current safety procedures.
Ms. Shalala suggested the costs would be modest for an industry that posted more than $35 billion of sales in 1992.
FDA Commissioner David Kessler said the agency will enforce the safety procedures aggressively.
"This is not an honor system," he said.
"These are regulations, and the government has oversight."
But Thomas Billy, director of the office of seafood at the FDA, said the agency won't have to hire more inspectors to enforce the policy.
Seafood-industry officials helped devise the regulations, and the industry generally voiced satisfaction with the result.
New, uniform regulations will reassure the public that seafood is safe to eat, said Tim Smith, executive director of the Pacific Coast Oyster Growers Association, the trade association for the shellfish industry.
"Consumer confidence has been eroding," he asserted.
He added that the regulations will help identify illegal harvesters who, he said, not only sell unsafe and poor-quality products but also oversupply the market and drive down prices.
The FDA said the rules would increase seafood prices, at most, 1% in the first year after the regulations are adopted and 0.5% annually thereafter.
Other industry people said the new standards should help U.S. producers in foreign markets.
While the new standards appear to be a plus for the U.S. seafood industry overall, some small businesses may lose out.
The FDA said that compliance costs may be high enough to "cause some firms to go out of business."
Moreover, consumer groups aren't completely satisfied.
The FDA rules "are a good first step . . . but they won't do any good without more money in the FDA budget for enforcement," said Caroline Smith DeWaal, the director of legal affairs for Public Voice.
Some held the new seafood rules as a model for other foods.
Agriculture Department efforts to strengthen safety requirements for meat and poultry have been stalled, partly because of the reluctance of producers.
"Seafood should set a good precedent for raw meat and poultry," said Carol Tucker Foreman, coordinator for the Safe Food Coalition, a consumer group.
She predicted that tougher meat and poultry rules are now "going to move."
FDA Commissioner Kessler estimated that there are 30,000 to 60,000 seafood-related illnesses and injuries each year.
Per-capita consumption of seafood has decreased in the U.S., even though total consumption has increased because of population growth, according to the National Restaurant Association.
The FDA will consider public comment on the proposed regulations for 90 days from the time they are published in the Federal Register, sometime this week.
