Western railroads are seeing a gravy train in Union Pacific Corp.'s plan to take voting control of Chicago & North Western Holdings Corp.
Several Western roads are publicly opposing the Union Pacific's application to the Interstate Commerce Commission to turn its nonvoting shares of the C&NW into a 29.5% voting stake.
But many of them quietly are using the proceedings to wring new concessions from the federal regulators.
The tactic is being closely watched by shippers, truckers and affected cities to see how drastically the Western rail map will be redrawn in the wake of the Union Pacific's move.
It already has paid off for the Dakota, Minnesota & Eastern Railroad, says J.C. McIntyre, president.
The regional railroad recently withdrew its opposition to the transaction after winning long-sought financial and marketing concessions from C&NW. Opposition, says Mr. McIntyre, "provided some leverage to get issues resolved."
"Railroads are having a feeding frenzy fighting for trackage rights and conditions," says Scott Flower, an analyst at Kidder, Peabody & Co.
For its part, Union Pacific says it is merely trying to make a close relationship closer and doesn't understand the fuss.
Union Pacific insists it doesn't have any current plans to merge the two systems.
But it wants to keep C&NW's high-speed mainline from Chicago to Omaha, Neb., and its route to low-sulfur Wyoming coal fields out of competitors' hands.
That's fine with C&NW managers.
"We appreciate the security their Union Pacific position in the company gives us," says Robert Schmiege, chairman, president and chief executive officer.
He adds that Union Pacific's $100 million investment in C&NW several years ago helped defeat a hostile takeover attempt by New York investors, Japonica Partners.
Supporters say that linking the two railroads would create benefits without excessive competitive harm because their tracks connect rather than overlap.
Union Pacific tracks cover much of the West and Southwest but don't reach into the Iowa, Minnesota, Wisconsin and northern Illinois stronghold of the C&NW.
Among the benefits, they say, are the two railroads' enhanced ability to speak with one voice when setting rates, offering new services and linking communications networks.
That, in turn, would help them smooth freight flows and compete with long-haul truckers.
"The name of the game in railroading more than ever before is marketing," says William Withuhn, transportation curator at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.
"This would give the Union Pacific more centralized authority over marketing all the way from Chicago to Los Angeles and every other point served by the two railroads."
Not every railroad is worried.
"Union Pacific already exercises a fair amount of operational control over Chicago & North Western, and changing their official status wouldn't really make that much difference to us," says a spokesman for Burlington Northern Inc., which withdrew its initial opposition.
But other railroads fear an increasingly powerful Union Pacific, which since 1982 has acquired the Missouri Pacific, Western Pacific and Missouri-Kansas-Texas railroads.
Southern Pacific Rail, for one, wants the transaction denied.
But failing that the company seeks protective conditions that would allow it to serve shippers on most parts of C&NW's territory and that of the former Missouri Pacific and M-K-T roads.
Southern Pacific also seeks the right to participate in commercial coordinations reached between Union Pacific and the C&NW.
And Southern Pacific is asking the ICC for tougher anti-discrimination measures over Southern Pacific's existing trackage rights on Union Pacific lines.
Those rights were granted by the ICC to preserve rail competition between northern California and the Midwest in the 1982 Union Pacific/Missouri Pacific merger.
Union Pacific denies it discriminates against Southern Pacific, and charges that Southern Pacific owes nearly $60 million in unpaid track rental charges.
This strikes Union Pacific executives as somewhat two-faced.
"They make statements about discrimination on the trackage rights they already have on Union Pacific and then they turn around and ask for rights across the rest of our system," says Richard Davidson, chairman of Union Pacific's Union Pacific Railroad.
Edward Moyers, Southern Pacific's chief executive, brushes off such criticism.
"Our conditions merely reduce what UP would take away," he says.
Kansas City Southern Industries Inc. is asking the ICC for haulage rights on C&NW lines to Iowa's grain-producing regions.
C&NW currently transports Iowa feed grains to Midwest rail yards where Kansas City Southern trains relay the shipments to Southern poultry farmers.
This traffic could be diverted to Union Pacific lines after it takes control of the C&NW, fears Landon Rowland, Kansas City Southern's president and chief executive officer.
"Union Pacific would have an incentive to take business off of other competing railroads and put it on its enlarged family of railroads."
Soo Line is lobbying the ICC to remove a provision from its 1931 track-sharing arrangement with C&NW between Kansas City and Polo, Mo.
The provision blocks other parties from using the line.
C&NW used the provision to block the sale of Soo's Kansas City-Chicago line to Southern Pacific in 1990.
"Soo Line isn't attempting to invade the territory or shipper base of the Union Pacific or C&NW as some of the conditions sought by others would do," says Terence Hynes, an outside attorney for Soo Line, a unit of Canadian Pacific Ltd.
"All we are asking for is the elimination of the veto power over the competitive responses we might make."
Meanwhile, shippers are lining up behind one side or the other.
Dacotah Cement is opposing the application until it gets a promise from the C&NW to renovate track and improve service on a line from Rapid City, S.D., to Crawford, Neb.
Tyson Foods Inc. supports the transaction, which is likely to lower freight rates and encourage shipments of feed grain to chicken farms in the South, says Donald Smith, director of commodity purchasing at Tyson Foods.
Other shippers are reluctant to choose sides though.
"I like the idea of two railroads working closely together to provide seamless service," says Woody Richardson, vice president of truck-rail at Schneider National Inc., a Green Bay, Wis., trucking company.
But "other railroads are opposing this move, and the industry has to be concerned about the competitive nature of this."
