If anything in the old Soviet Union lived up to the image of the Russian bear, it was the Olympic hockey team.
Featuring gruff, grisly veterans, many of them officers in the Red Army, the team mauled the world every four years, putting its claws on all but two of the gold medals since 1956.
This year's Russian team, stripped of the old, menacing CCCP jerseys, looks more like the bear's huggable cubs.
It is the youngest to ever skate out of Moscow.
There's more peach fuzz than stubble.
Not a single player comes from the army club.
Indeed, the team showed its vulnerability, losing to Finland yesterday 5-0 to fall to 1-1.
Russia beat Norway in its opener.
"It takes a long time to become a master at this game," muses Viktor Kuzkin, a star defenseman -- and lieutenant colonel -- on the gold medal teams of 1964, 1968 and 1972.
"Unfortunately, at 18 the kids are already trying to become professional players in Canada or America."
So it goes in the post-Communist sports world, where a contract with North America's National Hockey League glitters more than a gold medal and congratulations from the Central Committee.
Over the past four years, for instance, 22 players from the Central Sports Club of the Army (CSKA) -- once a veritable factory of Olympic hockey talent -- have defected to the NHL, including stars like Sergei Fedorov and Vyacheslav Fetisov.
Viktor Tikhonov, the CSKA and Olympic head coach, is still prowling behind the bench.
And he is as surly as ever.
Asked whether he would consider following the lead of his defecting players and coach in the NHL, the old master, who has guided four Olympic teams, stomps away, grumbling, "You reporters always ask the same questions.
I'm sick of it."
This year, though, his irritability is understandable.
The gold medal is no longer a virtual lock, the wanderlust of many of Russia's best finally leveling the international playing ice.
His team didn't come together until late January, and then it was barely recognizable with its roster of unproven, youthful talent.
And he knows his players are more interested in impressing the ubiquitous NHL scouts with their individual abilities than listening to his hoary lectures about teamwork.
Today, the hallowed CSKA arena is defiled with sponsors' logos -- McDonald's, Coca-Cola and Pittsburgh's Iron City beer.
Although they have lost many players to the lure of the West, CSKA officials also owe plenty to the NHL and capitalism.
Mr. Kuzkin's old No. 4 jersey, recently retired, hangs above a rink where the Russian Penguins now play, the army squad having been renamed after the NHL's Pittsburgh team that rescued CSKA from financial disaster.
But they don't have to like it.
The trim, 54-year-old Mr. Kuzkin, who coaches the Russian Penguins, aches for the days when players set Olympic supremacy as their highest goal.
"It was a different time, the golden era.
We didn't even dream of playing professionally," he remembers.
He recalls a playing career with CSKA that began when he was 18 and ended years before such dreams were allowed.
"Of course," he concedes, "it would have been interesting.
Every athlete wants to test himself at a higher level."
Such a challenge is the altruistic note of the NHL's siren call.
The big enticement is the money.
Mr. Fedorov recently renewed his contract with the Detroit Red Wings for $11.7 million over four years.
Mark Kelly, a hockey scout who represents the Pittsburgh side of the CSKA-Penguins joint venture, concedes that the NHL is targeting more and more young Russian stars.
NHL teams already are sizing up promising Russian 17-year-olds for this year's draft.
And most, if not all, of those drafted will pack their bags.
Mr. Tikhonov has been fighting to persuade the NHL not to poach players under the age of 22.
But by the time the next Winter Olympics are held, the issue could be moot.
Hockey may follow basketball's lead and permit professionals to compete in the Games.
Like the U.S. hoopsters' "Dream Team," the world's hockey powerhouses might be assembling sensational all-star squads of top professionals.
Russia's NHL elite could then return home for the Games.
It's an attractive prospect, but it certainly isn't enough to satisfy the old guard.
"We have only one dream here," says Mr. Kuzkin, "and that is to bring the team back to what it was before."
