President Clinton's $1.5 trillion budget for fiscal 1995 is an exercise in limits and restraint.
It preserves the strict spending limits imposed in last year's deficit-reduction law while shrinking the deficit for the third year in a row, to $165.1 billion this year.
It would give some 115 spending programs the ax, and squeeze out about 118,000 federal jobs.
In pursuit of some administration "investments" -- national health care, worker training and tax breaks for inner-city "empowerment" zones -- the budget would cut other programs dear to the hearts of most Democrats.
Subsidies for public housing, crop insurance and others were slashed to make way for new priorities.
The plan wouldn't raise taxes beyond last year's increases, aside from a cigarette tax to pay for health care.
"It forced the president and Congress to make fundamental priority judgments," said Leon Panetta, director of the Office of Management and Budget.
"I honestly believe that that's a very healthy debate."
Nutrition spending would rise, while outlays for many farm-subsidy, soil-conservation and other programs would be eliminated or cut.
The budget would boost spending for low-income pregnant women, infants and children by 10%, to $3.54 billion in fiscal 1995.
An average of 7.2 million monthly recipients would receive benefits under the program, up from 6.5 million currently.
Child-nutrition outlays would rise modestly; emphasis would be placed on educating students and training food-service workers about the importance of better school meals.
The Food Safety and Inspection Service would receive funds to hire 200 additional meat and poultry inspectors and to step up research.
The administration budget also assumes saving $53.5 million by phasing out subsidies for honey, wool and mohair; Congress already has ordered ending the latter two subsidies and is considering dropping honey subsidies.
Outlays for the Agriculture Department's big crop-subsidy program would fall 30% to $8.5 billion, a projection based on expected lower harvests during calendar 1994.
Farmers would have to enroll in the federal crop-insurance program to be eligible for crop subsidies and disaster aid.
Soil Conservation Service outlays for watershed and flood-prevention programs would be slashed 65% to $105 million, with a 91% reduction in budget authority presaging further spending cuts later.
No sweeping new environmental proposals adorn the budget, but the plan does call for increased spending in a few targeted areas.
"High-priority" items that would receive more funds include the White House's plan to fight global warming; the 1990 Clean Air Act; energy-conservation programs; efforts to promote solar and renewable energy; wetlands-restoration and pesticide-reduction initiatives; and several existing ecosystem-restoration plans, the most significant of which involves the Florida Everglades.
In addition, the administration proposes new spending for a variety of international programs that follow up on the 1992 Earth Summit.
Last year, the Environmental Protection Agency's budget was whacked by more than $900 million when a plan to accelerate spending for sewage treatment went down with the president's stimulus package.
This year, the agency's outlays will rise to $6.7 billion from $6.5 billion.
While the rate of increase won't significantly exceed inflation, the EPA said a large increase in budget authority would mean bigger outlay increases in future years.
It also said that by concentrating spending on operating programs this year, it will be able to hire more than 700 new employees and to boost its regulatory and enforcement efforts.
With the change, the agency "will be able to enforce the laws more fully," says Marc Smolonsky, a budget analyst for the nonprofit Environmental Working Group.
Interior Department outlays would hold steady from last year at $7.2 billion.
At the Energy Department, they would drop nearly 9% to $15.7 billion; most of the cuts would be in defense-related programs.
The administration proposes new spending to promote economic development and to help low-income people in depressed areas, while it would cut funds for public housing.
The budget for the Department of Housing and Urban Development proposes a package of tax incentives and wage credits for employers, as well as social service grants for local governments, in so-called empowerment zones.
Six large cities and one midsized city would qualify for the aid.
Smaller grants will be divided among 95 urban and rural "enterprise" zones; the proposed 1995 budget would offer $500 million in grants to finance capital projects, including housing, in zones that will be selected by the administration in the late summer or early fall.
Funds for rural enterprise zones would come from the Agriculture Department.
The amount HUD would be authorized to spend on various public, elderly and low-income housing would drop steeply to $4.7 billion, from $7.75 billion in 1994.
One-third of the reduction would involve grants for elderly housing.
Because of the long lead time in housing programs, the full effects of those cuts probably wouldn't be felt for three to five years.
But the proposed budget would reduce 1995 outlays for public housing development by $23 million, to an estimated $529 million.
Overall, new and previously committed spending would result in total HUD outlays of $29.5 billion, an increase of $2 billion from the 1994 level.
State Department and foreign-aid spending would decline to $20.8 billion from $21.8 billion, as the administration focuses on post-Cold War spending on broad categories, such as building democracy, instead of earmarking funds for specific nations.
The giant exception would be funds for Israel and Egypt, which won't be touched.
Most other bilateral security assistance will decline, although the budget is short on specifics.
In its place, the administration proposes broad spending categories -- such as promoting U.S. prosperity and promoting peace -- that link diplomacy and economics and trade.
The budget says aiding Russia and the former Soviet republics remains the "clearest link between the expansion of democracy and free markets and the U.S. national interest."
Outlays for this category would rise to $887 million from $635 million this fiscal year.
Spending for multinational development banks would rise to $1.7 billion from $1.4 billion.
The administration's effort to get away from country-specific aid is bound to rankle some members of Congress who look out for special interests.
"The White House wants flexibility to spend this money when and where it wishes.
Their notion is, `trust us, we'll spend it the way you want,'" says a congressional aide.
He predicts that the president's idea may succeed in the House because of support from pro-Israel forces, but that it could face some difficulties in the Senate.
The administration figures its health-care plan, if it passes Congress this year, would require $3.5 billion in additional federal spending in fiscal 1995, the first year of its phase-in schedule.
At the same time, the government would be saving money on Medicare and Medicaid and wouldn't be spending all that it took in from a higher tobacco tax, knocking $11 billion off the deficit.
As the program is phased in, it would widen the deficit in fiscal 1997 and 1998 before it resumed narrowing it in 1999.
Funding on most programs under the Department of Health and Human Services was frozen to focus spending increases on some specific programs.
Outlays on the National Institutes of Health, the government's main source of medical research grants, would rise 7.4% to $11.02 billion from $10.26 billion this year.
Funding would rise 28% for breast cancer research and 6% for AIDS research.
Spending for the federal government's principal AIDS treatment program, the Ryan White community grants to counsel and care for people infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, would grow 22.94% to $627 million.
Federal spending on childhood immunizations, one of the President and Hillary Rodham Clinton's chief interests, would more than double to $901 million from $446 million this year.
That includes $424 million for the administration's new federal vaccine entitlement program, which is scheduled to begin in October.
Through the program officials hope to raise child immunization rates to 90% by 2000.
The administration is also proposing more money for drug-treatment programs, including targeting more prevention efforts toward pregnant women and expanding treatment for hard-core drug users.
Overall spending on the department's drug-treatment programs would grow 22.44% to $862 million from $704 million.
Science spending would grow slightly as one of Mr. Clinton's favored investment areas.
But the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is feeling the sting of what agency officials call "severe cuts" to its budget for manned space flights.
NASA would be held to $14.46 billion in fiscal 1995, only $250 million more than this year even as it faces mounting costs to build an international space station and cooperate with new Russian partners.
While freezing space-station spending, the proposal would cut almost 6% in spending authority from shuttle operations.
In unmanned space flights, NASA announced it will try to recover from the $1 billion loss of its Mars Observer spacecraft last summer with a Mars Surveyor program featuring smaller, cheaper orbiters and landers that would be sent to Mars beginning in November 1996.
Total research spending would rise 3%.
The Clinton plan would dedicate 43.6% of $70 billion in federal research and development spending next year for civilian projects, compared with 42.7% this fiscal year, with the rest for defense projects.
The National Science Foundation, a big bankroller of university research, was a winner for a second year with a projected increase of 6%.
But universities and nonprofit institutions that get federal research grants could be in for a one-year freeze on reimbursement of their overhead costs.
Winners scoring budget increases include global-climate research, a favorite of Vice President Al Gore; the Human Genome project to map all the genes in the human body; the Advanced Neutron Source research reactor; Princeton's Tokamak Physics Experiment that looks at fusion energy, and the B-meson research facility at Stanford University that would explore the nature of matter.
In a move greeted with delight by anti-nuclear activists, the Energy Department said it would pull the plug on the advanced liquid metal reactor.
President Clinton wants funds to help local governments hire 50,000 additional police officers, increase prison construction and place a greater emphasis on drug-abuse treatment and prevention.
The Justice Department said the 50,000 officers would be "a big step toward the administration's goal of placing 100,000 police officers on the beat."
Many of the officers wouldn't appear on the streets immediately, however; the administration figures that in fiscal 1995, it will be able to spend only $345 million of the $1.7 billion authorized for the 50,000 officers.
Another unknown: State and local governments would have to provide $250 for every $1,000 they get in federal money to hire police.
About $589 million would be spent next fiscal year on prison construction.
Prison operating funds would total $2.3 billion.
Attorney General Janet Reno said the budget would "activate" almost 9,700 new prison beds.
Spending to fight drug abuse would increase 9% from the current fiscal year.
While funds for drug law enforcement would grow 3%, the Office of National Drug Control Policy, often called the "drug czar's" office, said spending on prevention and treatment would jump 18%.
As a result, 59% of the anti-drug budget would be aimed at reducing supply through enforcement and 41% at reducing demand through prevention and treatment.
This would mark the first time the enforcement allocation dropped below 60% of the total.
Drug treatment advocates have long argued that much greater emphasis should be placed on demand reduction.
The administration recommends a 9.3% increase to $2.81 billion in spending for the federal judiciary.
Most of the additional money would go for additional courthouse security and administrative staff.
The Education Department would receive a 7% increase in discretionary spending authority, one of the biggest boosts of any Cabinet agency.
But some programs would receive money that won't be spent for years to come.
Discretionary education outlays would decrease to $24 billion in fiscal 1995 from $24.5 billion this fiscal year.
The administration proposed a 21% increase in funds for Head Start, allowing the program to offer 100,000 additional all-day classes in 1995 and 290,000 more by 1999.
Currently, most Head Start programs offer just half-day classes.
The Bush administration had sought to serve more children but hadn't favored all-day classes.
One-fourth of all new budget money proposed in the Clinton budget would be set aside for such quality improvements as upgrading school buildings, buying new buses, and raising staff salaries.
The administration also proposed a 10% increase in its program to help disadvantaged school children.
The Education Department wants to concentrate the proposed $7.6 billion in so-called Title 1 funds on the poorest school districts, but its new spending formula already has run into trouble on Capitol Hill.
It also wants to increase money spent on teacher training by 22%.
Goals 2000, the administration's major education-reform plan, would get $700 million, much of which would be grants to schools and communities for education reform.
The program to catch abuse in the student loan program, meanwhile, would get a 65% increase.
The Pell grant program would be expanded to reach 4.1 million college students, with the maximum award raised $100 to $2,400.
The budget would cut off funds for 33 education programs, most of which were small programs recommended for elimination by the National Performance Review last year.
Highways remain a big priority for President Clinton, even if his rhetoric has turned to other areas.
Federal highway spending would increase 4% to $18.6 billion, fully funding the 1991 highway bill for the first time since its passage.
The administration is proposing a big increase in research spending for "intelligent-vehicle" systems, which include navigational aids in cars.
For mass transit, the picture is less rosy.
While capital spending for new buses, trains and other transit equipment would increase at a greater rate than for highways, operating subsidies for local transit systems would drop $121 million, or 16%.
"If you can't operate it, you can't buy it," said Rod Diridon, chairman of the American Public Transit Association.
Administration officials say replacing old equipment will allow transit systems to reduce maintenance costs.
The budget would provide a $1 billion subsidy program for domestic shipyards and owners of 52 American-flag ships, but this "maritime-reform" program would be funded by increased tonnage fees on foreign and domestic ships.
The budget also would increase Amtrak's funding 15.3% but provide less money for high-speed rail research than advocates, including Transportation Secretary Federico Pena, wanted.
The budget would eliminate 21-year-old subsidies to short-haul railroads and scale back subsidies that support airline service to small communities.
The administration also wants to scrap a $32 million boating-safety program.
