Republicans won a Senate commitment to hold hearings on the Whitewater affair that is bedeviling President and Mrs. Clinton, but the timing of the hearings must still be determined.
By agreeing to hearings, the Democrats have allowed the Whitewater issue to move to a new political plane.
However, the resolution specifically states the timing and the format of the hearings won't interfere with the investigation being conducted by Special Counsel Robert Fiske, so hearings might not occur for some time.
The details still have to be worked out by Majority Leader George Mitchell of Maine and Minority Leader Robert Dole of Kansas, who reached yesterday's agreement during a day of negotiations.
The two senators both claimed victory in presenting the agreement, which the Senate adopted on a 98-0 vote, as it completed work on a community-development banking bill designed to increase credit for poor communities and small businesses.
Mr. Dole said that the agreement commits the Senate to hearings on a complicated set of financial and political issues involving the Clintons.
Until now, the Senate's Democratic majority has refused to commit to hearings, arguing that any Senate investigation could impede Mr. Fiske's probe.
The agreement shows that "Robert Fiske doesn't have a veto" over the Senate's right to review the effectiveness of federal bank regulation and law enforcement, Mr. Dole said.
At the same time, Mr. Mitchell emphasized that the resolution makes it clear that the Senate won't proceed in a way that interferes with Mr. Fiske's investigation.
He also said that hearings won't occur immediately.
Nevertheless, Democrats had come to realize that hearings where inevitable.
"The disagreement has been over the time and the manner" of the hearings, Mr. Mitchell said.
While the two leaders could still fail to reach agreement on these details, both promised to negotiate in good faith.
-- Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan, a failed Arkansas thrift linked to the Clintons' political and business ventures.
-- Whitewater Development Co., a land partnership involving the Clintons, the head of Madison and his former wife.
-- Capital Management Services, a Little Rock, Ark., small-business investment company that made a loan that may have been used to clear up some of Madison's problems.
Republicans also made it clear that the hearings will focus on whether the White House has tried to stop government investigations of Madison, which failed in 1989 and cost the taxpayers $47 million.
Yesterday, two top White House officials -- White House Counsel Bernard Nussbaum and Deputy Chief of Staff Harold Ickes -- appeared before a federal grand jury looking into whether the White House tried to influence a government investigation of Madison.
In addition, White House adviser George Stephanopoulos yesterday was subpoenaed to testify before the grand jury.
"I welcome the opportunity to give Mr. Fiske the facts," Mr. Stephanopoulos said in a statement.
In the House, where the GOP is also pressing for full hearings, Republican leaders met with Mr. Fiske to try to clear away obstacles.
The discussions were inconclusive, but the Senate agreement should also help clear the way toward hearings in the House.
Next week, the House Banking Committee will hold general oversight hearings on the Resolution Trust Corp., the thrift-cleanup agency.
Rep. James Leach (R., Iowa) may use the hearings to release information that he says shows that "officials of the Kansas City RTC office are being gagged and possibly coerced by the Washington RTC office," presumably to halt work on the Madison investigation.
However, memos from the RTC's Kansas City office suggest that officials are pursuing the Madison investigation on a number of fronts, including the business dealings of Dan Lasater, a former Little Rock bond dealer and Clinton campaign supporter, as well as certain investments concerning Jim Guy Tucker, the current governor of Arkansas.
Separately, Attorney General Janet Reno moved to fill the spot of Webster Hubbell, who is embroiled in a dispute with his former law firm and has been linked to some aspects of the Whitewater investigation.
Ms. Reno named a career department lawyer, William Bryson, as deputy associate attorney general.
Mr. Bryson, who had been a deputy solicitor general, would become the acting associate attorney general when Mr. Hubbell leaves that office in a few weeks.
The associate oversees several department operations, including the antitrust, environment and natural resources, civil rights and tax divisions
