The Dow Jones Industrial Average roared back from Friday's 96-point plunge as investors buried their stock-market jitters and rediscovered their optimism about the economy.
Bond prices fell and the dollar was mixed.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average surged 34.90 points to 3906.32.
Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index rose 1.95 to 471.76, and the Nasdaq Composite Index gained 1.92 to 779.20.
Trading began on a bearish note, with the industrial average sinking more than 12 points.
Small stocks also were pummeled early as the Nasdaq composite plunged more than 10 points, or 1.3%.
A continued sell-off in bonds accounted for the early weakness in stocks.
But as bonds improved later in the day so did stocks, with investors flocking to economically sensitive shares.
Analysts said investors found the silver lining in the rise in short-term rates that sparked Friday's sell-off.
While the small jump in rates won't materially hurt the economy or corporate earnings, it will subdue inflation pressures and help to prolong the bull market, said Abby J. Cohen, market strategist at Goldman Sachs.
"We believe there's still a long way to go in the stock market in terms of duration and price gains," Ms. Cohen said.
Goldman Sachs emphasized its continued bullishness by boosting its recommended allocation to stocks after Friday's tumble.
Ms. Cohen said she now advises pension funds to increase stock holdings to 70% of their portfolios from 65% and reduce bond-market exposure to 25% from 30%.
For aggressive portfolios, the recommended stock allocation rose to 80% from 70%, with bonds falling to 15% from 25%.
Ronald K. Stribley, portfolio manager at Glenmede Trust in Philadelphia, said Friday's decline did nothing to change his view of the stock market or the economy.
Glenmede Trust, with $8.5 billion under management, maintains a long-term investment strategy that isn't altered by temporary blips in the market, he said.
"I've sold nothing because of Friday and I've bought nothing because of Friday," Mr. Stribley said.
"For all practical purposes it was a nonevent."
So far, mutual-fund investors, whose heavy buying has underpinned the bull market, appear to be sitting tight, neither bailing out nor buying heavily.
Fidelity Investments, the U.S.'s largest mutualfund firm, said it was seeing lower-than-normal inflows of cash into stock funds yesterday after a slight outflow Friday.
Other mutual-fund companies said their phone volume yesterday was normal.
But they said it's too early to tell whether investors will take a breather from the frenzied pace of investing in stock funds.
The big inflow of money into stock funds "is the main reason for reduced volatility in the Dow" during the past year, said Jeffrey Shames, president of Massachusetts Financial Services, a unit of SunLife Assurance Co. of Canada.
When cash is coming in, stock price declines trigger renewed buying by cash-rich stock mutual funds.
With less cash coming in, the market might be subject to steeper declines before funds start buying, Mr. Shames said.
But "the real problem would come" if fund shareholders pulled out of stocks, forcing their funds to dump shares to meet redemption requests, he said.
Some analysts were concerned that stock prices showed too much resilience.
Bernadette Murphy, director of technical analysis at money mangement firm M. Kimelman & Co., said the market was too high priced before Friday.
She added that she would prefer to see a further drop in prices of 2% to 3% to trim off the lingering fat.
"If everyone buys on the dips, as often happens, we again create an excessive period in the market that could lead to a deeper disappointment," she said.
Hugh Johnson, chief investment officer at First Albany, said he sees disturbing parallels between this year and 1962, when stock prices fell 27%.
Among the similarities: low interest rates, high stock prices, a healthy economy, and a young Democrat in the White House with a bent for federal intrusion into the private sector.
"Can you have a sharp correction in stock prices when almost everything looks good?"
Mr. Johnson wondered.
"The answer is yes."
World-wide, stock prices declined in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index lost 0.81 to 115.83.
Stock prices were mixed.
Volume totaled 346.8 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange, where 1,178 issues fell and 1,044 rose.
Bond prices fell.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year issue lost more than 3/8 point, or over $3.75 for each $1,000 face amount, to yield 6.39%.
The dollar was mixed.
In late New York trading, the currency was quoted at 1.7590 marks and 108.70 yen, compared with 1.7585 marks and 109.30 yen Friday.
