Merger mania might be back in style, but Warren Buffett is having a hard time spending $2 billion to $3 billion.
A year ago, the investor whose name is often preceded by the word "legendary," let it be known in his annual letter to Berkshire Hathaway Inc. stockholders that he would like to spend that amount in a friendly takeover.
He's still looking.
"If we are to hit the bull's-eye, we will need markets that allow the purchase of businesses and securities on sensible terms," Chairman Buffett writes in the 1993 annual report, being mailed to shareholders today.
"Right now, markets are difficult, but they can -- and will -- change in unexpected ways and at unexpected times.
In the meantime, we'll try to resist the temptation to do something marginal simply because we are long on cash," he writes.
Berkshire Hathaway, with its big insurance and reinsurance business, and its collection of operating companies and investments, had $1.84 billion in cash as of Dec. 31, up from $1.13 billion at the end of 1992.
It had another $2.1 billion of investments in obligations with fixed maturities and $12.54 billion in marketable equity securities.
Mr. Buffett was traveling yesterday and couldn't be reached for comment.
But Charles Munger, Berkshire vice chairman and Mr. Buffett's close adviser, notes that with high equity prices, it's no surprise that the big investment hasn't come along.
"The whole history of Berkshire Hathaway is discipline," says Mr. Munger.
"When we can't find what we want, we don't buy," he says.
Berkshire, which is based in Omaha, Neb., did spend some $440 million in Berkshire stock last November for closely held Dexter Shoe Cos.
That, combined with the previous purchase of two other shoe concerns, makes footwear one of Berkshire's biggest businesses.
Mr. Buffett says 1994 sales in the shoe operations should top $550 million, with pretax earnings of more than $85 million.
"Five years ago, we had no thought of getting into shoes," Mr. Buffett writes.
"Now we have 7,200 employees in that industry, and I sing `There's no business like shoe business' as I drive to work.
So much for strategic plans."
As he and Mr. Munger scout for bigger prey, Mr. Buffett has a small pitch to make.
He has invited shareholders to an Omaha Royals minor league baseball game on April 23, two nights before Berkshire's annual meeting.
Mr. Buffett will throw out the first ball, hoping to improve on last year's "humiliating performance," when he says he almost hit his foot.
Tickets are $5.
"I regret to report that you won't have to buy them from scalpers," writes Mr. Buffett, who owns 25% of the team.
