Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell denied reports that he overbilled clients, including a federal agency, as a private lawyer in Little Rock, Ark.
Responding to a published report that his former partners in the Rose Law Firm were investigating his billing practices, Mr. Hubbell said in a statement, "I am not aware of any `investigation,' and I have never overbilled a client."
Mr. Hubbell said the law firm did ask last week "about billings on cases I worked on."
He said one of these cases involved the Resolution Trust Corp., the federal savings-and-loan bailout agency.
"I responded promptly," Mr. Hubbell said.
"I did not overbill the RTC or any other clients."
He added that it isn't unusual for a firm to question a former partner about such billing issues once the partner leaves the firm.
The firm wanted "backup documentation on certain expenses paid for by the firm," the Hubbell statement said.
"I am in the process of helping the firm locate such documentation."
The report on Mr. Hubbell was published Wednesday in the Washington Post.
The White House has been besieged with questions about activities of high officials, particularly Mr. Hubbell and Hillary Rodham Clinton, who formerly were partners at the Rose firm.
The firm also has received attention because it represented Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan, a failed thrift once owned by James McDougal, a partner with the Clintons in Whitewater Development Co.
Whitewater, a real estate venture in northern Arkansas, is now the subject of a wide-ranging criminal and civil investigation.
After receiving inquiries from the Post, White House Chief of Staff Thomas McLarty telephoned Mr. Hubbell late Tuesday afternoon to ask about the allegations concerning his billings and expenses.
Mr. Hubbell vigorously denied doing anything wrong, according to White House Press Secretary Dee Dee Myers.
Mr. McLarty passed word of Mr. Hubbell's denials to the president.
That telephone conversation satisfied Mr. Clinton, the White House said.
"The president has full confidence in him," Ms. Myers said.
"He stands by Webb.
He believes him.
He believes his denial."
Ms. Myers also said neither William Kennedy, a White House lawyer who was the managing partner of the firm, nor Mrs. Clinton was aware of any inquiry by the firm into billings or of any problem that Mr. Hubbell might have had there.
The White House said it didn't call the Rose firm, the RTC or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. on the matter.
Mr. Hubbell supervised work the firm did for both agencies.
Ms. Myers said the White House considers the issue an internal matter for the law firm.
An assistant to Ronald M. Clark, the managing partner of the Rose Law Firm, said the firm would have no comment on the Post article.
According to the Post, senior partners of the Rose Law Firm are considering whether they should disclose the inquiry, which began in the summer of 1992, to the Arkansas Bar Association.
The newspaper quoted one person who alleged that Mr. Hubbell charged clients at his own partner's rate for work done by salaried associates.
Another person is quoted as saying that Mr. Hubbell might have paid for personal trips, credit-card bills and other items with money from an account used for client expenses.
At the Rose firm, Mr. Hubbell did "the usual litigation work," said Joseph Giroir, managing partner of the firm from 1975 until 1987.
Any overbilling on Mr. Hubbell's part would "surprise me," he added.
"I have no knowledge of it.
My feeling is that Webb wouldn't have done that."
Rose Law Firm rates, he said, range from $75 an hour for young associates to $250 for senior partners.
It is unclear which Rose clients might have been overbilled by Mr. Hubbell or the Rose firm.
In his statement, Mr. Hubbell said the questions about his billings included a case in which he represented the RTC.
Rose represented the RTC on several matters, including a case that had been initiated by the FDIC against Madison Guaranty's accountants, Frost & Co.
Mr. Hubbell was the lead attorney.
The agency sought $10 million in actual damages and $10 million in punitive damages.
Rose settled the case for $1 million and billed the government $400,000.
RTC officials said they weren't aware that the Rose Law Firm was investigating any overbilling on the case.
FDIC officials also said they have heard no suggestions that Mr. Hubbell or the Rose firm overcharged their agency.
John DiPippa, an expert on legal ethics at the University of Arkansas Law School at Little Rock, said the Rose firm has a duty to report any serious violations of ethical rules to the Arkansas Bar Association.
He defined "serious violation" as "casting doubt on the lawyer's fitness to practice."
"It depends on the nature of overbilling, the circumstances, the amount, the frequency," he said.
"At some point, you pass the line from minor offense to serious offense.
When you cross that line, lawyers have an obligation to report it."
Questions about Mr. Hubbell's integrity as a lawyer left the White House rattled.
Among White House insiders, Mr. Hubbell is held in the highest regard, respected for his honesty.
Mr. McLarty was said to be devastated Tuesday by the harsh spotlight on his old friend.
Many of the president's top aides met both formally and informally yesterday to discuss what to do.
A problem for Mr. Hubbell, they knew, would be trouble for Bill Clinton.
Mr. Hubbell, a confidant of the president, has not advised him on Whitewater.
In an interview earlier this week, Mr. Hubbell said he has had "no substantive discussions" with anyone in the White House about the Whitewater affair.
He noted, however, that his written recusal on the Whitewater matter relates only to the Justice Department.
"I'm not involved with anybody in Justice about it," he said.
Mr. Hubbell joined the department as a White House liaison without portfolio at the very beginning the administration, well before Attorney General Janet Reno was confirmed.
As the associate attorney general, he oversees the civil side of the department
Bruce Ingersoll contributed to this article.
