There is no doubting that the assassination in Mexico Wednesday of presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio comes at a bad time for the country.
Mexico's politics and its financial markets were already reeling from the Chiapas uprising, the peekaboo candidacy of Manuel Camacho, the recent kidnapping of banker Alfredo Harp and a nascent recession.
Now this.
Whatever forces may have been responsible for Mr. Colosio's assassination, they were no friend of Mexico's future.
But while there is a sense of deep mourning and chaos in the ruling political party at the moment, Mexico not surprisingly is holding together.
Markets in Mexico were closed yesterday.
But the Mexico funds at play in U.S. markets were surprisingly stable considering predictions made immediately after Mr. Colosio's death that they would plummet.
While the peso is trading at the top of the band within which it can trade without a devaluation, it hasn't broken the band, and President Clinton suggested that the U.S. would help secure the value of the peso if necessary.
Nothing resembling panic has appeared yet.
Mexico in fact is a fundamentally stable country.
And it's not mainly because of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), which Mr. Colosio represented.
As much as PRI activists would like to take credit for 65 years of relative political, social and economic stability, Latin America is full of similarly powerful parties that haven't been able to prevent political and economic chaos.
The secret to Mexico's success lies primarily with the Mexican people and their desire to become part of the global economy -- particularly the economy of the United States across the border.
Integrating a formerly highly subsidized economic system into a fast-moving world trading system was no small matter.
But had the PRI not begun to endorse the difficult process of economic and political opening, it surely wouldn't have survived the turmoil of stagflation in the 1980s.
President Miguel de la Madrid first responded to this call by placing Mexico's economy into GATT.
And when President Salinas and his economic team began to open the spigots of economic growth through dramatic supply-side incentives (culminating with Nafta), the Mexican market began to bloom.
Inflation came down -- to less than 10% from more than 150% -- and growth went up.
Foreign investment skyrocketed, the stock market thrived and domestic industries were restructured and modernized.
Mexico turned the hard corner from a Third World country dependent on oil exports to a modern nation of diversified exports and a growing internal market.
The ramifications of the Colosio assassination have to be considered within this wider context (in the Americas column on the page opposite, Sergio Sarmiento discusses Mr. Colosio's possible replacements).
(See "Mexican Assassination at a Political Crossroads" -- WSJ March 25, 1994) There is no demand -- particularly in the wake of the nation's collective mourning of Mr. Colosio -- for a general uprising or reversal of the policies pioneered by President Salinas.
Even the most populist politicians in Mexico, such as leftist presidential candidate Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, now admit that economic incentives are more important than economic controls in development.
Of course, Mexico's economy has been languishing for about a year, as high interest rates put a damper on economic growth.
This fought inflation, but at the cost of an increasingly recessionary environment.
Particularly hard hit have been small and medium-size businesses that must borrow at 35% interest rates, with an inflation rate of well under 10%.
Good news for foreign investors, no doubt, but harder for unemployed Mexicans to understand.
This stagnant economy, however, was just beginning to turn around.
Interest rates had dropped almost 10 points, and the election-jittery market was beginning to calm, particularly after presidential wannabe Camacho announced Tuesday that he wouldn't run for president.
Then the assassination hit.
If foreign investors do pull out of the peso-denominated markets, central bank president Miguel Mancera would likely be forced to raise interest rates to prevent a run on the peso.
This would forestall recovery and probably worsen the political climate.
But with about $27 billion in reserves, and the support of the U.S. Treasury, the government has maneuvering room.
It's also important to remember that the last time anything like this happened in Mexico was in 1928, when president-elect Alvaro Obregon was assassinated.
The U.S. has experienced more assassinations.
If Mexico manages these stormy political waters, its economy will likely prove that it has achieved resilience.
No doubt a major political assassination puts a nation to an enormous test.
Mexicans have worked hard to achieve the strength to survive something like this, and it is to be genuinely hoped that they will be able to continue forward from Mr. Colosio's death.
