President Clinton declares his new budget gimmick-free.
"In contrast to past budgets, which lacked credibility . . . ," he wrote in his introduction, "this budget dispenses with smoke and mirrors."
Almost, but not quite, Mr. President.
Mr. Clinton, for instance, proposes to spend $2.7 billion next year to get his health plan up and running, but doesn't count this against the caps on federal spending that are set by law.
However, in the four subsequent years -- where the president had a little more wiggle room -- the spending is counted against the cap.
Bottom line: Mr. Clinton proposes $2.7 billion more spending for next year than the caps allow.
The fine print in the president's budget also says he is counting on saving $10.6 billion over the next five years by "reinventing federal procurement."
As Chairman Sam Nunn (D., Ga.) of the Senate Armed Services Committee notes, the Pentagon does more procurement than any other agency.
Bottom line: Mr. Clinton proposes to spend less on defense than his budget says he does.
And then there's the rhetoric.
The budget asserts that "seven of the 14 major departments face a budget cut in nominal terms."
The table on the facing page shows that Mr. Clinton proposes to reduce budget authority -- the money that goes into agency checkbooks to be spent in some future year -- for four departments and to reduce outlays, or the money that comes out of the checkbooks next year, for six.
Instead of using a consistent standard, the White House counted any department that had either a cut in budget authority or outlays.
"We have presented no gimmicks here," Budget Director Leon Panetta said this week.
"What you see is what you get in this budget."
But Martha Phillips, head of the deficit-fighting Concord Coalition, says, "The P.R. job that's being done on the numbers by the Clinton administration is on a par with its predecessors -- at least."
Mr. Panetta's spokesman said the health-cost item was handled unusually because the administration isn't sure its plan will be adopted and didn't want to take money from other programs.
He added the White House doesn't believe a significant fraction of the procurement-reform savings will come from the Pentagon.
Defense Secretary William Perry said this week he wasn't so sure.
The flaws in the budget undermine its credibility, but don't change the message: The federal deficit is shrinking.
As it did last year, the Clinton administration adopted economic assumptions in line with those of private forecasters, a move that is especially important to financial markets' view of the budget.
But the small band of people who actually read the tables in the back of White House budgets are turning up evidence to challenge the claim that this budget is without sin -- and that ignores controversy over the accounting for the Clinton health plan.
"The budget is as remarkable for what it leaves out as for what it tells us," says Carol Cox Wait, president of the private Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget.
It leaves out the cost of welfare reform, of implementing the world-wide trade agreement struck last year, of the California earthquake and of overhauling the Superfund hazardous-waste clean-up program, she says.
"And we can't tell from the budget whether or not the administration favors the extension of expiring tax laws," Ms. Wait says.
A popular tax provision that allows employers to reimburse workers for tuition, for instance, expires Dec. 31, 1994.
Had Mr. Clinton sought to extend it -- as he undoubtedly wants to do -- he would have had to explain how to pay for it.
