In most states, few people have any idea who runs the state pension fund.
But Alabama's pugnacious David Bronner gets into so many public scrapes that his name has become almost a household word.
A few months ago, Gov. Jim Folsom's office sent investigators, incognito, to examine Dr. Bronner's records.
Most pension managers would have trembled.
Dr. Bronner threw them out for showing insufficient identification.
"They haven't been back," he says.
Gov. Folsom dropped his investigation.
Dr. Bronner, in fact, has built a strong political power base, and he uses his power to take risks-financial and politicalthat would terrify most state fund managers.
If most fund managers wanted to put pension money into the leisure business, for instance, they would do so by buying a leisure company's stock.
Dr. Bronner is doing it by spending $120 million of pension money to build seven huge golf complexes across the state.
Many pension managers invest in real estate, but Dr. Bronner is building fund-owned office towers and parking garages in downtown Montgomery -- so many that he has become the most active developer in Alabama's capital.
Officially just the bureaucrat who manages money for teachers and state employees, Dr. Bronner has come to view himself as the personal guardian of Alabama's future.
When he decided a few years ago that the state was stagnating, he launched the fund on a campaign to finance new business investment -- helping pull in a chemical plant, a pulp plant, even a Wal-Mart distribution center.
He also gives speeches on pet themes, such as how to reduce infant mortality, overcome the state's troubled past and fight the "crooks and thieves in government."
"We are always going to have crooks in government," he warned Troy State University seniors in a rousing speech last December.
"Never give up.
Never give up, by God, never give up trying to make Alabama reach its potential!"
In a state where the previous governor left office last year after being convicted of using a $200,000 inaugural fund for personal gain, that kind of talk has turned the pension chief into a popular hero.
But he also has made plenty of enemies in high places.
His critics are saying they think their populist pension manager finally has gone off the deep end, openly abusing his power.
Who said, they ask, that a pension manager should clean up politics, redevelop the state or popularize golf?
"I think all the publicity has gone to his head and he's gotten reckless with the people's money," says State Finance Director James White, one of Alabama's most powerful political appointees.
He contends that Dr. Bronner's fancy office buildings are overpriced.
"And to build this Robert Trent Jones Golf Trail as the golf courses are called -- that's the most ridiculous thing I've ever heard of to do with retirement money," the finance director says.
To Dr. Bronner's chagrin, his courses have hit financial trouble.
Technically, the 49-year-old official can be removed from his job by the two pension boards that appointed him 20 years ago.
Some Alabama politicians have been trying to get rid of him since the George Wallace days.
But they have failed.
His strength isn't really due to his pension fund's performance; it probably has done a bit above average, experts say.
But he has kept the money, which has grown to more than $13 billion from just $500 million in 1973, out of the hands of the much-mistrusted politicians.
To many in Alabama, including Dr. Bronner himself, that alone is a Herculean accomplishment.
"We need him to protect us from all those politicians," says Howell Register, a teacher in southeastern Alabama.
Even a vague threat to the pension chief can stir up a popular outcry.
When Gov. Folsom tried to appoint one of his own allies to a pension-fund supervisory committee last year -- an act that in most states would have gone unnoticed -- it was widely viewed as an attack on Dr. Bronner's independence.
Bronner supporters flooded the governor's office with angry phone calls.
Newspapers wrote editorials.
Homemade protest banners hung from highway bridges.
The new appointee resigned.
(A Folsom spokeswoman now says that the governor and Dr. Bronner never really disagreed and that the governor has high regard for Dr. Bronner.)
"Everyone's afraid of him," complains Victor Poole, one of Alabama's most senior state school-board members, who says no bureaucrat should have this kind of power.
"I call him King David."
When Mr. Poole proposed that the state put less money into the retirement system and spend more on schools, Dr. Bronner described him as a "sleaze" in a speech to school superintendents.
(Dr. Bronner says Mr. Poole turned on the fund after being refused a loan for a business project; Mr. Poole angrily denies seeking money.)
Dr. Bronner can intimidate even the boards that oversee him.
When, in one recent meeting, a board member said Dr. Bronner should be less outspoken, Dr. Bronner recalls that "I said, `I'm the one who got the law changed so you could be on this board,' so then he shut up."
And when Alabama judges, who are elected officials, began ruling against the fund in two current court cases, a furious Dr. Bronner warned that pensioners might have to get involved in judicial elections.
Dr. Bronner basks in the attention.
He can produce 18 scrapbooks of newspaper clippings chronicling his battles.
He may be America's only pension manager whose office walls are covered with dozens of political cartoons from local newspapers; they depict him as Rhett Butler and as Superman, for example.
"David Bronner is unique," says DeWitt Bowman, chief investment officer of the huge California Public Employees Retirement System.
"I really don't know of any other public pension system official who operates the way he does.
Most of us operate in an arena where you can't afford to get into political squabbles because it's your job if you do."
Dr. Bronner thrives on controversy.
When concrete for one of his fund's Montgomery office towers didn't meet his standards, he ordered 36 enormous support columns demolished and rebuilt.
When he found litter at one of his fund's new golf courses, he filled a golf cart with the trash and dumped it on the manager's desk to send a message.
Dr. Bronner scoffs at suggestions that he is power-mad.
"My thing isn't money, it isn't ego and it isn't power," he says -- it is fighting "against what I see as the uninformed, the bad guys, the corrupt, who have held Alabama down for so long."
As for complaints that this isn't his job, he says it is his duty to retirees to make the state advance.
And he has put that philosophy -- under his name -- on plaques next to the golf-clubhouse doors.
The son of a Minnesota pool-hall owner, Dr. Bronner didn't set foot in Alabama until he was 24 years old and scouting for a law school.
He earned both a law degree and public-administration doctorate at the University of Alabama and, recommended by the business-school dean, took charge of the pension program when he was 28.
He found officials squirreling checks away for weeks before depositing them, and readily cashable bearer bonds being left on tables while clerks went to lunch.
He modernized systems and began growing assets.
Dr. Bronner says that his conservative investment rules long kept his returns from getting much above average but that he avoided disasters such as junk bonds and real-estate partnerships.
His recent moves into higher-risk projects such as golf courses and real estate have affected fund performance little so far.
Like other pension managers, he is looking for higher returns in a world where bond rates have fallen too low to cover pension needs, he explains.
He is even thinking of financing movies, which most pension managers avoid.
He made gossip columns last summer by having lunch in Montgomery with actor Burt Reynolds.
Dr. Bronner's theory of movie finance: Invest along with experienced partners who risk their own money -- and invest big.
"I wouldn't do just one or two movies," he explains.
"But if someone were willing to put up money with me, I could do 10 or 12 -- and in 10 or 12 you have to have a few winners.
There are some investments where if you put enough money in it, you eliminate the risk."
But Mr. Reynolds hasn't got back to him, and Dr. Bronner says the idea is on a back burner.
Dr. Bronner started building golf courses after a 1990 national scandal, when it was widely reported that Birmingham's Shoal Creek golf club, site of the PGA Championship that year, was segregated.
"All I was seeing was my work of 20 years getting blown away -- by all these issues being raised again," he says.
A golfing enthusiast who keeps a photo of himself with Arnold Palmer in his office, Dr. Bronner built seven top-drawer public facilities, each with 36 to 54 holes.
Finance Director White complains that he can't get enough details on that or other subjects.
With the two men feuding openly last summer, Mr. White requested extensive figures on pension finance.
Dr. Bronner said the request was far too detailed and wrote to Mr. White that the pension program "is not like a small investment account at the local bank."
Ash Williams, who heads Florida's retirement system, says he looked into golf and movies and decided both were far too risky.
California's Mr. Bowman, however, calls Dr. Bronner a gifted deal-maker and adds, "If it is properly monitored and the person has the right skills, why not make use of them?"
But costs soared, and the golf project wound up more than 20% over budget.
With the courses only now becoming fully operational, Dr. Bronner says he won't know for a year or two how they will fare.
But on purely financial grounds, he says, he now couldn't justify building them.
After initially sharing ownership with a development group that ran into financial trouble, the pension fund took full control last summer.
"If we're going to crash," he says, "I want to be in the cockpit."
However, Dr. Bronner recently emphasized to his board what he called the courses' economic benefits -- their ability to pull in tourists and corporate investment.
"If your state is in the bottom five or 10, you've just got to do it because it is the only way to change the direction of your state," he says.
He adds in an interview later that the project represents only a tiny part of the fund's portfolio.
"Worst case scenario: We end up losing a little and selling it, and then Alabama still has some beautiful golf courses," he says.
Anyway, he still isn't shying away from risk.
He is spending millions of dollars to refurbish a huge New York office tower at 55 Water St., on Manhattan's southern tip.
Initially a lender to the project, his fund acquired majority control after the owner, the U.S. unit of Olympia & York Developments Ltd., ran into debt trouble.
He is as combative as ever.
When May Department Stores Co. tried to prepay some high-interest bonds, he persuaded other pension managers to help him challenge the move in court.
The case, which could set a major precedent, is being heard in state court in Montgomery.
And he is continuing to stir up controversy at home.
One of his most potent weapons is a monthly newsletter that he writes for the 223,000 retirement-program members.
Counting their relatives and friends, he figures it gets his ideas into as many as 40% of Alabama's homes.
When he wants to apply pressure, he isn't above publishing someone's home phone number and urging readers to call.
He doesn't mince words: A recent newsletter article about judges seeking higher pensions was headlined "Unbelievable Greed."
And in November, a strongly worded article accused Finance Director White, the state's highest-ranking black appointed official, of unduly favoring blacks for two state jobs.
The article was criticized by almost every civil-rights organization in Alabama, but Dr. Bronner says he stands by his accusations.
As the cartoons in his office attest, he has weathered other storms.
Late in the 1970s, he exposed bribery in state contracts.
In the 1980s, he tried to force beloved University of Alabama football coach Paul "Bear" Bryant to retire at age 70, like other state employees; Coach Bryant rendered the issue moot by dying.
Dr. Bronner later outraged freedom-of-the-press advocates by trying (but failing) to buy Montgomery's influential NBC television affiliate with pension money.
Dr. Bronner says his activist investing dates from the mid-1980s, when Alabama was reported near the bottom of the nation in literacy, infant mortality and highschool graduation rates.
He was strongly influenced by his father, who believed you can't solve big problems unless you take care of small ones, such as cleanliness.
"I scrubbed my father's pool hall every Saturday night," he says.
"It was the cleanest damn pool hall in Minnesota."
Today, Dr. Bronner writes Montgomery Mayor Emory Folmar as often as once a week, telling him where he has seen litter, weeds or broken street lights.
The mayor, who initially disliked the meddlesome pension chief, has become a big fan; he applauds the downtown building spree.
And even Dr. Bronner's critics aren't sure the latest controversy will weaken his popularity.
"He's rock solid," laments John Tyson Jr., the only school-board member who is backing Mr. Poole in his argument with Dr. Bronner.
