This summer, look for the return of sexy and dressy and the decline of clunky in fashionable women's shoe design, according to Nine West Group Inc., a retailer and maker of women's shoes.
Nine West, which has grown steadily to more than 300 retail stores largely in upscale malls, is banking on the return to more elegant footwear to help support its ambitious expansion plans for as many as 120 new stores in 1994.
Nine West, also a wholesaler of shoe brands to department stores, plans to increase its retail operations so that half of sales, which reached $552 million in 1993, come from company-owned stores in two to three years.
Vincent Camuto, co-chairman and president of Nine West, said sales this winter and spring in West Coast stores, where the company watches for early style trends, are showing a consumer preference for what Mr. Camuto calls the "dressy-casual" shoe.
He said sales of sleek "slides" -- backless slipper-type shoes -- are selling briskly as well as updated version of classic pumps.
"There is a return to the cleaned-up dress shoe," he said.
"And we can react quickly to deliver it."
Using Brazilian factories Nine West management has used for decades, it takes Nine West as little as eight weeks from the first order to make and deliver a new style to stores.
While Nine West was able to capitalize on last year's preference for heavier shoes, it's the lighter models that are moving quickly this year.
Mr. Camuto said the "sell-through rate" -- the rate at which shipped goods are actually purchased -- on the dressier lines has been up to as much as 50% in the past five weeks, particularly at West Coast stores.
Typically, women's dress shoe lines have a weekly sell-through rate in the single digits.
He noted that one Chicago department store recently sold out in one day a large shipment of its new, updated clogs -- a lighter version of last year's clunkier fashion hit.
Nine West Group, based in Stamford, Conn., plans to finance the new stores through existing company cash flow.
The store expansion will be spread across its four different retail concepts, which cater to different shoppers and offer varying styles and prices.
The flagship stores, Nine West, feature current shoe styles, and have shoe prices ranging mostly from $45 to $70.
One of its more promising store formats, Enzo Angiolini (named for a late company shoe designer) features slightly more expensive shoes and higher-quality leather, with prices ranging from $60 to $80, though boots can go as high as $175.
Nine West plans to open 20 Enzo stores in 1994.
The other formats are 9 & Co., a lower-priced line aimed at younger shoppers, and Nine West Outlet, which sells off-price merchandise.
Jerome Fisher, Nine West chairman, said the company has benefited from "favorable" leases from mall developers, who have been eager to sign up fashionable stores with the potential to generate increased traffic flow in the malls.
Nine West has shown strength at a time when women's specialty apparel retailers have slumped.
Company revenue has grown more than 60% from about $338 million in 1989 to about $552 million last year.
Nine West's comparable store sales -- sales in stores open at least one year -- in 1993 rose 3.5%.
Mr. Fisher said he expects same-store sales gains of at least that much in 1994.
Nine West said it continues to be comfortable with analysts' estimates for 1994 first-quarter earnings of 31 to 33 cents a share, or $10.6 million to $11.3 million, and full-year estimates of $1.80 to $1.85, or about $62 million to about $64 million.
