A week after Japan miffed the U.S. by saying "no" to numerical targets for reducing its gargantuan trade surplus, some Japanese political and business leaders are calling for a compromise to avoid a trade war with the U.S.
Ichiro Ozawa, a leading power broker in Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's ruling coalition government, told foreign reporters yesterday that he supports setting nonbinding import goals to help bring down Japan's surplus with the U.S.
Meanwhile, the chairman of electronics maker Canon Inc. and other business leaders are saying that Japan should take even firmer steps to cut its surpluses.
These conciliatory gestures from Tokyo weren't greeted with enthusiasm by Sen. Max Baucus (D., Mont.), who introduced legislation to renew the so-called Super 301 provision.
The legislation, which expired in 1990, allows the U.S. to unilaterally single out countries for retaliation against alleged unfair trade practices.
If negotiations don't result in a resolution within 18 months, the U.S. would retaliate, most often with tariffs.
Mr. Baucus, who moved to make the legislation permanent, made no secret about which country should be targeted, noting, "Super 301 has always been aimed largely at Japan."
Mr. Baucus, chairman of the Senate trade subcommittee, said he moved to introduce the legislation after the Clinton administration failed to renew it through executive order, an option U.S. officials had been weighing since trade negotiations broke down when Japan refused to accept import targets.
While the comments of Japanese leaders didn't represent an official turnaround in government policy, the signals coming from Tokyo may amount to a softening of Japan's stiff opposition to numerical targets for reducing the nation's trade surplus with America.
By Japan's reckoning, the bilateral imbalance topped $50 billion in 1993.
Mr. Ozawa said he would support doryoku mokuhyo, or "effort goals," to resolve the trade imbalance.
Such goals could include aiming to reduce Japan's surplus to a certain percentage of its gross domestic product, he said.
But he warned that Japan should agree to such goals only if they weren't considered a binding "contract" and the nation weren't subject to punitive sanctions if it didn't reach them.
"If it were a target to encourage both sides to make sincere efforts, I don't think that would be a bad thing," he said.
"There is nothing wrong with the government's making efforts for such a target, by explaining things to or asking favors from people in the private sector."
Mr. Ozawa's remarks came a day after Deputy Foreign Minister Koichiro Matsuura told a news conference that "it is important to achieve" a reduction in Japan's overall current-account surplus to 2.8% of the nation's GDP in the year that starts April 1, down from a projected 3.1% this fiscal year.
According to a Foreign Ministry spokesman who confirmed his comment, Mr. Matsuura said the 2.8% figure doesn't represent a Japanese commitment, simply a goal toward which the nation should work.
Japanese economic planners project that the surplus will fall to the 2.8% level next year if current trends continue, the spokesman said.
U.S. officials in Tokyo had no comment on Mr. Ozawa's remarks.
The idea of pursuing limited import goals also represents a rethinking of the praise Mr. Hosokawa initially drew from some quarters for standing up to Washington.
A number of business executives are pressing Tokyo to compromise with the U.S. in order to avoid a trade war at a time of a nagging economic slump and a new bout of strength from the yen, which makes Japanese exports more costly.
Some business executives have long been advocating targets for Japan's overall surplus.
Ryuzaburo Kaku, chairman of Canon, thinks Japan should have committed itself to reducing its current-account surplus to 2% of GDP.
"If the government tried to encourage construction of inexpensive housing, sewage systems and so forth," he said, "it would improve the surplus while making the Japanese people happy."
Mr. Kaku opposes numerical targets in specific industrial sectors, but other executives back that controversial idea as well.
Tadao Suzuki, president of alcoholic-beverage maker Mercian Corp., said: "Japan needs to present specific ideas to cope with the situation, such as accepting numerical targets for government procurement and urging industries to set voluntary targets for opening the market."
The idea of committing to firm trade targets, however, will meet with fierce opposition from many Japanese industries and the powerful politicians and bureaucrats who protect their interests.
An official at the Ministry of International Trade and Industry blasted the notion of accepting import goals on the condition America agree not to impose sanctions.
"Just agreeing not to impose sanctions is not sufficient," said the official, who said he hadn't seen Mr. Ozawa's comments and couldn't respond to them directly.
"Any target set by the government and forced on the private sector is still an intervention by the government that runs counter to the philosophy of the current administration," he said.
In the case of a U.S.-Japan semiconductor agreement, Japan recognized the "expectation" of U.S. industry that foreign companies would obtain a 20% share of the Japanese semiconductor market by the end of 1992, but explicitly stated the 20% figure wouldn't be a guarantee.
The U.S., however, later insisted that Japan had committed itself to the 20% figure and threatened sanctions if it wasn't achieved.
"We are still concerned that any numbers we are subjected to can take on a life of their own" as in the semiconductor agreement, the MITI official said.
Instead of targets, Tokyo says it intends to provide details early next month on a unilateral, four-part market-opening program.
Many Japanese politicians and bureaucrats also resist the idea of taking further measures to spur Japan's economy as a way of increasing demand for imports.
The Japanese press ran a story this week that said Japan is considering promising Washington to extend the one-year income-tax cut -- proposed earlier this month in a stimulus package -- if the economy doesn't recover.
But both Mr. Ozawa and Finance Ministry officials frowned on the notion.
"Our ammunition box is empty," said a Finance Ministry official close to the U.S.-Japan negotiations.
Japan, he said, has done all it can on the fiscal-policy front "for the foreseeable future."
