Faith Meurrens sees the work force of the future when she looks around her Omaha, Neb., office.
The 12 software designers she manages at U S West Communications Inc. are experienced, highly skilled and, at an average age of 42, about five years older than the typical U.S. worker.
Only two have small children, but most have missed work lately to care for an aged relative.
Jerrie Cippera took time off to move her father from his Nebraska farm to a nearby town.
Linda Smith rushed to Wyoming after her father had a stroke.
Candace Sorenson's mother had a hip replacement.
Duane Skaff wound up helping with three aged relatives.
Two others, plus Ms. Meurrens and her boss, took time off when parents were hospitalized.
"Elder care is the biggest personal issue we face in maintaining productivity from day to day," Ms. Meurrens says.
The tip of a very disruptive iceberg has surfaced in the workplace, and is changing people's lives and job performance to a degree few had anticipated.
"In the coming years, elder care will have a greater impact on the workplace than child care" or any other work-family issue so far, says Sally Coberly, an aging specialist at the Washington Business Group on Health.
"As the baby boom moves deeper into middle age, the need for elder-care services will simply explode."
About 22% of the work force expects to assume elder-care responsibility over the next three to four years, compared with 15% to 16% who have the responsibility now, says Boston consulting firm Work/Family Directions Inc.
By 2005, 37% of U.S. workers will be aged 40 to 54, the prime time for caring for elderly parents.
By 2020, more than one in three employees will be providing elder care, says Andrew Scharlach, a University of California at Berkeley professor on aging.
Some companies' internal research suggests those numbers are understated.
At New York Life Insurance Co.'s headquarters in Manhattan, 52% of 2,858 employees surveyed said they expected to have elder-care responsibilities within five years, compared with 50% for child care.
Last November and December, employee calls for elder care from the work-family referral service at U S West Inc., parent of U S West Communications, exceeded child-care calls for the first time.
"This is really a demographic revolution, one for which we as a society are totally unprepared," says Dr. Scharlach.
The number of people 85 or older who rely on their children will nearly double by 2030 and more than triple by 2050, the Census Bureau says, with families providing 80% of needed long-term care.
The revolution is touching even the highest ranking executives.
Just before Lawrence Perlman was promoted to chairman and chief executive officer of Ceridian Corp. in Minneapolis, he had to take time off from his job to make several trips to Palm Springs, Calif., to help his dying father.
The experience "certainly sensitized me" to the elder-care issue, he says.
Hugh McColl, chairman and chief executive of NationsBank Corp., lost time from work recently due to his father's long hospital stay.
Yet elder care remains largely undiscussed at most companies, a painful reminder of mortality that no one wants to face.
"It's a hidden issue, a big shadow out there," says Max Johnson, a human-resources executive at Principal Financial Group, a Des Moines, Iowa, insurer.
Few employees or their bosses are prepared for the disruptive force of elder-care concerns.
Aged relatives' needs tend to erupt in periodic crises and stretch on for several years.
That process of decline is more stressful for many employees than child-rearing, raising a thicket of sadness, anger, guilt and fear of loss.
Elder-care crises often strike in twos and threes, straining employee and employer to the limit.
The odyssey of Mr. Skaff, a financial-system manager in Ms. Meurrens's group, was only beginning when he got the call everyone dreads from his mother's parish pastor in Sioux City, Iowa.
"Duane, I hate to be the bearer of bad news.
But when I stopped by your mother's house today, I found a heavy smell of gas," the pastor said.
Mr. Skaff's mother, fiercely independent at 88, had absent-mindedly turned on her stove without lighting it, and the pastor "just happened to arrive at the right time," Mr. Skaff says.
"She could have killed herself."
Traumatized by worry over his mother, Mr. Skaff moved her to his home in Omaha, then to a nursing home.
But soon, another crisis arose when he found his wife's mother sprawled, gravely ill, on the floor of her Omaha home, where she had been caring for her wheelchair-bound husband, a stroke victim.
The ensuing months were a nightmare, with Mr. Skaff helping care for his mother and in-laws.
Briefly, his mother-in-law moved into his home, where his teenage daughter was already recuperating from a car accident.
Mr. Skaff was pulled away from work so much that he started going to the office late at night when his wife was home from her job.
Other times, he worked nights or weekends, stretching the limits of e-mail from his home computer.
"If my job hadn't given me flexibility, I don't know what I would have done," he says.
Such crises thrust care-givers, usually the children or close relatives of the sick, into a bureaucratic maze of trying to make successive care arrangements in a badly fragmented long-term-care system.
The nation's patchwork of nursing homes, foster homes, adult day centers and home health-care agencies offer a dizzying array of often-unsatisfactory options.
And about half the time, working care-givers live 100 miles or more from the relative, further snarling their efforts.
Dr. Scharlach estimates productivity losses from elder care at $2,500 per employed care-giver per year, based on time missed from work and the cost of replacing care-givers who quit their jobs altogether.
He estimates the lost output to elder care in the U.S. at $17 billion.
NationsBank was stunned to learn in focus-group and case studies that it was losing an estimated $1 million a year to absences for elder care.
The company is starting an employee-help line and other elder-care programs this month.
While child-care problems tend to hit younger employees who often hold marginal jobs, employees with elder-care problems tend to be "older, more experienced, more advanced in their careers and therefore more valuable to us," Mr. McColl says.
Women's increasingly crucial role in the work force intensifies the impact, says Michael Losey, president, of the Society for Human Resource Management, Alexandria, Va.
"This isn't the old days, when the care-giver was a clerk-typist and she could walk away from the work force, take care of an elder for a few years, then walk back in again."
As families fragment and scatter, more employees are tending to grandparents, stepparents and aunts and uncles, as well as parents.
When a 25-year-old American Express Co. employee approached his boss in Florida recently about an elder-care problem, the manager was incredulous.
"How old can your parents be?" the manager wondered.
It turned out the employee was caring for his 85-year-old grandparent, says Barbara Katersky, American Express's vice president, employee relations.
"We have a significant percentage of employees in that situation," she says.
Elder-care crises are taxing not only for employees, but for managers and coworkers.
When Judi Renard's Alzheimer'safflicted mother began wandering onto the freeway and hailing cars, Ms. Renard was frequently torn from her job processing customer orders for U S West Communications in Phoenix by calls from the police, saying, "Come and get her."
Her mother would also accidentally set her house on fire or call Ms. Renard to remove imagined intruders.
Though Ms. Renard tried not to miss work, she felt she had no choice.
Her absences posed "a challenge for all of us involved to be able to keep the business rolling," says her then-boss Susan E. Olson.
Seeing Ms. Renard was under "amazing pressure," Ms. Olson called a meeting of her staff to explain Ms. Renard's situation.
She invited a company health specialist to talk about Alzheimer's.
In response, some employees worked overtime to cover for Ms. Renard and others just worked harder.
But "as Judi's manager . . .
I felt at a loss over what to do, what to say, how to help her," Ms. Olson says.
When her employees had child-care problems, she found it easier to discuss a range of options.
But elder care "is sort of a scary thing," she says.
Sometimes, she would sit in her office and talk with Ms. Renard about her rage and sadness at her mother's plight.
Elder care "is an issue that we all are faced with," says Ms. Olson.
For U S West, Ms. Olson's strategy retained a skilled employee.
Several years later, after moving her mother to three different long-term-care facilities, Ms. Renard still visits her in a nursing home, but works mostly uninterrupted.
She has even been promoted.
When elder-care responsibilities hit an employee, they often must give up work, or work as they had come to know it.
A seven-year study by the New England Research Institute in Watertown, Mass., found that when managers deny flexibility or elder-care demands grow too heavy, 3.3% of employees with such responsibilities quit their jobs while 8.3% change employment.
Another 14% cut their work hours and 15% change their schedules.
Carolyn Johnson, a former field manager for a media-research concern, had a big problem finding someone to care for her mother, who has multiple sclerosis, in Ms. Johnson's Baltimore home.
No one she hired would come until 8 a.m., and they were often late, making it hard for her to get to her job on time.
And few of the aides were reliable.
Ms. Johnson fired one after she learned she was moonlighting as a prostitute.
Another had a drug habit and abruptly quit.
A third was dismissed after her mother complained she had yanked her earrings from her ears.
Another asked her mother, "Do you think I get a kick out of pulling you back and forth in your wheelchair?"
At the office, a new boss wouldn't accommodate Ms. Johnson with a less rigid schedule.
Instead, he increased her travel demands, requiring more overnight trips.
The change "was a slap in the face," Ms. Johnson says.
She resigned and started her own home-based business.
Ms. Johnson, 45, also talks about aging issues to groups of care-givers.
Some managers find it hard to understand elder-care decisions like Ms. Johnson's.
In the past, nursing homes were the accepted solution.
But today, amid rising concern about the quality of life in old age, many employees see them as something to avoid as long as possible.
That can leave a manager who put his own parent in a nursing home feeling "confused and even angry that the employee can't make the same decision he did," says Hank Linden, director of the employee-assistance program at American Express.
Elder care also unearths family issues that can be hard to decipher in the workplace.
Some managers resent their employee suddenly becoming responsible for an aged parent and wonder why siblings aren't helping.
If an employee fears a manager's disapproval, says Ms. Katersky, the American Express employee-relations executive, "the talk goes underground.
The employee suffers in silence while the manager wonders, `What the hell happened to this employee who was a star and now isn't performing well?'"
The problem intensifies when employees are tapped for promotions or transfers.
A telecommunications executive on the East Coast recently rejected a $1 million offer to become CEO at a West Coast firm because he didn't want to move far from his widowed mother, says E. Pendleton James, a New York recruiter.
An informal survey of U S West employees involved in a re-engineering of the company's service-delivery operations found that about 18% were weighing the impact of any transfer on their elderly parents -- even more than the number who mentioned children as a factor.
Indeed, elders seem certain to become an increasingly visible presence in the workplace -- much like new babies were in the 1980s.
When Bernie Santore's workday as an assistant customer-service manager for First National Bank of Maryland stretches beyond the hours of her mother's adult day-care center, she sometimes brings her mother to the office.
The 85-year-old woman sits in a back room, sipping tea and reading, while Ms. Santore or a co-worker checks on her periodically.
So far, the bank has been accommodating.
"We'd be a little foolhardy not to recognize that care-givers need support," says Diane Murphy, a benefits manager for the bank.
