Alfred DeCrane, chief executive officer of Texaco Inc., said the company will spend $15 billion to $17 billion over the next five years on energy exploration and other capital projects.
But Mr. DeCrane said in an interview that when he presents the Texaco board tomorrow with 1994's budget, it will fluctuate with oil prices, which have stuck for several months at five-year lows.
"We're going to recommend a bandwidth of investment," the chief executive said.
"You've got to watch your cash flow."
Mr. DeCrane's 1994 budget proposal underscores the changes big international oil companies are making in their planning processes.
In past years they would set a capital budget and try to stick to it even amid a plunge in crude prices.
The explanation was that many oil projects require massive amounts of spending over many years and may not begin to show a return until years later, when companies hoped prices would recover.
"The volatility that we've seen in oil and gas markets has signaled the demise of annual budget planning for any company that doesn't want to go the way of the Soviet Union," said Arvind Sanger, an oil-service analyst at Kidder, Peabody & Co. in New York.
"Any oil company must be more responsive to the market in not setting a budget in stone and living and dying by it."
Mr. DeCrane stressed that Texaco isn't making "any radical change" in its long-term exploration strategy but would defer certain projects if crude prices remain depressed.
Last year Texaco, based in White Plains, N.Y., made $2.86 billion of capital expenditures.
Through 1998, Mr. DeCrane said, he believes oil prices will recover and that the company will wind up spending a total of $15 billion to $17 billion.
"Five years from now when we look back, that's what we will have done," he said.
That averages around $3 billion a year, but he said that annual levels will fluctuate based on cash flow and the size of particular projects.
"Oil prices will increase," Mr. DeCrane said.
"I can't predict a specific time or level."
The chief executive acknowledged that he and others thought prices, which have stuck around $15 a barrel, would have recovered by now.
The likely reduction in Texaco's spending this year mirrors an industry-wide trend and bodes poorly for the many oil-service companies that live and die on the spending patterns of oil exploration and production companies.
That expectation was highlighted Tuesday when Cooper Industries Inc., a diverse maker of products for many industries including petroleum, said that 1994 net income could plunge 25% because of a slump in oil industry exploration.
