British novelist, biographer and journalist A.N. Wilson -- whose previous two books were a life of Jesus and a polemical look at the accelerating embarrassments of the royal house of Windsor -- finds ample scope to deploy his seemingly incongruous talents for out-of-bounds satire and poignant portrayals of souls at the ends of their tethers in his new novel about an Anglican clergyman plunged into the midlife crisis to end all midlife crises.
Francis Kreer, hapless hero of "The Vicar of Sorrows" (Norton, 391 pages, $23), rotely conducts services on behalf of a religion in which he no longer believes, and cold-shoulders a well-meaning but dopey wife with whom he is no longer in love.
He finds some satisfaction in his books, and satisfaction of a deeper kind in the companionship of his chess-playing adolescent daughter (whose poor mother is left to confide her sorrows to a cache of stuffed animals preserved from her childhood).
Intellectual, high-toned and mildly effeminate, Francis is an unreconstructed mother's boy who still worships his dollfaced octogenarian "Mummy."
She, in turn, still thinks of her 47-year-old son as "Little Boy."
Mummy dies unexpectedly -- after a sudden fit of pique in which she alters her will to leave half of her son's inheritance to an old wartime flame.
With the discovery of Mummy's betrayal (and her heretofore unsuspected wartime fling), Francis's world begins to fall apart.
At this critical point, the vicar's village of Ditcham is invaded by a ragtag caravan known as the Travellers.
Most of the locals take a dim view of these itinerant interlopers, though Francis is struck by the ethereal loveliness of one young woman in their midst: Jay Dunbar, a former violin student who is beginning to grow as disillusioned with her gypsy life as Francis is with his stagnant one.
The stage is set for comedy -- or tragedy -- as an increasingly quixotic Francis pursues his new-found love and Mr. Wilson piles up enough mistaken identities, missed connections and odd couplings to stock an entire season of bedroom farces.
But for all its genuinely hilarious moments, this novel (his 14th to date) is ultimately a very bleak vision of a world in which the pursuit of love engenders lunacy and no good deed goes unpunished.
In his transformation from comfortable, insulated cleric to dispossessed, disgraced "Vicar of Sorrows," Francis Kreer ends up losing not only worldly material things, but the inner peace of mind he so ardently sought.
Mr. Wilson's deft handling of this material is marred by an occasional touch of cruelty that lends a distinct chill to the proceedings.
It is something of a relief to turn one's attention to another soul in distress, portrayed with greater sympathy and optimism.
The man who narrates Mark Salzman's third book, "The Soloist" (Random House, 272 pages, $21), is a 35-year-old former child prodigy who's abandoned his concert career for teaching.
A soloist in more ways than one, Renne Sundheimer lives alone in Los Angeles, without even a pet.
He has no close friends and is still a virgin.
Even his beloved cello is less a comfort to him than a daily reminder of the problem that forced him off the concert stage 18 years earlier: "My natural gift for intonation turned against me.
My ear began to examine each note so intensely that even a variation of a single cycle in pitch bothered me.
Not even I could play with that kind of acoustic precision, which made it nearly impossible for me to concentrate on the melodic line, and as a result my playing became fragmented and weak.
Concerts became interminable humiliations instead of . . . euphoric experiences," he explains with an unabashed self-absorption that manages to be oddly moving.
Brought up by overanxious German Jewish refugee parents to channel his energies into nothing but his music, Renne feels unequipped to deal with many aspects of ordinary life.
The fame he would eventually enjoy as a world-class cellist, his mother always assured him, would automatically bring him all the friendships and romances he'd missed out on while growing up.
Things have not worked out as planned.
But Renne's life is about to be changed by two totally unplanned and unrelated events: a summons to jury duty and a request to listen to an unknown 6-year-old Korean boy.
Tiny, tongue-tied Kyung-hee Kim, who can barely lift his kiddie cello, plays like an angel, with a musicality uncommon among child prodigies.
After some initial skepticism, Renne is soon busy devising ingenious ways to draw out his shy pupil, engage his imagination and build his technique.
Serving, at the same time, on a jury trying a murder case, Renne finds himself attracted to a sexy female juror who doesn't know Mozart from Motown.
And he feels involvement of a very different kind in the case itself, as he tries to assess the extent to which an unbalanced young man who beat his Zen teacher to death should be held responsible for his actions.
Mr. Salzman provides admirably clear expositions of everything from court procedure to music training in an unassuming manner.
But perhaps the most impressive aspect of this novel is the subtlety of the ways in which Renne is changed by his experiences.
Going beyond what might merely have been the stereotypical and the melodramatic, Mr. Salzman has created an engaging, freshly observed and utterly convincing portrait of a young man in transition.
