R.H. Macy & Co. is expected this week to ask a federal bankruptcy court for a six-month extension of its exclusive right to file a Chapter 11 reorganization plan.
The department-store retailer, operating under bankruptcy-court proceedings since January 1992, is attempting to fend off unwanted suitor Federated Department Stores Inc., which last month acquired a chunk of Macy secured debt and said it wants to merge with Macy.
Federated has indicated it likely will wait for Macy to file its own reorganization plan before suggesting an alternative.
But analysts say Federated and other secured creditors such as Fidelity Investments could protest the six-month extension request at a separate court hearing in New York later this month.
"Federated could come in and say they have a reorganization plan to be considered right now, and that while some extension is reasonable, six months is too long," says Jack Hersch, director of research at M.J. Whitman L.P., a dealer specializing in distressed securities.
Macy, Federated and Fidelity declined to comment.
Macy, which is attempting to improve its performance, had been expected to seek the extension.
"Macy's cash-flow performance is on an upward trend," said M.J. Whitman's Mr. Hersch.
"If that continues, they can create more value for trade creditors, and that potentially gives management an argument to ask for equity" in the company that emerges from bankruptcy.
"So, time is important here," added Meredith Adler, a high-yield bond analyst for Chemical Securities Inc.
"Macy's gets a chance to do more to fix its business."
Analysts agreed yesterday that Macy, which operates 111 Macy's and Bullock's department stores, is likely to win the extension from Judge Burton Lifland of federal bankruptcy court in New York.
The extension could thus be granted on Feb. 22, when Macy has a hearing scheduled with Judge Lifland.
A plan of reorganization involves a detailed payout for each creditor group and a target date to emerge from bankruptcy-court protection.
Macy currently owes its creditors about $6 billion.
Macy, at some point, could face a competing reorganization plan from Federated.
But under bankruptcy law, Federated cannot file a plan of reorganization until Macy's exclusive right to propose its own plan has expired.
Currently, that exclusivity period terminates March 15, but can be extended by Judge Lifland.
