In a 1983 book called "Electronic Life," author Michael Crichton predicted that books would be printed and read on paper for "another 20 years."
Today, he thinks his prediction is pretty much on target.
Books on paper won't become extinct by 2003, says Mr. Crichton, just "increasingly rare."
But where is the electronic book today?
Sure, CD-ROMS and floppy disks are terrific for digging through piles of data, like President Clinton's 1995 budget.
And multimedia CD-ROMs are increasingly attractive for entertaining video-addicted children at home and school.
But read a book on a computer screen?
What grownup would actually do that by choice?
And how many are?
"I'm never going to read `Gone With The Wind' on a computer," predicts John Warnock, co-founder and chief executive of software producer Adobe Systems Inc., Mountain View, Calif.
"To me, the power of this revolution comes not from reading a single book electronically, but having the power to access one million books."
Indeed, the reference possibilities for multimedia are vast, and encyclopedias are among the early favorites in sales of consumer CD-ROM titles.
One electronic publisher, Allegro New Media of Fairfield, N.J., says its best-selling CD-ROM title combines 12 business reference books on a single disk.
But the change ahead will be much broader than that.
The transition of books to an electronic format has already begun, and the converts say the appeal and acceptance of electronic books will grow exponentially.
Jack Gaynor, a molecular biologist at Montclair State University in Montclair, N.J., was skeptical about reading novels on a computer screen until last month, when curiosity about the technology drove him to buy a $20 electronic version of Mr. Crichton's novel "Jurassic Park."
"I was surprised at how much I enjoyed it," says Mr. Gaynor.
"Now I can easily picture myself curling up on the couch with my PowerBook portable computer and reading more books this way."
The groundwork for rapid expansion has already been laid.
There is a large and fast-growing base of CD-ROM players installed in homes at the same time that dozens of adventurous electronic publishers are pumping out new titles (even if traditional paper publishers are technophobic and dragging their feet).
Nonetheless, the conversion to mass use of electronic books is expected to be extremely slow.
People can't crave something they have never seen and don't quite understand.
"Talking to people about this stuff is like explaining sex to a six-year-old," says Bob Stein, co-owner of Voyager Co., a New York publisher of much-lauded electronic books.
"It isn't until someone has actually used one of these themselves that they'll get what all the excitement is about.
But they will get it, and a substantial subset of computer-users already does."
The most ambitious demonstration project is a joint effort by Apple Computer Inc. and six multimedia publishers, specifically aimed at winning over avid book readers to the new technology.
Known informally as the Kiosk Project, the venture involves multimedia computers set up at eight bookstores, including one in Toronto and one in London.
Experts are at the kiosks in the evenings and on weekends, demonstrating from a library of CD-ROMs and floppy disks provided by the participating publishers.
The project is to last six months, and bookstores around the country are clamoring to be added to the original list of sites.
But a visit to one of the kiosks -- at the Shakespeare & Co. bookstore on New York's Upper West Side -- shows that while electronic books have potential, they won't be an easy sell.
George White, a young man with a long ponytail who works for Voyager, one of the publishers in the project, figures that about 80% of the customers simply ignore him.
(And some of those who don't ignore him want a different kind of help: He's tall, and they just want him to reach books on high shelves.)
Moreover, when people with little knowledge of the technology do stop by, a good 20 minutes of demonstrating may be necessary before they catch on.
Still, even when they don't buy anything, a seed may have been planted.
Typical, perhaps, is a middle-aged woman who stopped by the kiosk.
Her first reaction: No interest.
"To read a book, all you need is your brain," she says.
"I can see this multimedia stuff being good for kids."
Nonetheless, she watches as Mr. White demonstrates several titles, including "Scary Poems for Rotten Kids," an interactive book that lets children decide whether and how to have the poems read to them, and a multimedia survey of Japanese culture and language.
Eventually, she asks, "How much money would it cost to upgrade my home computer to CD-ROM?"
She may become a buyer of electronic books eventually, but not tonight.
Ron Litvak, a Denver lawyer who buys his books at the local Tattered Cover, another bookstore in the Kiosk Project, is more amenable to the technology.
Out of curiosity, Mr. Litvak says, he read "Pleading Guilty," a legal thriller, on his PowerBook, and liked that he could read it in bed, even when his wife was asleep, because the screen is lighted.
But, he says, "For recreational reading, I'm sticking with the good old paperback."
Chemist Wayne Mascarella, who works on computers daily, modeling molecules at Research Triangle Institute in Research Triangle Park, N.C., has also experimented with reading novels on his PowerBook.
"I'm actively hunting for reference works, now that I have CD-ROM on my home computer," says Mr. Mascarella, "But I'm skeptical when it comes to novels on screen, except for cyperpunk novels.
It just felt right to me to read `The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy' on PowerBook, because the plot revolves around an electronic book that contains everything in the universe worth knowing, a sort of ultimate PowerBook."
Many computer owners report that their kids are much more comfortable reading on screen than they are.
Mr. Gaynor, the molecular biologist, says his 10-year-old and 14-year-old sons also read "Jurassic Park" on PowerBook, and loved all the extra features, including a recording that conveys what scientists think dinosaurs sounded like.
Also, some of the images in the book, published on a floppy disk by Voyager, can be transmitted to a printer and copied onto paper; one of Mr. Gaynor's sons has covered his school books with dinosaur drawings from the book, and his classmates are jealous.
Numbers tell the story of the electronic book's modest start.
Voyager, though lauded as a pioneer, hasn't been able to make any money after 10 years in the business, and even its best-selling titles, like "Jurassic Park," sell in the neighborhood of 5,000 units.
Its attempts to sell electronic versions of Jane Austen, Marcel Proust and other literary authors haven't been nearly as successful.
The CD-ROM products that sell in huge numbers, several hundred thousand, tend to be entertainment-oriented, like Time Warner Inc.'s animated "Hell Cab."
One of the titles in the Kiosk Project, "Hell Cab" works like a video game; in it, a demented cab driver who is an apprentice devil goes on a wild ride through time.
There is little text and much action; at one point, the viewer fights gladiators in ancient Rome.
Nonetheless, a small band of believers continue to insist that multimedia technology will change the way all kinds of books are written -- as well as how we read them.
"There's a tremendous amount of baloney being dished up about the future," says Mr. Crichton.
"But I don't think there is any doubt that books will change enormously, or any reason to be nostalgic.
The ability to add sound, graphics, animation and layers of text will alter the experience of what a book is, and I can't wait."
Ms. Cox is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.
