Amity Shlaes's Jan. 18 editorial-page essay "Dear Naomi: Women, Opinions and the Press" successfully answered charges by Naomi Wolf and the woman-as-victim feminists that men alone control the world of opinion making; it was straight to the point and fun to read.
Objective critics of the media must admit that the voices of women who speak with authority on a range of issues are not only heard but growing in number.
My only complaint is that Ms. Shlaes overlooked what is happening with women as opinion makers down here in Texas.
At the Dallas Morning News, for example, a newspaper with enough clout that even the fabled James Carville credits it as one of the three dailies he read religiously during the 1992 presidential campaign, both the editorial-page editor and the op-ed editor are women.
Editorial-page editor Rena Pederson is also a vice president of the newspaper and writes a column with an intellectual perspective on issues from Nafta to Scouting.
Carolyn Barta, the op-ed editor, is a political columnist and commentator with a sharp and experienced eye.
While I admire the work of these two important Texas opinion makers, I sometimes find myself at odds with them -- happily always due to their opinions, not to their precise "no uterus" writing style.
I suppose Naomi Wolf's charge of "no uterus" writing falls in the same category as Gloria Steinem's accusation that the U.S. senator from Texas, Kay Bailey Hutchison, is "a female impersonator."
Oh well, so what.
I suspect that neither Naomi nor Gloria would understand Texas or its women.
But they can't deny that exciting things are happening here for and with women.
Our governor, for instance, is Ann Richards.
Almost all of the 12 statewide offices up in this year's election have women candidates -- and most are Republicans.
To the best of my knowledge, all of them get their hair done and wear lipstick free from guilt.
Just wanted to say how much I agreed with Ms. Shlaes's "Dear Naomi" column and to thank her for saying some of the things I wanted to say, if I hadn't been too lazy to sit down and write a response to the Wolf article.
I was particularly happy to see the rebuttal of Ms. Wolf's silly dismissal of Jeane Kirkpatrick because Ms. Kirkpatrick wrote "in an objective `no uterus' style that is `uninflected by the experience of the female body."'
(That is probably the category she would have reserved for me as well.)
Morning Light Publishing Co.
Overland Park, Kan.
(Ms. Christian was a 1981 Pulitzer Prize winner for coverage of Central America.)
Ms. Shlaes's piece on Naomi Wolf was really too much for our budding consciousnesses to bear.
We expect your editorial page to do better than recycle stereotypes such as "Women are civilizers.
They click the remote control past the screamers on `Crossfire' because they find them undignified."
Does this mean women are too fragile and high-minded for daily business?
Ms. Shlaes then continues to generalize about "the recent product of humanities departments of fancy universities. . . .
What exactly does this narrow group write about?
They write about sex, about their weight, about themselves as victims. . . ."
If this were true, then education for women would be wasted.
Assuming women are rational economic decision makers, none of us would have paid $80,000 to talk about sex, weight and victimization.
Unfortunately, this is one of those stereotypes that demeans its user and says nothing of substance.
If these statements had been made about Jewish-Americans, African-Americans or another minority, you would have seen them for what they are: mere caricatures of a diverse group of people.
Ms. Shlaes also says people do not check op-ed pieces to see the gender of the writer.
With all due respect, if that were true, none of this would be an issue.
We ourselves always check the gender of the writer, along with the writer's professional background, not to see if the paper is meeting a quota of whatever group (naturally, our lives are much too busy talking about sex and weight for that), but simply to evaluate, in the roughest possible way, what special insights the writer may be bringing to that piece.
In the same way, probably every reader of this letter has checked or will check to see the gender of the writer of this letter.
After all, the reader whispers to himself, only a woman would object to being called too high-minded for something as evil as opining.
I note that if you take a handful of outstanding female columnists -- such as Meg Greenfield, Karen Elliott House, Georgette Geyer, Flora Lewis, Jeane Kirkpatrick, Ms. Drew, Dorothy Rabinowitz, yourself, Cokie Roberts, Jane Kramer from Paris, those two NPR legal smarties, and one or two others -- all of whom were writing at the same time a few years ago, you could not possibly match them in numbers on the male side, in terms of quality, sense, toughness of mind, etc.
Frederick S. Wyle
Berkeley, Calif.
Anne O'Hare McCormick of the Times and Dorothy Thompson of the Herald Tribune, uninhibited by uterus in writing on foreign affairs a half-century ago, attained a status still unequaled by women journalists in that field.
