There's a familiar hand behind the stock market's sudden spurts and plunges recently: increasing in-house program trading by Wall Street trading desks.
This is the sort of rapid, computer-aided trading of long lists of stocks that investors wailed about after the 1987 stockmarket crash.
New York Stock Exchange data show that in-house, or principal, trading has accounted for an unusually large 55% of overall program activity so far in 1994, compared with 44.5% for all last year.
So is this 1987 all over again?
Probably not.
Actually, some traders argue that this program-trading binge is a comforting thing for small investors who are spooked by the market's roller-coaster moves, such as Wednesday morning's 50-point drop -- and subsequent recovery to a nearly 23-point gain -- in the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
Because it shows that many of the market's daily gyrations don't mean anything fundamental about stocks -- it's just minute-by-minute speculation by Wall Street firms, aided by computers.
There is "definitely" a bigger impact from programs in recent weeks, says Paul Hennessey, trading chief at Boston Co.
Institutional Investors, in Boston.
"Major investors, including us, have learned to live with" program trading by others although "we don't appreciate it."
The veteran Mr. Hennessey is a major nonprogram trader, who trades almost four million shares a day or 1.5% of the Big Board's total.
He says that while he can't prove statistically that program trading is moving prices more than before, "you certainly can feel it from a professional trading point of view.
Wednesday was a perfect example."
In the past, such as during last year, it was unusual to have even a single week in which most of the program trading was by Wall Street firms themselves.
But now it happens routinely -- seven weeks in a row, including a 65.1% in-house figure for the most recent week reported, the one ended Feb. 25.
"What we have seen is that some relatively small programs have had significant impact," says Laszlo Birinyi of Birinyi Associates Inc., Greenwich, Conn., who tracks program trading closely.
He says the skittish stock market has created "air pockets" on certain days that allow relatively small program trades -- the kind in-house trading desks often make -- to move stock prices.
The turmoil in foreign-currency markets has given program traders one more trigger to buy or sell.
"You've had a market in which there are concerns and fears, and the programs just push it along more than the market's own accord," says Mr. Birinyi.
His tip for investors: Don't worry about any no-news day on which the Dow Jones average makes a quick move in one direction and is stable the rest of the day.
That suggests speculative program trading was at work and the move will probably be reversed the next day.
After the '87 crash, many firms cut back on in-house program trading, hating to be seen as modern-day gunslingers.
But the cutbacks didn't last.
Firms including Morgan Stanley Group, General Electric's Kidder Peabody unit, J.P. Morgan and Bear Stearns -- as well as the U.S. units of Japan's Nomura Securities and Daiwa Securities -- all did millions of shares of principal program trading on the Big Board in the week ended Feb. 25.
Says Boston Co.'s Mr. Hennessey: "I think these firms have forgotten, or their clients have forgotten, the impact this has on the marketplace."
One reason investors haven't howled too much is the Big Board's 50-point collar, which slows program trading whenever the Dow Jones industrials move up or down 50 points in a day.
"There is a sense of security with that 50-point collar.
Generally it works," says one broker.
The most-active program trader in the Big Board's latest weekly statistics, released yesterday, was Cooper Neff & Associates, which did all 14.1 million shares of its program trading for its own account.
Cooper Neff and Susquehanna Investment Group are two Philadelphia-area trading firms that are among the only major program traders aside from the big brokerage houses.
At Cooper Neff, based in Radnor, Pa., partner Roy Neff says his firm is "trading at about the same pace as last year," but that it has moved up on the list of most-active traders because some other program-trading investors have backed away in this jittery market.
"That's made it easier for us," he says.
Mr. Neff argues that market moves like Wednesday's are caused by investors' cautious buying patterns, not just program trading.
"In a jittery market, where people don't want to lay their money on the line until they get more information, it makes sense that the market has to go down more before someone wants to buy," Mr. Neff says.
