One in seven cases of tuberculosis in the U.S. is resistant to drugs that previously cured the disease, the first national government survey of TB cases found.
Public-health professionals have been concerned for years about the return of tuberculosis, which was considered under control in the U.S. until the mid-1980s, and about the spread of strains that defy traditional drug treatment.
The study, conducted by the government's Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, showed an even greater problem than thought because the incidence of drug resistance was higher than expected, said Alan B. Bloch, a CDCP medical epidemiologist and the study's lead researcher.
Resistance arises when patients fail to complete their drug therapy, which lasts six months or longer.
The hardiest TB bacteria are allowed to survive as a result, and as they multiply, they spread their genes to a new generation of bacteria -- and to new victims.
The drug-resistant forms of TB that don't respond to the usual drug therapy might be treatable by other, sometimes more toxic drugs.
The study also found that patients with some of the deadliest strains of TB -- those that resist multiple drugs -- may be more likely to infect other people.
Officials of the CDCP called for aggressive intervention to prevent the further spread of drug-resistant TB, including finding "every TB patient" and ensuring that patients complete their drug therapy.
"We need to place a solid foundation under every state and local tuberculosis program in the nation to guarantee that the resources are always present to ensure that all tuberculosis patients can complete an adequate course of therapy," Dr. Bloch said.
The survey, published in today's Journal of the American Medical Association, collected information about TB cases reported across the country in the first three months of 1991.
Of the 3,313 cultures that were tested against antituberculosis drugs, 14.2% were resistant to one or more drugs.
In most of those cases, the bacteria were resistant to one or more of the most powerful anti-TB drugs -- isoniazid, rifampin and streptomycin.
Extrapolating from the survey sample, the researchers estimated a full-year incidence of 2,500 drug-resistant TB cases in the U.S. in 1991.
The resistant cases were found in 36 states.
But New York City accounted for 30% of all drug-resistant patients, and 61% of the multidrug resistant cases.
Patients in New York City have a 52-fold increased risk of multidrug-resistant TB than patients in the rest of the country, according to the researchers.
Dr. Bloch added that New York City health officials have made great strides since 1991 to catch TB cases early and closely monitor patient drug treatment.
Based on the survey's findings, the researchers called for changing the initial standard TB treatment to four drugs, from the current two-drug regimen.
But if patients fail to take all their medication, TB strains will eventually emerge that will render those drugs ineffective as well, Dr. Bloch warned.
"The potential loss of effective drug therapy is a cause of great concern."
