The Pacific region "is critical to America's future," says Secretary of State Warren Christopher over and over again.
He calls its dynamism a powerful engine of trade and jobs essential for continued U.S. prosperity.
Then why does he spend so much time quarreling with its three biggest economies?
The answer is that the Clinton administration remains unsure about how to deal with Asia despite a year or more of practice.
So its political demands clash directly with economic hopes, and the president's men and women aren't sure how to sort them out.
The result is that few goals have been met and things could get much worse before the year ends.
"U.S. government policy toward Asia is just not thought through," complains James Ableggen, chairman of Gemini Consulting (Japan) and a professor at Tokyo's Sophia University.
"If we're trying to build a Pacific community, this is a strange way of going about it," says Morton Abramowitz, a former ambassador to Thailand.
This shows up especially in relations with Japan, China and Indonesia, which have the area's largest economies and are leading political actors.
In each of them, the U.S. makes intrusive political demands that are resented for both style and substance, and which could damage future U.S. involvement in this economically exuberant region.
The main quarrels are well-known.
Washington is fed up with Japan's refusal to import foreign goods and investment like other leading industrial states.
So the U.S. threatens reprisals unless Tokyo reflates, deregulates, abolishes trade barriers and otherwise changes in ways Washington would find intolerable if it were demanded of it.
Despite some specific gains, overall economic ties remain in "serious disrepair," says chief trade negotiator Mickey Kantor.
China, meanwhile, rejects U.S. demands that it treat internal critics with decency, something its aged, aggressively intolerant leaders consider foolish and dangerous.
When Mr. Christopher took his human rights message to Beijing last week, the Chinese spent much effort humiliating him.
Barring a late compromise, which is still possible, there could be severe economic reprisals by summer.
In Indonesia, the problem is labor rights.
The authoritarian Suharto regime outlaws independent unions because some earlier ones were political troublemakers; it wants stability above all.
So Jakarta has let troops suppress local strikes despite U.S. threats to take away certain tariff privileges unless this stops.
Having finessed one deadline, Washington must decide in mid-August whether to act and thereby perhaps sour a basically friendly relationship.
(There's also a bizarre and presumably brief quarrel with Singapore.
As an assertion of its Asian identity, that righteous city-state insists on flogging an American teenager under laws left behind by British imperialists who founded the place.)
American goals may be noble, but Asians often find the style confrontational and abrasive.
Because this occurs as many leaders seek to "restore our sense of confidence, faith and pride in ourselves," as a Kuala Lumpur think tank stated recently, they're inclined to reject foreign advice, especially if it seems risky to personal interests.
Thus, such diverse observers as former White House adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski and American International Group Chairman Hank Greenberg prefer a more discreet Asian diplomacy, especially regarding China.
Yet Washington finds that difficult, partly because its priorities aren't clear.
For example, does it really rank quite limited human-rights progress above the huge China market, plus Beijing's help on North Korean nuclear matters and other arms-control issues?
Critics say this is backward; Washington should develop the joint interests first, then move quietly to internal matters, which doesn't at all mean abandoning them.
They'd like the same softer approach to Indonesia.
Some don't mind the Japan-bashing, hoping it might halt Tokyo's frustrating intransigence over trade.
But others find it dangerous to basic security and political ties, and thus to business interests over the long term.
They'd rather stop the shouting and support Japan's weak but reform-minded government.
They say this could speed internal changes and eventually bring the commercial relief sought by U.S. and other foreign companies.
Yet policy confusion is in the way.
Notes Linda Lim, an Asian specialist at the University of Michigan business school, "You've got to be clear about what you want to do."
And that clarity so far is lacking.
