The federal Office of Thrift Supervision, toughening its enforcement of community-lending laws, denied the applications of four thrifts in New Jersey and Ohio to change their charters.
The four savings-and-loan institutions had applied to switch from OTS-regulated savings associations to state-chartered mutual-savings banks.
But the agency turned down the "charter-flip" applications on grounds that they haven't adequately served their communities, failing to meet their responsibilities under the Community Reinvestment Act.
The OTS said these were its first denials of thrifts' charter-flip proposals.
Other financial regulators, including the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Reserve Board, have begun taking a sterner look at bank and other lenders' community investments, especially in low-income minority areas, under the Community Reinvestment Act.
The three New Jersey thrifts affected by the OTS rejections were Pulaski Savings Bank, Springfield; Gibraltar Savings Bank, Mendham, and United Roosevelt Savings & Loan Association, Carteret.
They were given "needs to improve" ratings on their last two Community Reinvestment Act compliance examinations; the most recent in 1993.
Mayflower Savings & Loan Co., Groesbeck, Ohio, received a similar rating on its last exam, in late 1992.
If the thrifts had been able to flip from their current status as state-chartered, OTS-regulated savings associations to state-chartered mutual-savings banks, they would have been subject only to less-stringent regulations by their states and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.
They also could have made another conversion, becoming stock institutions, with Ohio and New Jersey having passed laws that facilitate such stock conversions.
The FDIC and OTS have said that many mutual-savings banks first converted from OTS-supervised savings banks to statechartered savings banks before switching to stockholder-owned institutions.
Two weeks ago, the FDIC adopted interim rules aimed at preventing insider windfalls at the expense of depositors when state-chartered mutual-savings banks convert to stock institutions.
The FDIC said it will consider OTS-style rules that limit insider gains in conversions.
Federally chartered savings and loan associations and savings banks and state-chartered S&Ls are OTS-regulated.
Jonathan Fiechter, the acting OTS director, said the four charter-flip denials were "a signal that this agency intends to enforce consumer protection and fair-lending laws," to ensure that thrifts provide "services and conveniences" to their communities as required by law.
Pulaski has about 80% of its lending outside its communities, doesn't market effectively to low- and moderate-income neighborhoods in those areas, and has limited involvement in Community Reinvestment Act self-assessment, the OTS said.
It said that Gibraltar hasn't assessed or sought to meet the credit needs of its community, has done poor local marketing and has primarily promoted home-equity loans throughout New Jersey.
United Roosevelt has a "very low lending level," with only seven mortgage loans in 1992, and doesn't participate in community-development projects, the OTS said.
Mayflower has extended more credit outside its community than in it and hasn't joined in any special-credit programs, while its directors haven't sufficiently reviewed lending patterns or been active in planning or carrying out effective Community Reinvestment Act activities, the agency said.
