Glaxo Holdings PLC reported better-than-expected first-half pretax profit and outlined plans to assemble a U.S. managed-care venture that could go against competition created by Merck & Co.'s takeover of Medco Containment Services Inc.
Glaxo Chief Executive Sir Richard Sykes played down recent speculation about a possible alliance between Glaxo and Pfizer Inc., suggesting it might be some time before his company's plans for U.S. managed-care cooperation come to fruition.
"But we understand exactly what needs to be done," he claimed.
"The Merck-Medco deal tilted what previously was a level playing field.
We have to get it back on an even keel again."
Merck's takeover of Medco last year combined a giant drug maker with a company that manages drug benefits for health plans, a savvy move at a time when companies and governments around the world are trying to control health-care costs.
Buoyant profits -- and Sir Richard's comments -- impressed investors.
Glaxo stock soared 37 pence (55 cents), or 5.5%, to 712 pence ($10.51) in exceptionally heavy volume early Thursday before surrendering some of the gain, easing to 697 pence in late London trading.
Peter Laing, a London drug analyst with Salomon Brothers Inc., suggested Glaxo's upbeat report could spark a change of investor sentiment toward the entire European pharmaceutical sector.
"After months of just lying back, the industry finally seems to be taking positive action to counter threats to its business," Mr. Laing said.
Glaxo said pretax profit spurted 22% to #1 billion ($1.47 billion) during the first half from #819 million a year earlier.
Sales climbed at an equal rate, to #2.8 billion from #2.3 billion the previous year.
Glaxo executives said the assumption of majority control of a previous affiliate in India accounted for two percentage points of the first-half sales gain, but only an insignificant contribution to pretax profit.
Excluding currency fluctuations, first-half sales increased 13% and operating profit in the period rose 15%, Glaxo said.
Established products that account for 79% of Glaxo's sales grew 9% during the first half, measured in constant currency.
Sales of flagship ulcer drug Zantac rose 5% to #1.2 billion -- less than half the ulcer-drug market's 11% growth-rate during the period.
Zantac's share of Glaxo's total sales slipped a percentage point to 43%.
And while it remained the world's biggest selling drug, Zantac's world-wide market share declined two points to 36%.
