Six big banks, following the Federal Reserve's tightening of credit, nudged up their prime lending rates a quarter of a percentage point, to 6.25%, the first increase in five years.
The increases were announced by Norwest Corp., Banc One Corp., Bank of New York Co., Chemical Banking Corp., Chase Manhattan Corp., and First Chicago Corp.
Analysts said other major banks are likely to follow.
"Past experience would suggest that the increase will spread to the rest of the industry," said Robert Dederick, chief economist at Northern Trust Co., Chicago.
The prime has been unchanged since July 1992, and last rose in March 1989.
Because banks use the prime to set rates for small-business loans, credit cards and home-equity loans, the move will certainly boost interest costs for a broad array of borrowers.
But analysts said that because the increase is small, the overall impact on the economy will be moderate.
"This is inflation to the consumer because it costs more to buy things," said Susan Sterne, president of Economic Analysis Associates in Stowe, Vt.
But the impact "is probably more psychological" because consumers become worried when they see interest rates heading higher.
Consumer borrowing has picked up sharply in the past 12 months, reflecting lower rates and the improving economy.
Stuart Feldstein, president of SMR Research Corp., a Budd Lake, N.J., research and consulting firm, figures that rates on about one quarter of all outstanding consumer debt will rise once all banks increase their prime.
He estimates that debt service accounts for 17% of the total cost of living.
For small businesses, "I think the impact will be very limited," said Lynn Reaser, chief economist at First Interstate Bancorp in Los Angeles.
She says that while borrowing costs are edging up for businesses, banks are much more willing to make loans than a year ago.
Because of competition within the banking industry, companies are receiving looser terms and conditions for borrowing.
Although the prime rate is certainly one of the more visible interest rates, its influence on the economy is less than that of mortgage rates and U.S. Treasury rates, both of which have been rising since early February.
Mortgage rates have jumped 0.75 of a percentage point, and other short-term rates have risen half a percentage point.
Ms. Reaser said increasing rates will damp economic growth somewhat but not "enough to derail the expansion."
The Fed decided earlier this week to increase the benchmark federal-funds rate by a quarter point, to 3 1/2%, hoping to head off inflationary pressures as the economy strengthens.
The boost in that rate, which is what banks charge one another for overnight loans, pushed up the banks' own cost of funds.
When the Fed made a similar increase in the fed-funds rate on Feb. 4, the banks held off on boosting the prime.
That was partly because of competitive pressures but also because the banks' profit margins were wide enough for them to absorb the rise.
The latest Fed tightening, however, apparently was too much for some banks to shoulder without passing along at least some of the cost to borrowers.
In raising the prime a quarter of a point, the banks are essentially compromising between a half-point increase, which some analysts had expected, and none at all.
"The Fed has taken two quarter-point steps up on the fed-funds rate," and that gap is just too large not to increase the prime, John A. Russell, a spokesman for Banc One Corp., said.
Even at 6.25%, the prime rate is still high relative to short-term interest rates.
From 1989 to 1992 interest rates in the U.S. plunged, but banks never cut the prime rate as much as the Fed reduced short-term rates.
That helped banks fatten their coffers at a time when the industry's earnings were hurt by a rise in problem loans.
The Fed's tightening of credit does have some good news for consumers.
Yields on six-month certificates of deposit, which are tied to the federal-funds rate, have been under 3% for the past year and a half and have already started climbing.
