A New York subway ad for Adidas's athletic shoes and other sportswear shows New York Knicks All-Star guard John Starks and the caption, "Bust'n It And Surviving."
Well, not exactly.
Mr. Starks is sidelined, probably for the remainder of the season, following knee surgery this week.
But he is expected to return for the playoffs, a hero re-emerging just in time.
Given that scenario, Mr. Starks could prove to be a most appropriate spokesman for the Adidas America division of Adidas AG.
At least, the German sportswear company hopes so.
It was the standard of athletic footwear in the 1970s, before the company lost its footing and was overtaken by rivals Nike and Reebok International.
Now, Adidas is poised to sprint toward a modest comeback with the help of Robert Louis-Dreyfus, former chief executive of the Saatchi & Saatchi advertising company, who, together with a group of investors, paid 615 million marks ($373 million) in February 1993, for a controlling stake.
Adidas is showing signs of sales growth, though still minute compared with its big-foot competitors.
It reported U.S. footwear sales of $190 million in 1993, up 3% from the previous year, to rank No. 8 last year, according to the newsletter Sporting Goods Intelligence, in Glen Mills, Pa.
No. 1 Nike posted a 10% sales increase to $1.9 billion, followed by Reebok, with an 11% sales plunge to $1.3 billion.
Adidas AG is expected to report shortly that its world-wide group recorded a consolidated pretax profit of 23 million marks last year, compared with a loss of 149 million marks in 1992.
Last year's profit included write-offs of 70 million marks.
Adidas's strategy in the U.S. is to persuade young, urban consumers to buy the product with the familiar three stripes.
"We're working on getting more shelf space, which will hopefully increase our sales," Mr. Louis-Dreyfus said in an interview.
"Until then, we're going to go slowly with advertising."
This month, Adidas America begins airing a new television commercial during the NCAA "March Madness" basketball championship tournament on CBS.
The commercial, from Team One Advertising, a subsidiary of Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising Worldwide, stars hyperactive ESPN analyst Dick Vitale as the "brain" of a teenage basketball player, who is wearing Adidas sneakers.
Mr. Vitale shouts encouragement to the lad, who is seen walking off the court, shaking his head and trying to eliminate the incessant loud buzz.
Besides that commercial, Adidas's advertising is confined to subway posters in New York City and two painted brick walls in Harlem and Brooklyn, N.Y. New national television ads, scheduled to be filmed shortly with Mr. Starks, were postponed indefinitely because of his injury.
"Nike and Reebok have become the Coke and Pepsi of athletic apparel," says Cindy Yoshimura, director of marketing services at Adidas America.
"We need to communicate to customers in an entirely different way.
Our advertising is trying to be an honest reflection of the athlete himself, and not trying to think of the next cute tagline."
For instance, she says, phrases on the subway posters came directly from Mr. Starks, while he was talking about playing basketball.
Ms. Yoshimura admits Adidas doesn't have the deep pockets of its competitors.
"We're not going to throw dollar after dollar after them," she says.
That's for sure.
According to Competitive Media Reporting, which tracks ad spending, Adidas spent only $1.2 million for advertising last year, compared with $132.5 million from Nike.
The Adidas figure was down from 1992, when the company spent $3.2 million.
Adidas sees an opportunity to get its foot in the door to reach the lucrative, but fickle market of 12-to-17-year-olds.
"There is a whole new generation of kids coming up who see their dads and grandfathers wearing Nike and Reeboks," says Tom Cordner, Team One's co-chairman and creative director.
These young people "want their own identity."
Adidas may not have much choice in trying to tap them.
Middle-aged consumers, who sigh nostalgically when reminiscing about their first pair of Adidas sneakers, aren't racing to purchase the brand's shoes and apparel these days.
"Adidas is doing well with basketball shoes," says John Horan, editor of Sporting Goods Intelligence.
"And its sales are growing, thanks to the `graffiti' marketing in the inner city.
The Adidas brand is still a great name with a lot of value to it."
There will be a marketing push for the brand during the World Cup soccer tournament in the U.S. this summer.
Adidas is a major sponsor and, says Mr. Horan, still dominates sales of soccer footwear.
"We're advertising shoes for the pure athlete," says Mr. Cordner.
"Not someone who is just posing."
As for Mr. Louis-Dreyfus, he characteristically credits timing, rather than any business skills, for the start of the company's turnaround.
"I'm enjoying myself very much," he says.
"It's nice to have products selling again.
As for my influence, it's better to be lucky than good."
Coca-Cola Co. is launching two new non-cola ad campaigns, for Sprite and Fresca, from Interpublic Group's Lowe & Partners/SMS.
For Sprite, Coke has dropped its bouncy "I like the Sprite in you" jingle, replacing it with rap and rock music and a command to "Obey your thirst."
The new effort, focused on teenage boys, is part of an effort to attract customers who also drink rival sodas Dr Pepper and Mountain Dew, the company said.
Sprite is the No. 7 soft drink, according to Beverage Marketing Corp., behind No. 6 Mountain Dew and No. 5 Dr Pepper.
One Sprite ad features a rapper who complains about the "infinite number of product shots, drink shots, mega-superstars, jingles" in other soda ads.
The other spot features a pair of camels (no relation to cigarette spokesman Joe Camel, Coke says), who slurp some Sprite after a rough day in the desert.
Meanwhile, the first national advertising since the 1970s for Coke's Fresca citrus soda will break during the Academy Awards broadcast Monday night.
Coke is targeting "sophisticated" adults with the new ads, says Pierre Ferrari, Coke senior vice president of marketing.
The new spot features colored straws, bouncing and laughing, in tall glasses of Fresca.
Coke had planned to run a commercial featuring a glass of Fresca on a grand piano, but changed its mind when research showed the commercial appealed to a slightly older crowd.
Both ads pitch Fresca as "the Tasteful Alternative."
The TV ad is only part of Fresca's Oscar blitz.
On Monday, Coke will stock Fresca in 25 Los Angeles hair salons, where celebrities are expected to be coiffed for the big night.
About 250 limousines heading to the awards will be filled with Fresca.
Coke also plans to pass out the drink to waiting fans at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion, site of the awards, and to stock the backstage area for thirsty nominees and other participants.
INTERPUBLIC GROUP's McCann-Erickson created one of the commercials in a new campaign for Sprite soda.
Thursday's Advertising column failed to mention the agency based on erroneous information from Coca-Cola Co.
