Tokyo stocks tumbled 2% Wednesday, as Japan's economy-boosting package was considered insufficiently stimulating, and a rally was interrupted by selling of stock-index futures by institutional investors.
London prices rebounded from deep losses to end slightly lower.
Frankfurt shares retreated 1% on profit-taking.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.96, down 0.23, reflecting lower Asia/Pacific and European markets and higher American markets.
Household products/non-durables stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 119.76, up 2.52, or 2.2%, with Procter & Gamble of the U.S. posting a 3.7% gain in its local currency.
Pollution stocks trailed at 72.58, down 4.82, or 6.2%, with WMX Technologies of the U.S. sliding 11% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which gained 236.83 points Tuesday, lost 409.85 to 19841.38, its first finish below 20000 since Jan. 28.
In trading Thursday, the Nikkei eased 22 points to close the morning session at 19819.38.
Wednesday's first-section volume was estimated at 450 million shares, down from 616.4 million shares a day earlier.
Declining swamped gainers, 915-168.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which rose 15.26 points Tuesday, sank 18.68, or 1.2%, to 1598.02.
Investors searching for buying incentives didn't find any in Japan's economic stimulus measures, which didn't surpass expectations.
Enthusiasm also was sapped by the government's decision not to specify how it would finance tax cuts and rather to negotiate offsetting increases later, signaling further political battles.
Futures were sold because of worries that Japan-U.S. trade negotiations this week could stumble, pushing the Japanese yen higher; the sell-off also was spurred by domestic investors' sales of Nikkei-225 futures ahead of the launch of Nikkei-300 derivatives, and by a sense that the stock market needs either new buying incentives or a correction before it can push higher.
Overseas investors, whose purchases spurred the market's torrid pace last month, continued to buy, though some took profits.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index fell 11.1 points to 3429.1, though it was up solidly from the intraday low of 3403.7.
The FT 30-stock index dropped 7.7 points to 2634.2.
Volume was 912 million shares, down from 1.02 billion shares Tuesday.
A strong early performance on Wall Street helped reverse London's slide.
The gains in New York eased fears in Britain that higher U.S. interest rates would create a domino effect of falling share prices throughout world markets.
Britain's cut Tuesday in the base lending rate to 5.25% from 5.5% left the bourse confused; though lower rates had been long anticipated, investors had anticipated a reduction of one-half percentage point, and the quarter-point shave wasn't expected to have much effect.
Still, investors hoped for another trim to bring Britain's rate down to 5%.
In the banking sector, where prices are at high premiums to the overall market, most shares declined, as the rate cut created worries that banks' interest-rate margins would fall, though analysts said banks will be helped in the long term by lower rates, which will make it easier for borrowers to repay loans.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index fell 21.92 points to 2085.29, losing most of the previous session's gains.
Trading was light, easily causing price swings.
Of the DAX stocks, six advanced and 23 declined.
In Paris, stocks ended mixed to slightly higher, recovering from a 1.1% loss during the session on local buying in late dealings.
Likewise in Amsterdam, prices found late strength to scramble up from lows and finish mixed in reaction to Wall Street's early firmness; early activity was damped by drops in other European markets and in Tokyo.
In Madrid, too, shares staged a late rebound from lows to close with slight losses, after Wall Street's early strength.
In Milan, equities softened, hampered by technical factors such as the looming settlement date for the February trading account.
In Brussels, the broad market ended mixed, though the main index surged from negative territory to end slightly higher and log its second record in a row.
In Stockholm, shares declined in heavy trading, as rising Swedish interest rates and weak performances in some major markets abroad depressed prices; volatility in recent sessions created doubts about whether the Stockholm bourse could maintain the advances that began last month, and some investors took profits.
In Zurich, this week's losses increased to 3.6% after prices fell from selling sparked by a report that a major Swiss bank cut its exposure to stocks to 40% from 50% for its managed portfolios, a strategy change triggered by the U.S. credit tightening last Friday; some investors also believed major world markets have topped out for now.
In Sydney, share prices dived in afternoon trading, ending with a 1.5% loss, on active arbitrage dealings between the stock and futures markets; heavy selling of the stock-index futures contract pushed it to a discount to the market's main index, but this didn't unnerve investors, as fundamentals remained unaltered.
In Hong Kong's shortened session ahead of a holiday for the Chinese New Year, stocks initially gained on a good showing for Hong Kong stocks in London and Wall Street's flat showing Tuesday, but the market lacked a motive to support further rises, and buying interest petered out, leaving prices slightly higher.
In Singapore, shares also closed a half-day session higher ahead of the holiday; the market was helped by bargain-hunting and buying by foreign investors, and reined in by institutions, which were cautious about volatility.
In Manila, shares advanced 1.4% in moderate turnover, boosted by strong buying late in the session, led by utilities, banks and contractors.
In Bangkok, stocks rallied 2.8% on improved sentiment, but activity was thin ahead of a holiday Thursday.
The Kuala Lumpur, Taipei and Seoul bourses were closed for lunar new year observances.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
