Ask consumers if they want multimedia electronic gear, and many will say yes.
But then ask the tough question: How much will they pay for it?
That's the question that confronts the makers of multimedia equipment: computers that combine audio, video, graphics and text; and high-definition televisions, which will offer sharper resolution and a gateway to interactive services.
If history is any guide, household media appliances that merely entertain don't command big-ticket prices, no matter how dazzling the technology.
For instance, compact-disk players and videocassette recorders didn't start to sell fast until prices averaged below $400.
And one video-game player is wildly popular at $150, but another model that offers richer graphics flops at $650.
Personal computers for home use became a mass-market item at a higher price -- about $2,000 -- but they promised to do many new things.
Owners could, at least in theory, catch up on their office work, broaden their kids' educational horizons and balance their checkbooks.
Many consumers ended up using them just to play games and process words, but the perceived utility of the machines was, and is, immense.
Multimedia equipment seems to be following a similar pattern.
PCs equipped with CD-ROM drives, sound boards and speakers have already become well established.
As with regular PCs, the $2,000 price has proved a powerful lure.
When the multimedia machines were introduced at an average price of $4,500 in 1988, sales were anemic.
They barely picked up, to 87,000 units, when prices fell to $2,500 in 1992.
But last year, as prices fell to $2,000, multimedia PC sales erupted to 1.7 million units, according to Dataquest Inc., a San Jose, Calif., market-research firm.
The systems are being snapped up mostly by home, rather than business, users.
"In the consumer market, you have to hit certain price bands to be successful," says Bruce Ryon, Dataquest's multimedia analyst.
"Price has to come first, and features are next.
In the business market, it's the other way around."
Multimedia computers have invaded homes for the same reason they have stayed out of offices: entertainment value.
The soft side of the technology -- the elements of movement, sound and color -- doesn't translate into obvious productivity gains in the workplace.
Now that price isn't as much of a deterrent for consumers, shipments are expected to more than double by 1996, to 3.8 million units.
High-definition televisions, which won't reach the market until 1996, face a much higher hurdle.
Despite all the talk of 500 channels, movies-on-demand and electronic shopping, the question remains: Will consumers plunk down $3,500 to $5,000 for a television, at least initially, when they're used to paying only several hundred dollars?
"Companies are spending a lot of money on HDTV development that is very speculative," says Byron Reeves, a professor in the communications department at Stanford University.
"How long will consumer acceptance take and how much will prices come down is the No. 1 question in terms of who wins and who loses."
Robert Rast, vice president of HDTV business development at General Instrument Inc. in Chicago, adds, "The challenge of the business is, can we get down to $2,000 by the year 2000?"
Companies are counting on consumers being willing to shell out a lot more money for HDTV than current TV sets because they believe people will consider televisions even more important in the interactive era.
HDTV sets are being designed from the outset to be information as well as entertainment appliances, gateways that will be capable of downloading custom services, such as electronic messages, databases and movies-on-demand.
And they will permit two-way communications, such as selecting merchandise and even trying on clothes through a surrogate persona, or "agent."
"The TV set will be a communicator out into the world, an electronic marketplace," says Marc Porat, chairman and chief executive of General Magic Inc., a software consortium in Mountain View, Calif.
There's one problem: Television and computer companies are developing settop boxes that will allow conventional TVs to do most of those same things.
And history says consumers won't pay $2,000 for an appliance that doesn't offer added functionality.
But HDTV fans say that as consumers get hooked on all the new activities, and as they see the much-higher quality of HDTV, they will consider the new sets a necessity, even at $2,000.
"This is a TV picture on steroids," says John Taylor, a spokesman for Zenith Electronics Corp., Glenview, Ill.
"It's like looking through a highly polished window."
The screens will be larger than most and horizontal, as in movie theaters.
Add a sound system that virtually envelops the viewer, and today's color set soon begins to seem like yesterday's black-and-white.
Undoubtedly, the transition will strain the pocketbooks of most consumers.
Moreover, as with cellular phones and on-line data networks, high monthly service charges are apt to discourage use.
But service subsidies may emerge.
For example, merchants could help consumers defray the cost of plugging in to the marketplace through electronic coupons and frequent-buyer programs, Mr. Porat says.
"In aggregate, consumers are close to reaching a saturation for their time budget and financial budget," he says.
The electronic marketplace "is an expansion of that pie.
It gives consumers a method of funding their high-tech TV.
They won't be buying it for the better picture or the sound, but as a method of sending an agent into the world of electronic merchants."
Mr. King is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau.
