The Bangkok property market appears to be on the mend, confounding last year's gloomy predictions.
After a steep fall in 1992 and early 1993, office rents stabilized in the fourth quarter as companies moved to roomier quarters and construction slowed.
The housing market also looks healthier; sales of residential property -- particularly small, central apartments -- jumped in the quarter.
Just six months ago, the Bangkok real-estate market appeared headed for a sustained slump.
The rapid turnaround in sentiment partly reflects the stock market's surge late last year.
Soaring stocks bolstered confidence and gave investors windfalls to invest in real estate.
Lower interest rates and rising demand for citycenter apartments and offices from people frustrated by chronic traffic jams also bolstered the market.
"The property market moves into the new year in reasonably healthy shape," says Michael Poole, general manager of Chesterton Thai Property Consultants Ltd., a British real-estate sales and management concern.
He thinks rents in prime buildings will be steady to slightly higher this year.
Adisorn Thananannarapool , executive vice president of Land & Houses PCL, a property-development concern, says "Sales of residential property were stronger than we expected in the last quarter and stronger demand absorbed some of the oversupply in the market."
But not every sector improved.
A glut of luxury-hotel space persists, and worsening traffic jams hurt demand for some out-of-the-way locations.
Moreover, analysts warn that developers shouldn't count on prices rising much in the near future because new office and residential property continues to enter the market.
A year ago, the office occupancy rate in Bangkok was about 89%.
But, with a spate of new buildings nearing completion, property valuers at American Appraisal (Thailand) Ltd. predicted last year that occupancy would plunge to 58% by the end of 1993.
Some economists warned that the market would collapse, as it did in the mid-1980s.
But the warnings prompted developers to delay some projects and scrap others.
Now, American Appraisal says occupancy is about 88% -- or 30 percentage points higher than it expected a year ago.
Even so, the firm forecasts occupancy will fall to 65% by year end.
Some other analysts think that forecast is far too low.
Nigel Cornick, managing director of Colliers Jardine (Thailand) Ltd., says occupancy is likely to bottom out at around 83% in mid-1994.
Rodolfo L. Vergara, managing director of American Appraisal (Thailand), acknowledges he might have to revise his numbers if demand continues to grow.
"Things are definitely looking better than they did a year ago," he says.
One reason is that many companies are ditching cramped offices for spacious new ones.
Lower prices have enticed renters as well.
Even with the slowdown in construction, developers couldn't sustain the 1992 rents of as much as $24 a square meter for prime locations.
Now, most buildings in the central business district are renting space at about $18 a square meter, high enough for most of them to break even.
But such prices are wishful thinking in other areas, such as Asoke Avenue, which sports eight new office towers.
The avenue, just two kilometers from some of Bangkok's most expensive real estate, is so clogged by traffic that it may be impossible to find tenants for all the new space.
Landlords in some of the best new buildings on Asoke Avenue are asking $14 a square meter, but they are giving discounts and throwing in three months of free rent on two-year leases.
"Rents are leveling off, but more than ever before location is the most important thing," Mr. Vergara says.
In many cases, the declines in rent have brought prices back to more reasonable levels after a period in 1991 and 1992 when high occupancy rates pushed prices through the roof.
In early 1992, some of Bangkok's shoddier buildings commanded rents of $26 a square meter.
In 1988, when many of today's new buildings first were planned, rents averaged only about $4 a square meter.
In residential property, sales in Bangkok in the second half of 1993 were 30% above the previous six months and the year-earlier period, according to Somchai Phakaphavivat, adviser to the House of Representatives economic affairs committee.
He says most of the increase came in the fourth quarter as a 50% rise in the stock market fueled optimism.
