In another legal setback for federal anti-drug efforts, the Supreme Court made it harder for federal prosecutors to prove cases alleging a common type of money-laundering.
The high court ruled 5-4 that people can be convicted of evading a requirement that large cash transactions be reported to the government only if prosecutors demonstrate that the defendants knew they were committing a crime.
The majority rejected the Justice Department's contention that defendants may be found guilty even if they didn't realize that it is illegal to break up cash deposits to avoid triggering a currency-reporting rule.
Yesterday's decision involved defendants who were gamblers.
It is the latest in a series of Supreme Court cases that have placed restraints on federal efforts to attack drug trafficking and other crime by confiscating, or making it difficult to conceal, illicit profits.
Other recent decisions have imposed limits on government seizure of assets such as real estate.
The high court ruling was a victory for an Oregon couple, Waldemar and Loretta Ratzlaf, who got into trouble after they ran up a blackjack debt of $160,000 at a licensed casino in Reno, Nev.
The Ratzlafs proposed to pay in cash.
The casino said that like a bank, it was obligated to report cash transactions exceeding $10,000 to federal authorities.
The Ratzlafs then bought cashier's checks at various banks for less than $10,000 each and delivered them to the casino -- a maneuver designed not to trigger the reporting rule.
Prosecutors suggested that the couple's goal was to avoid an audit that would show they had evaded taxes on separate gambling income, but such charges weren't filed.
At trial, the judge instructed the jury that the Ratzlafs could be convicted of illegally "structuring" the cashier-check purchases, even if they didn't know that a 1986 federal law made such evasion a crime.
The Ratzlafs were found guilty, and the federal appeals court in San Francisco upheld the verdict.
The Justice Department defended the convictions, saying they could properly be based on the Ratzlafs' admission that they were aware of the reporting rule and tried to avoid triggering it.
But Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg stressed that while evasion of the rule may raise some suspicions, it isn't "inevitably nefarious."
Innocent people may want only to avoid an intrusive audit, she said.
Joining the majority were Justices John Paul Stevens, Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy and David Souter.
Joining the Blackmun dissent were Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justices Sandra Day O'Connor and Clarence Thomas.
(Ratzlaf vs. U.S.)
