The Clinton administration is set to propose tough new rules regulating indoor air quality, severely limiting smoking at work.
The proposal, scheduled to be announced this morning by Labor Secretary Robert Reich, would also eliminate smoking in restaurants and bars except in designated areas where food and drink aren't served, according to a copy of the proposal obtained by this newspaper.
The rule also would have broader implications, regulating such air contaminants as molds and pollens through air-conditioning systems.
The proposal, to be issued today by the Labor Department's Occupational Safety and Health Administration, would be another huge setback for the tobacco industry.
A number of state legislatures in recent years have adopted laws barring smoking in offices.
Congress is close to approving legislation that would ban smoking in all federal buildings.
And last year, an Environmental Protection Agency study determined that tobacco smoke is a carcinogen.
Once the proposal is issued, hearings will be held to allow public comment.
Then, the agency will publish a final standard in the Federal Register, after which the public will have 60 days to propose changes.
If OSHA doesn't change the standard within that 60-day period, employers would have a year to make the required changes in their workplaces.
The changes would be sweeping.
The tobacco-smoke standard would apply to all indoor or enclosed workplaces under OSHA jurisdiction -- roughly six million business sites.
One person familiar with the plan said the tobacco standard may be expanded to cover even those workplaces that aren't subject to the agency's rules, generally those with fewer than 10 workers.
The more general indoor air-quality standard would apply to what OSHA calls nonindustrial work environments -- offices, schools, commercial establishments, health-care facilities, cafeterias and break rooms located in manufacturing or production facilities.
OSHA estimates the broader rule would cover 4.5 million work sites.
Under the proposal, employers would be forced to set aside specific rooms for smoking and make sure that employees are "not required to enter designated smoking areas in the performance of normal work activities."
Employers would be forced to post signs clearly informing anyone entering the workplace that "smoking is restricted to designated areas."
Those designated smoking areas will have to be "exhausted directly to the outside" and be sufficient to contain smoke only in the area.
Because restaurants and bars are workplaces, they would be subject to the standard.
Like other work sites, they could set aside areas for smoking, but servers couldn't be forced to enter those workplaces.
As a result, people familiar with the proposal said, customers couldn't be served there.
The restaurant industry is expected to be a main opponent of the proposal.
OSHA has been working on a no-smoking rule for years, but hasn't been able to get the support of other administration officials.
Late yesterday, the proposal received the backing of the Office of Management and Budget, clearing the Labor Department to move forward.
More broadly, the proposal would require employers to designate a person in charge of indoor air quality and put in writing an air-quality compliance standard.
Employers would also have to establish a written record of employee complaints related to building-related illness.
Employees would have access to those records and could copy them.
Maintenance workers must be trained how to use protective equipment and how to keep adequate ventilation of air contaminants.
Employers also would be required to keep records for the previous three years.
-- Alert employees working in areas to be treated with potentially hazardous chemicals at least 24 hours before application.
