Denver again delayed the opening of the huge and controversial $3.2 billion Denver International Airport, raising, again, the cost of flying into and out of the Mile High City.
The cost of that delay -- to May 15 from March 9 -- is estimated at $100 million, which will be borne by the new airport's tenants.
The reason for the delay, the airport's third, is lingering problems with the $200 million baggage system, which has experienced power surges that engineers haven't been able to trace.
The postponement only reinforces the notion that DIA is out of step with the airline industry.
Indeed, the airport's very existence flies in the face of such industry trends as the shrinking of big hubs and cost-cutting by large carriers to compete with low-cost airlines.
With costs per passenger coming perilously close to $20, DIA will become the most expensive airport in the nation.
(The per-passenger cost at Denver Stapleton Airport is about $8.)
"At a time when airlines are taking lettuce leaves out of salads" to save money, "$20 is a big difference," says Michael Boyd, a Denver aviation consultant.
Already, the additional costs at the new airport have driven Continental Airlines to reduce planned flight operations at DIA by 23%, effective next week.
Continental has already decided not to move its maintenance operations to the new airport.
Further flight cuts are expected later this year, and many believe Continental will eventually stop maintaining a hub in Denver.
A Continental spokesman wouldn't comment.
Other airlines are economizing by cutting back flights in and out of Denver or contracting out maintenance work they once did in-house.
Low-cost carriers are likely to avoid Denver, or at least reassess how they operate there.
Mark Air, which has 22 flights a day in and out of Denver now, will raise fares in order to keep flying into DIA.
"We have to pass on the cost to the passengers," said a spokesman for the Anchorage, Alaska-based carrier.
It isn't clear yet whether Morris Air, which was bought by low-cost Southwest Airlines last year, will continue flying into DIA.
Southwest pulled out of Denver in 1985 because of weather and air traffic control problems.
Meanwhile, United, the only other airline with a hub in Denver, is increasing its flights into and out of Denver.
Its new operations at DIA will cost $100 million more a year than at Stapleton.
With less competition from other airlines, there will be little pressure on United, a unit of UAL Corp., to reduce fares.
In addition to complaints about higher air fares for Denver passengers, some people believe the DIA administration hasn't been forthright about the total costs of maintenance and operations of the new airport.
DIA officials, however, say the difference in costs between DIA and Stapleton is minor, and the benefits are great.
Delays will be reduced by the wide-spaced runways, saving the airlines $100 million a year, and the automated baggage system -- once it works -- will speed up checkin, the city maintains.
"We will have much more efficient and modern facilities," says Jim DeLong, DIA aviation director.
To be sure, Denver's airport needed upgrading.
In the fourth quarter of 1993, Stapleton had the most delays in the nation.
Its 1950s runways are too close together for today's aircraft to land simultaneously in low visibility.
The new airport itself, rising out of the plains with a huge, white-peaked roof that mirrors the Rocky Mountains in the distance, doesn't look like a public works project.
The inside was decorated with shiny terrazzo floors inlaid with four different colors of marble in the shape of mountain peaks.
A soaring, four-story atrium is made of glass and chrome and punctuated by colorful modern art by local and Western artists.
But in Denver, grumbling about the distance to the new airport -- it's 28 miles northeast of downtown -- and the extra cost of flying is as common as complaining about long lift lines at ski resorts.
Parking costs will go up, as will cab fare to the facility.
"Here you have an airport that has fewer gates than the one we had before, and it takes a half hour longer to get to than the old one," says Denver mining consultant Hans Von Michaelis.
"Maybe it will bring benefits, but it seems an awful lot to pay for a marginal improvement."
But by far the biggest concern is the cost.
When DIA opens, it faces an annual debt service of $280 million and operating costs of about $130 million, for a total annual cost of $410 million.
(Stapleton cost about $120 million a year and provided the city with about $30 million in annual profits.)
With 1995 passenger traffic to Denver expected to fall to 14.5 million, that will cost airlines about $25 a passenger.
Mr. DeLong, however, says the new airport will save the airlines up to $120 million because of fewer flight delays; he also expects to reap $40 million from a passenger facility charge of $3 a head that will be added onto ticket prices.
Thus, he reasons, DIA's per passenger fee will be only $15.
But operations and maintenance costs have been underestimated by the city, say Jim Buck and Paul Earle, retired Denver engineers who have turned studying DIA into nonpaying second careers.
DIA's runway and road surfaces are six times bigger than Stapleton's, but the city has acquired only 25% more snow-removal equipment to handle them, they point out.
Snow won't slide off the Teflon-coated tent roof, maintains Mr. Earle, who traveled around the country to examine snow removal problems of similar roofs.
Says Phil Burgess, executive director of the Center for the New West, a think tank funded by business, "Almost every projection they've made there has turned out to be wrong.
My real concern is there will have to be a public bailout of this thing."
Additional problems and costs at DIA could easily send passengers to other airports.
Suburban residents south of Denver wouldn't have to drive much farther to take flights from Colorado Springs, and Fort Collins may tempt northern suburbanites.
The higher fares and extra $20 to take a van to Vail may divert skier traffic to direct routes to the state's ski resorts.
(Already 1.3 million skiers bypass Denver and fly directly to Colorado ski resorts each season.)
The new airport was originally scheduled to open last Oct. 29.
Officials aren't speculating about whether this is the last delay, but Wall Street wags have their doubts.
DIA, they joke, stands for "done in August."
