Turkish Prime Minister Tansu Ciller's party appeared headed for an unexpected victory in local elections, ensuring the survival of her embattled coalition government.
But the results were overshadowed by the fact that the militant Islamic Refah Party apparently registered twice as many supporters as it did in 1989.
With 75% of the ballots in, Ms. Ciller's True Path Party led with 23% of the vote, despite widespread criticism of her economic policies and her failure to end the 10-year-old war against Kurdish rebels in southeastern Turkey.
Refah's strength signals widespread disillusionment with Turkey's mainstream political parties, which are perceived as being rife with corruption.
The party has proposed pulling Turkey out of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and forming an Islamic common market.
Turkey's extreme nationalist National Movement Party also doubled its support.
Together, Refah and the National Movement captured 25% of all votes cast.
Israeli, German and Jordanian firms could dig a "new" Jordan River under an Israeli plan to make a parallel channel to the biblical river to supply desalinated Mediterranean Sea water to both Israel and Jordan, the daily Yedioth Ahronoth newspaper reported.
The existing river is a winding stream that forms most of Jordan's border with Israel and the occupied West Bank territory.
The $3 billion project would take 10 years to complete using land on both sides of the present border.
Vietnam's state oil company says it is close to awarding a contract for two natural-gas pipelines and related processing facilities to a consortium of British, Japanese and Canadian companies.
Neither the government nor the consortium would estimate the value of the project, which includes an offshore gas-compression station and a liquefied petroleum gas production plant.
Meanwhile, the state oil company said it is seeking a bank loan of as much as $1 billion to finance oil and natural-gas development and the construction of its first oil refinery.
EU AND U.S. END DRINK DISPUTE
The European Union and the U.S. agreed to stop using each other's brand names for distilled spirits.
The EU agreed that bourbon and Tennessee whiskey are distinctive U.S. products and promised to allow only U.S. distillers to use either name in the 12-nation trade bloc.
The U.S. agreed to ban non-EU versions of Scotch whisky, Irish whisky, cognac, Armagnac, Calvados and brandy de Jerez.
Russia and Kazakhstan reached a number of economic, political and military agreements, including a 20-year lease of the Baikonur space launch site in Kazakhstan.
They also decided Moscow would control Kazakhstan's nuclear arsenal until it is dismantled.
The two former Soviet republics had been arguing about conditions for using Baikonur, the launch site for all Soviet manned space flights, since the Soviet Union broke up in 1991.
Russia agreed to pay $115 million annually for use of the cosmodrome, with an option to extend the lease for another 10 years.
Japan's population growth has slowed to an annual rate of 0.25%, the lowest since World War II.
That rate brought Japan's population to an estimated 124.8 million as of Oct. 1, the government said.
The previous postwar low was 0.33%, in 1992.
The decline in the birth rate has been attributed to cramped housing, high land prices, late marriage and the high cost of education.
Japanese age 65 and older now account for a record 13.5% of the population, up from 13.1% in 1992.
Children under 15 accounted for a record low 16.7%, down from 17.2% in 1992.
China has issued rules for the next step in its ambitious currency reform: creation of a computer-linked interbank currency market.
The regulations don't mention any role for foreign banks, which previously had been told they might be able to apply to trade on the new market.
Foreign companies are to continue to trade at the existing currency swap markets, which indicates they will function apart from the new interbank operation.
Chinese firms, on the other hand, will be barred from the swap markets, draining the firms of most of their liquidity.
The interbank currency market is to begin operations on Friday.
When first announced in December, the market was described as a way to unify trading on the country's more than 100 swap markets, so that a single exchange rate could be maintained.
Each swap market currently derives its own exchange rate based on supply and demand, and wide rate disparities sometimes develop.
Foreign business people fear that the new system will make it harder to get the hard currencies they need to import equipment or repatriate profits.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Nearly 10% of Laos's 4.4 million people face critical food shortages because of poor rice harvests, two United Nations agencies said, recommending that 43,000 tons of rice be supplied until the next harvest. . . .
A brokerage firm in China paid a $5,750 settlement to the widow of a stock investor who committed suicide because of his trading losses.
The widow sued the brokerage firm for allegedly letting her husband trade on margin.
