Long-distance telephone companies are scrambling to persuade Congress to add tough conditions to a bill that would open the way for the Bell telephone companies to enter lucrative niches of the long-distance market.
Long-distance carriers ranging from American Telephone & Telegraph Co. to some 400 or 500 small companies fear that two provisions in the legislation would cripple competition and kill dozens of the industry's smallest companies.
One would let the Bells offer intrastate long-distance service.
The other would authorize the regional phone companies to offer nationwide long-distance service to their local customers by buying and reselling services of AT&T and other long-distance carriers.
"The House legislation means I will essentially be out of business within a year because there is no way I can compete against the local Bell company," frets Dennis Miga, owner of Matrix Telecom Inc., Fort Worth, Texas.
Kathryn Haycock, president of Call-America, a Mesa, Ariz., carrier whose revenue totals just $4 million a year, adds: "We don't have the advertising budgets or marketing strength to withstand competitive pressure from a Bell company."
The big long-distance carriers -- AT&T, MCI Communications Corp., and Sprint Corp. -- also are concerned.
Al McGann, a former AT&T executive who now heads the long-distance coalition, says the legislation as written "could hurt the whole industry."
The bill, a compromise between House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman John Dingell (D., Mich.) and House Judiciary Committee Chairman Jack Brooks (D., Texas), is expected to clear both panels today.
Except for the two provisions, the long-distance carriers support the bill because it would keep the Bells out of the $60 billion long-distance business for many years.
It would authorize the seven regional Bell companies to apply for authority to offer long-distance service, but they would have to wait five years to do so.
And before granting their applications, the Justice Department and the Federal Communications Commission would have to find "no substantial possibility" that the Bells could use their local telephone monopoly power to impede competition in the long-distance market.
However, the bill would let state regulators decide when the Bells could sell intrastate long-distance service.
And Bells could begin reselling long-distance companies' services in their areas almost immediately.
Toll-Call Business The reselling provision comes with a catch.
Although the bill's language is imprecise, the Bells apparently couldn't resell long-distance services unless long-distance companies also can compete with them for toll-call business -- that is, service within certain geographic areas known as "local access transport areas."
One such area includes Los Angeles and Anaheim; calls between those cities are carried by Pacific Bell.
But calls between Los Angeles and San Francisco cross a boundary, and are carried by long-distance companies.
Calls within local access areas represent a $15 billion market -- roughly the same size as the long-distance industry's intrastate market.
Despite the long-distance companies' lobbying efforts, the two provisions are likely to remain in the House bill.
But the Senate version, introduced by Senate Commerce Committee Chairman Ernest F. Hollings (D., S.C.), would keep the Bells entirely out of the long-distance business unless they prove they can't abuse their market power.
If the provision is watered down, Mr. Hollings recently warned, "there won't be a bill."
Long-distance carriers contend that so long as the Baby Bells control connections between long-distance carriers and their customers, the competition won't be fair, especially for small carriers that resell service from AT&T, MCI and Sprint.
"The local phone company knows who my best customers are, how much they spend and where they call," Mr. Miga says.
"Could any monopoly resist cherry picking?"
Mr. Miga gives the local phone companies his sensitive business data so that they can send bills to Matrix's customers along with regular monthly phone bills.
The long-distance industry says the Bells shouldn't be allowed into either the resale or intrastate long-distance markets until a large number of Bell customers have a choice of providers of local telephone service.
Moreover, the long-distance coalition wants lawmakers to require the Bells to offer long-distance service only through separate units that must pay the same fees to complete calls that the Bells charge their competitors.
And the coalition says the Bells should be barred from using sensitive customer data in their marketing efforts.
The Bell companies argue the long-distance industry needs more competitors, and the two provisions would help accomplish that goal.
MCI and Sprint aren't big enough to check AT&T's market power, asserts Philip Quigley, president and chief executive officer of Pacific Bell, a unit of Pacific Telesis Group.
"The long-distance industry is characterized by umbrella pricing, with the major carriers moving their prices in lockstep," Mr. Quigley testified at a recent hearing.
The solution, he says, is to let "seven natural competitors of AT&T" enter the market.
The Bells also argue that they need the new line of business because of mounting competition in their own backyard.
They currently have well over 90% of the local telephone business in their regions, but by all counts, competition could become fierce over the next few years, especially if Congress passes a separate bill that would clear the way for telephone and cable-TV companies to compete head to head.
Mr. Quigley of Pacific Bell told lawmakers that some $2 billion a year will be up for grabs once California customers can select long-distance carriers to handle their toll calls.
Most customers, he believes, would choose their regular long-distance carriers, abandoning Pacific Bell.
That could have broad implications if the Bells can't enter the long-distance field, he says, because the high profit-margin toll business subsidizes the cost of local residential service.
As the bill advances, the industry's smallest players see an opportunity as well as a threat: buyouts by the Bells.
For example, LCI International Inc., which has extensive Midwest operations, might be attractive to Ameritech, the Chicago-based Baby Bell.
"We're not terribly happy about this," says Ashok Rao, chairman of the Telecommunications Resellers Association and of Mid-Com Communications Inc., Seattle.
"I'm not so sure it will be good for our customers -- small to medium-sized businesses that get billing services and personal attention from us that the big companies don't offer.
We just want the opportunity to continue dancing beneath the elephant's feet."
