An insurer for a World Trade Center tenant is intensifying efforts to avoid liability on the grounds that the buildings' operator allegedly ignored warnings that the complex was vulnerable to terrorist attack.
Phoenix Assurance Co. of New York is scheduled to go to state court here today to seek internal reports of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which operates the World Trade Center.
Phoenix contends in a pending lawsuit that the Port Authority negligently failed to heed warnings in several such reports -- going back to 1986 -- that lax security left it open to just the type of attack that was carried out on Feb. 26, 1993 -- with a bomb hidden in a vehicle in the complex's underground parking garage.
Overall, insurers face an estimated $510 million in property claims stemming from the February bombing.
But Phoenix, which is facing as much as $10 million in claims, has maintained in its lawsuit that it shouldn't have to pay because of the alleged negligence of the Port Authority.
And other insurers have said they are looking into taking a similar position.
The insurers' arguments, however, depend largely on reports that they haven't seen.
Although reports of the warnings and recommendations came to light in public hearings shortly after the bombing, the Port Authority has maintained that the security plans are confidential and shouldn't be turned over as part of the litigation.
New York state Judge Walter M. Schackman has scheduled a hearing for today on Phoenix's request for the security documents.
If the judge grants Phoenix's motion to compel access to the reports, he effectively would clear the way for other insurers to use the documents in similar suits that are expected against the Port Authority, said Blair Fensterstock, an attorney for Phoenix, a unit of Sun Alliance Group PLC of London.
"We understand that the reports analyzed the effectiveness of existing security systems at the World Trade Center and made specific recommendations," said Mr. Fensterstock, of the New York office of law firm Sutherland, Asbill & Brennan.
Phoenix had insured Teleport Communications Group Inc., a Trade Center tenant that maintains phone systems and equipment for the Port Authority, for as much as $10 million in property damage and losses due to business interruption.
The insurer is now seeking that amount in damages from the Port Authority.
Mr. Fensterstock said that the internal security reports -- which were discussed in testimony before a state legislative panel investigating security at the complex -- "made recommendations, some easy and inexpensive, that could have been done to increase security."
He said the reports flagged the center's underground parking garage as one of its biggest points of vulnerabily to terrorist attack.
"Knowing the risk in general and in specific of a potential terrorist attack, the Port Authority declined to spend money in ways that could have protected the World Trade Center," the lawyer said.
Several other insurers have filed such claims, known as subrogation claims, stemming from the World Trade Center bombing, said Allen Morrison, a spokesman for the Port Authority, a quasi-govermental agency.
Insurers that have notified the Port Authority that they might make such claims have until a year after the bombing to do so.
Mr. Morrison said, "We maintain that the documents must remain confidential, because to release them would publicly display the vulnerabilities of the facility, which are discussed in detail."
The Port Authority also has said that it wasn't negligent in its response to the recommendations.
Mr. Morrison said the Port Authority adopted most of the security suggestions but it rejected a recommendation that the public parking garage be closed.
He said the Port Authority believes that it made the correct decision at the time but has decided since the bombing that it won't reopen the garage to public parking.
In a ruling last month, Judge Schackman instructed Phoenix to narrow its request for the security documents but didn't address whether he would order them turned over to the Port Authority.
The insurer has since asked the Port Authority for four specific reports, plus analyses and memos in response to the reports, Mr. Fensterstock said.
Judge Schackman said in his decision last month that the Port Authority's concerns about confidentiality could be satisfied with less drastic measures than barring all access to the documents.
For instance, he said, Phoenix could be ordered to keep the documents confidential.
"One might ask whether it is appropriate . . . to offer a victim of a bombing a day in court to prove that a governmental landlord was lax in carrying out its duties, while denying the tenant access to the documents and the testimony needed to establish the laxity," Judge Schackman said in the opinion.
Separately, the trial against the four men accused of conspiracy in the Trade Center attack is in its 18th week in federal court in New York.
Prosecutors are expected to finish presenting evidence as early as next week, and the jury is likely to begin deliberating after the defense concludes its case sometime in February.
The New York law firm Shearman & Sterling, moving aggressively to open a Hong Kong office, has hired two partners and an associate from a competing firm.
The 553-attorney firm drew the new lawyers from the Hong Kong office of Los Angeles law firm Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher.
Mark Kessel, Shearman's managing partner, said the partners, Albert Theodore Powers and Clark T. Randt Jr., and six others designated for the Hong Kong office will concentrate on corporate finance, foreign investment and financing the country's infrastructure.
Ron Beard, Gibson Dunn's managing partner, said its office in the colony already has three new attorneys.
"We are not going to close our Hong Kong office," he said, and the firm may soon add one or two lawyers.
Other firms are hastening to Hong Kong as well: New York law firm Debevoise & Plimpton will open a small office there this spring, and another large New York firm is said to have similar plans.
"If you look at where the clients are and where they're putting their resources, it's Hong Kong," Mr. Kessel said.
"It's got the infrastructure, it's got the language and it's got the juridical structure that really lends itself to that kind of business."
Said Ned Stiles, managing partner of New York law firm Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen & Hamilton, "Hong Kong is becoming or has become everybody's base for that kind of work.
Tokyo is too far away and too expensive and, for lawyers, basically too unfriendly."
His firm has two partners and several other attorneys in Hong Kong.
Law firm partners say they're not worried about what will happen when China assumes sovereignty of Hong Kong in 1997.
"We're certainly expecting to continue on the same scale we have now," said Robert L. Berner Jr., a partner in the Chicago firm Baker & McKenzie, which has more than 100 attorneys there.
Junda Woo contributed to this article.
