Growing optimism about imminent approval of political reform sparked a rally in Japanese stocks Wednesday, pulling the country's giant institutional investors into the market.
The Nikkei 225-stock index Wednesday closed above the psychologically important barrier of 19000 for the first time since Nov. 2, rising 524.85 points, or 2.8%, to 19039.40.
In trading Thursday, the Nikkei index rose 14.51 points to close the morning sesison at 19053.91.
Wednesday's first-section volume was estimated at 400 million shares, up from 285.5 million shares a day earlier.
Gainers over whelmed decliners, 933-136.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues jumped 29.76 points, or 2%, to 1541.15.
Political paralysis had dragged stocks down in recent months, as politicians haggled over reforms while ignoring measures to end Japan's recession.
But hopes were rising that, one way or another, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa will complete political reform and concentrate soon on passage of measures to boost eco nomic growth in Japan.
Such measures, including a tax cut, have been widely anticipated for months.
The bills moved one step closer to passage Thursday, with approval by the reform committee of the upper house.
The Nikkei this year has risen 9.3% on the growing belief that Japan's prolonged economic slump can't get any worse, and that the government will leak specific pump-priming measures any day now.
But Japan's largest investors, the nation's giant banks and insurers, have been slow to join the bandwagon.
"I think what we saw Thursday is institutional investors coming in to buy, because they were getting nervous about falling behind" the rally, said Yasuo Ueki, head of stock trading at Nikko Securities Co.
Thursday's activity intensified as the Nikkei approached 19000, which traders termed a level many investors have been awaiting before buying.
Christian Howes, senior salesman at Smith New Court in Tokyo, said, "This shows that there is a lot of money waiting out there."
Already this year, the Nikkei has risen more sharply than it did during all of last year, when Japan's equity market was dogged by falling industrial output, weak consumption and generally deflating asset values.
Repeated government attempts to kick-start the economy through spending packages and interest-rate cuts failed to lift the economy out of its slump.
But analysts said last year's outlook was too pessimistic.
Many expect Mr. Hosokawa to announce specific economyboosting measures before he leaves for the U.S. for a Feb. 11 summit with President Clinton.
Some analysts said even limited measures may give stock prices a boost, given last year's pervasive glumness.
London equities soared to record highs, as British economic news raised hopes further that lower lending rates are coming soon.
The Stockholm, Madrid and Brussels bourses also logged record highs.
Frankfurt stocks rebounded almost 1%, for the market's first gain this week.
Hong Kong shares rallied 3.1%.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 114.21, up 0.77, reflecting higher markets in all regions.
Pipelines stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 143.15, up 3.65, or 2.6%, with TransCanada PipeLines of Canada posting a 4.4% gain in its local currency.
Semiconductor stocks trailed at 197.55, down 6.07, or 3%, with Intel of the U.S. sliding 7% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index soared 38.1 points, or 1.1%, to a record 3475.1.
The FT 30-stock index climbed 30.8 points, or 1.2%, to 2654.1.
And the FT-SE 250 index of smaller stocks jumped 135.5 points, or 3.4%, to 4148.8, a second consecutive record.
Volume was 1.32 billion shares, up from 964.9 million shares a day earlier.
The heavy turnover stemmed from international and British buyers flocking to the smaller-capitalization stocks.
Gilts, or British government bonds, rallied sharply and the interest-rate futures contract continued to factor in lower lending rates, while the pound slipped in foreignexchange dealings.
Stock prices took off when government figures showed inflation slightly below expectations and December retail sales much lower than anticipated, a scenario that supports a reduction in Britain's base lending rate.
Though a rate cut might not come immediately, analysts said, stocks' rally was justified because the economy is growing well and will increase corporate earnings.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index rose 20.54 points to 2134.38.
The rebound, which ignited only cautious enthusiasm, stemmed from an easing of selling pressure by foreign investors, particularly U.S. traders, for now, rather than a new direction for the market.
In Paris, stocks rose, helped partly by French industrial production statistics that supported the notion an economic recovery has begun.
In Stockholm, after the previous day's setback, stocks resumed their rally, bringing market indexes to new all-time highs on record volume, despite profit-taking in the forestry sector.
In Madrid, shares scored a second record high in a row, as expectations for a Spanish interest-rate reduction were boosted by a stronger bond market and currency.
In Brussels, stocks surged 1.3% to a record finish with broad gains.
In Hong Kong, stocks' sharp rise were fueled by bullishness about strong earnings in the telecommunications sector, which encouraged overseas buying, and in the banking industry.
Institutions bought blue chips across the board.
The market's strength provided the impetus for the Manila bourse to soar 5.2%, with strong gains by banks, utilities, property and energy companies.
In Sydney, shares staged a late rally to close at a new six-year high, spurred by strong corporate retail sales figures.
In Singapore, though the main index rose 1%, the broad market was weak and prices were mixed as many investors sat out, awaiting a further correction.
But in Kuala Lumpur, stocks plummeted 2.6% amid jitteriness in the wake of recent volatility.
In Seoul, the benchmark index shot up 1.6%, its second straight rise, on active buying by individuals, though declining issues outnumbered advancing issues.
In Wellington, stocks rose solidly to a new four-year high in moderate trading, amid bullishness about the market's short-term prospects.
But in Bangkok, prices slumped 1.1% in a continuing consolidation.
In Mexico City, stocks advanced 1.8% to a record, as the previous day's rally continued when bellwether interest rates fell to historic lows and the peasant insurgency was believed to be winding down.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
