Germany's big IG Metall engineering union and employers early Saturday agreed to a cost-neutral wage pact, averting a formal strike previously set to begin today in the state of Lower Saxony.
Negotiators for both sides made significant sacrifices to get a deal after 14 hours of talks that began Friday evening.
Lower Saxony's IG Metall workers must approve the accord with a 75% vote in a ballot set for this week.
If adopted, the pilot agreement could be a model for IG Metall's other western German regional chapters, representing 3.6 million workers in the engineering, automotive and electrical industries.
Employers fell short of their aim to get a 10% saving in labor costs by freezing wages and cutting vacation bonuses.
The union backed away from its demand for a 5.8% pay increase and higher Christmas bonuses.
In exchange, management was able to keep costs neutral while the union received certain job guarantees.
-- Workers will receive a delayed 1994 wage increase of 2% beginning June 1, representing a reduction in real income when set against projected 1994 inflation of around 3%.
-- For a provisional two-year period, employers can reduce working schedules to as low 30 hours a week from 36 hours without pay compensation for lost hours, provided the reductions are imposed plantwide.
The union will receive job guarantees in exchange for shorter working schedules.
-- Minimums set on vacation and Christmas bonuses are to be frozen at current levels, postponing for one year an agreement that foresaw 1994 Christmas bonuses increasing to 60% of a month's pay from 50%.
"For companies this agreement means no additional costs in 1994," said Hans-Joachim Gottschol, president of the Gesamtmetall employers association.
German industry has been pressing unions this year for cost concessions after a decade of rising labor costs eroded Germany's competitive edge in global markets.
The tentative IG Metall agreement inevitably will play a role in Germany's other wage negotiations, including stalled talks between the government and the OETV public-sector union.
