Sears, Roebuck & Co., which has put some zip into its stodgy stores, is now trying to put more zing into its message.
Following recent agreements to sponsor a yacht and a rock star, the nation's third-largest retailer also plans to freshen its marketing with a series of infomercials this year.
What's more, Sears is boosting its $1 billion marketing budget about 9% this year and refocusing on selling national brands.
Last week, Sears announced it had hired Thomas Sharbaugh, vice president, brand management, at Anheuser-Busch Cos., to help guide the new strategy.
Currently, Sears's merchandise mix is 40% national brands and 60% private label.
The company yesterday said it wants to increase the national-brand portion of its sales to 50%.
The new marketing emphasis isn't without costs.
Sears said its fourth-quarter profit was slimmer than expected in part because of higher ad spending.
According to industry estimates, it spent $60 million more in the fourth quarter on advertising than in the year-earlier period.
In addition to increasing ad spending, the retailer is shifting funds into the new marketing projects from more traditional media such as newspaper inserts.
"Sears is clearly more aggressive" in its marketing these days, says Gary Stibel, principal of New England Consulting Group, a Westbury, Conn., consulting firm.
Until recently, the retailer had employed broad -- some say bland -- pitches aimed at an amorphous middle America.
Examples: "Sears: You Can Count on Me" and "Sears: Where America Shops."
Both slogans have been shelved.
"The consumer market is changing" and that requires new strategies to reach customers, says John H. Costello, Sears's senior executive vice president for marketing.
"Sears is looking for ways to lead these changes."
King World Productions Inc., a television syndicator based in New York, will produce the infomercials, handle the orders they attract and monitor the results for Sears.
If the initial one or two are successful, Sears plans to air five to seven more infomercials this year.
The first, a 30-minute piece, pokes fun at the chain in a story line that follows two actors playing Sears managers charged with finding a product for the company to sell.
The men negotiate Sears's corporate labyrinth as they convince themselves, their boss and their boss's bosses of the benefits of a $350 Kenmore Whispertone II vacuum cleaner.
Tyee Productions, the Portland, Ore., studio that wrote and produced the advertisement, says the spot will begin airing on cable and broadcast stations in the next four to six weeks.
Sears, King World and Tyee Productions won't disclose which other products are slated to become the subject of infomercials.
But Sears indicated that one might feature exercise equipment, and Tyee Productions says it has just completed a two-minute infomercial promoting a pair of Sears wire pliers called "RoboGrip."
Judith Langer of Langer Associates Inc., a New York market-research firm, is skeptical that the initial infomercial will work, in part because it uses two men to pitch a product that is going to be bought by women.
Furthermore, Ms. Langer says, "I can't imagine anyone spending half an hour watching an infomercial about a vacuum cleaner."
But she says infomercials promoting complicated products might work, as might those that promote cosmetics or other goods that rely on testimonials.
If Sears stumbles with the format, it wouldn't be the first.
Retailer Dayton Hudson Corp. dropped infomercials after two tests at selling bedding failed to produce significant results.
Sears is carefully calling its first one a test, although Mr. Costello, the marketing executive, says it's "a very well-thought-out test."
Sears "has recognized that the way major brands communicate is changing and that you can't continue to do things the same way," says Clive Chajet, chairman of Lippincott & Margulies, a New York-based corporate-image consulting firm.
"I don't know whether any of these things will work, but the important thing is that they're trying."
Sears's first major move in this direction has produced positive results.
Its $40 million print and broadcast "Softer Side of Sears" campaign last fall improved the company's image among women, says Ms. Langer of Langer Associates.
Sears also says apparel sales are up as a result of the campaign, the first done by its new agency for apparel, Young & Rubicam.
The retailer is trying other approaches, too.
Early last month, Sears agreed to exclusively sponsor soft rocker Phil Collins's 30-city North American concert tour set to start in May.
The retailer won't say how much this will cost.
Also last month, Sears disclosed a three-year, $3 million agreement to partially sponsor yachtsman Dennis Conner's Stars & Stripes boat in the prestigious America's Cup races.
Sears also negotiated deals with Mr. Conner and Stride Rite Corp. that call for Sears this spring to begin selling Stride Rite-produced men's casual shoes and sportswear under the "Stars & Stripes" label, which is owned by Mr. Conner.
The retailer's only other foray into event sponsorship has been its long relationship with auto racing.
"But we have never been involved with events of this size," Mr. Costello says of Sears's latest deals.
"We're really accelerating our marketing efforts."
