Metallgesellschaft AG set a "provisional" extraordinary shareholder's meeting for Feb. 24 to seek approval of a proposed share offering.
Implied in setting the date is the belief that the financially strapped German metals and trading company won't file for bankruptcy protection next week.
A crucial decision on a 3.4 billion mark ($1.96 billion) financial rescue plan had been expected from banks yesterday, but was pushed back to tomorrow because of delayed responses and last-minute opposition from a group of French banks.
Metallgesellschaft, which said it received a positive response from banks at the proposal's first hearing last week, has said it will file for bankruptcy if the plan is rejected.
Under the proposal, shareholders will be asked to approve the issuance of 5.6 million new shares at 250 marks each to raise 1.4 billion marks.
The plan also calls for bank creditors to arrange a 700 million-mark credit line, and to convert 1.3 billion marks in Metallgesellschaft bank debt into convertible profit-sharing certificates.
The company said yesterday it remained confident that banks and shareholders would approve the package.
Major shareholders, which account for 62% of Metallgesellschaft's equity, include Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Daimler-Benz AG, insurer Allianz AG and the government of Kuwait.
Each has signaled acceptance of the new share issue, as long as the banks did their part.
But that was far from certain yesterday.
The credit restructuring plan, which the company said Wednesday must be unconditionally accepted as a package by all of its 120 bank creditors for legal reasons, was threatened with unraveling as several banks withheld approval.
Banking sources said six French banks, including Societe Generale Cie., stated they would reject the plan unless changes were made, claiming that shareholders should bear more of the burden.
French bankers also cited inadequate information on the status of Metallgesellschaft's losses.
Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank were still fighting yesterday to keep the deal from unraveling.
The two big Frankfurt banks rushed a delegation onto a plane to Paris to try to persuade French banks to stay aboard.
Deutsche Bank, which heads the steering committee of Metallgesellschaft bank creditors, also extended the deadline for responses from U.S. banks until late yesterday.
Norddeutsche Landesbank, the most strident opponent of the plan among German banks this week, apparently was brought back into the fold after achieving undisclosed modifications in talks with Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank officials.
"We were able get agreement," said a Deutsche Bank spokesman, who also confirmed the hurried talks with French banks.
"We still have work to do to get everybody into the boat," he said.
As recently as November, few outside the company had a notion anything was wrong.
Last month, its board sacked senior management for allegedly withholding information on the company's financial condition.
It went on to discover that the company's existing and potential losses for the past fiscal year totaled 1.8 billion marks, plus another 1.5 billion marks in potential oil trading losses.
Metallgesellschaft shares, which were suspended from trading yesterday in anticipation of a decision from the banks, had been supported by speculation of an approved financial plan.
It closed Wednesday at 226 marks a share, up from less than 200 marks late last week.
