The House Ways and Means health subcommittee voted to reduce what Democratic-backed health legislation would require many small businesses to pay to insure workers who currently are covered through spouse or family policies.
The action came as the panel approved a premium schedule that will help dictate how insurance costs are allocated under the plan.
The schedule would apply directly to a proposed Medicare-like program for small-business employees and lower-wage workers who can't get private coverage.
But it also would determine how companies compensate one another in cases such as that of a two-worker family that chooses to enroll in one employer's private health plan and not the other's.
As initially drafted, the bill anticipated that employers would have to pay 80% of annual premiums totaling $2,500 per worker, regardless of the worker's family situation.
The revised schedule would set a premium level of $2,000 for single workers without children.
That lower premium also would become the standard for what companies would have to pay if their workers are enrolled in insurance plans paid through spouses' employers.
The issue of spouses' coverage can be immensely sensitive both for small companies, which resent requirements the proposed bill would impose on them, and for big businesses, which believe they currently bear more than their share of the nation's health-insurance burden.
Though the data are imprecise, government figures indicate that about 20% of those working for companies with 100 or fewer employees currently are insured through family plans financed by relatives' employers.
In about two-thirds of the cases, the relatives work for companies that have more than 100 employees.
Rep. Fortney "Pete" Stark (D., Calif.), the subcommittee chairman, opposed the change and warned it would adversely affect some small employers.
But the net impact was seen as favorable to many small companies, and a bipartisan coalition led by Rep. Gerald Kleczka (D., Wis.) pushed it through the panel on a voice vote.
Mr. Stark had proposed the single $2,500 premium for the sake of simplicity and because it advanced his belief that the costs of health care for children -- as with public education -- should be absorbed more generally.
But Mr. Kleczka and many Republicans argued that the single premium would impose too high a burden on single individuals or couples without dependent children, and their arguments dovetailed with a broader desire by Democrats to find some means to reduce the burden of health reform on small business.
In the case of the new Medicare-like program, all companies with enrolled workers would pay the government 80% of the following premiums: $2,000 for single individuals, $4,000 for couples without children, $4,150 for single parents, and $6,075 for families with children.
Workers would be responsible for the balance.
Under the revised premium schedule, lower-wage families with children would have to pay more than the original bill would require.
Yesterday's debate illustrates a deeper division in both parties over how to allocate costs and insurance risks.
Both the Clinton administration's health plan and the alternative bill would move toward a "community-rating system" that would spread the cost of insurance more broadly.
But the result would be to increase costs substantially for younger workers, who represent less of a risk for insurance companies today.
To maintain a sufficiently large pool to spread risks broadly, limits must be set on the ability of companies to opt out of the system by insuring their employees themselves.
But there's disagreement over where to draw the line.
The administration would permit only the very largest companies -- those with more than 5,000 workers -- to opt out.
The Democratic-backed alternative would allow those with more than 1,000 workers.
Moderate Democrats yesterday appeared willing to come down still further, but by a 7-4 margin, the panel rejected a GOP effort to set the level at 100 workers.
The same partisan split recurred in a fight over the community-rating system; by a 7-4 vote the panel killed a Republican proposal to allow different rates according to three age groups.
Also yesterday, the subcommittee agreed to reconsider next week a proposal, which it had tabled earlier, to raise cigarette taxes to $2 a pack.
That increase, which would finance subsidies for small employers, would be twice what the president has sought and eight times the current levy of about 24 cents a pack.
It has set off intense lobbying by the tobacco industry.
While a majority on the panel appears willing to go beyond the president's proposal, Rep. Nancy Johnson (R., Conn.) said yesterday that the $2 a pack tax -- which she had supported earlier this week -- was too high for her.
In other action, the subcommittee gave bipartisan support to a little-noticed but far-reaching amendment by Rep. John Lewis (D., Ga.) seeking to end discrimination in how health plans contract with physicians to provide care.
The provision would require plans to offer contracts to so-called essential community providers -- including clinics and physicians who provide at least 20 hours of care a week in rural or inner-city areas where health services are limited.
