With the Baby Bells pushing for looser regulation by claiming that competition in the local telephone market is intensifying, a new report suggests that just the opposite is true.
A decade after the breakup of the old Bell system, the seven regional telephone companies still handle more than 95% of telephone calls in the U.S., and their local monopolies will likely avoid a serious challenge for at least another decade, the study asserts.
The report was sponsored by American Telephone & Telegraph Co., MCI Communications Corp., and a long-distance industry trade group.
It is slated for release this week.
It will serve as ammunition in their battle to blunt the Bells' effort to gain entry into the $60 billion long-distance business.
The Baby Bells, which were granted monopoly power over their respective service regions when they were spun off in the breakup of AT&T a decade ago, were banned from long-distance and equipment manufacturing.
Now they contend they deserve entry because conditions have changed.
"Competition is a reality," Phil Quigley, president of Pacific Bell, proclaimed in a press release last week.
But the report shows that, despite trying for the past decade, new rivals have made scant inroads into the Baby Bells' turf.
Indeed, the combined revenues of Bell rivals in the lucrative market for access to dedicated lines amount to less than 1% of the Baby Bells' take, the report states.
The seven Bells generate about $26 billion a year in so-called "access fees" for connecting customers to long-distance calls, giving them a 99.2% share of the market.
Competitors take in about $209 million annually for a 0.8% stake.
Even if cable systems -- the Bell companies' much-cited new threat -- were to begin selling local telephone services, "fully 99% of all calls" would have to go over the Baby Bell network, the report states.
The only calls that could bypass Bell lines would be those made by one cable subscriber to another on the same system.
The 300-page study was put together by Economics and Technology Inc., a research group in Boston, and Hatfield Associates Inc., a consulting firm in Denver.
