Hours before President Clinton arrived at the House of Representatives, Congress's half-dozen or so longtime State of the Union groupies were there, a group of senior citizens staking out the best seats and sustaining themselves on cookies and junk food.
"We keep 'em in our pockets so we don't mess up the place," says courtly Democratic Rep. Sonny Montgomery of Mississippi.
It's another one of the many rites of Congress.
For years -- 27, in Rep. Montgomery's case -- some of the same House friends have arrived early to claim the aisle seats that put them in glad-handing range of the president, his cabinet, the Supreme Court and the diplomatic corps.
They start showing up at about 6 p.m., three hours before the speech begins.
They would be there earlier, but in these security-conscious days, "they won't let us in 'til after the bomb-sniffing dogs leave," says Rep. Montgomery.
It's not the majesty of the moment that draws them.
It isn't even the certainty of getting on national TV; these are some of Congress's few publicity-avoiders.
And, lest Mr. Clinton think otherwise, it's not his personal celebrity.
"I don't show up for the Democratic president," says Republican Rep. Bob Stump of Arizona.
"I show up for the other guys."
As far as Rep. Montgomery recalls, 84-year-old Rep. Bill Natcher of Kentucky started the tradition sometime after his 1953 election.
Rep. Montgomery, 73, has been arriving early since he was a freshman in 1967.
He's now a committee chairman, but rank has no privileges when it comes to saving a seat for this occasion.
A few freshmen tried to cut corners last night, putting place cards to reserve prime seats.
But Rep. Montgomery won't do that; he's afraid he'd find his seat gone when he came back to claim it.
Rep. Montgomery acknowledges that exchanges with presidents don't get much beyond, "Hello.
Glad to see you."
But leave it to the voluble George Bush, who'd been elected to the House the same year as Mr. Montgomery, to say something more profound.
"There you are, Sonny," Mr. Bush said, "in the same old seat."
