Trans World Airlines named Jeffrey H. Erickson, currently chief executive officer of upstart Reno Air, as its president and chief operating officer, adding management depth to TWA, which lost its two top officers in January.
Three months ago, TWA was stung by the resignations of William R. Howard, its chairman and CEO, and Glenn Zander, its co-vice chairman who had been with the airline for more than 20 years.
After only six months on the job, Mr. Howard had had clashes with Mr. Zander and other senior officers over strategic plans, pricing moves and other issues, according to TWA managers.
Mr. Howard has refused to discuss the matter.
Amid those disputes, the two officers quit, leaving directors of the nation's seventh-largest airline scrambling to find successors.
Immediately, they picked Donald R. Craib Jr., a TWA director and former chairman of Allstate Insurance Co., to be TWA's new chairman and CEO.
Mr. Craib, 68 years old, hadn't run an airline before.
Since the management shake-up, industry executives have expected TWA, which emerged from bankruptcy-law protection last November, to seek a No. 2 officer with airline operating experience.
Mr. Erickson, 49, has spent a quarter century in the airline industry, starting as a senior engineer with Pan American World Airways.
He also held management positions at Aloha Airlines, Midway Airlines and Continental Airlines.
At TWA, he will work with Robin H.H. Wilson, who remains vice chairman and head of airline operations.
As CEO and president of Reno Air, Mr. Erickson cherry-picked underused or overpriced western routes and expanded into them.
The airline -- and its stock price -- took off rapidly in its first year.
Since its maiden flight in July 1992, the Reno, Nev., carrier has grown to a fleet of 17 jets and flies to 11 Western cities.
Mr. Erickson put the tiny carrier on the map this time last year in a David-and-Goliath battle against Northwest Airlines.
Reno charged that Northwest took illegal, anticompetitive actions to thwart its entry into the Minneapolis-Reno market.
In a high-profile, regulatory slap that signaled a protectionist stance toward smaller airlines, the Clinton adminstration last March forced Northwest to abandon plans to enter three of Reno's markets and undercut its discount fares.
But amid intense price competition in the Midwest, Reno had to abort its expansion there after a few difficult months.
That contributed to a drop in Reno's stock price from a 52-week high of $21.75 last year to a 52-week low yesterday of $5.875, down 25 cents, in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
"We won the battle, but not the war," Mr. Erickson said in an interview.
Reno said it named its chairman, Lee Hydeman, to the added post of CEO, and chose Bob Reding, formerly vice president of operations, as president and chief operating officer.
Analysts gave Mr. Erickson's run at Reno mixed reviews.
"The good news is he moves quickly to fix mistakes," said Samuel Buttrick, an airline analyst with Kidder, Peabody & Co., noting that intense competition by United Airlines and Southwest Airlines is squeezing smaller carriers to the sidelines in the western U.S.
"The bad news is the mistakes are made in the first place."
When he assumes his TWA jobs in mid-April, Mr. Erickson faces an airline much in need of repair.
Its fleet is one of the oldest among the majors.
Earlier this month, TWA had to abandon its Atlanta hub to defend its core Midwestern markets from low-fare rivals such as Southwest.
And it has had to scale back its European service amid competition from bigger and financially stronger airlines.
TWA is expected to report fourth-quarter and year-end losses this week.
Still, Mr. Erickson said he is optimistic about TWA.
"I think their cost structure is pretty well placed, and can be enhanced a little bit," he said.
"Strategically, each route has to be looked at on a case-by-case basis, but they have a valuable franchise," he said.
