Much of the nation was locked in a cold wave yesterday, but the junk bond market was hot.
Investors snapped up bonds offered by Family Restaurants Inc. and MFS Communications Corp.
One sign of investor willingness to take greater risks in the junk bond market was the way they scrambled to buy zero coupon bonds, which accounted for part of both offerings.
Zero coupon bonds pay no interest and are sold at a steep discount to face value.
They are sensitive to interest rate moves and are considered a riskier bet than coupon-paying corporate bonds.
MFS raised $500 million by selling 10-year zero coupon senior notes.
Family Restaurants raised $450 million by selling $300 million of eight-year senior notes and the remainder in 10-year zero coupon senior notes.
Meanwhile, the price of the 30-year Treasury bond dropped 3/8 point, or $3.75 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 99 10/32 to yield 6.29%, compared with 6.26% Tuesday.
Other Treasury maturities were slightly lower to unchanged.
Both of the junk deals were extremely well-received and only began to tap the large investor demand waiting to pounce on new issues, syndicate officials and traders said.
One sign of strong demand was sharp price increases shortly after the Family Restaurant bonds were priced.
According to Kingman Penniman, head of high-yield research at Duff & Phelps Investment Research Corp. of Chicago, the price of Family's eight-year senior notes jumped two points to 102, a gain of $20 for a bond with $1,000 face value.
The price of the Family's zero coupon notes rose about 1 1/4 points, he said.
The eight-year notes had been sold at par to yield 9.75%.
By the end of the day the notes were yielding 9.52% since yields drop as prices rise.
The notes are noncallable for five years and are rated single-B1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and single-B by Standard & Poor's Corp.
The company also raised $150 million by selling 10-year senior subordinated discount notes, priced at 72.697 to yield 10.875%.
The yield had dropped to 10.608% by day's end.
The notes, which pay no coupon for four years and aren't callable for five years, are rated single-B3 by Moody's and single-B-minus by S&P.
The debt was sold by underwriters led by Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp.
Family Restaurants is the former Restaurant Enterprises Group Inc., which is in bankruptcy-court proceedings.
The debt offering is part of the company's reorganization plan which is expected to be completed by the end of the month.
As part of the reorganization, Apollo Advisors L.P. and its affiliates will purchase a 40.6% stake for $65 million and Green Equity Investors L.P. and its affiliates will purchase a 18.8% stake for $30 million.
Foodmaker will receive a 40.6% stake and cash in return for the sale of its Chi-Chi's Inc.
Part of the proceeds from this offering will go towards paying Foodmaker for the sale.
Apparently the success of the sale of the Family Restaurant bonds spilled over into the offering by MFS Communications, a digital fiber optic communications company, according to Mr. Penniman.
MFS was able to increase the size of its offering to $500 million and reduce the yield on its zero coupon notes thanks to the strong demand.
MFS sold the senior discount notes at 63.426 to yield 9.375%.
The notes won't pay a coupon for five years and are noncallable for five years.
They are rated single-B3 by Moody's and single-B by S&P.
The issue was sold through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.
It was the company's first foray into the junk bond market.
MFS Communications is the nation's largest provider of local competitive access telecommunications through digital fiber optic networks.
The Omaha, Neb.-based company has focused its service in the larger business-to-business sector, and plans to expand to 60 markets in the next five years through a $1 billion expansion, a company spokesman said.
According to the prospectus, proceeds may be used to fund the expansion.
"MFS Communications is a great company.
They have found a niche in the fiber optics business," said Marion Boucher, a managing director and senior telecommunications analyst who joined Bear Stearns & Co. today after leaving DLJ.
"They are in the right spot at the right time," she added.
Unlike traditional telephone companies which use copper wires for transmission, MFS provides state-of-the-art fiber optic links in major metropolitan areas, said Ms. Boucher.
Copper wires aren't always totally reliable, while fiber optics are virtually fault free, she said.
While yesterday marked MFS Communications' first debt issuance, Ms. Boucher said she has been recommending the company's stock for the past year.
"It's been quite awhile since we've seen a number of issuers like this" selling zero coupon bonds, said Mr. Penniman of Duff & Phelps.
"We're beginning to wonder if people are making interest rate calls in addition to credit calls," he added.
That's because if interest rates drop, investors in zero coupon bonds stand to earn more than investors in plain vanilla corporate bonds.
Mr. Penniman said he thought the final yield on the MFS deal was a bit too low for his tastes.
"We would have liked to see it coming 1/4 to 1/2 point higher," he said.
There are a number of other zero coupon junk bond offerings in the works, according to MCM CorporateWatch, including a $200 million offering of five-year zero coupon notes from ACF Industries Holdings Corp.
According to Evan Steen, manager of the PaineWebber High Income Fund, part of the reason for such strong demand may also be great confidence of investors in so-called "growth stories" or companies expected to flourish in the next few years.
In the investment-grade market, $804 million of debt was priced from issuers including AON Corp., First Chicago Corp. and Private Export Funding Corp.
News that economic growth is not only expanding but accelerating did little to affect a thinly traded Treasury market because the news was anticipated.
Nonetheless, the Federal Reserve's report on regional economic conditions gave traders a sense that the economy continues to strengthen.
The data covers a period of mid-December to Jan. 10.
Prices of many Treasury securities maturing in five years or less were little changed while those with longer maturities posted losses.
While the 30-year Treasury bond dropped 3/8 point, the 10-year note dropped just 1/8 point to 100 6/32 to yield 5.71%, compared with 5.69% on Tuesday.
A bigger story was the bitterly cold weather gripping much of the nation.
Some traders attributed the lackluster state of the market as much to frigid temperatures as the lack of compelling economic data.
The market's attention turned to what effect the cold weather might have on the economy.
Ford Motor Co., for instance, closed two plants in Louisville, Ky., and reduced production at 11 other plants as a result of severe weather conditions in much of the U.S. and Canada.
Analysts believe the cold weather will affect consumer spending and the housing sector as well as manufacturing far more than the Los Angeles earthquake.
The Treasury announced plans to sell $17 billion in two-year notes Tuesday and $12 billion in five-year notes Wednesday, on target with expectations.
The five-year note offering was increased from $16 billion last month to finance the previously announced call of a bond.
In when-issued trading, the five-year note yielded 5.10% and the two-year note yielded 4.15%.
Issuers priced more than $1 billion of municipal debt, with major offering from Washington Suburban Sanitary District and North Carolina.
A Morgan Stanley & Co. group won the Washington Suburban Sanitary District's $435.3 million various 1994 refunding bonds.
The issue was priced to yield from 2.40% in 1994 to 5.20% in 2013-15.
The session's second-largest issue, North Carolina's $400 million capital-improvement bonds, was won by a CS First Boston group.
Yields range from 2.30% in 1995 to 5.00% in 2012 and 2013.
In Los Angeles, muni dealings remained slow following the severe earthquake Monday, traders said.
California Gov. Pete Wilson said damage may range between $15 billion and $30 billion.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency said it may spend $500 million on repairs and relief, backing off from an earlier estimate of $1 billion.
Prices of mortgage securities showed little, if any, movement.
The 6 1/2% securities for February delivery finished unchanged.
Government National Mortgage Association ended at 99 23/32, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Golds were at 99 28/32 and Federal National Mortgage Association was at 99 23/32.
Jacqueline Doherty contributed to this article.
