Here's how some Los Angelenos coped with the trauma of the worst earthquake to hit the city this century: They rented the movie "Earthquake."
"It's kind of sick in a way," says Stephen Marcus, a clerk at the Video West store in West Hollywood, which rented all three of its copies of "Earthquake" Monday night and could have rented dozens more.
In the 1974 film, the City of Angels is hellishly leveled by "The Big One."
But leave it to an expert to have a gentler view than Mr. Marcus.
"It's counter-phobic behavior, to make manageable feelings that are pretty unmanageable," says Los Angeles psychologist Melinda Peters, who has found comfort from her own post-quake anxieties by listening to her patients' problems.
"If you look at something bad or worse than what you're going through, it makes your situation seem less scary."
Call it laughing in the face of tragedy, but in a city that has lurched from one calamity to another over the past 20 months, residents have developed unusual coping mechanisms to get through this latest disaster.
Carol and Joseph Ozer managed to crack a few jokes even as they showed a reporter their Sherman Oaks apartment, which now has gaping cracks in the walls and glass and debris strewn throughout.
"Do you like what we've done to the place?
We call it California Earthquake Modern," says Mr. Ozer, a part-time movie extra.
By daybreak Monday, earlier scenes of terror and devastation had already mutated into tourist attractions for squads of Angelenos who had endured countless aftershocks of the 6.6 quake.
Just off La Cienega Boulevard, where the Santa Monica Freeway pancaked into a storage warehouse below, gawkers and even a cadre of on-duty policemen clamored to get their pictures snapped in front of the wreckage.
Michael Thomas, an engineer, and his friends left with pocketfuls of pavement chunks that still bore yellow freeway striping.
"Souvenirs for my friends and family," he explains.
"Just like the Berlin Wall."
As residents groped to make sense of the random destruction around them, fate's tiniest acts of mercy were taking on almost miraculous significance.
Euni Brown narrowly escaped with her life from the building adjacent to the devastated Northridge Meadows apartment complex, where at least 16 people died.
She was amazed to find that, although her apartment was demolished, her prized patio plants were left untouched.
"I couldn't believe it," she says.
"Three of my plants were still sitting perfectly balanced there on the balcony railing."
Coleene Kiley, mopping up in her Sylmar home, marvels that the only memento that didn't come tumbling off the walls was a cherished Italian ceramic dish depicting the Holy Family.
"And that was the only thing that was left on the walls in the 1971 quake, too," says Mrs. Kiley, a devout Catholic.
Parishioners at the Metropolitan Community Church in Culver City -- located in a 65-year-old Turkish-styled building that was once a popular watering hole for MGM moguls -- were amazed to find the only damage was to a garish brick minaret in the building's front.
"We're remodeling anyway, and I guess God just didn't think the old tower looked right," says Judy Hosner, a church member and engineer.
"Community" and "spirit" aren't words often used in the same sentence here, but the earthquake has had the undeniable effect of bringing together this sprawling city of strangers.
"I went outside with a flashlight after the quake, and it was a block party with all these people I'd never met before," says Vicki Greenleaf, who awoke to the sound of "everything I own and worked so hard for crashing to the ground."
Neighbors huddled around car radios for news reports and swapped survival stories.
Without potable water to make a much-needed cup of coffee, Ms. Greenleaf broke out the vodka for the group.
"When my mom called from Pennsylvania to see if I was OK, I said, `Mom, does it mean I'm a lush because I'm having vodka at nine in the morning?'
And my mom, who doesn't drink at all, said, `I was just telling your father I hoped you were having a drink.'"
Long after the initial tremors had subsided, strangers were reaching out to one another for support.
People in the hard-hit San Fernando Valley -- without electricity and worried that their tract homes might not withstand the aftershocks -- pitched tents on their front lawns and invited one another to impromptu barbecues.
On the menu: All the meat in their freezers destined to spoil because of power outages.
In West Hollywood, actress Estelle Harris of TV's "Seinfeld" -- who had arrived from New York to visit her son Glen just in time for the quake -- organized an impromptu potluck dinner for the neighbors at her son's apartment complex.
Just like the yenta-like matriarch she plays on the sitcom, Mrs. Harris spent the evening fussing over this ragtag brood of shaken souls, making sure they ate plenty of her barley soup and rump roast.
"I'm a mother, and when something like this happens, I worry that there won't be any more food," Mrs. Harris says.
She made sure the group left with her soup recipe and even interrupted the nonstop earthquake coverage on TV to pop in a videotape of herself making the soup on "Live With Regis & Kathie Lee."
This being Lotusland, psychics as well as psychologists have been on the front lines helping to get Angelenos back to emotional equilibrium.
Annie Guy, who reads palms and tarot cards from her shop up the street from the collapsed Santa Monica Freeway, says she has seen plenty of new customers in the past two days.
"They want to know if there will be a much larger earthquake than we've already had, and if we will recover," says Ms. Guy -- adding that her psychic powers tell her "there isn't going to be anything major" in the way of aftershocks.
"My advice . . . is to have faith and think positive.
A lot of prayer and meditation will help."
Maybe, but Mr. and Mrs. Ozer aren't taking any chances, and have decided to move out of their Sherman Oaks apartment for somewhere else in the area.
The omens have been just too great: "The night after we moved in in 1992, the Landers quake hit," Mrs. Ozer says.
"It's time to leave."
