Poland's Securities Commission revoked the brokerage license of Bank Slaski SA, and asked prosecutors to investigate possible stock-price manipulation during the bank's initial Warsaw Stock Exchange listing.
The commission reported last week that it had found that only bank employees and management were able to trade shares during the stock's first day of listing on Jan. 25.
"We have found that on the first listing, the bank's management and employees were selling because only they had their share certificates confirmed," said Leslaw Paga, commission chairman, according to Reuter news service.
"The commission decided to report to the prosecutors a possible price manipulation, because the bank's management was aware of the situation and didn't ask the bourse to postpone the issue's first listing," Mr. Paga was quoted as saying.
Bank Slaski's brokerage office, which is Poland's largest, acted as issuing agent for the public offering.
The regulators' move marks another dramatic episode in the politically charged saga of Bank Slaski's privatization.
Bank Slaski's share price rose to 6.7 million zlotys ($306), or roughly 13 times, on the Jan. 25 listing, from the 500,000-zloty initial offering price of December.
The unprecedented runup drew strong criticism of the finance ministry's share-pricing methods by members of Parliament, the media and the general public.
They all argued that the state's treasury had lost out on millions of dollars in potential revenue.
Roughly 800,000 investors bought Slaski stock in December, creating such demand that each was allowed to buy only three shares at most.
Last Thursday's actions by the Securities Commission indicates that the stratospheric stock price was artificially induced by trading irregularities and a shortage of tradable shares.
Only 0.3% of Bank Slaski's shares crossed the Warsaw exchange on Jan. 25, in part because few shares had been properly certified to be traded.
Stocks of privatized Polish companies generally begin trading on the Warsaw exchange several weeks after their sale through initial public offerings.
The time is necessary to certify paperwork and confirm proper share ownership.
In revoking Bank Slaski's brokerage license, the Securities Commission accused the bank's brokerage office of privileged treatment of certain investors; of accepting orders from clients who lacked adequate capital in their accounts to back the orders; of a lack of supervision; and of delays in confirming share certificates.
The share-certificate issuing delay meant that most of those who bought shares in December were unable to trade them upon the stock's listing.
This helped create the sparse share trading that pushed prices so high.
As more shares have come on the market, the stock's price has dropped to 4.5 million zlotys.
The securities agency gave Bank Slaski's brokerage office six months to wind up its business and transfer its accounts to other brokers.
"We gave the bank so much time to wind up the brokerage's operations to ensure that our decision wouldn't hurt investors," Reuters quoted Mr. Paga as saying.
But even with that much time, the task may prove difficult.
At the end of 1993, the Warsaw exchange's 30 brokerage firms held 280,000 brokerage accounts.
Bank Slaski's brokerage office held roughly 35,000 of these.
The Bank Slaski listing more than doubled the number of shareholders on the Warsaw exchange.
Since Bank Slaski's brokerage office handled this offering, it has taken much of the new business, but all brokerage offices face enormous backlogs for new accounts.
The commission also gave the bank two weeks to appeal its decision.
A subsequent commission meeting on Feb. 23 will discuss details of the brokerage office's liquidation.
Bank Slaski officials weren't available for comment.
In accusing Bank Slaski of irregularities, the commission initially appears to have drawn some of the heat off the finance ministry.
Prime Minister Waldemar Pawlak used the storm surrounding Bank Slaski's initial price rise to fire Stefan Kawalec, deputy finance minister, under whose jurisdiction the privatization was handled.
However, most analysts and Mr. Kawalec, pointed to political reasons for his dismissal.
A fight over Mr. Kawalec's dismissal between former Finance Minister Marek Borowski and Prime Minister Pawlak prompted Mr. Borowski to tender his resignation Feb. 4.
In accepting the resignation, the premier sparked a showdown within the ruling coalition last week.
