Nearly two generations from the Supreme Court's landmark 1954 Brown vs. Board of Education decision and 30 years after Martin Luther King's 1963 "I Have a Dream" speech, a crop of well-spoken, affluent, highly educated and professionally accomplished black Americans bloom full-flower across the national landscape.
In "The Rage of a Privileged Class" (HarperCollins, 192 pages, $20), Ellis Cose describes how this group is finding that integration is not worth its cost in self-esteem.
Many affluent blacks, Mr. Cose argues, are engaging in "psychological segregation" from white mainstream America.
Mr. Cose, a contributing editor and essayist for Newsweek magazine, and a black man himself, details the outrages faced by middle-class blacks because of their skin color.
His book is a confessional catalog of frustrations and anger that may shock some white Americans.
I remember, for example, how some whites were shocked to hear Arthur Ashe tell an interviewer that fighting against racism was more difficult than his fatal struggle against AIDS.
Many whites view such omnipresent figures as Bryant Gumbel and Colin Powell as positive proof of the transcendence of the nation's racist past.
So why are these blacks angry?
Mr. Cose attributes the rage to the hurt "privileged" blacks suffered as they tried and failed to fit in among white people, who often don't try particularly hard to distinguish between a media image of a black hooligan and a college-educated black striver.
The resulting rage is hidden by the masks of achievement worn by professional black people who do their jobs without giving off a hint of the isolation they feel amid their white co-workers.
Interestingly, a gracious plenty of the interview subjects come from Harvard, Yale and other Ivy League bastions.
Imbedded in Mr. Cose's subjects is an implicit argument that if a black, Harvard-trained doctor-lawyer has a race problem, then it must be a serious problem.
We listen, for instance, as "an eminently successful corporate lawyer" dumps a lifetime of frustration on the author.
The lawyer recalls his humiliation when a junior subordinate refused to step aside as they both entered their office building one morning.
The black man was reduced to spitting out his name and identifying himself as a partner before gaining entry.
"Because of his color, he felt he had a right to check me out," the lawyer says.
"Here I am, a black man who has done all the things I was supposed to do."
Then there is the story of the New York Times reporter rushing to catch a plane only to be detained by an overzealous white security official who has jumped to the erroneous conclusion that she can only be in such a hurry if she is ferrying drugs.
And we hear a public-relations executive at a major corporation self-diagnose an acute case of "coping fatigue."
Her psychological ailment stems, she thinks, from "the fact that her race was not seen as an asset but as something she had to overcome."
Anguished voices such as these are united by a shared sense that white America has disappointed them.
The problem is a broken contract.
In the days when promise of racial harmony filled the air at public rallies, middle-class blacks believed, perhaps more aggressively than anyone else, in the dream of America.
They worked hard, saved their money and protested peacefully.
The deal was that in exchange their children would grow up in good (i.e. white) schools, secure professional/managerial positions, and share equally in the opportunity pie.
So what happened?
White Americans never bought this version of the American Dream.
Instead, Mr. Cose says, white Americans pointed to the pathologies in the underclass of urban black life without distinguishing this underclass from the burgeoning upscale end of black suburbia.
When the middle-class blacks finally realized that black skin defined them more than education, income or profession, they began a silent, angry withdrawal from a previous generation's efforts at assimilation.
"If there was one sentiment that consistently came through in interview after interview with very successful black people in all walks of life, it can be summed up in one phrase: We are tired of waiting," Mr. Cose writes.
He lectures softly as he communicates what is going on in the emerging Buppievilles -- those little-known places to which an increasing number of affluent black Americans are retreating to avoid contact with white people.
Mr. Cose neither advocates nor criticizes this trend; he describes it.
But he does express outrage toward such figures as Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who repeatedly appears in the book to raise the alarm of an encroaching black underclass.
The problem at the top is just as serious to America's future as anything at the bottom, Mr. Cose responds, adding that "a nation which embitters those struggling hardest to believe in it and to work within its established systems is undermining any effort to provide wouldbe hustlers and dope dealers with an attractive alternative to the streets."
Failure to pay heed, Mr. Cose argues very persuasively, will generate a nation divided by race and class that may rip apart the idealism of the Brown decision and King's dream.
Mr. Fulwood is on leave as Washington correspondent of the Los Angeles Times.
