R.H. Macy & Co. has begun negotiations with General Electric Capital to explore the possibility of a significant investment in Macy's reorganization plan, according to a person close to the retailer.
General Electric Capital, the financial services arm of General Electric Co., is the largest shareholder of Macy's preferred stock and has a seat on the retailer's board.
Macy is attempting to fend off Federated Department Stores Inc., which has said it wants to merge the two giant department store chains.
Federated is a major holder of Macy senior secured debt.
The individual familiar with the situation said General Electric is considering a plan that would enable Macy to pay off Federated's senior secured claim, thereby denying the Cincinnati-based chain a formal say in the Macy reorganization plan.
Macy, which operates 111 Macy's and Bullock's department stores, has been operating under Chapter 11 federal bankruptcy protection since early 1992.
Federated, which operates department store divisions such as Bloomingdale's and Rich's, owns Macy senior secured debt valued at $449.3 million, and has the right to acquire a similar amount currently held by Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
At current value, it would cost about $1 billion to retire the senior debt facility held by Federated and Prudential.
A Macy spokesman wouldn't comment about the possible talks with General Electric.
He said, however, that "Macy is looking at all possible alternatives.
We are making very good progress in the development of a consensual plan of reorganization."
In 1991, General Electric Capital acquired Macy's credit-card business for an estimated $110 million, after paying down associated debt.
Gary C. Wendt, chairman, president, and chief executive of General Electric Capital, based in Stamford, Conn., sits on Macy's board.
General Electric Capital wouldn't comment beyond a prepared statement from Mr. Wendt.
"We continue to support Macy's management in its effort to find a viable, independent solution that provides the maximum benefit to all," Mr. Wendt said.
Wall Street analysts estimate that Macy is currently worth about $3.5 billion, based generally on projections of Macy future cash flow and potential sale value.
While the exact size of any cash infusion is unclear, according to those familiar with the talks, the use of new capital in a consensual reorganization plan would have to get the approval of most if not all of Macy's eight creditor groups.
Separately, the Macy spokesman said Myron E. Ullman III, the retailer's chairman and chief executive officer, will visit Hong Kong and other points in Asia next month, apparently in search of other investors.
Mr. Ullman is expected to meet with Peter Woo, chairman of Wheelock & Co., a large Hong Kong conglomerate; there has been speculation that Mr. Woo may emerge as an investor in a reorganized Macy.
Mr. Ullman has close ties to Mr. Woo, a former roommate at the University of Cincinnati.
In the 1980s, Mr. Ullman worked as a managing director of Wharf Holdings Ltd., a transportation, real-estate and retail company in which Wheelock owns a 44% interest.
Among Wheelock's other holdings is a 67% stake in Lane Crawford Ltd., a large department store chain.
Pressure is mounting on Macy to speed its emergence from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
On Tuesday and yesterday, Federated held a series of closed-door meetings with Macy's secured and unsecured creditors to review Federated's financial condition, to answer questions about its Macy debt holdings, and to outline in general terms why it wants to merge with Macy.
In addition, Texas has filed a complaint in U.S. bankruptcy court in New York objecting to Macy's motion to extend its exclusive rights to file a reorganization plan.
Macy will appear on Tuesday before Judge Burton Lifland to have the exclusivity period extended from its scheduled termination date of March 15 to Sept. 15.
Texas is owed a significant amount of back sales-tax dollars.
Earlier this week, in an amendment to the Texas complaint, New York state's tax department joined the petition and disclosed it is owed $55 million in back taxes by Macy.
A spokesman for Macy explained that when the retailer filed for Chapter 11 protection in January 1992, all the sales taxes collected during the previous quarter were frozen.
Texas, in its complaint, estimated Macy owes various states $330 million in back taxes.
Macy executives noted yesterday that Texas alone has claimed it is owed about $500,000 in unpaid sales taxes frozen at the time of the bankruptcy filing.
