Searching for meaning amid the 2,013-page, four-volume hieroglyphic text that is the Clinton FY 1995 budget, our eyes caught a single line on page 27 under "Proposed Investments."
At last we had found the Rosetta Stone.
The line reads "Payment to the Legal Services Corporation," and it shows spending going up from $357 million in 1993, to $400 million in 1994, to a $500 million windfall in 1995.
That's a 25% increase in a single year, or about eight times the rate of inflation.
So this is what President Clinton means by "investing in people": Increase the subsidy for lawyers, who can then use the money to paper America with lawsuits.
Somehow he forgot to mention this in his State of the Union address.
We offer this translation guide because just listening to the Egyptian budgetese you might conclude this is a skinflint document.
Mr. Clinton even says his $1,518,300,000,000 budget "has frozen discretionary spending," which sounds impressive.
But parsing the numbers reveals a bait and switch.
Spending on favored Clinton "discretionary" items actually goes up by about 8% from 1993 to 1995, and even more in the future.
The ruse is to cut defense spending to the bone, then transfer that money to other domestic accounts.
So from 1993 to 1995, Mr. Clinton would cut defense by some $33 billion, even as total "discretionary" spending stays level.
And remember Mr. Clinton's "floor" under defense spending in the State of the Union?
More Egyptian: This is true only if you don't account for inflation and if you wait until after 1997.
By 1997 U.S. defense spending will have fallen to 3.3% of the U.S. economy, lower than at any time since 1940.
If Mr. Clinton wants to bomb Serbia, he'd better do it soon, while the U.S. military can still afford to.
Mr. Clinton's spending priorities, on the other hand, are clear from the excerpts on the list nearby.
For example, consider the SBA's "Investment Company guarantees."
This more than doubles in 1995 to $91 million, as do the loan levels, to $730 million.
Arkansologists will recall that it was just such a ($300,000) SBIC loan that David Hale made to Susan McDougal, the partner of the Clintons in their Whitewater venture.
Then there are last year's failed "stimulus" spending items repackaged as "investments."
The HUD budget will get $149 million for something called "moving to independence," which we assume will make Big City mayors happy.
The same goes for "homeless programs," up 52%.
These are New Democrat initiatives?
And of course, Mr. Clinton's much-ballyhooed "spending caps" don't even include the nearly $10 billion in "emergency" spending he's just proposed for the Los Angeles earthquake.
No offsetting spending cuts for that.
The broader, more realistic budget story is told by the top half of the chart nearby (see accompanying illustration: WSJ Feb. 8, 1993).
Most of Mr. Clinton's hypothetical deficit reduction is the result of faster economic growth and higher tax rates, projected to raise the federal government's revenue share of GDP to 19.3% in 1995.
This trend is taking us back to Carter-era tax levels, if you believe that the Clinton taxes will yield the revenue they claim.
Spending, meanwhile, will fall to 21.6% of GDP, if you also choose to believe.
The decline here is mainly a result of lower interest payments, a windfall from the resale of S&L assets acquired by the feds in the late 1980s, defense cuts and reduced jobless benefits because of the better economy.
But if the Clinton budget passes, through 1999 nondefense spending -- the kind that Democratic constituencies like -- will grow at a rate of 7% a year.
This is why, even by Mr. Clinton's own calculations, the deficit will grow again after 1998.
It's also why (see the bottom half of the chart) the national debt levels off as a share of GDP but doesn't decline.
Mr. Clinton's answer to this is "health care reform," which is supposed to accomplish the miracle of simultaneously insuring 37 million more Americans, adding "free" drug and mental-health benefits, and reducing the deficit.
Anyone other than Ira Magaziner who believes that needs a Prozac and a long rest.
All of which helps to explain why Mr. Clinton lobbied so mightily last November to kill the Penny-Kasich spending cuts.
Mr. Clinton wants to spend more, not less.
Stripped of its hieroglyphic obfuscation, the Clinton budget's priorities are these: Tax and spend.
