In response to complaints that minority communities suffer disproportionately from environmental hazards, President Clinton has ordered the Environmental Protection Agency and other federal agencies to stop inflicting "environmental injustice."
Cued by her boss to be contrite, EPA Administrator Carol Browner told a group of angry community activists that she sometimes "is not proud to be part of the EPA."
But the very existence of "environmental injustice" is far from clear.
Although minority communities have a disproportionate share of environmental problems, research suggests that the cause is not necessarily racial discrimination.
Environmental hazards are likely to be placed in any community that either lacks political power or is willing to accept risks because they create jobs or generate taxes.
In fact, voters in many predominately white communities have recently approved the siting of risky facilities.
Many toxic waste sites are not waste dumps but rather abandoned factories whose construction was originally thought a plum to the locale.
The absence of factories in wealthy areas can usually be explained by those areas' high real-estate prices and lack of good access to freight services or natural resources.
Moreover, in many instances, the environmental hazards did not come to minority neighborhoods, but rather the minority populations came to the hazards.
One reason is that the hazards depressed property values, making housing more affordable.
Another reason is that local governments in rich, white areas with nice environments zone out the kind of housing that the poor can afford and the kind of jobs that they can get.
Against this complex reality, Mr. Clinton's command that agencies avoid "disproportionately high and adverse . . . effects on minority populations and low-income populations" is nothing but fluff.
Suppose that the EPA determines that XYZ Corp.'s proposed incinerator would produce a risk to health sufficiently low to meet generally applicable health standards.
Under the executive order, people living near the proposed site could nonetheless object that they would suffer a disproportionate impact because other areas have lower air pollution levels.
The order does not tell the agencies how to decide whether a pollution differential is large enough to be disproportionate.
Nor does it make clear whether lower environmental quality in poor areas is disproportionate if caused by market forces, which are the chief source of such differentials.
Most people would oppose using income to determine who gets exposed to high risks, but not to low risks or aesthetic problems.
After all, our market system allows the wealthy to buy healthier foods and nicer homes.
Under modern environmental laws, agency actions typically do not cause high risks.
So, to what extent must agencies, in gauging disproportionate impact under Mr. Clinton's order, chuck the market system that he, in other contexts, applauds?
Does Mr. Clinton's order mean that nothing can be sited in areas that are not rich and white until every rich, white suburb gets a pro-rata equal share of environmental problems?
Whether an environmental risk is disproportionate is a question that cannot be answered by science or legal criteria and so must be answered by politics.
Instead of addressing that question forthrightly, our political leaders once again try to shift the blame to agencies, raising expectations that are destined to be dashed.
There are many examples of this blame shifting, but I'll offer one from my own experience.
As founder of the Natural Resources Defense Council's Urban Environment Project in the early 1970s, I spearheaded the environmental movement's effort to deal with the lead pollution that plagues inner-city children and that is today a prominent example of environmental injustice.
Although environmentalists back in 1970 asked for a Clean Air Act that banned lead additives to gasoline, Congress and the president enacted a statute that passed the buck to the EPA.
EPA scientists quickly decided -- correctly, in hindsight -- that leaded gas endangers inner-city children, who are more exposed to gasoline fumes than are children who live in the suburbs.
But when the agency tried to regulate the lead as a health hazard, the very same legislators and presidents (both Democrat and Republican) who pretended to be environmental champions responded to complaints from the lead and petroleum industries by pressuring the EPA not to regulate.
As a result, lead additives stayed in gasoline until the late 1980s.
This is just one example.
The point is that because charges of environmental injustice often originate in actions of legislators and the president, they are disingenuous in making agencies the scapegoat.
The procedures that political leaders use to shift the blame to the agencies may well do more harm than good.
Every agency and department must within 12 months develop a strategy that makes environmental justice a part of its decision-making in every aspect of its operations.
This applies not only to licensing, but also to federal grants, facilities, rule-making and enforcement.
Examples include environmental impact statements under the National Environmental Policy Act and records of decision under the Superfund toxic cleanup program, to name just two.
The race-conscious decison-making mandated by the order will open agencies to lawsuits under the Civil Rights Act, which the order interprets as applicable to them.
The red tape and litigation will significantly delay many environmental decisions and increase the cost to agencies of making them.
The ultimate losers will be the corporations and state and local governments that seek federal decisions and the communities, especially the minority communities, that want agencies to speed up the cleanup of toxic wastes.
The costs will be particularly heavy for the EPA, on which Congress and the president already have heaped duties far in excess of what it can accomplish with the resources they have appropriated.
The fine print of Mr. Clinton's order says "Federal agencies shall assume the financial costs of complying with this order."
The costs and delay might be worthwhile if the executive order made environmental programs more just.
But the order presents only the illusion of justice, which may well suffice to deflect the blame to the agencies -- at least until after the next presidential election.
Mr. Schoenbrod is a professor at New York Law School and author of "Power Without Responsibility: How Congress Abuses the People Through Delegation," just out from Yale University Press.
