The director of the Congressional Budget Office testified that conservative alternatives to President Clinton's health-care plan are likely to be less effective than the president's proposal in curbing health costs.
Appearing before the Senate Finance Committee, Robert Reischauer showed broad skepticism about the ability of pure "managed competition" provisions to curb health expenditures.
Without strict caps on insurance premiums, the cost of the president's plan would be "quite a bit higher," the director said.
He added that his own "gut feeling" was that alternative tax-cap provisions in rival plans would be less effective than the president's proposed premium caps in controlling costs.
Mr. Reischauer specifically addressed a bill sponsored by Rep. Jim Cooper (D., Tenn.) and Sen. John Breaux (D., La.).
It would cap corporate tax deductions for worker health-care plans in an effort to encourage industry to curb the cost of health benefits.
The result would be a "pretty hefty tax" on employers, the director said.
But he wasn't optimistic that the bill would slow the rise in health costs, which the CBO estimates now equal 14% of the national gross domestic product.
After Sen. David Durenberger (R., Minn.), a co-sponsor of the Cooper-Breaux bill, spoke optimistically of bringing costs down to 10% of GDP, Finance Chairman Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D., N.Y.) joked, "That's his plan."
"That's his plan before we have costed it out," chimed in Mr. Reischauer.
Coming just a day after the release of CBO's analysis of the president's plan, Mr. Reischauer's remarks were an implicit warning to rivals that they too will face tough scrutiny when his staff evaluates their proposals.
The Cooper-Breaux scheme would be less ambitious than the Clinton plan.
But a budget office study of an earlier version last year concluded that the lawmakers' bill would add marginally to rising health costs.
In contrast, the budget office says, the president's cost-controls would slow the rise in health expenditures.
The improvement would be relatively modest -- national health expenditures under the Clinton plan would rise to more than $2 trillion, or 19% of GDP, by the year 2004, instead of 20% if nothing is done.
But that translates into a savings of $150 billion that year.
Many proponents of managed competition say the CBO is too locked into scorekeeping, and fails to give credit for the savings potential in the new approach.
"We're talking about changing behavior," said Sen. Durenberger after Mr. Reischauer's testimony.
"He's never met a medical market."
Republican conservatives have taken a certain pleasure in the rise of the Cooper-Breaux alternative, largely because of their desire to bloody the Clinton plan.
Now that the president is perceived as weakened, the tone has shifted to pressure on Rep. Cooper to move to the right.
A memo circulated yesterday by Project for the Republican Future, a new Republican think tank, is entitled "Defeating the Coming Clinton-Cooper Compromise."
