The National Hockey League used to ban ads on the dasherboards lining its rinks.
The conservative owners who controlled the sport wouldn't permit them.
These days, NHL arenas are festooned with ads, not just on the dasherboards but imbedded in the ice, in back of penalty boxes and aboard the Zamboni machines that smooth out the ice between periods.
Some teams top off the ad orgy with indoor blimps -- two in the case of the Hartford Whalers.
The use of such ads at major-league arenas and stadiums increased 13% in 1993, according to a recent study by Ernst & Young.
The accounting firm counted an average of 77 signs in NHL arenas, 59 in National Basketball Association arenas, 25 in baseball parks and 23 in National Football League stadiums.
"The use of signage has become a whole new element in the last three or four years," says Tony Ponturo, a sports-marketing executive at Anheuser-Busch Cos.
Former NHL President John Ziegler says the NHL changed its policies after it realized a simple fact: "We were pristine, but we were losing our posterior."
Now Mr. Ziegler's sport is baseball, and last year he helped the Detroit Tigers launch a signage revolution.
Detroit was one of the first two teams to put rotating signs behind home plate, an abomination to purists but a delight to advertisers.
Mr. Ziegler, representing the Tigers, successfully lobbied the American League to allow the signs.
In 1994, five more big-league teams may have them.
The increase in signs is spurring a new kind of conflict.
The signs' purpose is to be seen on TV, and their presence can undercut TV broadcasters' own ad-sales efforts.
This season, the New York Yankees irked their telecaster, Madison Square Garden Network, with plans to install home-plate signs.
"Without TV, those signs are worth $5," says Bob Gutkowski, the network's president.
It's the declining impact of TV advertising, though, that has prompted the rise of signage.
TV spots have grown shorter, their price dearer and their impact more dubious as viewers zap or channel-surf their way through timeouts.
"Advertisers started looking at signs to break the clutter of the TV commercials," says Mr. Ponturo of Anheuser-Busch.
Certainly a sign that's in the line of TV cameras gets viewers' attention at a fraction of the cost.
Indeed, today's signage is designed for home viewers, and its cost is often based on TV exposure.
Dorna USA, which operates the rotating signs surrounding 14 NBA courts, guarantees three minutes' air time a game to the 14 advertisers sharing the space.
The Los Angeles Kings, with rotating signs at both blue lines in the Great Western Forum, guarantee two minutes a game.
For some companies, signage is their only way to make it onto TV.
Tobacco giant Philip Morris Cos., barred from the airwaves, is baseball's third biggest sign advertiser, according to Ernst & Young.
That enrages antismoking groups, one of which has pressed to scuttle Philip Morris's Marlboro Man sign at New York's Shea Stadium.
Towering above an outfield wall, it's a frequent TV backdrop.
"The city charter says parks must be used for the benefit of the people," says Joseph Cherner, president of Smokefree Educational Services.
"Tobacco addiction doesn't benefit people; it kills people."
The group unsuccessfully sued Mayor David Dinkins to remove the sign from city-owned Shea, but successor Rudolph Giuliani has said he'll have it taken down.
The rotating-sign technology has also allowed nontraditional sports marketers to get into the picture.
Advertisers can share space, lowering the cost and allowing smaller companies into the game.
A local jeweler named Morgan's graces the L.A. Kings' rotating signs.
A faux-log company called Duraflame is on Dorna signs in several arenas.
"What's happened is that second- and third-tier categories have come into the market," says Chuck Fruit, a top Coca-Cola Co. marketing executive.
As a result, advertisers now face the kind of commercial overload in sign-infested arenas that they sought to escape on TV.
It's a growing concern, says Mr. Fruit, noting, "We as advertisers put less value on signs in a cluttered environment."
Nonetheless, the signage onslaught is sure to increase.
It's simply too important a revenue source for teams, many of which are collecting the maximum on TV rights and ticket prices.
A big-market NBA or NHL team reaps $4 million to $6 million a year from signage and related promotional rights, says Dick Sherwood, general manager of Network International, the ad-sales arm of arena operator Spectacor Management Group.
That's more than double the sum of five years ago.
Conflicts are also sure to increase, at least in the short term.
As exclusive beer sponsor for NBA games on Turner Network Television, Anheuser-Busch doesn't like Miller Brewing Co.'s exclusive beer signage at courtside in Chicago Stadium, a frequent venue for Bulls games.
Nor was Turner Broadcasting System's sports advertising chief, Mark Mariani, happy to hear the retorts of some companies to TV ad pitches: "`Why do I need to buy you guys?'" he recalls them saying.
"`I can get on courtside signage.'"
Mr. Mariani notes that some signs do complement TV ads.
Reebok International Ltd. arranges for its name to come up on rotating courtside signs as halftime arrives on TNT games.
It's a deft prelude to the network's "Reebok Halftime Report."
The NBA has also taken steps to reduce conflicts.
Starting with next year's playoffs, it has banned courtside signage at games televised by TNT.
It already forbids the signs at its NBC games.
Baseball, which televises more games than any other sport, is particularly susceptible to conflicts.
Teams may be able to work out conflicts with their home broadcasters -- as the Yankees and Madison Square Garden Network are trying to do -- but they can't control other teams' arrangements.
A club sponsored by Delta Air Lines may televise road games that show American Airlines signs behind home plate.
The owners "have to do some heavy thinking: Is this a bargain with the marketing devil?" says Gene Orza, associate general counsel of the players' union.
(The conflict vexing the union involves how the game is played.
Some infielders complain the ball is harder to pick up coming out of a signage background.)
One answer to the growing conflict and clutter may lie in technology.
A small company called Princeton Electronic Billboard Inc. has developed a process to insert signage into a TV picture.
It can create signs where none exist, substitute one sign for another or insert different signs for different viewing audiences.
The Princeton, N.J., company expects to have at least two baseball teams using the "virtual reality" signage this year, and figures other sports will be close behind.
Ad Notes. . . .
ACCOUNT: Staples Inc., the chain of office-supply "superstores" based in Framingham, Mass., tapped Saatchi & Saatchi Co.'s Cliff Freeman & Partners to create advertising.
The new account is expected to include a $20 million national television advertising campaign, executives said.
WHO'S NEWS: Mark McLaughlin was named executive vice president and director of media services at the New York office of Saatchi & Saatchi's Campbell Mithun Esty.
Mr. McLaughlin, 35 years old, succeeds Thomas H. Winner, 47, who left the agency in January for Anheuser-Busch as director, national broadcast media.
