Heartened by recent improvements in business conditions, manufacturers and construction executives expect modest increases in orders and employment over the next three months, according to two surveys by Dun & Bradstreet Corp.
The monthly survey of 1,000 manufacturers nationwide indicated that the industry's gloomy outlook has begun to lift.
Until now, the manufacturers said they noticed business was improving but were wary of making any changes in operations, said Douglas Handler, manager of economic analysis for the business information services company.
"Finally, manufacturers are beginning to factor this growth into their early production plans for 1994."
Manufacturing conditions, as measured over the past three months, reached their highest level since the survey began in 1990, with output, new orders, and export orders each hitting record levels.
Expectations for the coming three months for production, new orders, unfilled orders, finished-goods inventories, and export orders all climbed from November levels.
D&B's industrial-sentiment index, which provides a composite picture of these three-month expectations, climbed four points to 20.
The index represents the percentage of responding firms expecting increases in orders, production and other facets of manufacturing, minus the percentage expecting decreases.
"The only down side to the survey is that many manufacturers foresee an increase in their finished-goods inventories," said Mr. Handler.
"If the demand for these goods does not materialize, we may see some cutbacks in the second quarter.
"Construction firms reported they are in the best shape since the end of the recession almost three years ago," said Mr. Handler.
"Expectations for additional improvements suggest that this boom will continue through the first quarter."
The construction survey includes indexes of new orders, employment and prices.
Indexes of current conditions improved for both new orders and employment, while remaining unchanged from the month-ago figures for prices.
All showed sizable improvements from a year ago.
The indexes of expectations for the coming three months also logged improvements across the board, with modest improvements expected in employment.
"Most of this growth is fueled by new single-family housing construction," explained Mr. Handler.
"Growth in the other areas still remains flat."
