Maybe I'm missing something, but I always thought journalism was supposed to be balanced.
Unfortunately there seems to be a growing number of one-sided articles that attack the full-service investment industry (Your Money Matters, Feb. 4).
There is a constant barrage about the evils of commissions, and no discussion about services that are provided in return for commissions.
The article says, "Commissions are the real reasons brokers talk to you. . . ."
It goes on to say that brokers will recommend only the product paying the highest commission.
I suppose this is why investors have entrusted us with $540 billion at Merrill Lynch.
We go through years of training -- lifelong training -- on asset allocation and financial planning.
We are rewarded and compensated by having our clients' assets grow.
We are expected and demanded to recommend only appropriate investments and strategies for our clients, and, yes, paid commissions as part of our compensation.
Yes, there can be a real or perceived conflict of interest when working solely on a commission basis.
That is why we have taken major strides in trying to move our clients and financial consultants to a fee-based compensation system.
And I believe the rest of the industry will follow our lead.
Unfortunately, whether we charge fees or commissions, many of your writers continue to proclaim that we have no right to charge anyone for anything.
In any service or product that we purchase in our lives, there is some compensation involved for service or product providers.
In our industry we not only provide one-time services, but ongoing services, often without additional compensation.
I implore you to use some objectivity.
If you are going to quote no-load fund managers, then in fairness, get comments from full-service fund managers.
If you are going to quote diatribes from fee-only based financial planners about the evils of commissions, then would it be too much to ask for responses from those they are criticizing?
Philip M. Caso
