Sweating workers squat on a bare floor, hammering metal into shape.
Others hunch over jigs on rough benches.
Sparks fly as welders join rods.
Intent on their work, the men hardly spare a glance as their boss shows a visitor around.
High tech it isn't.
Everything, from the delivery of iron strips to the finishing touches on a range of handicrafts, is done by hand.
The equipment is old, and the factory itself is a converted warehouse and sawmill.
This modest venture by a British entrepreneur, profitable in its first year, says a lot about Vietnam, which is trying to attract foreign investment as it makes the transition from central planning to a market economy.
A low-cost, industrious and educated work force is one of its strengths.
Ominously, it also says something about the Philippines, which is attempting to overcome 30 years of mismanagement and missed opportunities to join the ranks of nations that have forged what is known as the East Asian economic miracle.
With no chance of catching neighbors such as Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia, the Philippines must compete directly with the next wave of potential winners, among them Vietnam and China.
Continental Indochine Import Export Ltd.'s investment in the suburbs of Ho Chi Minh City provides a rare chance to compare how the Philippines and Vietnam are shaping up.
The plant makes labor-intensive products identical to ones produced by an associated company near Manila.
As far as Clive Fairfield, Continental's owner, is concerned, the contest is all over.
His start-up venture has shown it could put its established Philippine competitors out of business.
"Our selling price in Vietnam is the same as the manufactured price in the Philippines," he says.
"I think it is a microcosm of the situation generally."
Analysts caution that it might be unfair and premature to write off the Philippines.
After all, one example scarcely proves a case.
Besides, the Philippine government and others cite gains on several fronts.
Real gross national product is expected to expand 3.5% to 4.5% this year, and one brokerage firm forecasts 27% average growth in corporate earnings.
The stock market rocketed more than 150% last year, making it Asia's top performer and the third-best in the world.
Still, a study of Continental's experience is sobering for the Philippine faithful because it affords a comparison of some of the elements that determine a country's progress: its work ethic, infrastructure, raw-material supplies and bureaucracy.
Vietnam wins easily on the first three counts and shares dubious honors over red tape.
Gerrard Heinen, a 36-year-old Philippine-based Dutch businessman who has switched some of his Philippine handicraft production to Continental, says Vietnam's materials and labor cost less, and its workers are 50% more productive.
Typically, Continental makes an ornamental reproduction of a turn-of-the-century pram, or baby buggy, at half the price of his Reprocrafters Inc.
"It's cheaper, it's better," Mr. Heinen says of Vietnam.
The 49-year-old Mr. Fairfield, who has been involved in trading and manufacturing in Southeast Asia for 26 years, has opened Continental offices in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.
He obtained Vietnamese government approval in 1991 for the handicraft factory as a 100% foreign-owned enterprise, which means he is obliged to export its entire output.
The company leased land and some dilapidated buildings at Thu Duc, five miles north of downtown Ho Chi Minh City, and began training the first batch of recruits in September 1992.
After the premises were renovated, production started early last year.
Initially, the factory made only one item, the antique-looking pram, in three different sizes.
(Customers in the U.S. and Europe usually sit a potted plant in the pram and use it to decorate their homes.)
Today, there are 12 different products, using local rattan, timber, rubber, paint, lacquer and fabric, as well as metal recycled from the war.
Production rose from 1,000 prams in February last year to a peak of 25,000 in October, while the number of employees climbed to 300 from 60.
The company expects to turn out 50,000 prams a month this year, in addition to other lines, and projects its work force will total 700 by the end of December, with another 700 employed by subcontractors.
Mr. Fairfield says turnover this year will reach $4 million, compared with $1 million last year, and is likely to rise to $6 million or $7 million next year, boosted by American orders that have arrived since the U.S. embargo was lifted last month.
He declines to give further details beyond confirming that the business is profitable.
Chris Reid, 50, Continental's country manager who runs the plant with the help of his Vietnamese wife, gives much of the credit to the employees.
They've learned quickly, he says, their best effort being to retool to produce a new product, a miniature bicycle, in just five weeks.
"We went from zero to 150 bicycles a day," he says.
"That's pretty impressive."
Workers have even suggested refinements to the Philippine-designed items.
For instance, it was their idea to add a tread to the rubber tires on the bicycle.
When Mr. Reid returned from Manila in December with a reproduction of a Victorian phaeton, or wheeled carriage, employees took only two weeks to produce a half-size version, with axles and spokes perfectly proportioned.
An added bonus was the discovery of a qualified accountant in the painting department; he's now in charge of stock control.
Another worker turned out to be trained in technical drawing, part of the reason the staff was able to copy the phaeton so faithfully.
The decision last August to switch from paying the legal minimum wage of $35 a month to piece rates was a major innovation.
Output immediately soared 45%.
Given a choice of working overtime or seeing another shift added to the payroll, workers voted unanimously to do the job themselves.
"Most employees have effectively doubled their income," says Mr. Reid, who has fired only three, for pilfering and laziness.
The factory has avoided the strikes that have hit some other foreign manufacturers in Vietnam.
"If you treat the Vietnamese sensitively, they respond," he says.
"If you try smacking them around the ears, you're looking for trouble."
It hasn't been all easy sailing, though.
Continental took 18 months to obtain its license in the first place, a hint of Vietnam's cumbersome and sometimes corrupt bureaucracy.
In the middle of last year, the government banned wood exports, temporarily halting the company's shipments and affecting its Christmas orders, because a wooden frame accounts for about 2% of a pram.
It took nearly a month to get the matter clarified and the production line working again.
