The White House is considering cutting $2 billion in benefits for elderly immigrants to help pay for welfare reform, according to administration officials.
While cutting off the supplemental-security-income benefits to the parents of legal aliens is high on the administration's list, cuts also could come in the emergency-housing assistance program.
In addition, the administration is exploring what savings could be achieved by ferreting out fraud in the recently expanded earned-income tax credit for low-income families.
The administration's challenge is to find enough money to fulfill the president's politically popular pledge "to end welfare as we know it" in a time of tight federal budgets.
Mr. Clinton's domestic policy advisers have spent the past several weeks floating spending proposals, in some cases only to see them swiftly shot down.
The president wants to allow people to stay on welfare only two years.
But the White House says welfare reform will require between $4 billion and $7 billion annually once it is fully phased in by 1999.
Those funds would pay for job training and placement, child care and a work program for welfare recipients who can't find jobs after benefits run out.
Because of spending caps enacted in 1990 and the need for funds to finance health-care reform, money to overhaul welfare must come almost entirely from other programs that aid low-income Americans.
The White House hasn't yet figured out how to raise the money that welfare reform demands.
Administration officials are busy bringing expectations in line with budgetary reality.
"You could phase this program in over the next decade and you'd still be ending welfare as we know it, as long as you're sending a clear signal to the generation that's coming into the program," says Bruce Reed, a top domestic policy adviser to the president who is supervising the welfare-reform effort.
"I don't think that how much money we spend is the only measure of our ambition."
At a White House meeting on Jan. 25, as President Clinton prepared a State of the Union address that highlighted welfare reform, two top officials from Mr. Clinton's interagency working group on welfare presented cabinet officials with a buffet of ideas to raise between $6.5 billion and $7.8 billion.
Among the options discussed, according to a New York Times article yesterday, was the taxing of welfare benefits, food stamps and housing assistance.
That idea could raise as much as $4 billion a year.
But several administration officials, including Mr. Reed, say the logistical and political difficulties of such a plan make it unlikely.
Also dropped was the idea of cutting $1.2 billion from a Social Security provision that increases benefits by nearly 50% to retired fathers of young children.
Numerous members of the working group considered that idea the most sensible of the lot, but it was discarded because it would force the White House to say it was cutting Social Security to pay for welfare reform.
What's left are spending cuts amounting to between $2.5 billion and $3 billion, and plans to check into other areas that might yield more.
The immigrant-aid cut would focus on legal aliens who bring their parents to the U.S.
Currently, they must promise to support them for as long as five years.
Once that time period expires, however, the immigrant parents are eligible for supplemental-security income.
As a result, noncitizens have grown to account for 20% of all the elderly on supplemental-security income.
The administration's proposal -- that the elderly be prohibited from collecting such benefits until they became citizens -- would bring in only $2 billion because it would deal only with new people coming into the program.
A similar proposal by Republican lawmakers could save as much as $7 billion by making the citizenship rule retroactive.
That would throw thousands of elderly immigrant recipients off the rolls.
Another $1 billion in annual spending by 1999 might be cut from emergency cash assistance funds that pay for homeless shelters and go to low-income Americans who face eviction or termination of utility services.
Administration officials complain that states have taken advantage of these federal funds for programs that once were backed by state budgets.
Meanwhile, officials at the Department of Health and Human Services are busy examining how much might be saved from identifying fraud and duplication within a $16 billion annual tax credit for low-income families.
Of special interest: a father who might be collecting the earned-income tax credit while the mother of his child is receiving welfare.
Savings might amount to another $500 million, administration officials said, though the estimates are preliminary.
A similar area of investigation is limiting the number of drug and alcohol abusers who get supplemental-security benefits on the grounds their addiction is a disability.
Among the ways of narrowing the number of such recipients is the idea of providing benefits only to people who enter certain types of treatment programs.
It's unclear how much money that change would save.
