Someone smart enough to make $1 billion in a month playing foreign-exchange markets might have something to teach East Europeans about markets and money.
George Soros certainly does, yet he would just as soon teach them medieval history, or the development of the postwar novel.
Of the hundreds of millions Mr. Soros has given the East -- amounts outstripping many Western countries -- less has gone to reconstructing capitalism than to rediscovering the human riches that communism plundered.
His goal is to turn the closed society of totalitarianism into an open society that "sets free the critical powers of man," in the words of his own teacher, the philosopher Karl Popper.
Before the revolutions, dissidents in Eastern Europe had a similar goal; they called it "civil society," defined by some as "the connective tissue of democratic political culture."
These are the thousands of strands of a culture's interactions, from libraries to Goodwill stores, that help keep people peaceable in the absence of a police state.
A community free of discrimination and dogma is like the air, as Mr. Soros has put it: You hardly know it's there until it's gone.
In aiding the East by hard-wiring it to capitalism, he believes, the West has forgotten about the air.
"We thought free enterprise, laissez-faire," he says.
"The failures in Eastern Europe prove that laissez-faire is a false doctrine.
It's not enough to remove an oppressive regime.
Our system is more complex than the one that collapsed.
If the West had given a big hand up, a lot more progress could have been made."
In its focus on finance and government, the West hasn't totally neglected the softer and subtler sides of free societies.
American voluntary organizations multiplied their giving 10 times in 1990 alone, to $50 million.
The European Union is funding projects that support trade unions, women, rural co-ops, local newspapers, human rights.
As with economic advice, though, most of this money goes to Westerners who impart their wisdom and fly home.
Mr. Soros, born in Hungary 63 years ago, thinks he has a better idea.
Having made his fortune as a fund manager, he opened a foundation there 10 years ago.
Now he has offices in 19 states of the old Soviet bloc, more than any other charity.
By mid-1993, he had given away $300 million.
Last fall, he pledged $250 million to revamp Russian education, and then granted a $200 million endowment to the Central European University, which he founded in 1990, and $100 million to a think tank called the Open Society Institute.
Hardly any of it ends up in Western pockets.
Uninhibited by red tape, or the fear of losing other people's money, Mr. Soros dispenses his own as quickly and directly as he wants, no strings attached.
Of course, he has a lot of money: By some estimates, he pocketed $1 billion by betting against Britain's pound in September '92.
Still, in the eyes of official aid givers, Mr. Soros's charitable notions are radical.
They squirmed a year ago when he proposed handing dollar bills to poor Russians; with $6 a month enough to live on, he figured, $10 billion could save the country.
"Nobody bought it," he says.
"Politically, it was impractical."
Another Soros idea, for a Western-funded trade organization to revive trade among the former Comecon countries, received a similar brushoff.
But bureaucratic reluctance couldn't stop Mr. Soros from showing his disgust with the West's failure to broker a peace in Bosnia; he poured $50 million into humanitarian aid there last year.
And with a long-term promise of $100 million, he got the jump on official plans to keep Russian scientists in their labs.
For just $15 million, he has so far provided a year's pay -- $500 -- to 28,000 of them.
"He tried several times to work with big institutions," says a friend in Hungary.
"It never worked out.
He makes decisions in the sphere of culture or aid as he does in business -- very, very quickly.
But while he is a tough businessman, here he can be cheated; he thinks strict accounting interferes with trust."
Trust is what separates Mr. Soros from the institutions.
Instead of hiring Westerners skilled in grantsmanship, he gives straight to Easterners.
"We support the recipient, not the donor," he says.
"We leave it to them to decide how to spend the money."
"You in America can't know what we need," says Irena Veisaite, of the Soros Foundation in Lithuania.
"You can't jump over our mentality."
The catalog of items she and other Easterners feel they need most demonstrates how airless their atmosphere has been.
The Lithuanians have drawn up a list of books to translate: The Worldly Philosophers; The Concept of Law; Democracy and Its Critics; Nationalism in the Twentieth Century; The Second Sex.
The Estonians fund a radio station for their nervous Russian minority.
The Poles support the first ex-Communist branch of Alcoholics Anonymous.
The Hungarians have given one young man a grant to write about use of the bagpipe in the Carpathian Basin.
Ventures like these hint at the East's highest ideals.
Mr. Soros also wants to save it from its worst instincts.
That was the aim of his Central European University.
In Budapest and Prague, at campuses where English is a common tongue, 500 Serbs and Croats, Russians and Ukrainians, Hungarians and Romanians, seek a common ground.
"We train an elite, if not in each other's language, at least in each other's motivation," says Istvan Rev, its academic director in Budapest.
"The university is full of tensions."
Courses run from the literature of national identity to philosophy of art and the sociology of race.
Medieval history isn't pure luxury when the legacy of feuds between the Latin and Orthodox rites still wreaks havoc a few hundred miles away.
"You cannot have a university if you teach only subjects with immediate practical value," Prof. Rev says.
The curriculum doesn't ignore business law or public finance; there even is a privatization project.
In a smallish way, Mr. Soros does his bit to promote free enterprise in the East.
But one thing he won't do is put his investments where his charity is.
Just after the revolutions, he went to an annual conclave of bigwigs in Davos, Switzerland.
Businessmen swamped the East's new finance ministers, eager for deals.
As a friend tells it, Mr. Soros hung back, concluding quietly that a better place to bet his millions was in Mexico.
And apart from relatively small exceptions, says the friend, that is what he did.
