As the four-wheel-drive vehicle stops in a swirl of dust, Emilio Cassinello points to a string of one-story concrete buildings near the roadside.
"That's where the park's best restaurant will be," he says proudly.
"And it'll serve the best Spanish and Catalan wines.
It'll even have top French wines, for those who want them."
Mr. Cassinello is deputy chairman of Grand Tibidabo SA, the Spanish company that has teamed up with Anheuser-Busch Cos. of the U.S. in a joint venture called Grand Peninsula SA to build the second-largest theme park in Europe.
He and his partners believe they have learned from the mistakes of Euro Disney SCA, which initially forced diners visiting Europe's largest theme park to wash down their gourmet meals with soft drinks.
Almost a year before Tibigardens is scheduled to open on April 7, 1995, its promoters say they have dissected what went wrong at Euro Disney to avoid similar missteps.
They say they also have come close to clearing a financial logjam that has cast doubt on the park's viability and kept Anheuser on a five-year roller-coaster ride.
The result of all their efforts, they hope, will be a unique venture that combines the low costs of a regional park -- like the Belgium-based Walibi chain -- with the novelty of a pan-European giant like Euro Disney.
Anheuser, the big brewer that operates Sea World, Cypress Gardens and other U.S. theme parks, designed the rides and attractions for the 43 billion-peseta ($308.5 million) investment in southern Catalonia.
The main "themes" here are five geographical areas: Polynesia, a Catalan fishing village, the American Wild West, China and Mexico.
Tussauds Group Ltd., a Pearson PLC unit and the United Kingdom's largest commercial operator of visitor attractions, will manage the park if, as expected, it completes talks to acquire a 30% stake in Grand Peninsula.
Twelve bars and outdoor cafes will be found alongside traditional ice cream parlors.
Open-air theaters will feature live performances, and actors' troupes will replace the secondary-school marching bands that Anheuser usually offers as a source of street entertainment.
Mr. Cassinello, who was general commissioner of Seville's highly successful Universal Exposition in 1992, notes that "one of the biggest hits at the Expo was the use of outdoor space for the public.
In a Mediterranean climate you can create open air spaces where people can meet and mix."
Indeed, Tibigardens hopes to capitalize on the mild weather at Salou, a seaside village an hour's drive south of Barcelona.
The park, which sits on 119 hectares of gently rolling land covered with olive, carob and oak trees, is only a couple of kilometers from the Mediterranean.
Although Tibigardens' feasibility study envisages the park's being open at first 156 days a year for some three million visitors, Mr. Cassinello says it will be flexible enough to adapt to demand.
In contrast, Euro Disney is open all year, but because of the area's harsh winter weather it receives more than 80% of its visitors in a six-month period, which gives rise to long lines and crowds, he says.
That schedule also leaves facilities overstaffed and underused during the other six months.
When Anheuser began casting about for a park site in Spain, it looked at more than 40 different locations, 20 of them in Catalonia.
But soon after it settled on Salou-Vilaseca, as the town was then known, civic affairs intervened.
The local city hall split the town into two municipalities because of differences over taxes and zoning, and both sections then claimed the right to tax the park.
Anheuser originally planned to spend about $300 million on the park, with the possibility of nearly doubling that investment in a second phase.
But constant bickering between the two municipalities brought the investment to a halt and sent Anheuser searching for an equity partner who could untangle the bureaucratic mess.
The Catalan government, which had guaranteed Tibigardens a 12-year operating monopoly for southern Catalonia, pressed Grand Tibidabo to take an 80% stake in Grand Peninsula.
Anheuser then contributed the $73 million it had spent for land, engineering and design work for the remaining 20% of the venture.
Although Anheuser stayed in the project, its decision to let an equity partner handle most of the day-to-day work made many analysts nervous and raised concerns about the park's future.
Then Grand Tibidabo hit a rough patch of its own: Its majority shareholder, Javier de la Rosa, ran afoul of banks last year after the Kuwait Investment Office lost billions of dollars that he had managed on its behalf in Spain.
Since then, the hunt has been on for new equity partners who could replace Grand Tibidabo and ensure the park's success.
The regional government recently persuaded Fuerzas Electricas de Catalunya, the Catalan electrical company, to acquire a 10% stake from Grand Tibidabo for 1.5 billion pesetas, and Tussauds is likely to take a 30% stake, with the option of increasing that to 50% in the future.
In return for its equity stake, Tussauds would manage the park.
"We feel very comfortable with this project," says Ray Barratt, development director of Tussauds.
"It has a great location, it's been well-researched, it's well-designed and it's of very high quality.
It's everything you'd expect from an Anheuser-Busch park."
If Tussauds does eventually acquire 50% of the venture, Mr. de la Rosa will be out of the picture.
That would still leave, however, a 20% stake that Grand Peninsula and the regional government are trying to place with institutional investors.
The Caja de Ahorros & Pensiones de Barcelona, the big Catalan savings bank known as La Caixa, says it's considering buying the stake, which was spurned by two Spanish electrical utilities in December.
Average temperatures of 17 degrees Celsius from April to October make the Catalan coast a favorite with tourists from northern Europe, providing Tibigardens with a large pool of potential visitors.
Tourism, in fact, swells Salou's population from fewer than 20,000 people in the winter to almost 200,000 in the summer months.
Salou officials also expect the triple devaluation of the peseta since the fall of 1992 and unusually bad weather in the north to bring Europeans flocking to the Catalan coast.
Bureaucratic problems delayed construction of the park by several years.
But that proved to be "a blessing in disguise," argues Mr. Cassinello of Grand Peninsula.
"Because of all these problems, we didn't enter the real-estate market."
Indeed, an ill-conceived property-development project has been at the root of Euro Disney's financial problems.
In contrast, plans to build a hotel and an 18-hole golf course at Tibigardens were shelved after a deep economic recession caused Spain's real-estate market to collapse two years ago.
Park visitors are expected to find lodgings at one of Salou's 54 hotels.
Mr. Cassinello says Euro Disney's investment for each expected visitor is three times what Tibigardens projects, even though he believes the quality of the two companies' attractions is equal.
Because of the hotels, 1,000 of Euro Disney's 9,000 employees now work in administration, while only 170 of the 2,400 people to be employed by Tibigardens will be in administration, he says.
Similarly, the total volume of fees that Tibigardens is expected to pay for Anheuser's services will be only a fraction of what Euro Disney pays its parent in the form of fees and royalties.
Moreover, the delays mean that the interest rates charged on Tibigarden's financing are almost half of what they would have been two to four years ago.
Altogether, Mr. Cassinello says, construction costs will be 30% lower because of the delays, although a weaker peseta will drive up the cost of imported attractions and rides.
The project has shareholders' equity of 10 billion pesetas.
Debt financing so far includes a 10 billion-peseta bank loan guaranteed by the regional government of Catalonia, which has also pledged to spend another 10 billion pesetas on infrastructure and a water-treatment plant.
In addition to its initial investment, Anheuser has provided five billion pesetas of subordinated debt to the venture.
Organizers also hope the state-run financing agency, the Instituto de Credito Oficial, will provide a 15 billion-peseta loan.
