The only memory loss in Al Hunt's Jan. 6 column is his own ("Clinton Allegations Cause GOP Memory Loss," op-ed, Politics & People).
Mr. Hunt argues that my request for the appointment of a "special counsel" to examine the burgeoning Whitewater controversy is somehow inconsistent with a statement I made last November opposing the re-authorization of the Independent Counsel Act.
The statement Mr. Hunt cites as inconsistent is this: "We ought to have confidence in our nation's attorney general-confidence that she can conduct criminal investigations with independence and without the intrusion of politics."
Now, here's what Mr. Hunt forgot.
The very next sentences of my remarks make this point: "In fact, the attorney general already has the authority to appoint special counsels in cases that merit an independent review.
This authority exists with or without an independent counsel statute, and it has been invoked by past attorneys general. . . ."
It didn't fit Mr. Hunt's argument, but the fact is I opposed the independent counsel statute in part because the attorney general already has the authority to appoint special counsels, the same authority Republicans, Democrats and editorial writers for many of the nation's most respected newspapers have now urged Attorney General Reno to use.
Mr. Hunt then suggests I would be critical of any final report "exonerating the Clintons."
In fact, I have provided Attorney General Reno with a list of seven individuals, including such prominent Democrats as former Carter administration Attorneys General Griffin Bell and Benjamin Civiletti, whom I believe would be suitable for appointment as Whitewater special counsel.
All seven individuals have reputations for integrity and competence that are unassailable, and whose conclusions wouldn't be second-guessed by me, or I believe most Republicans.
I hate to disappoint Al Hunt, but I'll have to decline his nomination for his political inconsistency award -- the facts disqualify me.
Sen. Bob Dole (R., Kan.)
