W. Edwards Deming's vision about how companies should be run has been boiled down to what he called "14 Points for Management."
Our company in Portland, Ore., is one case study in the success that comes from implementing some or all of Mr. Deming's principles.
His 14th point, that everyone in the company must be put to work to accomplish the firm's transformation, means there must be personal transformation as well.
And that draws from Mr. Deming's 13th point, that companies institute a program of self-improvement.
Through reading books on personal growth, I felt myself grow in my ability to communicate and saw my effectiveness in business grow.
I wanted to share this growth with my staff.
So I added a library to our lunchroom.
This evolved into what we call our "Learn and Earn Program," in which employees are paid to read books, listen to tapes or attend seminars and then make a report to me about what they have learned.
Employees get as much as $30 extra in their paychecks per report.
Some books are mandatory reading, such as "The Power of Ethical Management," which every new employee must read within the first 90 days of employment.
Raises are often tied to the employee's efforts at self-improvement.
"Learn and Earn" has also helped fulfill Mr. Deming's first recommendation, that companies create constancy of purpose.
We are all singing from the same song sheet now.
As a result, communications have improved not just with the customers, but within the firm.
Improving the staff's ability to communicate has driven out fear, his eighth point; broken down barriers between departments, his ninth; and made possible other innovations.
For example, we have "Round Table" discussions every month, in which all employees participate.
Any topic is fair game, from finances to problems in production.
If we had tried such a thing before our communication skills were improved, people could have retreated into defensiveness and turf protection and nothing would ever have changed.
The "Peer Review" process is another innovation made possible by improved communications.
In years past, when someone wanted a raise he would come before his manager and present his case.
Now, before his situation is even reviewed, there are certain criteria to be met.
Pay reviews are linked to goals met on the job, as well as the number of seminars attended or books read.
The employee fills out a form and submits it to his supervisor and one or two people he works closely with.
Then, the group sits together and evaluates the appropriateness of a raise.
It puts the burden of responsibility on the employee to demonstrate that a raise is warranted -- he doesn't get it by default.
So that we don't become too hidebound in all our programs, we also have an "Exception to the Rule" program.
If there is a request to break with company rules, everyone has to vote on it.
I think this is the finest flower of Mr. Deming's thinking.
He didn't want to enslave business to the rules, but to free it to creatively meet challenges while making profits.
Mr. Gordon is the president of ipd Co., a Portland, Ore., manufacturer of automotive parts.
