ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc. said shareholders "overwhelmingly" voted to back Milan Panic, ICN's founder and longtime chairman, rebuffing a 10-month campaign by stockbroker Rafi Khan to oust Mr. Panic and his board.
The drug holding company said "more than 90%" of the votes cast went to the management slate, but it declined to give a more specific vote count until the final vote is tallied.
Mr. Panic, presiding confidently over the annual meeting in the company's cafeteria here, hailed the outcome.
Mr. Panic returned to ICN last year after a nine-month stint as prime minister of wartorn Yugoslavia.
"The shareholders have spoken," demonstrating that "capitalism truly functions," Mr. Panic said.
He said the margin in his favor was "one of the largest ever" in a proxy fight involving a New York Stock Exchange-listed company.
Most of the two-hour meeting was a sales pitch for ICN and its three publicly traded affiliates.
Mr. Khan, who clashed with Mr. Panic only briefly during the tightly controlled meeting, conceded defeat but angrily challenged the vote tally.
He claimed to have carried about two million shares, or about 16%, of the 12.5 million shares ICN said were cast.
ICN has 20.4 million shares outstanding.
At a news briefing after the meeting Mr. Panic dismissed the apparent vote-tally discrepancy as unimportant.
After the meeting Mr. Khan lashed out at the press for alleged errors that he said damaged his reputation and discredited him with shareholders.
ICN's three largest institutional investors, including Invesco MIM PLC, based in London, with a 6.4% stake, voted with management partly because of highly publicized and "baseless" allegations of improper dealings with him, Mr. Khan said.
Mr. Khan said his support came from smaller institutions with 50,000 to 200,000 shares of ICN stock whose names hadn't cropped up in reports of the bitter battle.
He didn't identify them.
When Mr. Khan launched his attack on ICN management last April, he freely used the name of Invesco and other large holders, boasting that he would be "shocked" if they didn't support him.
Several shareholders at the meeting said they voted with management but thought that Mr. Khan had raised some valid concerns.
One Texas investor thanked Mr. Panic for his "humanitarian" efforts in Yugoslavia, but complained that ICN private stock placements in Europe last year weren't properly disclosed.
Another holder complained that ICN lacked independent board members with strong business backgrounds.
Mr. Panic disagreed with that assessment.
He indicated that the company has an even stronger need for scientific advisers on the board who can help make major strategic decisions about development of the company's ribavirin antiviral drug and other drug research.
Shareholders re-elected the entire management slate of nine directors.
Following the shareholders meeting, directors elected a 10th director, Michael Smith, a chemist from the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, and a 1993 Nobel prize winner for chemistry.
Dr. Smith's election was a step toward fulfilling a promise to shareholders to add two outside directors.
In recent months, the company has "started a dialogue" with its shareholders that will continue, Mr. Panic pledged.
The company has deliberately decided not to "promote" itself, Mr. Panic said, after government censure and criticism of its attempts to promote ribavirin as an AIDS treatment several years ago.
Mr. Panic also said ICN has a five-year goal of becoming a "world class pharmaceutical company."
Under that plan, the company's 42%-owned SPI Pharmaceuticals Inc. affiliate would achieve $2 billion in annual sales, a four-fold increase from current annual sales for SPI.
Other ICN affiliates are Viratek Inc. and ICN Biomedicals Inc.
Much of the meeting was devoted to upbeat financial and scientific presentations by Mr. Panic and other executives.
For his part, Mr. Khan wouldn't say whether he intends to try again to take control of the ICN board.
He said he is "nearly broke" after having spent about $2 million on his fight to replace ICN directors with his own slate.
ICN has spent "close to $4 million" to defend itself, Mr. Panic said.
Mr. Khan now faces legal charges of perjury and insider trading in a New York court case brought by ICN.
In the near term, Mr. Khan said, "I will look to clear my name."
