Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. and Travelers Inc. are in talks to combine their health-care businesses, a move that would create one of the nation's largest health-insurance and managed-care operations.
Although details have yet to be worked out, the combination would likely take the form of a joint venture or strategic alliance rather than an outright sale of one business to another, say people familiar with the discussions.
Eventually, however, the two companies might consider a public stock offering in the venture.
Both companies declined to comment.
Besides being among the largest health insurers, Met and Travelers also operate managed-care networks, such as health maintenance organizations, which provide medical services to members in return for an annual fee.
Managed-care networks are considered the future of health care because they offer more affordable rates than regular health insurance.
But health-care experts say a network can succeed only if it is one of the biggest in its market.
"It is a business very much based on critical mass and local market dominance," said Larry Mayewski, senior vice president of A.M. Best Co.
By combining their businesses, Met and Travelers hope to boost their market shares in specific cities, which would make it easier to get volume discounts from doctors and hospitals.
That, in turn, would attract more customers, specifically big corporations, to their networks.
Right now, the two companies are smaller players in managed care compared with such industry giants as Prudential Insurance Co. of America, Cigna Corp. and Aetna Life & Casualty Co.
The combination would come at a time of intense consolidation in the health-care industry.
Earlier this month, FHP International Corp. agreed to acquire TakeCare Inc. for about $1.1 billion in cash and securities in a bid to create one of the nation's largest HMOs.
Within the last year, Columbia Hospital Corp., now Columbia/HCA Hospital Corp., purchased Galen Healthcare Inc. and HCA-Hospital Corp. of America, its largest competitors among for-profit hospital chains.
Also last year, Merck & Co., the country's biggest pharmaceutical company, bought Medco Containment Services, a mail-order drug company.
Health insurance companies have also been exploring ways to get bigger.
Last year Travelers and New York Life Insurance Co. discussed a merger of their health-care operations, but talks fell through.
In the debate over health-care reform, both Travelers and Met have sided with Prudential, Cigna and Aetna to support HMOs and other forms of managed care.
Other health insurers, with less of a presence in managed care, have preferred a more gradual approach that would protect the usual health-insurance business, which pays a claim every time a doctor or hospital provides a service.
HMOs and other managed-care organizations get a flat, annual fee for every patient enrolled in their network.
Since 1986, enrollment in HMOs has soared to 45 million people from 25.7 million.
Travelers and Met rank fifth and sixth, respectively, in health-insurance premium income, according to A.M. Best, reflecting their large presence in the traditional health-insurance market.
But while Prudential, Cigna and Aetna rank in the top 10 among HMO companies, neither Travelers nor Met crack the top 20, according to the Group Health Association of America.
Both companies are bigger in forms of managed-care networks other than HMOs.
Travelers and Met, like other health insurers, are interested in persuading their traditional insurance customers to join their managed-care networks.
At the end of last year Primerica Corp., the parent of the Smith Barney Shearson Inc. brokerage company, bought Travelers Corp. to create Travelers Inc., based in New York.
