It's time to come to the defense of Arkansas, recently maligned with an image of a close-knit political circle of mutual back-scratching.
In this department, Little Rock has nothing on Washington, D.C.
With Webb Hubbell leaving the Justice Department, Jamie Gorelick is about to arrive.
Ms. Gorelick's nomination as Deputy Attorney General may be voted on in the Judiciary Committee today, with Senators anxious to rush some help to Attorney General Janet Reno.
Ms. Gorelick seasoned her administrative experience the past year or so as general counsel of the Defense Department, but prior to that was a partner in Miller, Cassidy, Larroca & Lewin.
This firm may not be familiar in Little Rock, but among Beltway bigwigs its phone number is posted right next to 911.
Miller Cassidy is totally nonpartisan, having helped Richard Nixon on his pardon.
And "according to quiet rumors," as the National Law Journal put it, the firm advised Ronald Reagan on Iran-Contra.
Good GOP clients also included Edwin Meese, Michael Deaver and former Attorney General Richard Kleindienst.
Ms. Gorelick has been active in intra-bar politics, rising to president of the D.C. Bar Association.
But she has found time for her share of high-profile cases, most recently on behalf of Clark Clifford and Robert Altman.
Her part of their litigation has been trying to get reimbursement for their legal fees from First American Bank, where they worked when it was secretly owned by the Bank of Credit & Commerce International, or BCCI.
In a January 1993 letter to a lawyer for First American Bankshares, she wrote that her clients had "certified that they acted at all times in good faith with respect to First American, in a manner consistent with the best interests of the corporation, and neither of them had any reasonable cause to believe that his conduct was unlawful.
Their proper stewardship of First American has been confirmed repeatedly by federal and state regulators, extensive company audits and testimony of bank officials."
Ms. Gorelick argued the bank should pay their legal fees.
They have, she related, "been billed in excess of $8 million for legal fees and expenses by the law firms of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom (`Skadden, Arps') and Davis Polk & Wardwell (`Davis Polk')."
That is to say, the ultimate beneficiaries of Ms. Gorelick's letter prominently included Robert Fiske, independent counsel for White-water, who also led the Clifford-Altman defense at Davis Polk.
By the way, Ms. Gorelick also represented Senator Joseph Biden, chairman of the committee voting on her nomination, in the investigation of Anita Hill leaks.
And Orrin Hatch, ranking minority member, hired one of her partners at Miller Cassidy in the Senate Ethics Committee investigation of allegations that some illicit influence was at work in his 1990 floor speech defending BCCI.
Now, we do not see in any of this reason to doubt Ms. Gorelick's personal abilities or integrity.
We'd be happy to see her in some other government job at some other time.
If we're in hot water, we'd be more than happy to have her on our side.
Mr. Altman was acquitted in trial, we should also mention, though he and Mr. Clifford remain defendants in a civil suit by First American's trustee.
And the Ethics Committee ruled that Senator Hatch was kosher.
With all that said, Ms. Gorelick's experience and pedigree seem to us precisely the opposite of what we need entering the Justice Department at this particular time.
We also suggest Chairman Biden and Senator Hatch set up a phone call with Paula Casey, Friend of Bill and U.S. Attorney in Little Rock.
After turning down plea bargain attempts from and launching the prosecution of David Hale, the fellow who said Bill Clinton urged him to make a fraudulent loan, Ms. Casey admitted she had a conflict in handling Whitewater matters.
Before the Senators cast their committee votes, maybe she can advise them on whether they should recuse themselves.
