In response to your Dec. 30 page-one article "Physicians Fight Back as Insurers Cut Them From Health Networks": Massive accumulation of financial and political power is rapidly moving into the hands of the large for-profit insurance companies and their HMOs, giving them almost dictatorial power over the jobs and incomes of physicians.
The insurance industry's freedom from antitrust constraints, via the 1945 McCarran-Ferguson Act, coupled with enormous untaxed financial reserves that can be used for buying and creating HMOs, give them an unique advantage in the climb to the pinnacle of the health care power mountain.
While physician incomes will go down and down, the incomes and perks of marginally educated HMO and insurance executives will go up and up.
For society, moving from fee for services, an inherently wasteful, but quality oriented system, to the "less is best" capitation world of giant for-profit HMOs, is like trading a great dane that could be housebroken for a bull rhino that may crush anything that happens to get in its path.
If a patient develops cancer at the end of an HMO's fiscal year and the oncologist they go to is $50,000 over budget, management will strongly encourage, when possible, the oncologist to tell the patient that there is no chemotherapy that will benefit him, and when not possible, will strongly encourage the oncologist to treat the patient with the lowest-costing drug protocol available for that particular cancer.
No therapy and minimal therapy for cancer patients will be the buzz phrases for HMO executives in our new health care system.
As an oncologist, I fear for tomorrow's cancer patients who will be at the mercy of the "bottom line" managers at capitation HMOs who practice medicine without knowledge, wisdom, compassion or a license.
Medical practice by insurance fiat will eviscerate quality and the art of medicine from medical care.
Charles C. Douglass, M.D.
Your excellent article entitled "Losing Patients" should be read as a cautionary story by citizens who will require medical care under an increasingly managed system, not just as a description of the problems of practitioners.
Larger systems of care, whether government or corporate, may set parameters and provide "report cards" on care.
This approach should be thought of as a useful public-health model for care and is protective of broad populations of patients.
Unfortunately, individuals may not be well-protected when only that model is used.
Only a physician with an ongoing relation to a patient over time can care and advocate, rendering far more than just technical care to their patients.
Frighteningly, the current trend in managed care aims to destroy the doctor/patient relationship.
M.D.s are increasingly intimidated away from active advocacy for fear of being dropped from networks and thus suffering the loss of referrals and livelihood.
Patients, like commodities, are shifted from provider panel and thus lose their champions.
When Americans say they want "their own doctor" they don't simply mean they want the M.D. they have now.
They mean they don't want to be frequently shifted from one M.D. to another, as must occur for managed competition to work.
Rather, they want a relationship with an M.D. whose judgment they trust.
They want a system in which that doctor is able to advocate for their best interests without fear of reprisal.
They worry they will get "company doctors" who are controlled not primarily by their clinical needs but by the calculus of corporate bottom lines.
Barry B. Perlman, M.D.
Purchase, N.Y.
