Just weeks after receiving a state handout of nearly $170 million, a money-losing French credit institute is aggressively undercutting its bigger private-sector rivals in the lending marketplace.
As the government is preparing a much larger aid package for Credit Lyonnais, the nation's biggest bank, angry rivals are pointing to this smaller case as an example of the pernicious effects of French state meddling in business.
By writing big checks for struggling state-owned companies, critics say, the government of Prime Minister Edouard Balladur is distorting fair competition and rewarding bad management at the expense of the private sector.
"It's untenable for those who manage their banks well," gripes a top executive at one of France's largest private-sector banks.
Adds an official at another bank: "Taxpayers' money is being used to distort the market."
Economics Minister Edmond Alphandery announced in late December that the government would inject one billion francs ($167.6 million) in new capital into Credit d'Equipement des Petites et Moyennes Entreprises, a state-owned lending institution known as CEPME.
The institution isn't technically a bank because it doesn't take deposits, but it does compete with banks on long-term loans, especially to small and medium-sized companies, and claims to hold 15% to 20% of that market.
The state bailout came at the end of the worst year in CEPME's 12-year history.
After making heavy provisions for soured loans, it is expected to report a net loss for 1993 of between 700 million and 800 million francs, following an operating loss of 200 million francs in 1992.
But boosted by the capital injection, CEPME quickly embarked on a new round of aggressive lending, offering clients rates on loans that are as much as 50 basis points, or half of a percentage point, below the market average.
A CEPME spokesman, Philippe Adami, says the bank is offering rates as low as 6.9%, compared with the minimum of 7.35% being charged by its rivals.
He defends the capital injection, saying it was needed to raise the institution's capital ratio to well above the level required under banking regulations, and "allows us to develop our activity and help the country's economic recovery."
The effect has been quickly felt by mainstream banks.
Officials say their lending officers around the nation have been complaining bitterly about the dangers of losing credit business, which is already lackluster because of France's recession, to CEPME.
In a free market, other banks could theoretically respond to the challenge by lowering their own rates.
But in France, private-sector banks are hobbled by numerous restrictions.
For example, they are required to pay fixed rates for savings deposits kept in what are known as Livret A accounts.
Although market interest rates have been falling sharply in recent months, the government has refused to cut rates on these traditional savings accounts, fearing such a move would hurt its popularity.
Private-sector bankers here bellow about the problems of competing on this unlevel playing field, just as some U.S. banks griped about the distorting effect of Washington's rescue of some savings and loan institutions.
CEPME is one of several French state-owned financial entities, including the national post office, that compete with banks in some areas but are governed by different rules.
"It's as if we have a group of people playing canasta while others are playing bridge at the same club," says Baudouin Prot, executive senior vice president at France's recently privatized Banque Nationale de Paris.
Such complaints are growing as the government considers a recapitalization plan for Credit Lyonnais, which has plunged into the red following an aggressive -- critics say reckless -- international expansion strategy.
The chairmen of BNP and Societe Generale have publicly complained about the prospect of the government picking up the bill for the mistakes made by their state-owned rival.
But government meddling in business is a longstanding tradition in France, and one that Mr. Balladur shows few signs of wanting to end.
Although he has received plaudits for launching a big privatization campaign, his conservative government continues to play a big role in corporate affairs.
Among other things, Mr. Balladur has been twisting the arms of major companies not to lay off workers during the current recession.
Such government micromanagement often infuriates employers, who say piecemeal tinkering with the economy is no substitute for action to address deeper problems, particularly the rising cost of maintaining the welfare system.
"The real question is how long can we keep going without tackling fundamental reforms," says Francois Perigot, president of the national employers' association.
