This is in response to the Feb. 4 Americas column by Carlos Ball.
I understand that Mr. Ball is a free-lance writer whose views do not represent The Wall Street Journal's editorial policy.
Nevertheless, inasmuch as Mr. Ball's article contains false and misleading statements about my family, my involvement with Banco Latino, my family's business ventures (known as ODC companies) and our views about the future of Venezuela, I have to object.
The suggestion that I am part of a "controlling group" of Banco Latino is false.
At all times since I became one of 10 directors of the bank in late 1992 I served only as an "outside" director and was never involved in the management of the bank or its day-to-day operations.
I played no role whatsoever in the events that led to the intervention in the bank.
Moreover, Banco Latino has never suffered any credit losses from transactions with ODC companies.
At the time of the intervention all ODC companies' transactions were current and in good standing.
The article states that CADA, our supermarket chain in Venezuela, and Banco Latino were "siphoned off to purchase Pueblo Supermarkets," our Puerto Rico and Florida-based supermarkets, when in fact neither organization provided any financing.
The bank financing for the acquisition was provided by a syndicated bank loan of 12 substantial U.S.-based money-center banks headed by Chase Manhattan Bank along with the Bank of Nova Scotia.
Banco Latino did not participate nor did any other Venezuelan institution.
The article attributes the international expansion of companies comprising ODC to a desire of the Cisneros family to reduce exposure in Venezuela following the coup attempt in November 1992.
This is false.
Mr. Ball specifically refers to the purchase of Univision as evidence that our companies are abandoning Venezuela because of political turmoil.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
The purchase of Univision was announced April 8, 1992.
The purchase of a $55 million business is not done overnight.
Negotiations to buy Univision began early in October 1991.
It is evident to us that there is no link, as Mr. Ball states, between the purchase of Univision and the November 1992 coup attempt.
Our expansion outside of Venezuela does not mean we're neglecting our Venezuelan businesses; on the contrary, our involvements in businesses such as Univision and Pueblo have provided important outlets for Venezuelan products and significant economic benefits and opportunities for Venezuelan businesses both in and outside of the ODC group.
Our joint ventures with different world-class companies and other acquisitions that operate solely within Venezuela further confirm our belief in the vitality of Venezuela and its economy.
It is true that we are in the process of selling companies in Venezuela, but we are also in the process of acquiring other companies in Venezuela and will continue to do so.
We have more than 15 joint ventures with major American companies in Venezuela; the most recent include Motorola and Sprint, completed in 1993.
Soon, we will officially announce a substantial additional investment in Venezuela.
This makes it clear that far from deciding "to cut its losses, wipe the slate clean and get out of Venezuela," we have great confidence that the current economic difficulties of the country will be overcome, and that Venezuela, as well as our business enterprises located there, will resume the growth and development that began in 1929.
My father, Diego Cisneros, began his first company in 1929, and thereafter developed a variety of businesses in fields such as retailing, the manufacture of consumer goods and television.
As his children we have continued to carry out his entrepreneurial vision both within Venezuela and elsewhere.
The article suggests that some shareholders of Banco Latino owe their success to their political connections, becoming "multimillionaires practically overnight" from quasi-public projects.
In the case of the Cisneros family, nothing could be further from the truth.
