Despite months of litigation and a barrage of damaging headlines about its brokerage arm, financial experts say Prudential Insurance Co. of America, one of the largest financial institutions in the country, is strong enough to absorb the drubbing.
Analysts say that on a purely financial basis, it's hard to conceive of a scenario related to the continuing scandal at Prudential Securities Inc. that would topple Prudential Insurance.
The company is simply too strong and too important.
Prudential Insurance has $200 billion in assets and annual revenue of about $45 billion, of which Prudential Securities accounts for about 8%.
It has capital, as measured by insurance regulators, of nearly $13 billion.
In the insurance world, only the arguably overcapitalized State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. has more.
As for earnings, the company -- a mutual insurer that is owned by its policyholders rather than stockholders -- made about $1 billion last year, said Prudential Insurance Chief Financial Officer Eugene O'Hara.
Despite news reports about possible fraud at Prudential Securities, life-insurance sales at Prudential Insurance rose 26% last year and annuity sales rose 17%, the company says.
Of course, the major ratings agencies are keeping a close watch on developments at Prudential Securities and trying to assess how they will affect the insurance company.
A.M. Best Co. has put Prudential Insurance's rating on review, partly because of the scandal.
The agency now rates Prudential double-A-plus -- its highest rating -- but is trying to determine what effect the continuing legal actions and negative publicity will have "on future marketing activities and existing business."
Moody's Investors Service Inc. says that it is watching the repercussions, and that it, like Prudential Insurance itself, is also reviewing monthly sales figures.
Moody's now rates Prudential double-A-2, one of its highest ratings.
"Virtually all parts of the company had the best year they've ever had," said Moody's analyst Robert Riegel.
He said the total losses for Prudential Securities, now about $800 million, would have to go considerably higher before Moody's even considered lowering its rating.
In any event, Prudential Insurance customers interviewed for this article say they aren't worried.
For example, Suzanne Bowman, insurance administrator for the American Association of Retired Persons, one of Prudential's largest health-insurance clients, says she is more interested in the insurer's financial strength and its ability to service claims.
"I've had only one client who was actually influenced by this," said Murray Becker, a Teaneck, N.J., consultant who advises investors on guaranteed investment contracts.
Because of Prudential Insurance's earnings power -- as well as the earnings power of Prudential Securities itself -- the financial impact of the affair on the insurance company has so far been negligible.
Indeed, the brokerage unit has footed the bill itself.
In 1991, Prudential Insurance pumped $215 million into Prudential Securities to help settle investor claims, but Prudential Securities paid it back three months later in the form of a dividend, Mr. O'Hara said.
Last year, Prudential Securities agreed to settle state and federal securities-law violations by paying $371 million.
The settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission and state regulators called for most of the money to go to investors.
Again, Prudential Securities paid the bill itself.
Prudential Securities should have resources to meet new obligations.
Despite losses to settle fraud allegations, Prudential Securities said yesterday that it earned $145 million in 1993.
Of course, matters could always get worse for Prudential Insurance.
For one thing, last year's agreement with securities regulators is open-ended.
If investors prove they deserve more money, courts could force Prudential Securities to ante up again.
And, if the securities firm didn't have the money, it could turn to Prudential Insurance for an investment.
But any infusions from the insurance company would be voluntary.
Prudential Insurance is technically shielded from liability because it owns Prudential Securities as a stockholder, albeit the only one.
If the losses at Prudential Securities ever became overwhelming, Prudential Insurance could simply refuse to make a capital investment and let the brokerage unit fail.
To get at the deep pockets of Prudential Insurance, investors would have to prove the insurance company -- not just its brokerage house -- participated in fraud.
Plaintiff lawyers have turned up only the scantiest evidence of that.
Should worse come to worst and Prudential Securities fail, even that wouldn't bring down Prudential Insurance.
Experts say it would be an embarrassment for Prudential Insurance, but one it could survive.
The insurer paid about $385 million when it bought the brokerage house in 1981.
The company now values its investment in the unit at $850 million.
Writing off the entire amount would equal less than a year's profit.
Prudential Insurance has survived worse.
In 1992, the company lost $940 million on Hurricane Andrew, and still made money for the year.
A final question hanging over Prudential Insurance, however, is what happens if the company is named in a criminal indictment.
The U.S. Attorney's office in Manhattan is investigating not only Prudential Securities, but also the role in the affair played by the insurance company.
Although Prudential Insurance and Prudential Securities discount the likelihood of an indictment, if it were to happen state regulators could suspend or even revoke the company's ability to sell insurance -- an event that could put Prudential Insurance out of business.
But regulators are unlikely to take such harsh action because they have their own interests in keeping Prudential Insurance alive.
Not only would a failure of the insurer put 102,000 employees on the street, but it would disrupt the lives of the company's 50 million customers -- one in five Americans.
"Insurance regulators are interested 99% in insurance-company solvency and only 1% in insurance-company integrity," said Eugene Anderson, an insurance attorney with Anderson Kill Olick & Olshinky.
