Europe got its first taste of the management style of Walt Disney Co. when Joe Shapiro started kicking in a door at the luxury Hotel Bristol here.
It was 1986, and Disney was negotiating with the French government on plans to build a big resort and theme park on the outskirts of Paris.
To the exasperation of the Disney team headed by Mr. Shapiro, then the company's general counsel, the talks were taking far longer than expected.
Jean-Rene Bernard, the chief French negotiator, says he was astonished when Mr. Shapiro, his patience ebbing, ran to the door of the room and began kicking it repeatedly, shouting, "Get me something cheap to break!"
Mr. Shapiro says he doesn't remember the incident, though he adds with a laugh, "There were a lot of histrionics at the time."
But Disney's kick-down-the-door attitude in the planning, building and financing of Euro Disney accounts for many of the huge problems that plague the resort, which currently loses $1 million a day because of its sky-high overhead and interest payments on loans.
The project is in danger less than two years after opening, as Disney and creditor banks try to work out a costly rescue.
The sides are believed to be coming closer to an agreement by a deadline of March 31.
The irony is that even though some early French critics called the park an American cultural abomination, public acceptance hasn't been the problem.
European visitors seem to love the place.
The Magic Kingdom has attracted an average of just under a million visitors a month, in line with projections, and today it ranks as Europe's biggest paid tourist destination.
Euro Disney's troubles, instead, derive from a different type of culture clash.
Europe may have embraced Mickey Mouse, but it hasn't taken to the brash, frequently insensitive and often overbearing style of Mickey's American corporate parent.
Overly ambitious, Disney made several strategic and financial miscalculations.
It relied too heavily on debt -- just as interest rates started to rise -- and gambled, incorrectly, that the 1980s boom in real estate would continue, letting it sell off assets and pay down the debt quickly.
It also made uncharacteristic slips in the park itself, from wrongly thinking Europeans don't eat breakfast to not providing enough toilets for the hundreds of bus drivers.
Disney executives declined to comment for this article.
In the past, the company has blamed its problems on external factors, including an unexpectedly severe European recession, high interest rates and the devaluation of several currencies against the French franc.
And Disney supporters note that many of the same people now complaining about Disney's aggressiveness were only too happy to sign on with Disney before conditions deteriorated.
But Disney's contentious attitude exacerbated the difficulties it encountered by alienating people it needed to work with, say many people familiar with the situation.
Its answer to doubts or suggestions invariably was: Do as we say, because we know best.
"They were always sure it would work because they were Disney," says Beatrice Descoffre, a French construction-industry official who dealt with the U.S. company.
If Euro Disney had been a financial success, few would have cared.
In the project's early days, banks and private investors fell over one another to help finance the deal.
S.G. Warburg & Co., a British investment bank that arranged Euro Disney's equity offering in the U.K., put out a brochure describing the project as "relatively low-risk."
As of Dec. 31, Euro Disney, which opened in April 1992, had a cumulative loss of 6.04 billion francs, or $1.03 billion.
Now, just when it needs it most, Disney seems to have lost the goodwill it found when it first arrived in Europe -- and along with it an unblemished reputation for success.
"Tonya Harding just got her first endorsement," comedian Garry Shandling joked at this month's Grammy Awards, referring to the U.S. skater.
"They go, `Where you going?'
She says, `I'm going to Euro Disney.'"
In practical terms, Disney's image problem could prove costly.
To rescue its 49%-owned affiliate, Disney last October quietly proposed a $2 billion restructuring to the 60 creditor banks, and offered to pick up half the tab.
People familiar with the proposal say Disney would have contributed three billion French francs ($520 million) in cash to a rights issue, and waived enough future management fees and royalties to bring its total contribution to $1 billion.
But the banks, feeling they were being steamrolled by Disney, rejected the offer.
"They had a formidable image and convinced everyone that if we let them do it their way, we would all have a marvelous adventure," says a top French banker involved in the negotiations.
"The Walt Disney group is making a major error in thinking it can impose its will once more."
People familiar with the debt negotiations say Disney and its banks have struck a much more conciliatory tone in just the past couple of weeks, raising hopes that a solution may be at hand.
If an agreement is reached, analysts say, Disney's cash-generating powers are such that it could absorb the blow of spending more than $1 billion in cash and deferred fees to save Euro Disney.
More important will be to avoid more write-offs and losses in the future, so Disney can meet the ambitious growth targets it promises its shareholders, and preserve its future fee-earning power if Euro Disney turns around.
The alternative for Disney -- to walk away -- likely would trigger a host of time-consuming lawsuits in France and cause an immeasurable loss of prestige.
Few believe Disney will allow the European resort to fail, even though it has threatened to cut off funding at the end of this month unless it can reach a deal with the banks.
Too much rides on the future of Euro Disney for the U.S. company, the creditors and the French government, which provided $750 million in loans at below-market rates, built road and rail networks to the park and allowed Disney to buy up huge tracts of land at 1971 prices.
Already, Euro Disney has brought in new management and made other changes to save the project.
Even detractors say they have been impressed by the way the company is changing tack, cutting prices and reducing costs.
The initial overconfidence of Disney, a company already known for corporate hubris, is perhaps understandable.
The current management team of Chairman Michael Eisner and President Frank Wells arrived in late 1984 and immediately began tapping into theme-park, film and merchandising riches unmined by their predecessors.
In the seven years before Euro Disney opened, they transformed Disney into a company with annual revenue of $8.5 billion -- up from $1 billion -- mainly through internal growth.
"From the time they came on, they had never made a single misstep, never a mistake, never a failure," says a former Disney executive.
"There was a tendency to believe that everything they touched would be perfect."
Forged in the go-go culture of California and Florida, where growth seemed limitless, the new Disney team determined it wouldn't repeat two mistakes of years past: letting others build the lucrative hotels surrounding a park, as happened at Disneyland in Southern California, and letting another company own a Disney park, as in Tokyo, where Disney just collects royalties from the immensely profitable attraction.
But this determination exported poorly to Europe, particularly when combined with Mr. Eisner's vow to make Euro Disney the most lavish project Disney had ever built.
Though tight with a buck in many ways, Mr. Eisner was almost obsessed with maintaining Disney's reputation for quality.
And his designers -- the "creative" people with whom he identified -- convinced him that in Europe, home of great monuments and elaborate cathedrals, Euro Disney would have to brim with detail.
Unlike the Japanese, Europeans wouldn't accept carbon copies of Disneyland and Florida's Walt Disney World, Disney reasoned.
In argument after argument, executives say, Mr. Eisner sided with the designers and architects -- who had direct access to the chairman's office -- and piled on more detail.
Even the centerpiece castle in the Magic Kingdom had to be bigger and fancier than in the other parks.
So the cost of park construction, estimated at 14 billion francs ($2.37 billion) in 1989, rose by $340 million to 16 billion francs before the opening in April 1992.
Construction of the hotels, estimated at 3.4 billion francs, rose to 5.7 billion.
One measure of Disney's overconfidence was a belief that it could predict future living patterns in Paris.
Invited to the apartment of French negotiator Mr. Bernard in the western part of the city, where most of the French establishment has long lived, Mr. Eisner one evening boasted, "You live in the west of Paris, as do your friends, but your children and grandchildren will live in the east of Paris" near Euro Disney, Mr. Bernard says.
Similarly, Disney executives believed, wrongly, that they could change certain European habits, such as a reluctance to yank their children from school in mid-session as Americans do, or their preference for longer holidays rather than short breaks.
With hindsight, some former executives, bankers and others say Disney's biggest mistakes were its overambitious plans to develop the site, plus Euro Disney's financial structure itself, which depended on a highly optimistic financial scenario with little room for glitches.
Both were creations of Gary Wilson, then the chief financial officer, a man known for his knack for creating financing packages that placed the risk for many Disney projects on outside investors while keeping much of the upside potential for the company.
Mr. Wilson, now co-chairman of Northwest Airlines Corp. and still a Disney director, declined comment.
Mr. Wilson set up a finance company to own the park and lease it back to an operating company.
This ownership vehicle, in which Disney kept just a 17% stake, was to provide tax losses and borrow huge sums at relatively low rates.
Disney would manage the resort for hefty fees and royalties, while owning 49% of the equity in the operating company, Euro Disney SCA.
The rest was sold to the public.
The park, moreover, was just the cornerstone of a huge and growing real-estate development by Disney in the area.
The initial number of hotel rooms -- at 5,200, more than in the entire city of Cannes -- was expected to triple in a few years as Euro Disney opened a second theme park to keep visitors at the resort for a longer stay.
There would also be office space, which would grow 20 times to a stunning 700,000 square meters, or just slightly smaller than France's biggest office complex, La Defense, in Paris.
And the plan called for shopping malls, apartments, golf courses and vacation homes galore.
Euro Disney would tightly control the design and build nearly everything itself, selling off the completed commercial properties in due course and at a big profit.
At first, all seemed to work beautifully.
Disney's initial equity stake in Euro Disney was acquired for about $150 million, or 10 francs a share, compared with the initial price to investors of 72 francs a share.
After the public offering, the value of the company's stake zoomed to $1 billion on the magic of the Disney name, and later to $2.3 billion when the stock peaked just before the park's opening.
Today it is worth about $550 million.
The company's shares closed at 36.15 francs yesterday on the Paris Stock Exchange.
Dozens of banks, led by France's Banque Nationale de Paris and Banque Indosuez, eagerly signed on to provide construction loans.
Euro Disney's total debt stands at about 21 billion francs, or about $3.5 billion.
Several European financial institutions, including Lazard Freres -- Disney's own adviser -- worried that the plan was too clever, according to people familiar with the financing.
"The company was overleveraged.
The structure was dangerous," says one banker who saw the figures.
The public offering price seemed high, and the proposed financing appeared risky because it relied on capital gains from future real-estate transactions, critics charged.
But Disney's attitude, current and former executives say, was that those views reflected the cautious, Old-World thinking of Europeans who didn't understand U.S.-style free-market financing.
Those who defend the deal point out that for more than two years after the offering, the stock price continued to swell, and that the initial loans were at a low rate.
It was later cost overruns, they say, and the necessity for more borrowing, that handcuffed Euro Disney.
As the European recession started to bite, though, the French real-estate market tumbled, taking with it Disney's hopes that it could quickly sell many of the park's assets, especially the six big hotels.
The company also passed up the chance to lessen its burden.
"Disney at various points could have had partners to share the risk, or buy the hotels outright," says a Disney executive.
"But it didn't want to give up the upside."
Disney's early worries mainly concerned attendance.
If Euro Disney could only meet its target of 11 million visitors the first year, it reckoned, money would roll in.
The target was met, but the reality turned out to be very different.
And that helps to explain why the park is doing reasonably well while Euro Disney is racking up huge losses.
The cost of building was simply too high.
In his pursuit of perfection, Mr. Eisner himself ordered several last-minute budget-breakers.
For example, he removed two steel staircases in Discoveryland because they blocked a view of the Star Tours ride; that cost $200,000 to $300,000, a Disney official estimates.
Disney built expensive trams along a lake to take guests from the hotels to the park.
People preferred walking.
Minibars were placed in economy hotel rooms; they lost money.
Disney built an 18-hole golf course, then added nine holes, to adjoin 600 new homes.
The homes haven't been built, and the golf courses, which cost $15 million to $20 million, are underused, says a former executive.
Disney and its advisers failed to see signs of the approaching European recession.
"We were just trying to keep our heads above water," says one former executive.
"Between the glamour and the pressure of opening and the intensity of the project itself, we didn't realize a major recession was coming."
So Disney priced the park and the hotels more to meet revenue targets than to meet demand.
Park admission was set at $42.45 for adults, higher than at its U.S. theme parks.
A room at the flagship Disneyland Hotel at the park's entrance cost about 2,000 francs, or about $340 a night, the same as a top hotel in Paris.
The hotels have been just over half full on average, and guests haven't been staying as long or spending as much as expected on the fairly high-priced food and merchandise.
While visitors to Florida's Disney World tend to stay more than four days, Euro Disney -- with one theme park, compared with Florida's three -- is a two-day experience at most.
Many guests arrive early in the morning, rush to the park, come back late at night, then check out the next morning before heading back to the park.
There was so much checking-in and checking-out that additional computer stations had to be installed.
Disney executives have frantically lowered most prices in response, but high fixed costs and looming interest payments still are too great a burden without the addition of more development and a second theme park.
Euro Disney is, in the words of one senior French banker familiar with the company, "a good theme park married to a bankrupt real-estate company -- and the two can't be divorced."
If it didn't foresee all the potential financial pitfalls, Disney clearly realized at the outset that it might encounter cultural problems.
It sought to head them off by choosing Robert Fitzpatrick as Euro Disney's president.
He is an American who speaks French, knows Europe well and has a French wife.
But he seemed caught in the middle, and quickly came to be regarded with suspicion by some on both sides.
Mr. Fitzpatrick, who was replaced last year by a French native but still does consulting for Disney, declines comment.
Officials sympathetic to him say his warnings to Disney management that France shouldn't be approached as if it were Florida were ignored.
While Mr. Fitzpatrick was well acclimated, some of the American managers sent over to start up Euro Disney had their own culture shock.
One French manager says he remembers being astonished when an American colleague complained about the cost of Evian bottled water, which is cheaper in France than in the U.S.
It turns out the American was going through dozens of bottles per week because he was nervous about using French tap water for anything, including washing.
One executive even had his own dog food flown over, another manager says.
European executives felt they were in the shadow of Disney corporate types and almost always lost out when the interests of Euro Disney and Disney itself weren't the same.
Disney, for example, refused in the early stages of development to renegotiate the management and royalty fees that it would be paid by Euro Disney; that might have lessened the financial burden on Euro Disney, these executives say.
Unfamiliar with the French market, Disney made mistakes in selecting contractors, French construction-industry officials say.
Two general contractors filed for bankruptcy during construction, forcing Disney to pay twice for the work done by the subcontractors, once to the failed general contractors and again to the 60 or so smaller firms that carried out the work.
Euro Disney won't say how much the double payments cost, but French industry sources peg the amount at about 200 million francs, a number Disney has said is too high.
Bad press has dogged Euro Disney since the opening.
Mr. Eisner and his management team dismissed early criticism by scornful French intellectuals as the ravings of an insignificant elite.
But the mainstream press, too, described every Disney setback with glee.
"There was a perceived arrogance on our part," concedes one former executive.
The effect, he adds, was to demoralize the work force and cut down on initial French visitors.
"Working for Euro Disney has a very pejorative connotation," says Patrick Roger, a union official at the park.
"When I tell people that I work there, they say, `you poor thing.'"
European creditor banks feel they have been victimized by poor communications, too, and resent not being properly apprised of the resort's difficulties, some say.
Until last July, Disney continued to say that plans for the development of a second theme park were on track.
In November, Euro Disney reported a $905 million loss and Disney itself took a $350 million writeoff, covering its initial investment and providing operating capital through March 31.
Shortly afterward, Mr. Eisner gave an interview to a French news magazine in which he raised the possibility that Euro Disney could close.
Disney advisers, however, say the banks were given regular, detailed financial statements and were just too slow to spot the problems.
Here Operational errors just made things worse.
The policy of serving no alcohol in the park, since reversed, caused astonishment in a country where a glass of wine for lunch is a given.
Disney thought Monday would be a light day for visitors, Friday a heavy one, and allocated staff accordingly; the reality was the reverse.
The company still is struggling to find the right level of staffing at a park where the number of visitors per day in the high season can be 10 times the number in the low season.
Disney, accustomed in Florida to telling an employee, "We don't need you today," has chafed under France's inflexible labor schedules.
The hotel breakfast debacle was another unpleasant surprise.
"We were told that Europeans don't take breakfast, so we downsized the restaurants," recalls one executive.
"And guess what?
Everybody showed up for breakfast.
We were trying to serve 2,500 breakfasts in a 350-seat restaurant at some of the hotels.
The lines were horrendous.
And they didn't just want croissants and coffee.
They wanted bacon and eggs."
Disney reacted quickly, however, with prepackaged breakfasts delivered to rooms and satellite locations.
Another demand, from bus drivers, wasn't anticipated.
"The parking space was much too small," says a former executive.
"We built restrooms for 50 drivers, and on peak days there were 2,000."
From impatient drivers to grumbling bankers, Disney stepped on toe after European toe.
Former Disney executives shake their heads when they think about it, because much of Disney's attitude sprang, they say, from a relentless pursuit of quality, the same drive for perfection that has made the company so successful.
"We were arrogant," concedes one executive.
"It was like, `We're building the Taj Mahal and people will come -- on our terms.'"
