Sara Lee Corp., its huge hosiery business snagged by a shift to more casual dress and intense competition, reported disappointing fiscal second-quarter results and said earnings for the current quarter would be flat.
The numbers also provided a clue about why Sara Lee's first non-American president lasted only six months on the job.
The world's largest maker of stockings and socks has declined to discuss the sudden resignation on Dec. 31 of Cornelis Boonstra, who had spent much of his tenure trying to repair the company's $6 billion personal products business.
"The company said he left for personal reasons.
Perhaps some were `personal products' reasons," said John M. McMillin, food analyst at Prudential Securities Inc., after seeing the results.
Sara Lee's stock fell on the news, dropping $1.50, or 6%, to $23.50, as more than 3.1 million shares traded on the New York Stock Exchange.
For the second quarter ended Jan. 1, net income was $236 million, or 48 cents a share, up 7.2% from $220 million, or 44 cents a share, a year earlier.
The gain was fueled by the strong performance of Sara Lee's packaged meats and bakery business as well as its household and personal care unit, each of which posted double-digit gains in operating income.
Total sales rose 4.4% to $4.01 billion from $3.84 billion.
But personal products -- the Chicago company's biggest sector and one that Wall Street increasingly looks to for future growth -- reported an 8.4% decline in operating profit, to $179 million from $196 million on a 1.2% sales slippage to $1.7 billion.
Sara Lee sells such powerhouse hosiery brands as Hanes, L'eggs and Dim.
Also included in personal products are Playtex women's underwear, Hanes T-shirts and underwear and Champion fleecewear.
Joanna Scharf, an S.G. Warburg & Co. analyst, attributed the unraveling in hosiery to "a structural shift in what women are putting on their legs" that Sara Lee failed to recognize early on.
While more women shed sheer pantyhose and stockings for opaque hose and even socks as part of a more casual lifestyle, Sara Lee mistakenly regarded it as "a fashion statement," Ms. Scharf said.
"They're late to the party," but eventually will catch up, she predicted.
Still, she said, "It's a disappointment to see a decline in hosiery against a decline last year."
Sara Lee blamed "ongoing softness in our European hosiery and knit-products operations, combined with weaker-than-expected trends for U.S. hosiery and knit products" for the likelihood of "generally flat earnings for the third quarter."
A year ago Sara Lee earned $152 million, or 30 cents a share, on sales of $3.3 billion.
Analysts, taken aback by the latest numbers, had been projecting third-quarter earnings of 33 cents, and full-year figures of $1.54, according to First Call, which monitors estimates.
Because the company now doubts it can fully offset personal products' problems with other businesses, Prudential's Mr. McMillin now expects that "earnings will be up about 5% for the year instead of most people's hopes for 10%."
Some analysts suggest that what Sara Lee needs to do with its apparel business in Europe, where an economic slump has exacerbated excess manufacturing capacity, is to further reduce costs, push branded products wherever possible, and wait for what some see as inevitable industry consolidation.
During yesterday's conference call with analysts, Sara Lee disclosed that it has abandoned efforts to introduce its Princessa hosiery line in Spain.
"The issue in Europe is much more competition than volume," Mr. McMillin said.
Warburg's Ms. Scharf, citing the presence of such rivals as U.S.-based Fruit of the Loom and U.K.-based Hartstone, said, "The near-term costs of Sara Lee positioning itself to be the European leader are greater than I anticipated."
Traditionally, Sara Lee has been reluctant to engage in price wars, instead maintaining its margins by stringent cost reductions.
Its strategy is to turn regional labels into megabrands that span borders wherever possible.
Among its major foodside brands are Hillshire Farm, Jimmy Dean and Sara Lee; in beverages its Douwe Egberts coffee is a leading European brand, in household items Kiwi shoe polish and in accessories Coach leather goods.
