Victims of severe burns face long, painful and costly treatments that involve grafting healthy skin from elsewhere on their bodies.
It usually leaves them horribly scarred, if they are lucky enough to survive.
Several small biotechnology companies, though, are testing a variety of man-made skin replacement products that one day could revolutionize the complex medical science of wound healing, cut down on scarring and improve the lives of burn victims and sufferers of other serious skin ailments.
Wound healing is a tricky science that has stymied other efforts to develop new treatments.
For instance, Amgen Inc., whose biotechnology success is legendary, stopped human trials of a once-promising tissue-growth factor after the tests proved disappointing.
Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc. hopes it has cracked the problem with a system of growing human skin cells in small plastic cartridges.
At the company's laboratory, tall incubator chambers hold banks of the cartridges, linked together by a web of tiny tubes.
Thinner than a videocassette, each cartridge is a miniature factory growing human skin cells.
The forebears of these cells come from infant foreskins.
These cells, called fibroblasts, are seeded onto a flat piece of mesh material.
After a few weeks, the new cells cover the fishnet-like holes, forming a three-dimensional patch.
The cases are supposed to shut out contaminants until a surgeon opens the lid to graft the patch onto a patient.
"We're trying to trick the cells into thinking they are growing in the body," says Arthur J. Benvenuto, Advanced Tissue Sciences's soft-spoken chairman and chief executive officer.
The tubes deliver a nutrient soup to the cells in a continuous flow that mimics the way tissue is fed by the blood, he says.
Once the mesh is filled in with new cells, the cassettes could be readied for shipping.
The product is expected to have as much as a one-year shelf life in an ultracold freezer.
A man-made skin product would have wide applications.
Of two million serious-burn victims in the U.S. each year, as many as 15,000 need skin grafts.
Advanced Tissue is developing a permanent replacement for the dermis, the thick inner layer of skin, but it is also working on temporary replacements.
Yesterday, the company said it received Food and Drug Administration approval to start human tests of such a temporary replacement product.
In severe burn cases today, surgeons use cadaver skin as a life-saving stopgap to keep out infection and prevent vital-fluid loss.
The hope is that patches of the patient's own skin, especially precious in major burn cases, can eventually be grafted onto the wounds before the cadaver skin is rejected.
While the patient's healthy skin replenishes itself for the next graft, the cadaver skin sometimes must be repeatedly replaced over many weeks or months.
"There are tremendous numbers of complications," says John F. Hansbrough, director of the regional burn center at the University of California at San Diego.
Cadaver skin may contain HIV or other deadly viruses, and sometimes simply doesn't work, he says.
The American Red Cross estimates that only one-sixth of the skin needed for burn victims is available from the nation's tissue banks.
Dr. Hansbrough and Advanced Tissue predict the transitional covering they're working on together will be as good as, or better than, cadaver skin.
Instead of suture material used in permanent skin, which eventually dissolves, the temporary product's scaffolding is made of a nylon mesh with a top layer of silicone that acts as the epidermis, or outer layer of skin.
"Without the synthetic epidermis, the Dermagraft would just dry out," Dr. Hansbrough says.
Having a temporary man-made covering readily available would likely ease the long hospital stays and enormous costs that burn patients face.
Cadaver skin, priced at as much as $1,000 a square foot, comes in thin strips that must be sewn together like a jigsaw puzzle, Dr. Hansbrough says.
Man-made skin could be grown in various sizes to fit different injuries.
The company has made the permanent version of Dermagraft in small quantities for several years, and the results in treating about 375 patients have been promising.
On a gamble that regulatory approval for at least one of its products will come in a year or two, the company is already building a commercial plant.
It should be ready for FDA inspection toward year's end.
Others who might use Dermagraft are the 2.6 million people who suffer from chronic, slow-healing or nonhealing skin ulcers.
In Advanced Tissue's tests, a piece of Dermagraft is plugged into the wound to promote the overgrowth of the patient's own epidermis.
Looking ahead a few years, Advanced Tissue's ambition is to produce a "universal full-thickness skin" that will work in all patients, says Gail K. Naughton, one of Dermagraft's inventors and the chief operating officer of Advanced Tissue.
The company is already collaborating with Cell Genesys Inc., a Foster City, Calif., biotech company, on a genetically modified epidermis to solve the rejection problem.
The making of Dermagraft starts in a company lab with the separation of fibroblast cells from donated infant foreskins.
The mother's health history is taken and the cells are tested to make sure they are normal and virus-free.
Then they are stored in glass vials, and frozen in liquid nitrogen at about minus 300 degrees Fahrenheit.
After thawing, technicians dressed head-to-toe in white, protective "bunny suits" transfer the cells into plastic bottles laid sideways on a slowly rotating deck.
The fibroblasts attach to the sides of the bottles and start growing and dividing.
After the walls are lined with cells, they are redistributed among more bottles.
Eight of these "passages" later, the number of fibroblasts has multiplied many times over.
Then the cells are harvested and pumped into the cartridges.
But before the cartridges can be used commercially, Advanced Tissue must prove to the FDA that its product truly behaves like living skin when used in a patient.
Advanced Tissue and Dr. Hansbrough hope to start their human tests of the temporary Dermagraft covering within several weeks.
"The only way to tell if it works in humans is to try it," Dr. Hansbrough says.
"After we start, we'll know in a month or two."
