Call it the land rush of the 1990s.
Only a finite amount is available from nature.
And any signs that new sections will open up bring throngs of people waving checkbooks.
We're talking about the electromagnetic spectrum.
The problem is a simple one: So many wireless ventures and applications are being proposed that some people fear widespread scarcity of commercially usable frequencies.
Already, certain bands of the spectrum, such as those for cellular-phone operation, are overcrowded in some cities.
But scarcity creates opportunity.
Telecommunications giants and small startups are adopting new techniques to better exploit familiar frequencies.
And they are exploring parts of the radio spectrum that have been untapped for commercial purposes.
These efforts may not come in time to head off a short-term crunch.
But they are likely to increase the capacity of the entire spectrum eventually, making possible the expansion of wireless voice and data communications -- and cutting the price people pay for them.
"I believe we're moving from a spectrum shortage to a spectrum glut," says Ira Brodsky, president of Datacomm Research Co., a wireless-research concern in Wilmette, Ill.
Here's a look at some of the ways that companies are looking to squeeze more out of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Divide and Conquer: Consumers are already familiar with one trick -- increasing capacity by splitting the territory.
Cellular phones divide a geographic region into sections called cells; callers in different cells can simultaneously use the same frequencies without interference.
As markets get crowded -- getting a cellular dial tone is already difficult at times in Los Angeles -- existing cellular carriers add additional transmission towers to improve signal quality and increase the number of simultaneous users.
The next step is to create microcells, which boost the number of potential users by using even smaller geographic divisions.
American Telephone & Telegraph Co., for example, already offers a wireless service that uses cells that are hundreds of feet across, compared with a range of one to 20 miles for today's cellular systems.
One early installation is in New York's Pennsylvania Station.
Microcells are a key feature of personal communications services, the new wireless technology that is expected to spawn myriad pocket-size communicators in three to five years.
PCS cells will be as little as a few hundred feet across, and use frequencies around 1.8 gigahertz (a gigahertz is a billion cycles per second), compared with cellular's range of 800 to 900 megahertz (millions of cycles).
The Federal Communications Commission's auction for PCS frequencies is expected to raise about $10 billion, though skeptics suggest the actual amount will be smaller because franchises are so fragmented.
"This may be the biggest auction in history," says Bob Steen, director of wireless systems for International Business Machines Corp.
Mr. Steen adds that the resulting competition for sending data via PCS cells will greatly reduce the price for users.
The Digital Advantage: Both PCS and new cellular-phone services use digital signals rather than the analog format of conventional radio.
That makes several spectrum-sharing tricks possible.
Digital compression schemes, for example, will squeeze a conversation that ordinarily accounts for about 64 kilobits per second of data down to about eight kilobits per second, notes Richard Gitlin, director of communications systems research at AT&T Bell Laboratories.
In other words, it will allow companies to carry about eight times more conversation over the same frequency bandwidth.
Digital coding techniques also can fit different communications signals into the same frequency space.
One proposed digital standard, called time division multiple access (TDMA), chops a radio signal into pieces that are identified by time slots lasting a fraction of a second.
A receiver filters out all but the selected time slot and reassembles the message.
Supporters of this technique, including McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., say a single cellular channel can carry three to seven calls at a time; a newer variant, called enhanced TDMA, may bring a 19-fold advance over analog technologies, backers predict.
But many companies are backing a rival digital technology.
CDMA, which stands for code division multiple access, uses low-powered signals spread across a wide swath of communications frequencies.
This approach, known as spread-spectrum, programs each phone with an identifying code contained in a signal called pseudonoise.
The receiving station uses the code to identify and reconstitute the original signal, a phenomenon comparable to the way an American could pick out two people speaking English in a room full of others speaking Japanese.
CDMA, developed by Qualcomm Inc., San Diego, is widely expected to increase transmisson capacity by a factor of 10 to 20.
Andrew Viterbi, Qualcomm's vice chairman and chief technical officer, uses the more conservative number of a sevenfold improvement.
Arrays of Antennas: Another approach being tested by some companies uses arrays of antennas in each cell, rather than one.
By spacing them carefully and measuring when signals arrive at each, socalled adaptive antenna arrays can discriminate between signals based on distance and direction.
Arrays would make it easier to use the same frequency simultaneously in adjacent cells, something today's systems can't do without creating interference.
"That's very, very promising," says Mr. Gitlin of Bell Labs.
"We are strong believers that this technology will allow a high level of frequency reuse."
Hopping and Jumping: The other major strategy is to tap different frequencies.
Metricom Inc., a start-up in Los Gatos, Calif., is attracting attention with plans to set up regional wireless networks in an unlicensed band of frequencies now used by conventional cordless telephones.
To avoid interfering with them, Metricom uses a different spread-spectrum technique called frequency hopping.
Robert Dilworth, the company's chief executive officer, says its wireless data network divides a large chunk of radio spectrum into 165 narrow channels.
Portable communicators using its service keep hopping about every half second among channels that aren't being used, avoiding interference with cordless phones that might be operating nearby.
People sending messages on the Metricom system rarely interfere with one another, because the company has developed a proprietary system that synchronizes the jumps so that users don't land on the same frequency at the same time.
Metricom's service is being tested around Apple Computer Inc.'s corporate campus, and at Stanford University.
It plans to start hooking up other parts of the San Francisco Bay area this year, using low-powered transmitters that will cover a square mile or so in an urban area, Mr. Dilworth says.
Infrequent Frequencies: Others dream of real virgin territory -- frequencies so high there is no competition.
Most commercial communications operate below about two gigahertz.
One reason is that operating at higher frequencies requires chips made out of costly gallium arsenide rather than silicon.
And radio waves at higher frequencies begin to act more like beams of light.
Signals move in straight lines and bounce off objects, reducing their ability to penetrate walls.
"For in-building coverage, once you get higher than about three or four gigahertz you begin to have problems," says Mr. Steen of IBM.
But gallium arsenide is falling in price, while silicon chips are assuming more tough communications jobs.
Mr. Viterbi of Qualcomm predicts that some personal communicators will eventually operate in the range of five to six gigahertz; he says that at least one large PCS proponent is considering that band.
"That will happen in our lifetime," he says.
In a celebrated breakthrough, Motorola Inc. managed to develop a wireless local-area network system called Altair that operates at an impressive 18 gigahertz.
To produce the high frequencies at an acceptable size and cost, the Schaumburg, Ill., company developed an extremely fast gallium arsenide chip to handle a job that typically required a machine the size of a refrigerator.
A special six-sided antenna compensates for the scattering of radio waves off walls and furniture.
An even higher jump was made by Cellular Vision of New York, a company that plans to compete with cable TV companies by delivering video signals at a frequency of 28 gigahertz.
The unusual technology, which uses cells that are six miles in diameter, depends on signals that bounce off buildings and slip through the spaces between them.
Customers use an antenna that is five inches square and can be attached to a window.
Shant Hovnanian, Cellular Vision's chief executive officer, expects the system also will be used for two-way interactive services and for high-speed data communications.
Bell Atlantic Corp. already is a partner, and Cellular Vision predicts other companies will license its technology for other markets and applications.
"We are talking to hundreds of potential licensees," Mr. Hovnanian says.
Mr. Clark is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau.
