Lend an ear, Buffett watchers: Shares of Guinness PLC, the British distiller, are selling at a price 15% below what investor Warren Buffett paid two years ago.
Is this really such a big opportunity?
Or did Mr. Buffett make a goof in his first major investment outside the U.S.?
Some smart folks are convinced that Guinness's future is still as bright as the one Mr. Buffett painted for shareholders of his Berkshire Hathaway two years ago, when he likened Guinness's prospects to those of Coca-Cola, because of both companies' international franchises.
If fact, some believe the British concern, which is expected to report fourthquarter earnings today, is on the verge of turning the corner.
"The worst is behind the company," says Steven Dixon, an analyst with Arnhold & S. Bleichroeder.
If he regrets his 1991 investment, Mr. Buffett didn't admit as much in his annual report to shareholders for 1993.
"When this century's smartest investor makes an investment, it behooves you to take a look," says John Spears, a general partner at Tweedy Browne, especially if you're looking at a price discount to what Mr. Buffett paid.
Tweedy Browne has invested about $284 million in Guinness in the past year, including in the past two months.
Mr. Spears says he can't get over the fact that the company earned #999 million ($1.49 billion) in 1992 on capital of #2.8 billion, excluding goodwill.
That's a return of around 35%, he says.
The stock's home market is in London.
But there are also American depositary receipts quoted in the so-called pink sheets, a non-Nasdaq over-the-counter market.
Adds James Engle, chief investment officer of Wood, Struthers & Winthrop: "We've been buying it continuously.
You're going to start to see economic growth again in Europe and greater penetration in India and China."
Analysts are expecting Guinness to report 1993 earnings of #875 million, a big drop from the 1992 results.
No matter.
Investors already have their eyes on whether 1994 will bring better news.
Any sign that the clouds are parting will be greeted with glee from investors, says Mr. Dixon.
"Investors expect the company to make a cautiously optimistic statement" today, says Mr. Dixon, who has a "buy" rating on Guinness.
Guinness ADRs have sunk in the U.S. for a variety of reasons, including the decline of the British pound against the dollar, the price-crimping potential of low inflation in major markets, recession in Europe and Japan, and management upheaval.
In fact, a look at why Mr. Buffett's investment hasn't yet paid off provides a good lesson in some of the risks of investing in foreign companies.
Mr. Buffett was on a roll for a while with his Guinness investment, which some analysts say he made at an average price of around $44 from August through December of 1991.
Mr. Buffett, who was traveling and couldn't be reached for comment yesterday, added seven million shares to the holding in 1992, bringing the total number of shares to about #38 million.
Guinness ADRs hit a high of $56 in the spring of 1992 (each ADR denotes five shares).
Then came the dive of the British pound against the dollar after the European Monetary System broke down.
That knocked about 25% off the market value of Mr. Buffett's investment nearly overnight, says Mr. Dixon.
Adding insult to injury, inflation in many of Guinness's markets nearly crept to a halt.
That's a problem for a company like Guinness, which has had a strategy of raising prices at a pace faster than inflation for its Guinness stout and premium Scotch whiskys, which include Johnnie Walker Black, Johnnie Walker Red and Dewar's.
"The company does much better in periods of inflation," says Mr. Dixon.
A recession in Europe and a slump in Japan curbed results in those markets, which in the past had generated nearly half of Guinness's sales.
The recession in the U.S. didn't help either at Guinness, whose North American sales accounted for 17% of total revenue in 1992.
The string of disappointing news, coupled with management changes in the past six months, led to a low for the ADRs of $29 late last year.
Much of the bad news may be behind the company now, says Mr. Dixon.
Investors are hoping the company will report an improvement in European and Asian sales.
Guinness also has restructured its investment in LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton in a way that will contribute more to the bottom line.
The new relationship will add some of the best champagnes and cognacs in the world to its lineup.
GUINNESS PLC stock held by a Tweedy Browne fund amounts to about 2% of a $284 million portfolio; yesterday's Heard on the Street column incorrectly said Tweedy Browne had invested about $284 million in Guinness.
