The Feb. 24 Letter to the Editor from Donna Shalala, secretary of health and human services, revealed both the naivete and arrogance of the people in Bill Clinton's administration.
Naivete is represented by Secretary Shalala's example of the ATM card.
This service was not dreamed up by some political appointee who then imposed it by force on the American people, but by independent businesses seeking to meet customers' needs.
A number of the early systems failed and the overall system went through an evolutionary process until it became the mostly open, extremely useful system we see today.
That evolution was made possible through a series of "trial and error" efforts by entrepreneur/businesses risking their own capital.
In short, it was the market that made such a service possible.
The government, on the other hand, has consistently hampered the banking industry's natural evolution to such consumer-friendly services as nationwide (even in some cases statewide) banking.
Indeed, the ATM cards have become a technology driven "end-around" by banks and consumers seeking to circumvent those barriers through the various networks that now exist.
If such a card were of value to consumers in the medical-care industry, one would reasonably expect the market to create such a device.
I suspect that a significant reason it does not yet exist is the web of government regulation and restrictions, including privacy, tax and antitrust laws.
Arrogance is evident in Ms. Shalala's assumption that Hillary Rodham Clinton knows best what health plan is right for 250 million Americans.
One reason so many alternatives exist today is that consumers are demanding choices.
Virtually every other industry evolves toward offering more choices, not less.
This administration is the first I can recall that thinks the best way to improve market efficiency is to eliminate competition.
When I was in school it was taught that the more firms serving a market the more intense the competition and the better the prices to consumers.
Beyond the "feel good" babble, the Clinton plan violates the fundamental laws of economics and seeks to treat Americans as a monolithic group of morons.
Surely we won't accept that.
Jeffrey S. Galt
Palo Alto, Calif.
Unlike the health care reform scheme being pushed by the White House (which seeks government control of even the simplest medical tasks), consumer services in banking have vastly improved as the result of private-sector competition.
The development and growing use of ATM cards is one such example.
The same will not be said of government-run health care.
Any time consumer choice is limited and prices are artificially set, quality soon suffers.
Just ask the people of the former Eastern bloc nations.
If politicians in Washington are truly interested in making our medical-care system better, they should seek ways to increase competition -- not stifle it.
Otherwise, the president's health card is only a symbol, not a solution.
