Meera Hoosan's job is to teach South Africans how to vote.
But how to do that when she doesn't know what to teach?
Ms. Hoosan, the elections training administrator in the African National Congress's office here, can't tell illiterate voters on what line to put a cross because she's not sure in what order the parties will be listed on the ballot.
She can't even tell them how many parties will participate in the April 26-to-April 28 elections.
Nor does she know whether there will be one single ballot or two separate ones -- one for the national parliament and another for regional legislatures.
"It's quite confusing," sums up Ms. Hoosan.
"This is all very new for South Africa."
Ms. Hoosan's confusion mirrors that of South Africa as it nears its first-ever multiracial democratic elections.
With the country wracked by worsening factional violence, the liberation many feel at the prospect of voting for the first time is tempered by fear of a full-fledged civil war and a sense of foreboding.
Many blacks are wondering: will the new government deliver on its promises of a better life for all?
And many whites are fretting that the country's economy will go the way of most of the rest of Africa as it comes under black rule.
One thing is practically certain: the ANC appears headed for a big victory, with polls showing it garnering as much as 65% of the vote.
This would carry Nelson Mandela to South Africa's presidency, only four years after President F.W. De Klerk freed the ANC leader from 27 years in jail, unleashing what has been called a "negotiated revolution."
The ANC already is considered a government-in-waiting.
But the only other certainty is that a post-apartheid South Africa will be a pressure-cooker of ethnic and political tensions.
This was underscored over the weekend, when a series of confrontations left 34 people dead.
In one incident, 15 ANC election workers preparing for a voter education meeting in a village in Natal province were killed by unknown assailants.
The electoral process itself is under a cloud of uncertainty.
The major threat comes from the Freedom Alliance, a motley coalition of the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party, which wants greater autonomy for the Kwa-Zulu homeland; the white right-wing Afrikaner Volksfront, which is demanding a homeland for white Afrikaners, and the government of nominally independent Bophutatswana, which is resisting reincorporation into South Africa.
They are threatening to boycott the elections.
While many analysts portray the Freedom Alliance as a group of disgruntled politicians who stand to lose their power in a new South Africa, its leaders make their case on constitutional grounds.
They claim that the government and the ANC are trying to steamroll them into accepting an interim constitution that will create an all-powerful central government.
They want a federal form of government that would allow for a strong measure of autonomy.
In a bid to ease the tension, Mr. Mandela last week unveiled a set of concessions, including ill-defined powers of taxation for provincial governments, measures to ensure that provincial government powers aren't "substantially diminished' by the constitution to be drafted after the elections, a constitutional principle that would allow for the consideration of a white homeland and the acceptance of a two-ballot system.
"We must treat the threat of civil war seriously," Mr. Mandela said.
"That is why we have gone out of our way to make these concessions."
But even before a Freedom Alliance meeting to consider the proposals, Inkatha leader Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi quickly rejected them, saying "Mr. Mandela's statement amounts to no more than cheap politicking on life-and-death issues."
It's unclear how the Freedom Alliance would press its case if its demands aren't met before the elections.
But its stand raises the possibility that millions of voters won't go to the polls, casting doubts over the fairness of the elections.
"No one has explained to me how polling booths will be put up if they stay out of the elections," says Steven Friedman, director of the Center for Policy Studies in Johannesburg.
"It could get very nasty."
By staying out, the Freedom Alliance is also raising doubts over the stability of South Africa after the elections, which could cause problems for South Africa's economy.
After years of recession, worsened by international sanctions, the country seems on the rebound.
The economy grew about 1% last year, and inflation fell to 9.7% -- the first single-digit figure since 1973.
After shunning the country for years, foreign investors are again looking at South Africa, and foreign loans are coming back, too.
This will be vital for the new government as it faces massive demands for housing and social services from its long-disenfranchised black population just as domestic white capital is reported to be flowing out of the country.
But economists warn that the expected inflow of investments after the elections won't materialize if violence continues.
Another possible deterrent is the ANC's contradictory statements on economic policy.
Although it has moved away from its past dogma on nationalization of major industries, the ANC still advocates a leading role for the state in the economy.
When mining executives fired a broadside at ANC plans to create a central marketing board and references to "government intervention in output and pricing decisions," the ANC promised to hold "extensive consultations" with them before implementing any changes.
But one week later, Mr. Mandela, addressing mine workers, said "an ANC-led government will wrest mineral rights from mining houses and place them in the hands of the state."
Commented one businessman: "The ANC tells unions one thing and foreign investors another.
We don't know what side of their mouth to believe."
