A subdued Bell Atlantic Corp.
Chairman Raymond W. Smith made his first public appearance since the collapse of his plan to acquire Tele-Communications Inc., embracing a more cautious interactive strategy that he had rejected just four months ago.
Mr. Smith, addressing analysts at a PaineWebber Group Inc. industry conference, defended his decision to pull the plug on the $16 billion-plus deal that he had spent four months championing.
He said the Philadelphia-based regional telephone company now will scrap efforts to team up with one cable giant, instead seeking myriad partners for many different markets.
Bell Atlantic will continue with plans to build interactive networks serving 1.2 million homes by next year in its own six-state mid-Atlantic region.
This year it will spend $1 billion on new networks, Mr. Smith said.
Signing up smaller cable partners market by market, however, will probably result in a much slower pace as Mr. Smith tries to turn Bell Atlantic into a national programming power.
Had he succeeded in acquiring TCI, the Baby Bell would have had immediate reach into about 40% of the nation's homes.
Mr. Smith conceded the new patchwork approach "doesn't have the sweeping elegance of the merger," but added, "it may have more importance and attributes than the grand simplicity of the grand alliance."
That was in sharp contrast to the views he expressed when the TCI deal was unveiled Oct. 13.
In an interview that day, he went to great lengths to explain the advantages of a massive merger over a patchwork of partnerships.
Bell Atlantic would have "a controlled situation, you have all of the parts working together," he said at the time.
"Those minority partnerships have a way of unraveling, and they often don't have the promise that they have in the beginning," he added.
Those words proved fateful for Bell Atlantic, which was ultimately unable to agree with TCI on a purchase price.
The two officially parted ways last Wednesday, promising to pursue smaller ventures with each other in the near future.
But Mr. Smith yesterday insisted "our vision is exactly the same," and he said Bell Atlantic was right to withdraw from the deal rather than pay too high a price for TCI.
"Last week was not a jolly week for me, but it was a cake walk compared with defending what would have been a very bad deal for Bell Atlantic," Mr. Smith told analysts.
New cuts in cable rates imposed by the Federal Communications Commission would have reduced TCI's annual cash flow by almost $150 million, triggering a $1.7 billion decline in the price Bell Atlantic was willing to pay.
(It had offered to pay 11.75 times TCI's cash flow.)
Yet TCI wouldn't cut its asking price, and indeed demanded an even greater amount of Bell Atlantic stock because of the decline in that company's stock price.
The new demand would have diluted the regional phone company's per-share earnings by 50%, rather than the 35% Mr. Smith had first approved.
"That was something I could not do," he said.
Had Mr. Smith succeeded, the TCI deal would have been one of the largest ever, approaching $33 billion in total value including TCI debt.
The ensuing publicity turned the little-known Bell chief into a media star.
Any new pact he pursues, however, will be far more conservative.
"When we do make an investment, we won't overpay, we won't overbuild, and we won't overinvest," he said.
That less-is-more approach should keep Bell Atlantic shareholders happy, Mr. Smith added, "even if I never make it into People magazine again."
Yesterday, Bell Atlantic closed at $53.50, down $1.25, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
On the Nasdaq Stock Market, TCI's Class A shares closed at $23.125, down 50 cents, while the Class B shares closed at $26.25, down $1.25.
