Microsoft Corp., worried that its Windows software may be too daunting for home computer users, plans to offer later this year a new "look and feel," featuring familiar scenes such as a living room.
The effort, code named "Utopia," reflects Microsoft's desire to experiment with easier ways of controlling software than the company's Windows approach, which some executives at the company think is too confusing to children and some adults who use computers at home.
Rather than rely on icons, or pictures of popular commands, and lists of options called menus, the Utopia interface presents scenes from the physical world.
One Utopia prototype offers a screen image of a room with a desk and play materials.
Pointing and clicking on an image launches an activity or shifts the scene to another part of the house.
The new interface, which will appear in several Microsoft products to be released in the second half of 1994, runs on top of the Windows program and isn't intended to replace it.
But Utopia does give Microsoft, the world's largest software maker, the chance to "find out if you need a radically different interface in the future," said Michael Maples, Microsoft's top executive for new products.
Mr. Maples said the home market is the ideal place to test the appeal of what he called "a physical-world metaphor" for software.
Other software suppliers already have seen good results in offering programs that make working a computer seem like an exercise in handling familiar objects.
Broderbund Software Inc. sells a popular program for young children called Playroom.
General Magic Inc.'s Magic Cap interface, which is drawing support as a standard for telecomputing, relies on a scene depicting a city's downtown in order to help users shuttle among electronic services.
This approach seems likely to spread because "it seems fun to people who are afraid of technology," said Marc Porat, General Magic's chief executive officer.
Software that presents the physical world as tools for manipulation "could be everywhere in a few years," Mr. Porat added.
"First, the computer, then personal communicators, the television and the stereo."
The trend ultimately could undermine Microsoft's hold over the software market, which in the past four years has decidedly shifted toward programs that adhere to the Windows "look and feel."
"There's a huge market for something easier to use than Windows that invites kids in," said Sally Narodick, chief executive officer of Edmark Corp., which makes a line of home software that presents physical worlds, including Kid Desk.
Ms. Narodick said that, because of Microsoft's size and marketing clout, the company's support for the approach should broaden interest in it.
