Spurred by increased manufacturing activity, the U.S. economy expanded moderately in January and February despite the California earthquake and a bitter winter, the Federal Reserve said in its periodic regional report.
Moreover, the Fed said, "Almost all district reports suggest that merchants expect solid sales growth in coming months."
The inflation outlook was good.
Prices were slightly higher for building materials and a few other items, but manufactured products and consumer goods are generally not experiencing upward price pressure, the Fed reported.
The news sparked a rebound in bond prices and pushed stocks mostly higher.
Manufacturing activity showed the most strength during the first months of 1994, with demand particularly strong in automobiles and auto parts.
Sales of durable goods such as electronics products and home furnishings also showed strong gains, the Fed said in its review of the six weeks ended Feb. 28.
Almost all districts report plans to expand hiring and continue capital investment.
But the Fed said streamlining and caution continue to temper gains in manufacturing employment.
Mother Nature did hurt some parts of the economy.
Retailers in the storm-swept East suffered sales declines of as much as 20%, while consumer spending came to a near standstill in Southern California following the earthquake there.
Although two-thirds of retailers reported sales were down due to the weather, the Fed said "merchants are optimistic, expecting sales to increase during the first half of 1994."
Construction was hampered by snowstorms, with five of the 12 districts reporting delays.
In the Los Angeles area, however, January's earthquake increased demand for residential and freeway repair.
This added demand is expected to continue through 1995.
The Fed reported that low interest rates contributed to strong residential sales in most of the country, but the Cleveland and Chicago districts expressed concern that the strength would be short-lived.
Some districts posted modest commercial rent increases, but demand for office space is still sluggish.
"Scattered comments on service industries generally suggest improvements in economic activity," the Fed reported.
Overall, loan demand was mixed with such districts as Kansas City, Mo., and Dallas showing an increase while the New York and Philadelphia districts posted declines in loan applications.
The weather has stunted the winter wheat crop, and increased the need for supplemental feeding, leading to rising hay and feed grain prices.
Some regions report an expectation of a decline in farm incomes due to a reduction of livestock inventories.
"The frigid weather caused a flurry of activity in the energy industry" in the Dallas and Kansas City districts, according to the Fed.
But in those same districts, oil exploration fell, glutting the market and keeping a lid on crude prices.
BOSTON: Snowstorms kept consumers away from January promotions, leaving retailers with larger than expected inventories, and has delayed spring housing starts.
Selling prices of autos and raw materials are flat to down.
Over one-third of the region's contacts reported a reduction in their work forces, and an expectation of continued cutbacks to reduce costs.
Investment management companies showed strong growth, with as much as a 50% increase in assets under management compared with January 1993.
NEW YORK: Retailing sails "snapped back" in early February when practical items such as outerwear, home furnishings and electronics were best-sellers.
Although the district noted an improvement for rental housing in New York City, vacancy rates in downtown Manhattan and Westchester County rose because of continued downsizing and merging of companies.
Despite continuing cutbacks, both New Jersey and New York have been able to increase payroll employment.
PHILADELPHIA: Construction, retail and manufacturing activity were all hampered by winter storms, but are expected to recover and recoup losses with warmer weather.
Bankers expect consumer lending to rise as the post-Christmas payoff period ends and spending picks up again.
Home sales in the region were off substantially from 1993 and inventory of homes for sale, while down from last year, is still high.
CLEVELAND: The district reports generally optimistic economic activity and expects a continuing solid expansion, with a significant contribution from auto production.
Housing markets are expected to continue to be strong throughout 1994.
RICHMOND: The cold weather affected farming only slightly and boosted business in ski and beach resorts.
Revenues, employment, inventories and shopper traffic declined, while wages and sales of big-ticket items were steady.
In manufacturing, shipments, new orders and order backlogs increased.
The ports of Baltimore and Charleston expect exports to outpace imports during the next six months.
Loan activity in the area has shifted from business refinancing to business expansion.
ATLANTA: There are "sporadic reports of supply constraints slowing sales, especially for some makers of trucks and sports-utility vehicles."
Regional energy companies are being hurt by lower oil prices and stricter environmental policies.
Demand remains strongest for new homes but vacancy rates are gradually declining.
CHICAGO: Unemployment rates closed out 1993 close to their lowest levels since 1977, and hiring plans rose significantly in early 1994.
Auto industry momentum remained positive; suppliers say foreign-owned auto plants report sharply higher plans for buying domestic parts.
Consumer spending was affected for only a few days by the weather.
ST. LOUIS: A backlog of construction orders from wet weather in 1993 is beginning to be filled.
Bankers expect a moderate increase in loan demand from both retail and commercial customers.
A number of industries continue to expand, such as the region's poultry industry.
MINNEAPOLIS: Consumer confidence in Minnesota is at a five-year high, and retail spending throughout the district is reportedly vigorous, especially for light cars and trucks.
"Recent cold spells did not abnormally reduce economic activity," the Fed said.
Manufacturing sales are strong.
In agriculture plantings are expected to increase from 1993 and livestock numbers remain high.
KANSAS CITY: Retail sales are increasing although some businesses say their inventories are too high.
The cold weather helped to boost natural gas prices, but oil drilling activity in the district slipped, dragging down the energy sector.
The stunted winter wheat crop will need adequate rainfall for the rest of the growing season to ensure an adequate supply this summer.
DALLAS: Passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement heightened talk of increased trade opportunities.
Auto sales were appearing to slow down in February after an increase in January.
Both apartment occupancy rates and rents are rising; markets are especially tight in San Antonio and Austin.
Real estate was the primary reason for increased loan demand in South Texas and Houston.
SAN FRANCISCO: California, particularly the Los Angeles area, continues to lag behind the national economy, but much of the rest of the nine-state district showed signs of solid growth.
Tourism remains sluggish in Hawaii but increased advance bookings have led to expectations for improvement during the coming months.
Manufacturing activity is mixed, with weaknesses reported in aerospace, defense and wood industries.
Sales and production levels in the computer industry have improved from last year.
