A what?
House Republican leaders have been threatening to take their former colleague to court after recently discovering that he had formed a political-action committee named the National Republican Campaign Committee for Change, or NRCCC.
The name rang a bell -- and set off an alarm.
Mr. Vander Jagt headed their own National Republican Congressional Committee, or NRCC, 18 years, until 1993 -- and left the longstanding, official group $4.5 million in debt.
He should be the last person, Republicans grouse, to compete with them for conservatives' dollars.
Mr. Vander Jagt hasn't done any fund raising so far.
But in a letter to him this week, deputy House GOP leader Newt Gingrich of Georgia warned that the official committee's name and acronym "are protected trademarks" and that any fund raising for the Vander Jagt PAC "will be regarded as an infringement of that trademark and legal action will be initiated without delay."
Adds Rep. Bill Paxon of New York, the current chairman of the House GOP committee, who heretofore has refrained from criticizing his predecessor: "It's an outrageous attempt to take advantage of the good name of the party.
It's very clear that if people who previously received a solicitation from the NRCC now get one from the NRCCC, signed by the former chairman of the NRCC, it will cause confusion about who is soliciting money for what."
After Rep. Gingrich's warning and inquiries from this newspaper, Mr. Vander Jagt this week telecopied a letter to the GOP leader promising to change his PAC's name.
He has been out West riding the rubber-chicken circuit, having joined a speaker's bureau on the strength of his reputation for conservative stemwinders.
And in an interview yesterday from Las Vegas, Mr. Vander Jagt revealed the likely new name: Committee to Change the Congress.
But the big NRCC debt still rankles some people.
The flap also offers a glimpse of a particular Washington type: the former member of Congress who can't go home again because home -- in Mr. Vander Jagt's case, rural Luther, Mich. -- isn't really home at all.
After his 26 years in Congress, Washington is home in terms of professional opportunities and personal tastes.
"With the legal skills I possess," he says, "I think there is a bigger market for them in Washington than there is in Luther."
In an interview last month, Mr. Vander Jagt said he has tripled his income since losing his $129,500-a-year seat in Congress.
A lawyer, he lobbies for the Washington office of Baker & Hostetler, a Cleveland-based law firm, and still dines with House GOP cliques on Capitol Hill.
He sits on corporate boards and, with an agent's help, gives motivational speeches around the country.
"There's a dearth of inspirational speakers out there," he said.
After addressing truck-stop operators in Las Vegas, he is going off to motivate Montana farmers.
He often begins his speeches, he says, with a line like, "Don't hold it against me that I was a congressman.
I'm now earning an honest living -- I'm a lawyer."
That, he said, "breaks 'em up."
But back in Washington, Republicans aren't laughing.
The PAC episode, however briefly, revived a family feud that Republicans had thought behind them when Mr. Vander Jagt left Congress after his 1992 defeat.
His early kudos for rebuilding the party's money machine from the ruins of Watergate had given way by 1990 to Republicans' complaints of lavish spending and cronyism in the award of consulting contracts; he won the final two years of his 18-year NRCC chairmanship only after a nasty challenge.
Even after that scare, Mr. Vander Jagt spent about $300,000 on travel in his final year as House Republicans' chief fundraiser, according to embittered people at the NRCC.
His expenses, they say, included chartered airplanes, first-class air fares, hotel suites, meals and limousines stocked with his brand of cigarettes.
By contrast, they add, Rep. Paxon spent less than $5,000 last year.
Mr. Vander Jagt, recalling his committee travels late in the 1992 campaigns, says, "You don't cover 45 states and 110 congressional districts in a 2 1/2-month period without running up some expenses."
Mr. Vander Jagt's NR-triple-C PAC was registered with the Federal Election Commission three days before Christmas.
Rep. Gingrich acknowledges that Mr. Vander Jagt had told him of his plans to form the committee.
But he adds: "It's one thing to say, `I'm going to form a little PAC.'
In that conversation with me, he was describing a general approach to helping elect Republicans.
He at no point suggested he'd start a group whose name and acronym is almost identical to the NRCC.
We were very shocked when we saw the FEC filing."
Mr. Vander Jagt says he started the committee "because people said they missed giving to me, and why didn't I have a PAC?"
But many House Republicans are wary, and simply changing the PAC's name won't pacify them.
They suspect that the committee would be run the way they describe the Vander Jagt-era NRCC -- underwriting his travels and paying large fees for outside consultants before GOP candidates see any money.
They note that Mr. Vander Jagt's own name had become identified with the party in the minds of many past contributors -- a point he himself made in 1990 when he pleaded with GOP colleagues to keep the job.
But "the single biggest concern," says Rep. Gingrich, is that Mr. Vander Jagt will use the NRCC's own direct-mail list to tap contributions.
The list is jointly owned by the NRCC and Wyatt Stewart, a direct-mail expert and Mr. Vander Jagt's longtime NRCC finance director.
Mr. Stewart acquired his stake in the list and formed his own direct-mail firm while at the NRCC, and over the years his charges to the NRCC for fund-raising expenses were several times his finance-director salary.
Mr. Stewart, though, denies any suggestion that he would have a role in the Vander Jagt PAC.
"They don't know what they are talking about," he says.
"That's the most ridiculous thing I've ever heard.
I'm personally shocked."
But Rep. Gingrich wants assurance.
Late yesterday, after learning of the name change, he got Mr. Vander Jagt's pledge that Mr. Vander Jagt won't rent or use the NRCC list.
"Peace and affection reign in the family," the legislator later quipped.
Rep. Gingrich also is asking Mr. Vander Jagt to head an effort to retire the NRCC's current $3.6 million debt, though he acknowledges that such an effort might cut into Mr. Vander Jagt's own fund-raising and speaking time.
But since the red ink piled up "on his watch," Rep. Paxon says, "Guy would be particularly appropriate in helping us to retire that debt."
