In another potentially damaging development for Lockheed Corp.'s next-generation F-22 fighter jet program, the Air Force has detected "shortfalls" in the quality of stealth features that help the aircraft elude radar detection.
The problem, disclosed by the Air Force late Friday, comes as backers of the jet are fighting to stave off further congressional cutbacks in the $86 billion program.
The F-22 already has suffered a 30% cut in planned production, along with development delays, rising estimates of per-jet costs and difficulties with advanced engines and onboard computing systems.
Under terms of the F-22 contract, the government generally covers additional costs, including increases resulting from fixing technological problems.
But the latest problem could give critics of the program more ammunition to push for cutbacks, possibly costing jobs at Lockheed.
"This can't help," said Jack Modzelewski, a PaineWebber Inc. analyst, adding that the latest problems provide "just one more reason to slow it down."
Tacking added expenses for fixes onto the F-22 now "clearly makes it more difficult for the program," said analyst Wolfgang Demisch of BT Securities Corp., who called the new problem "an adverse development and actually somewhat unexpected at this stage in the program."
The F-22, the only advanced U.S. fighter aircraft currently slated for production, is intended to be a highly maneuverable air-combat and attack jet that can travel long distances at supersonic speeds while avoiding radar detection by virtue of its design and materials.
The Air Force said in its statement that it had "identified some shortfalls" in the aircraft's radar cross-section signature, which is a measure of its reflectivity on enemy radar screens.
The Air Force didn't elaborate on the defects, but said they were uncovered by an advanced modeling technique that permits such discoveries during design phases.
An Air Force spokeswoman said program managers wouldn't field further questions about added costs or other aspects of the problem until this week at the earliest.
A spokesman for Lockheed, which controls two-thirds of the F-22 after expanding its stake through a $1.5 billion acquisition from General Dynamics Corp. last year, referred all questions to the Air Force.
Lockheed is based in Calabasas, Calif.
A spokeswoman for Boeing Co. of Seattle, which controls the other third of the F-22, also declined comment.
Others familiar with the problem were guarded in discussing it, since Air Force program leaders at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio ordered all involved in the program to decline comment.
The disclosure was made after service officials decided word of the problem would leak to the public anyway.
The problem is said to stem from numerous smaller features of the plane -- rather than its overall design -- that have compromised its ability to avoid detection and must be corrected by special teams that already have been dispatched to work on the problem.
Such smaller features would include numerous panels that allow access to the inside of the plane for maintenance, along with unexpected "bumps" from rivets, seams, gaps between surfaces and holes for various purposes.
In their statement, Air Force officials heralded their discovery of the problem during the design phase as a tribute to advanced modeling processes that will allow them to correct the problems before any planes are built, when they become harder and more costly to fix.
When problems with stealth features arose during flight testing on the B-2 bomber made by Northrop Corp. and Boeing, they added heavily to costs and subjected that plane to criticism and cutbacks.
The Air Force disclosure came after the close of trading.
In composite trading Friday on the New York Stock Exchange, Lockheed shares closed at $66.25, up 37.5 cents.
Lockheed developed the advanced modeling system for the F-22 during the last two years and first used it late last year.
Some people close to the program expect solutions to be fully identified by mid-April and alterations to be completed by this time next year.
Analysts said that while the modeling system is laudable, its success nonetheless foretells of added costs at a particularly inopportune time.
Additional cutbacks on defense spending are being sought by Congress and the Pentagon, where more than $500 million has been cut from development-phase funds for the F-22 during the last three years.
Last year, plans to make 648 of the jets by the year 2010 were cut to 442 airplanes.
And congressional critics, backed by assessments from the General Accounting Office, argue that the urgency to build the F-22 has faded with the fall of the former Soviet Union.
