The absolute worst moment to buy an initial public offering is when you read a newspaper headline about how hot it is, a new study suggests.
The soon-to-be-released three-year study of IPOs holds disheartening news for small investors: It's usually fruitless to buy an IPO if -- like most of us -- you can't get it at the offering price.
That's because an enormous chunk of the IPO's gain is likely to occur on the first trading day.
People often don't "realize that so much of the money is made on the first day," says Claudia E. Mott, Prudential Securities Inc.'s head of small-cap research, whose group did the study.
"This is a tough part of the market to be successful in, if you're not able to get stock right at the offering" as mutual funds and other big investors do.
Consider the fate of small investors who snapped up red-hot Boston Chicken Inc.
Nov. 10, the day when every business page in the U.S. was trumpeting the 143% gain the stock had registered on its opening day, Nov. 9.
These investors have seen their holdings slump 7% through yesterday .
New IPOs almost never turn out to be the "next Microsoft" that brokers tend to suggest they will be.
Moreover, the Prudential Securities study shows that even the gains that IPOs muster on their first day tend to be "short lived."
How so?
Performance of new issues (during the past three years) has tended to peak at three months, and fall off sharply after a year or two, the study shows.
Ms. Mott's team studied 1,500 IPOs (not including closed-end funds) that came to market in 1991, 1992 and 1993.
She said she undertook the project partly to support what academics including finance professor Jay R. Ritter have done in the past in studying IPOs, "but also as an eye-opener for people interested in this market, so they know what they're getting into."
The Prudential study found that, on average, an IPO gained 10.9% on its first day of trading in the past three years, beating the Nasdaq Composite Index by the same margin.
Over the first week of trading, the average issue's return was still 10.9%, a juicy payoff for a week's effort.
But alas for the first week.
Issues bought at the first-day close do an average 0.1 percentage point worse than the Nasdaq over that initial week.
Moreover, performance for these end-of-the-day IPO purchases peaks with a 3.3-percentage-point return over the Nasdaq after the company has been public for a full quarter, but "actually becomes negative" again after one year, Ms. Mott says.
"It's not to say there's no reason for buying" young IPOs after they have started trading, says Ms. Mott.
But it does mean that such stock picks require the usual hard scrutiny, not just a hunch or a favorable rumor.
New-issue analyst Robert Natale, who edits Standard & Poor's Corp.'s Emerging & Special Situations newsletter, has long preached that IPOs outperform the market in both bull and bear markets during the first three months, but underperform after that.
He usually recommends selling within three months.
For those "fortunate individuals able to get an allotment of shares" at the offering price, Mr. Natale usually suggests flipping -- or selling the shares quickly and moving on.
This isn't the kind of buy-and-hold investing that most small investors should concentrate on.
But then, the IPO market isn't for most small investors.
Professional IPO investors insist there are ways to make money in IPOs by cherry-picking among ones that are already public.
But it's not a simple matter of finding a slumping IPO and assuming it'll go back up.
Says Mr. Natale: "You don't want to be bottom-fishing in the new-issues market.
The law of averages is against you."
What some professionals are adept at doing, however, is identifying IPOs that are ignored in the marketplace for one reason or another.
If the companies behind the new issues are strong, such IPOs can be good buys -- even weeks after they come out.
Mr. Natale has four suggestions -- "exceptions to the rules," he calls them -- of recent IPOs that could be good buys now.
They are:
-- Rock-Tenn, a paperboard company that came out on March 3 at 16 1/2 and is bobbing along at 16 3/4 on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
-- Talbots, a women's apparel retailer that hit the market at 19 1/2 in November and has climbed sharply to 31 3/4 on the New York Stock Exchange.
It's trading at around 24 times Wall Street estimates for 1994 earnings.
-- Igen, a medical-products company that went public at 11 1/2 in February and has slumped to 10 1/2 on Nasdaq.
-- Tractor Supply, a retailer that focuses on farmers, whose stock has climbed modestly to 22 3/4 on Nasdaq from its Feb. 18 offering price of 20.
All four companies "have very attractive longterm fundamentals," says Mr. Natale.
Renaissance Capital, in Greenwich, Conn., specializes in IPO research for institutional investors.
Analyst Kathleen Smith there has studied the numbers, too, and she says that at least for the first 90 days of a stock's life, "this is an excellent market.
You can make money buying after the offering, through the first quarter or so."
One of the stocks her firm is looking at is Martin Marietta Materials, a spinoff from Martin Marietta that came out at 23 in February and is meandering at 22 3/4 now.
It's an example of a promising IPO that professionals might buy on the first sign that it might finally build up some momentum.
"We're waiting for the technicals to look better," says Ms. Smith.
Ms. Smith says investors have to be careful about buying post-IPO stocks that are illiquid (with too few shares available to trade) or priced at euphoric levels, as is still the case with Boston Chicken despite its comedown.
But don't dismiss the idea of buying post-IPO stocks entirely, says Ms. Smith.
"There are a lot of other investors who aren't necessarily buying on the offering that add these companies to their portfolios" later, she says, adding: "If you're a small investor, only buy stocks that your brokerage firm has knowledge about."
Another IPO pro, Charles Ronson of Balestra Capital, says one recent IPO he believes is underpriced now is Concord Holding, a company that administers bank-owned mutual funds.
It came out at 12 1/2 in late February and is at 13 1/4 now.
He says statistics about overall IPO performance don't matter because the individual stocks' performances are all over the map; it's a matter of doing stock-picking as with any other stocks, he says.
The Prudential Securities study has one more sobering finding for investors: As time goes on it's harder and harder to pick the winners.
"Investors who can't get stock at the offer price have less than a 50% chance of picking a winner if they buy stock the day after the offering, and the odds don't really improve over time," the study says.
After two years, 35% of IPOs bought at the first-day close had outperformed the Nasdaq.
