The city government may be close to reaching its first deal involving the sale of historic bank buildings along Shanghai's Bund, the pre-World War II financial center.
Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corp. and the local Pudong Development Bank are rival bidders for what was once Hongkong Bank's landmark colonial headquarters on the Bund, according to local officials and foreign bankers.
The building has been home to Shanghai's city government since the Communists took over the nation in 1949.
Executives of both banks declined to comment on specifics.
However, people close to the negotiations said the city government has reduced its offering price to Hongkong Bank for the symbolic -- but now run-down -- structure to around $50 million from about $170 million in the early 1990s.
That's still a princely sum that easily would make the transaction the most costly for a single building in China.
Buildings along the Bund, whose stately, granite exteriors remain largely unchanged after 45 years of communism, are perhaps the most evocative symbol of pre-World War II colonialism in China.
From the late 19th century until the Communists took power, Shanghai served as the Asian headquarters of many international banks, which profited immensely by serving businessmen who traded opium, cotton and other goods from their foreign concessions in the city.
Chinese officials never lost sight of that symbolism, making the Bund the home of city government organs and Chinese banks.
But as the city now contemplates ways of restoring its status as an East Asia financial center, it has notified current residents of buildings along the strip that they should be prepared to relocate to make way for the return of one-time imperialists.
Pudong Development Bank is considered a long shot at getting the property, as government officials in Shanghai hinted that they would have to charge any local bank considerably less than what they would demand from a foreign bank, making such a deal less attractive from the seller's point of view.
Other foreign banks and financial institutions, including American International Group and Banque Indosuez, a French concern, have held serious negotiations with city officials on the purchase of their old Shanghai headquarters, executives of both companies confirmed.
But Shanghai city government officials and foreign bankers are paying particularly close attention to Hongkong Bank's negotiations.
If such a high-profile deal were completed, they said, other banks might consider the city's exorbitant asking prices in a more favorable light.
One person close to the government said there isn't even an informal agreement with Hongkong Bank, but that he believed negotiations would be successfully concluded by year end.
Hongkong Bank officials said they are attracted to the structure, which dates to 1923, for nostalgic reasons, but skeptical about its usefulness for modern banking.
"We're quite interested in the building itself, but serious practical problems are inherent" in purchasing it back from the government, said Bob Sherbin, a Hongkong Bank spokesman.
Indeed, for foreign banks the price of readmission is high, particularly when they consider that China confiscated the properties from them in the first place.
In 1990, Vice Premier Zhu Rongji, then Shanghai mayor, first allowed the possibility of the sale of Bund buildings.
But disagreement among top-level Chinese over the appropriateness of any sale, and unrealistic quotations have so far prevented any deal.
In December, the city established a corporation with the explicit purpose of "re-establishing the Bund as the `Wall Street' of China."
The corporation will oversee the sale of buildings and the resettlement of government units and companies currently using the properties, according to Wu Jialu, the official appointed as director of the corporation.
Shanghai's stock market, the new national currency-swap center, most local brokerage houses and the Shanghai-based Bank of Communications already have established offices there.
City government officials have also begun transferring their operations to the new government center near Shanghai's People's Park.
Mr. Wu says 20 of the 113 banks that once had offices on the Bund have sought at least informal information about repurchases.
"And we've only just started," he adds.
Among the banks and financial companies that have made inquiries are: Jardine Fleming, Standard Chartered Bank, Citibank, Morgan Stanley Group Inc., Credit Lyonnais SA and Bank of East Asia.
Those companies said they have had only preliminary discussions with Shanghai officials.
"Now that the Chinese seem serious about renovating the Bund, we are a little more interested," said David Kiang, chief executive for China and Macao of Hong Kong's Standard Chartered Bank.
"We would love to get it back for sentimental reasons.
There might also be economic reasons as well if the Bund really becomes an important financial center."
But Mr. Kiang, like most foreign bank executives, emphasized that the interiors of the old bank buildings have deteriorated to such a low state that the cost of renovations alone might exceed the cost of building a new headquarters elsewhere.
