Three of the four defendants charged with conspiracy to fix prices of industrial diamonds didn't present themselves at their arraignment yesterday in federal court here.
General Electric Co., the only defendant to show up, pleaded not guilty before Judge George C. Smith of the U.S. district court for the Southern Division.
GE, based in Fairfield, Conn., was indicted with De Beers Centenary AG and two middle-level managers last month.
A spokesman for De Beers in Johannesburg, South Africa, who previously denied any wrongdoing by the company, couldn't be reached for comment.
The two individuals indicted were Peter Frenz, managing director of GE Superabrasives who's based near Frankfurt, and Philippe Liotier, the deputy general manager of Cie. Financiere de Suez in Paris.
Until recently, Mr. Liotier was chief executive officer of Brussels-based Diamant Boart SA, which makes synthetic diamonds through a 50-50 joint venture with De Beers Centenary AG, a De Beers unit.
U.S. attorneys for the men reiterated that their clients hadn't done anything wrong and that they weren't subject to the U.S. judicial system.
They said their clients couldn't be extradited to the U.S.
Although Mr. Frenz's lawyer in Washington said his client wouldn't stand trial in the U.S., a GE spokeswoman in Fairfield said, "We strongly urge Mr. Frenz to appear for trial."
Mr. Frenz, a German citizen, is an employee of GE Superabrasives, GE's industrial diamond unit in Worthington, Ohio.
When the judge pointed to the absence of Messrs. Frenz and Liotier at the arraignment, an attorney representing the U.S. Justice Department, which brought the price-fixing charges, said that he didn't expect them to appear.
Judge Smith set April 18 as the date for trial.
But attorneys for GE and the Justice Department told a reporter that they will seek a later date.
Synthetic diamonds are used in industrial cutting tools.
The criminal indictment charges that the companies and the individuals named exchanged pricing information for industrial diamonds in Europe in 1991 and 1992.
