Is the battered bond market turning the corner and heading for more stable ground?
After yields dropped last Tuesday and Wednesday on news of reduced inflation, many investors began to think so.
Low inflation is good for bond investors because it means less erosion of the buying power of a fixed income.
But by Friday, yields had risen to nearly where they were a week before, leaving the benchmark 30-year Treasury at 6.90%.
Investors are still nervous.
Many are encouraged that yields didn't end the week higher than where they started.
Yet it is still easier to find people willing to predict a 7% yield in the weeks ahead than to find people predicting 6.5%.
And higher yields mean lower bond prices.
"Last week we were in the grips of gloom and doom," said Bruce Whiteford manager of Chase U.S. Fixed Income, a money-management arm of Chase Manhattan Corp.
"This week, we kind of evened out a bit . . . but "psychology is still negative.
People are still a little bit leary to jump in here" and buy bonds.
Like many other potential buyers of Treasury debt these days, Mr. Whiteford says that there isn't enough inflation to justify all the nail-biting in the bond market.
Still, he is loath to take the plunge.
"There is value at these levels right now, but that doesn't mean we're going in and buying bonds right now," he said.
This week will be a major test for the bond market.
The Federal Open Market Committee, the policy-making arm of the Federal Reserve, is scheduled to meet beginning tomorrow.
Investors are holding their breath.
"The expected increase in the federal-funds rate is still hanging over the market," said Mr. Whiteford of Chase Manhattan.
The federal-funds rate is the rate charged on overnight loans between banks.
Many expect the Fed to move quickly to raise short-term interest rates again, in order to squelch any building inflationary pressures.
A number of analysts believe the Fed still needs to convince investors that it is making a pre-emptive strike against inflation before it becomes a problem and not merely reacting to growing inflationary pressures.
Speculation about possible White House pressure on the Fed pushed up bond yields and depressed prices on Friday.
The benchmark 30-year bond dropped nearly 7/8 point Friday, or nearly $8.75 for a bond with a $1,000 face value.
The drop was mainly in reaction to news of a meeting Friday morning between Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan and President Clinton.
At the White House's invitation, Mr. Greenspan met with President Clinton and several of his advisers "to hear the chairman's analysis of the economic fundamentals," particularly the strength of the economy in the first quarter, according to White House economic-policy aide Gene Sperling.
Such meetings have been held more than a half-dozen times in the past year, but this one got an enormous amount of attention because word of it leaked out in advance.
The White House took great pains after the session to try to convince reporters that it wasn't trying to pressure Mr. Greenspan not to raise interest rates when the FOMC meets.
Robert Rubin, head of the president's National Economic Council, who initiated and attended the meeting, said that Mr. Greenspan "discussed what he thought was going on economically."
He added, "What he didn't do is tell us what he's going to do at the open-market committee, and what we didn't do is convey any opinion about what he ought to do."
Also present at the hour-long session in the Oval Office were Vice President Gore, chief White House economist Laura Tyson, Budget Director Leon Panetta and presidential adviser George Stephanopoulos.
White House economist Alan Blinder didn't attend because Mr. Clinton is expected to nominate him to be vice chairman of the Fed.
When the Fed last raised the federal-funds rate on Feb. 4 to 3.25% from 3%, many investors began to second-guess the Fed's timing.
Since then, investors have pushed up long-term yields on speculation that perhaps the Fed moved too late.
It is widely believed that the next increase will be to 3.5% or 3.75%.
If the Fed wanted to move quickly, the earliest it would raise rates would probably be Wednesday.
That's because the first chance the FOMC would have to vote on a rate boost would be tomorrow afternoon, long after the Fed's traditional 11:30 a.m. intervention time.
But there is a good chance the Fed will wait longer, until it has a better idea of what is happening with the economy so far this year.
A number of analysts think there's a better chance the Fed would move to raise rates around April 1, the day the March employment report is due.
In any case, many bond investors are still sitting on cash rather than putting money into the market.
Like the Fed, they want to see what's happening with the U.S. economy before buying more.
One person with piles of cash is William R. Leach, director of fixed income at Boston Co.
Asset Management in Boston.
Boston Co. is keeping in cash around 10% of the $6 billion in fixed-income institutional assets it manages.
That is its highest cash level in more than two years.
"Are we concerned and nervous about the market?
Yes," says Mr. Leach.
Some studies show that inflationary pressures are building, he added: "Inflation isn't a problem now but it could be in six months, which isn't far off."
"Based on economic growth of something around 3.5%" as measured by annual gains in the gross domestic product, "you do have potential inflationary pressures in 1995," said Donald Fine, chief market analyst at Chase Securities Inc.
But "if the Fed moves quickly enough and gets the federal-funds rate to 4%, then I would say you could head off any inflationary pressures in 1995."
Among the bonds affected by rising yields in a growing economy are the three 100-year bonds sold last year by Walt Disney Co., Coca-Cola Co. and ABN Amro Bank NV, the New York branch of ABN Amro Holding NV, a Netherlands concern.
Prices of these bonds have sagged, but not nearly as sharply as might be expected for securities that mature 70 years after the longest-lived Treasury bond.
(Bonds with longer maturities are considered more vulnerable to interest-rate moves and inflation than shorter-term bonds, whose investors get paid back sooner.)
Disney's bonds, for example, were quoted at 95.92 on Friday, down about about four points from their offering price last July, or about $40 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, according to Morgan Stanley & Co., which underwrote the offering.
The latest price is down nearly 13 points from October, when U.S. interest rates hit the lowest levels in decades.
Coca-Cola's 100-year bonds, sold soon after Disney's, are down only about two points from when they were sold, according to Merrill Lynch & Co., which underwrote the offering.
ABN Amro's 100-year bonds have dropped nearly 10 points, says Morgan Stanley, which underwrote the offering just two days before long-term interest rates reached their low point in October.
For a comparison, consider how U.S. Treasury debt fared.
Since yields bottomed in October, the price of the then-benchmark 6.25%-coupon 30-year Treasury bond maturing in 2023 has dropped about 13 points.
According to Michael Knebel, a portfolio manager at Safeco Life Insurance Co., a unit of Safeco Corp., which bought some of the bonds from ABN Amro and Walt Disney, these 100-year bonds may be benefiting from a pickup in the economy.
The yield gap of these bonds over 30-year Treasury bonds has actually narrowed since last fall, a sign of growing demand.
"They don't respond to interest-rate movements as dramatically as you might think," he said.
This greater stability "has been true for the most part for corporates, and for those companies that are perceived as a safe bet," especially in a strengthening economy.
U.S. Treasury notes and bonds ended sharply lower Friday following speculation about the meeting between the central bank chairman and President Clinton.
The 10-year note dropped more than 1/2 point to 95 16/32 to yield 6.48%, up from 6.40% on Thursday.
"The market was pretty weak; there was a lot of nervousness in reaction to this morning's meeting," said a money-market economist for Kidder, Peabody & Co.
The fear in the marketplace is that the independence of the Federal Reserve is being compromised.
The market had little in the way of economic data to cling to last week following the release of producer and consumer price data Tuesday and Wednesday.
