Media mogul Silvio Berlusconi greeted the world yesterday as the face of the New Italy.
But the coming days, in which Mr. Berlusconi negotiates with his two right-wing party allies to form a government, may show whether the Old Italy of strife and factionalism has actually been vanquished.
In one of Europe's most stunning success stories, Mr. Berlusconi's three-month-old Forza Italia emerged as the largest political party in the country following Italy's landmark parliamentary elections Sunday and Monday.
Together with its Freedom Alliance partners, the federalist Northern League and the neo-fascist National Alliance, Mr. Berlusconi's movement claimed an absolute majority of seats in the lower house of parliament and is three seats short of a majority in the upper house.
"In record time, my political force was able to become the first political force in Italy," Mr. Berlusconi said yesterday.
In a remarkable transformation from business tycoon to deft politician, he promised to guarantee the values of "freedom, family, business, free markets, profits and competition but also solidarity and values of the Christian tradition."
But now the hard part begins.
Assuming, as most expect, that President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro taps Mr. Berlusconi to form the next government, his first obstacle will be smoothing over harsh differences between his two allies.
In campaign rhetoric typical of Italian wheeling and dealing, the Northern League's leader, Umberto Bossi, had called Mr. Berlusconi "a recycled product of the outgoing five-party regime."
In an effort to extract concessions, Mr. Bossi vowed the League would not enter a government with Mr. Berlusconi as prime minister and instead proposed League leader Roberto Maroni.
But by last night, Mr. Bossi tempered his gruff political rhetoric and signaled a willingness to begin negotiations with Mr. Berlusconi today; for the first time, he also agreed to negotiate with the National Alliance.
"We should create a government considering the League as a real political force," Mr. Bossi said.
Still, the gruff talk and uncertainty damped the early euphoria that the election had delivered Italy its first clear and therefore stable majority since Fascism.
In addition, in a nation rocked by recent repeated political scandals, there are persistent worries about whether Mr. Berlusconi will be able to separate his private business interests, ranging from television and real estate to soccer and supermarkets, from his public duties.
As a signal of caution, the Milan Stock Exchange, after a 3.8% surge on Monday, fell by 1.9% yesterday.
Instability, financial markets warn, is exactly what Italy has been trying to overcome with the introduction of its new political system.
Moreover, the current government structure, which makes for a weak prime minister and duplicates many government duties in both chambers of parliament, is still a relic of the old Italy.
Constitutional experts say institutional reform will be essential before Italy can emerge as an efficient, workable democracy.
Still, the clear mandate for change voiced by Italians should not be obscured by the potential uncertainties, political observers say.
"The change has been rather radical and drastic," says Giovanni Buonvicini, president of Rome think tank Istituto Affari Internazionali.
"Italians gave a clear indication that they want to give up the old centralized, inefficient, lazy way of governing."
Though the three parties' platforms differ within the Freedom Alliance, the overall message of the right's campaign was one of efficient public services, lower taxes and an end to government red tape.
Voters indicated that they prefer that the state provide only "direction and control rather than management, liberating the economy from the obstacles that put a brake on it," says the state industrialists' association Confindustria.
The differences between the League and the National Alliance, which were glossed over during the campaign, are now strikingly apparent, particularly the degree to which the government should be decentralized in Italy.
The National Alliance, created from the former Fascist Party, is nationalist in nature and against decentralization of tax collection, which is the primary platform of the League.
The National Alliance also favors preserving some national ownership of business, in direct contrast with the ambitious privatization plans of Mr. Berlusconi's Forza Italia.
To win over Mr. Bossi, the other two allies may be forced to concede to his demands, especially on regional federalism.
Still, some think the lure of governing, a first for Italy's new right, will be so strong that the factions will put aside their bickering.
"There will be no divisions on the right," declared Alessandra Mussolini, newly re-elected parliamentary member for the National Alliance and granddaughter of Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini.
"The numbers must push even Bossi to reflect on putting aside differences to form a good government."
Ventures Patrick McCarthy, political science professor at Johns Hopkins Center in Bologna: "If Bossi brings down the government by refusing to join, he'll wipe out his whole electoral base -- and he's not going to do that."
