At a time of unprecedented opportunity for U.S. car makers in Japan, Ford Motor Co. is pulling out all the stops.
America's No. 2 auto maker is blitzing Japan's consumers with a massive new ad campaign, touting "My First Ford."
Soon, Ford will market right-hand drive cars to match the Japanese standard.
And, in the most brazen statement of its presence, Ford is putting its own name on a Japanese dealer network -- a first for a U.S. car maker.
"Now is a good time for the new invaders to attack the market -- when those Japanese auto-industry giants are seeming to lose their direction and confidence," says Konen Suzuki, a former Toyota Motor Corp. managing director who is president of Ford's Japan unit.
This year Mr. Suzuki plans to triple Japanese sales of Fords made overseas, to 15,000 vehicles.
By the end of the decade, he envisions "drastic" expansion of Japan's Ford dealerships -- up to 1,000 outlets, triple today's number, selling a total of 200,000 Fords annually.
Ford's Japan push is well-timed.
Detroit's auto makers are suddenly outperforming their Japanese competitors financially, lending the Big Three new credibility while domestic makers stumble.
Recent U.S. models are getting glowing press coverage.
Currency trends also are helping the Americans in recessionary Japan.
Ford says it has cut prices 25% since 1989.
And when Chrysler Corp. cut prices on its Jeep Cherokee, sales almost tripled in Japan, demonstrating that Japanese consumers do indeed have an appetite for foreign products.
The marketing drive also comes at a time when U.S. officials are digging in their heels in trade talks to open the Japanese market yet further to American goods.
And while Ford's sales in Japan lag behind those of General Motors Corp. and Chrysler, which is helped by its popular four-wheel drive vehicles, experts say Ford is in the best position to exploit the new opportunities.
In conjunction with Mazda Motor Corp., Ford's 25%-owned affiliate, the company owns Autorama, a string of 286 Japanese dealerships.
(In contrast, GM and Chrysler sell through local partners' outlets.)
Last year, Ford's sales of its U.S.-made cars rose 50% to more than 5,000 vehicles, while Autorama dealers sold roughly 39,000 Ford-marque cars made by Mazda.
With its current moves, Ford is getting bolder.
That's especially reflected in its decision this week to take down the Autorama signs and replace them with ones that say Ford.
Tetsuhiko Nakamura, director of Autorama's main office in Tokyo, says he sees proof of Ford's presence in growing traffic through his stores.
"Ford is forming more of an identity here," he says.
"It has new character."
The bolder character can also be seen in Ford's ads, which attack perceptions that its cars don't measure up to the Japanese and claim an edge in comfort and safety.
Safety is seldom promoted by Japanese competitors, though it has been used by other foreign lines, such as that of Mercedes-Benz AG, a unit of Germany's Daimler-Benz AG.
"Our product's real strength is that it is much better than people's perceptions," says Mr. Suzuki, who commissioned WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson unit and Japanese advertising giant Dentsu Inc. to develop the new campaign.
The Japanese print ads for Ford's American-made Taurus and Explorer models push the idea of space: "Two families are welcome," beckons the caption for the Taurus station wagon.
It's a revolutionary proposal in this cramped society, and apparently a welcome one: Wagons make up about 90% of Taurus sales here.
Last month, Ford began television ads five evenings a week, and plans to increase the frequency before the debut of new models in the spring.
The ads, which show dual airbags and bear the slogan "My First Ford," are an attempt "to make Japanese people feel more comfortable about buying a Ford," says Jun Nakano, a Dentsu account executive.
After all, he adds, "most Japanese are, in fact, buying a Ford for the first time."
All the fuss has made people like Hiroshi Ito curious.
He has driven a Nissan model for the past 10 years, but recently dropped into an Autorama dealership near Tokyo's fish-market district, looking to browse through Taurus brochures.
"I've liked the Taurus for a long time," says the 47-year-old fish distributor.
"I like the design, first of all."
Stretching himself out luxuriously in front of a sales desk, he notes, "You can do this in a Taurus.
You can't do it in a Japanese car."
The Taurus price is also a selling point, he adds.
"Right now, it's cheap" to buy American, he says.
In fact, at 3.13 million yen ($28,874), the Taurus wagon is significantly less expensive than the competing Toyota Camry, which rings in at 3.3 million yen ($30,442).
Trade pressures give Ford a leg up, too.
The U.S. government has pressed Japanese auto makers to let their dealers sell U.S. cars.
Tokyo-area Nissan Motor Co. dealers recently said they want to carry Ford vehicles, and Ford says it may take them up on the offer.
The changing environment could send a message to other U.S. car makers.
"Is this an opportunity?
Well, you bet it is," says Stephen Usher, an analyst with Kleinwort Benson International Inc.
"Americans should be in Japan now."
On top of currency-related advantages, he says, Japanese attitudes towards U.S.-made cars have been changing as well.
"The fact that both companies {Ford and Mazda} are willing to come out of the closet and say, `Hey, we sell Fords here' is an indication of the improving perception," he says.
"Detroit no longer has anything to be ashamed of."
