As many as 1.3 million canceled stock certificates of General Motors Corp. apparently were stolen from a warehouse and have surfaced in small batches since September.
The Securities and Exchange Commission and First Chicago Trust Co., a unit of First Chicago Corp., the transfer agent for GM's stock, said none of the worthless certificates have been successfully cashed in or used as collateral for loans, despite 20 apparent attempts.
The SEC, GM and the transfer agent aren't commenting on who was responsible for warehousing the canceled certificates.
Nor are they commenting on how the certificates got out of the warehouse and showed up at banks, brokerage firms and lawyers' offices, mostly in the U.S.
The circulation of the canceled GM certificates is the first encountered by the SEC since mid-1991, when hundreds of millions of dollars in improperly canceled corporate bonds began appearing in Europe and the U.S., causing about $6.8 million in losses for banks and other institutions that accepted them.
Citibank, a unit of Citicorp, whose securities-transfer department was to have disposed of the bonds, settled with the Comptroller of the Currency and the SEC without admitting or denying wrongdoing.
First Chicago received its first inquiry about the certificates last September and notified the SEC, according to vice president John Bagdonas.
The SEC warned its fellow securities regulators in the U.S. and overseas about the canceled certificates last month.
Some of those agencies warned the public.
"The cancellation is generally evidenced solely by small perforation holes in the lower right corner of the certificates, although some of the stolen certificates may not even bear the perforation marks," SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt said in the letter alerting his fellow regulators.
"In light of the potential losses to financial institutions and investors, it is critical that all securities firms, depositories and other financial institutions be alerted that such securities are being circulated," Mr. Levitt wrote.
The SEC chairman also said "U.S. criminal authorities have begun an investigation" into the matter.
He also wrote, "There may be securities certificates of other issuers that have not yet been reported as lost or stolen."
SEC officials wouldn't elaborate on either statement.
The 1.3 million canceled GM certificates were issued before Jan. 1, 1984, although some certificates from that time are valid.
A GM spokesman said the company believes the number of canceled certificates in circulation "is much smaller" than 1.3 million.
