Here are some things that happened in and around the Great Earthquake of 1994, circa Los Angeles and Malibu, Calif.
My son, Mr. Perfect, a six-year-old angel, slept through the earthquake on Monday morning.
When he awoke, he was stunned that his cartoons were not on and wanted to know why, if I loved him, I couldn't turn the power back on.
G., a madam who's been upset for months at all of the attention that Heidi Fleiss got, and who seems to want me to ghostwrite her autobiography (which I'm not going to do), called four times to tell me that the earthquake did not scare her, and that she was ready to be a movie star, and that the proof was that she had an earthquake preparedness kit in her car.
KGB, which is the real name of a rock radio station in San Diego that I get clearly in Malibu, broadcast '60s rock songs for two hours Monday morning, reported on "outstanding" surf conditions, and did not once mention the earthquake in its somewhat larger neighbor to the north.
My assistant, K., notified me that she was really annoyed because a casting session for "L.A. Law," which was surely going to make her into a star, had been canceled because of the earthquake, which really made her want to cry.
T., a former colleague who now lives in the San Fernando Valley, told me that her whole apartment had been "trashed" and that everything she had was ruined, and said that she would probably have to go to Idaho to ski to get over the pain.
She was crying.
On Sunset Strip, near the Chateau Marmont Hotel, two conscientious hookers who endlessly patrol a certain stretch of the sidewalk were on the job, even after a major earthquake and a dusk-to-dawn curfew, several hours after dusk, winking and smiling at the passersby.
The big party to mark the re-opening of the town's premier restaurant, Morton's, a $1,000-a-plate dinner to aid an environmental group, was canceled, saving yours truly $2,000.
Mr. Perfect learned that he had some old episodes of "Sonic, the Hedgehog" on tape that could tide him over once we drove 40 miles to our house in town, which had power but no cable.
He was intensely relieved.
Today, as I write this on the day after the quake, it is painfully hot.
John Coyne called me from Chicago to tell me that I might feel better knowing that it was 20 below zero on Michigan Avenue.
The full complement of hookers was operating on Sunset Boulevard.
My agent called to tell me that she needed more demo tapes.
It's hard to believe that people actually have died tragic, premature deaths in a place like this, but they have.
Mr. Stein is a writer and actor.
