Former U.S. Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, who lent his name to bonds that eased the Latin American debt crisis, is launching a company with powerhouse backing to invest in emerging markets.
The new company, Darby Overseas Investments Ltd., is set to pump as much as $100 million into private firms in Argentina, Chile and Mexico, with investments planned later for New Zealand and Australia.
The Bechtel engineering fortune is behind Mr. Brady's company, according to the former Treasury secretary.
Other backers include top officials of his former employer, New York investment bank Dillon, Read & Co., and Sheldon Lubar, chairman of Christiana Cos., a Milwaukee real-estate developer.
Darby Overseas was hatched last summer by Mr. Brady, his former top aide at the Treasury, Hollis McLoughlin, and Daniel Marx, Argentina's No. 2 finance official, when the three were on a wildlife expedition to Argentina's rugged Patagonia region.
Earlier this month, Mr. Marx resigned his job as Argentina's undersecretary of finance to join Darby Overseas as a managing director.
"It's a private firm which is going to be investing in the emerging markets," with a "probable focus on Latin America," said Mr. Brady, at the company's headquarters in Easton, Md.
"We'll be looking outside the U.S. for investments for our own account and the account of our friends."
But some institutional investors regard Latin America as amply picked over.
Does Mr. Brady know something they don't?
In a word, yes; but it isn't what, so much as who he knows.
In the U.S., Mr. Brady is famous not for investment expertise but for his signature on U.S. currency, his Brady Commission report on the 1987 stock-market crash and for his lowball estimates of how much it would cost taxpayers to bail out the savings and loan industry.
Overseas, it's a different story.
In 1989, then-Treasury Secretary Brady introduced what became known as the Brady Plan, through which debtor nations could repackage large amounts of their debt into easily tradable bonds, dubbed Brady bonds.
Now, his name has undeniable door-opening power in Latin America.
But the Darby group's "secret weapon" -- says one of the group's outside investors -- is Mr. Marx.
Well-connected in his own right, Mr. Marx last year spearheaded one of the largest public offerings ever, the $2.7 billion sale of a majority stake in the Argentine state-owned oil company, Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales, known as YPF.
He is best known as Argentina's chief debt negotiator.
Darby Overseas will provide working capital to privately held manufacturing, consumer-product and telecommunications companies with an eye toward restructuring them and taking them public in several years.
Jay Pelosky, director of Latin American research and strategy at Morgan Stanley Group Inc., says "the big-money guys" are "pushing into private placements."
The idea, he says, is "that, three to five years down the road, you have a more developed, liquid market" and the investments can be repackaged and sold profitably as initial public offerings.
Among the risks, Mr. Pelosky notes, is that local currencies may devalue rapidly and that Darby wouldn't have a way of bailing out if the investment doesn't work.
It won't be easy.
In Latin America these days, "the most obvious opportunities" for profit "are gone," says Ignacio Sosa, managing director of the emerging-markets sales group of Bankers Trust.
"But it's not too late" to make money in "the companies that the people who read research reports aren't going to find," he agrees.
"These companies have been operating on family money, and they're going to need to go to the capital markets to compete, to grow."
In fact, Darby investors are betting the twin marquee names of Brady and Marx will be enough to overcome any reluctance these families might have to surrendering partial ownership of their firms.
"When Brady and Marx call, people answer the phone," observes a Wall Street executive who specializes in Latin American investments.
"They will be told things that these companies would never tell a big U.S. fund manager."
Reached in Buenos Aires, Mr. Marx said what Mr. Brady brings "to the party" is "his capability and his reputation."
And "what we have in common, all of us, is that we've always worked on situations bringing things public."
But spotting good investments may be harder than the partners' first shared effort, spotting sea lions during their Patagonian expedition.
The principals of Darby Overseas don't deny that Latin American investing has become something of a fad, and the company is essentially making the same bet the rest of the institutional investor community has already made -- that Latin Americans with improving economies will want a higher standard of living.
But, they say, they will stay long after the fad has faded.
Also serving as a managing director of the firm will be Michael Curtain, former executive vice president of the Interamerican Development Bank, and now a vice president of Bechtel Enterprises Inc., the developmental and financing arm of privately held Bechtel Group Inc.
Investors in Darby Overseas include John Birkelund, chairman of Dillon Read, and George Wegers, a former managing director of the investment-banking boutique.
"The players are of such significance," says one of the investors, "that it will at least be interesting."
Peter Truell contributed to this article.
