Nothing about NBC's "Mad About You" (Thursdays, 8-8:30 p.m. EST) seemed more unlikely, when it began airing last season, than the possibility that this frenzied little sitcom (which began with a coupling on a kitchen table) could evolve into serious entertainment.
Even so, that is what did happen to this rich comedy about a Manhattan couple.
There is no explaining why, outside of the usual good reasons -- wit, work and the triumph of talent over form.
There is indeed hardly an episode that doesn't underscore how much talent can do for a standard sitcom line -- which isn't to say that the scripts here are standard; they are better than that.
Still, there's no denying how much better better can get when those two masters of timing, Paul Reiser and Helen Hunt, get to work on their lines.
To appreciate what the show has become only requires looking at the life that Mr. Reiser/Ms.
Hunt (as the two leads, Paul and Jamie Buchman) and Cynthia Harris (Paul's heroically terrifying mother) manage to squeeze out of a timeworn comic situation.
Jamie has falsely claimed that Paul is away working on his movie job so that the couple can avoid having dinner with Mother Buchman.
But Mother Buchman (a role Ms. Harris plays with grimly sustained panache), who is driven by a suspicion of the universe in general and of her son and daughter-in-law in particular, pops in unannounced, as her knowing son predicted she would.
The resulting frantic effort to hide Paul's presence in a small city apartment -- he ends up trapped on the fire escape -- may be the stuff of stock farce.
Yet in the hands of this team, it is farce that can convulse.
The trick is that, for all the situational madness, the talent here keeps its grip on the goal of portraying real-life people.
The work going on here, in short, is a lot more complicated than the delivery of fun one-liners.
"Mad About You" may be somewhat similar in content to that crowd of neurotic-family sitcoms aired the past two seasons, but it's a world apart in sensibility.
It's not hard to imagine how the loudmouthed stars of "The Mommies," for instance, or the just plain noisy star of "The Nanny" would deliver those lines that Mr. Reiser and Ms. Hunt manage with such fine-tuned venom (when their sunny sides aren't up).
Ms. Hunt, Mr. Reiser and company know the obsessions of the social types they depict.
One scene in one of the series' better episodes takes place in a hospital room.
Paul's father (Louis Zorich), who has just suffered a heart attack, has only one preoccupation and one question for his visiting children: "Where did you park?"
Bent on ignoring her daughter-in-law, Mother Buchman hovers around the hospital bed and concentrates on asking her son questions on the order of "How is Murray?" (the dog).
"The dog is good," comes the exasperated reply.
"He would have been here but he's running errands today."
Mr. Reiser can deliver one-liners like these so that he actually sounds like an irritated, smart-mouthed son -- rather than a stand-up comedian who got a TV series.
In the line of filial duty, and to comfort Mother Buchman while her husband is in the hospital, Paul and Jamie go off to share a meal with her.
It is a visit that occasions immensely complicated if not altogether insane exchanges on the subjects of turkey, turkey sandwiches and eating in general.
"Food ordered in," Mother Buchman sniffs, "isn't the same as cooking.
It's only ordering in."
"That's right," her son replies with murderous calm, "and cooking isn't the same as ordering in.
So cooking, I'm guessing, would be cooking."
The show isn't without its rough spots, among them the screechily overdrawn character of Jamie's sister, whose appearances are all too frequent and witless.
Then there is the industrial quantity of sexual fun and daring that can get mightily self-conscious.
Such flaws aside, "Mad About You" is an artful howl, deserving of praise and a wide audience, both of which it is likely to win if there's any justice in the world.
Let us pause, while turning to less entertaining matters, to note the latest convulsion of self-analysis to hit the media as a result of Adm. Inman's pronouncements on the press.
As all the world has by now heard, the president's nominee for the post of secretary of defense last week decided, for reasons best known to himself, to drop out before his confirmation hearings.
The reason Adm. Inman gave -- that he had been made the target of a plot by the Senate minority leader and a columnist -- was so ludicrous on its face that some network reporters delivering word of the accusations could not conceal their amazement.
It was hard, the day the news broke, to keep track of the numerous times the admiral's reason was compared with the one Ross Perot offered for dropping out of the presidential race: an alleged plot to mess up his daughter's wedding.
Still, all the well-justified journalistic incredulity Adm. Inman's charges inspired could not succeed in preventing an onslaught of high meditation on the merits of the admiral's charges about the press.
A guest on "The MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour" last week was, for instance, moved to point out that as a result of Adm. Inman's charges there would be growing debate on the media's excesses, and author Larry Sabato joined in to say that yes, the admiral's charges weren't persuasive -- but that he made a point.
There really is something quite remarkable about the way even the most absurd charges of media culpability can produce instant and reverent attention from the media, along with bouts of solemn self-reflection.
There is plenty of reason, generally, for the press to reflect on its behavior.
And one of the things it might reflect on (after dealing with others more important) is why every charge of media perfidy uttered by every political crank who wants to change the subject should invariably be credited as being important and worthy of urgent debate.
It is a question.
