If you're looking for high dividends, you can't get much loftier than Houston Industries.
At its current stock price of about $37, the Houston utility and cable-television holding company is yielding more than 8% annually, more than a full percentage point higher than the average utility.
Even with rising interest rates, that yield far exceeds the return on most Treasurys.
But if you buy, there's a price attached: You may spend your nights worrying about not one but two government agencies whose actions could effect the company's stock.
On one front, the Texas Public Utility Commission is looking to pare rates charged by Houston Industries' Houston Lighting & Power unit, in the wake of an administrative law judge's finding that enough evidence exists to suggest HL&P is earning excess profits.
On the other front, the Federal Communications Commission last month imposed a 7% reduction in cable-TV subscriber rates, a further tightening of the regulatory noose around the industry's neck.
All of that means uncertainty to shareholders.
Not only do the maneuverings mean the company's share price is subject to continued erosion, but future dividend growth appears to be imperiled.
In fact, many analysts don't expect the $3 annual dividend will expand at all for the next few years because, they contend, regulatory rulings will stifle earnings growth.
"I don't think the dividend will be cut anytime soon, but investors have to question its sustainability" over the next few years, says Oppenheimer analyst Craig Lucas in New York.
Last year, Houston Industries diverted a whopping 93.7% of earnings into dividends, much higher than the industry average of about 80%.
That leaves the company little room for error in 1994.
Analysts predict Houston Industries will earn $3.20 to $3.45 a share this year, roughly the same as the $416 million, or $3.20 a share, it earned in 1993.
But next year could get dicier if HL&P gets hit with a rate reduction.
Last month, an administrative law judge, hearing a complaint brought by a former HL&P employee, required the utility company to prove that its rates are reasonable.
A utility is allowed a certain return on investment as set by the utility commission.
A Texas utility-commission staff analysis found that, based on 1992 earnings, HL&P might be overearning anywhere from $23 million to $101.4 million because its borrowing costs have fallen and it has lowered its expenses by laying off 1,500 workers.
(The company, however, points out that a later commission review, based on the 12 months ended June 1993, found the utility could be underearning as much as $9 million, or overearning as much as $62 million.)
Last week, the commission declined to hear Houston Industries' appeal, meaning a full-blown rate case is likely.
HL&P now is appealing directly to the administrative law judge.
Analysts say a reduction of about $62 million -- roughly the midpoint of the early findings -- would trim about 30 cents a share from 1995 earnings.
Making matters worse, this comes as public pressure is mounting against HL&P.
The city of Austin recently filed a $125 million lawsuit in Harris County District Court in Houston, claiming HL&P mismanaged the South Texas Project nuclear power plant, which has been shut down for more than a year because of mechanical and managerial problems, and in which Austin is a partner.
Such problems and earnings pressure are customary at utility providers.
So Houston Industries has attempted to bring some earnings stability through its cable-TV unit, Kblcom.
But even that business has struck upon uncertain times.
Kblcom has yet to record a year in the black.
And while many, including the company, expected 1994 to be Kblcom's first profitable year, "reregulation has pushed profitability out further into the future," says Michael Worms, a manager at Brown Brothers Harriman in New York.
The company hasn't determined the impact of the latest round of reregulation, but executives say the original cable reregulation effort in 1992 is costing Kblcom about $30 million annually.
But even with a profitable Kblcom, the utility side of the business is Houston Industries' real earnings generator for the immediate future.
Even if Kblcom were to contribute $14 million to net income for 1994 -- the high side of what analysts had expected before reregulation struck -- that's just 3% of the holding company's earnings last year.
But some analysts see the cable-TV side providing most of Houston Industries' earnings growth in the future.
And Kblcom could help the dividend to a small degree if part of the cable unit is sold.
Houston Industries last November announced it was seeking a "strategic partner" interested in buying as much as 50% of Kblcom.
It has yet to find a buyer.
But if successful, the money received would erase the cable unit's debt and increase the parent's net income, thereby reducing the dividend payout ratio and providing some leeway for future growth.
Analysts aren't counting on a sale just yet.
Though cable properties have been hot in recent months, they've lost much luster because of the reregulation efforts and the demise of the Tele-Communications and Bell Atlantic deal.
Still, there are some who find the stock mildly attractive.
Raymond Moore at Dillon Read in New York contends that with the high yield and depressed price -- the stock is trading near its yearly low -- he would "be a buyer now, but I wouldn't be banging on my desk about it."
Others aren't so sure.
Barry Abramson, a utilities analyst at Prudential Securities in New York, rates the company a "hold."
Mr. Abramson notes that until the company finds a way to boost its earnings, the high payout ratio all but prevents any dividend growth.
On top of that, there's the uncertainty surrounding the possible rate cut.
"That could put added earnings pressure on the stock," Mr. Abramson says.
Hornbeck Offshore Services, Galveston, leaped more than 30% last week as investors responded to strong earnings.
For the fourth quarter, Hornbeck posted net income of $2.69 million, or 20 cents a share, including a loss of $280,000 from early retirement of debt, as well as a charge of $614,000 from unsuccessful salvage efforts.
A year earlier, Hornbeck earned $1.16 million, or 12 cents a share.
La Quinta Inns, San Antonio, gained 14% on news that company founder and chairman, Sam Barshop, said he would step down March 19.
La Quinta's shares jumped $3.83 a share to $30.75, adjusted for a 3-for-2 stock split paid March 16.
Tanknology Environmental, Houston, dropped 8% to $4.375 after announcing it expects to report a small loss for the first quarter.
The company says it doesn't expect the loss to exceed three cents a share.
A year earlier, it earned two cents a share.
Tanknology, whose main business is testing underground storage tanks for leaks, noted that the first quarter, typically the company's slowest, "has been further impacted by the unseasonably cold weather in many parts of the U.S."
