Prof. Thomas Gale Moore's argument for either totally deregulating the Bell telephone companies or retaining the present restrictions on their offering information services and video programming or manufacturing equipment ("Partial Decontrol of Baby Bells Rings Hollow," editorial page, Feb. 1) ignores the availability of a third option that would avoid that stark and unsatisfactory choice.
The necessity that he sees for choosing one or the other of these two extremes is traceable to the continued regulation of the companies in most of our states under a rate-base/rate-of-return system, which essentially entitles them to a reasonable opportunity to earn a going return on their invested dollars.
In these circumstances there is indeed a danger that, if permitted to enter into the activities now closed to them, the telephone companies will compete unfairly in the various ways Prof. Moore describes -- overinvesting in costly upgradings of their systems in order to provide new, esoteric services, paying inflated prices for equipment they purchase from their manufacturing affiliates, cutting prices on the competitive services to unremunerative levels -- in each case recouping the costs or losses from their monopoly services, with the permission of regulators obliged to permit them a reasonable return on their total operations.
Hence his posing the choice: either deregulate them entirely or continue to exclude them from the competitive fields.
But the first of these is certainly not going to happen in the near future.
Nor should it.
Even though competition at the local level is most certainly coming, the overwhelming majority of subscribers are still served by a local telephone company monopoly; and competitive suppliers of equipment, information services or long-distance calling continue to be heavily dependent upon those local networks for access to ultimate customers.
Regulation continues to be necessary, therefore, to protect customers from exploitation and competitors from exclusion or discrimination in their access to the essential local facilities.
While I think Prof. Moore grossly understates the capacity of regulators to guard against many of these abuses even under the present system of regulation -- for example, by allocating total company costs (however arbitrarily) between regulated and unregulated operations -- the real evil is the present essentially cost-plus method of regulation.
What most countries of the world -- and a few American jurisdictions -- now do instead is regulate the monopoly prices directly, linking their course over time, not to the company's actual costs but, typically, to some index of economywide inflation minus an estimated achievable annual improvement in productivity.
While there are problems in devising a reasonable formula and some tendency in some countries to "correct" the formula after a period of years by looking at what has happened to actual returns, this method in principle gives the regulated companies the same incentives as unregulated companies to hold down their costs, improve their efficiency and engage in successful innovation -- while forcing them to absorb the cost of investments that turn out unsuccessfully.
In so doing, it also eliminates the incentive to engage in the various perverse practices that Prof. Moore describes, because it denies the utility companies the right to recover the costs of their inefficiencies, mistakes or predatory tactics in increased charges to monopoly customers.
There is plenty of room for a much greater amount of deregulation of telecommunications than we have so far adopted in this country; but the possibility of substituting rate caps or direct price for rate-of-return regulation provides the clue, missing from Prof. Moore's exposition, to extricating us from the dilemma he describes.
Alfred E. Kahn
Ithaca, N.Y.
