Fantasy and reality quickly blur in "Treasure Island: The Adventure Begins . . . ," say the promotional materials for a special to be broadcast Sunday on the NBC network.
So do advertising and entertainment.
The prime-time show chronicles a boy's vacation at Treasure Island, the new pirate-themed Las Vegas resort and casino owned by Mirage Resorts.
Young Robbie and his father sword-fight with swashbucklers and search for buried treasure.
Stephen A. Wynn, chairman and chief executive of Mirage, is an executive producer of the "Treasure Island" special.
Mirage purchased the one-hour time slot as advertising from NBC, a unit of General Electric Co.
NBC says it wasn't involved in the show's contents, other than a review by its standards and practices department.
NBC and Mirage decline to comment on the price, but executives estimate it to be about $1.7 million.
Coca-Cola Co. has bought four minutes of ad time in the show from the casino resort operator, said a Mirage spokesman, and Mirage donated another two minutes to the Las Vegas Visitor and Convention Authority.
Mirage will use the remaining four minutes to run commercials for its Treasure Island and Mirage casino resorts.
The hourlong show has raised eyebrows in advertising and broadcasting circles as the latest and perhaps most extreme example of the melding of advertising and entertainment.
Advertorials in magazines and program-length television "infomercials" have long pushed the limits of how far advertisers can go to disguise pitches as information.
And product placement in movies has become a big business, as many producers offset expenses by cramming brand-name products into scripts.
But advertising is creeping into entertainment in even subtler ways, critics say.
For example, "Nick and Noel," Toys "R" Us's half-hour holiday special, featured a dog and cat that also appeared in a book and video sold in the company's stores.
NBC recently began a prime-time series called "Viper," whose title character is a Chrysler sports car.
"Treasure Island" appears to go even further because the casino resort is the show's centerpiece.
"This is really pretty blatant," says Kathryn Montgomery, president of the public-advocacy group Center for Media Education.
"It's consistent with other hotel chains and vacation packages that make their appeals to kids so they will influence their parents."
An NBC spokesman said the network plans to air a statement as part of the closing credits saying that the show "has been sponsored by Treasure Island Productions Inc."
An NBC spokesman said the show doesn't violate any rules.
"This isn't new ground," he says.
"It has gone through all the same checks and balances as a Disney special."
Walt Disney Co. operates theme parks and also produces programming.
Rules for plugging products on television are somewhat murky, but when advertisers provide money or other consideration to a show's producers in exchange for exposure, the relationship is supposed to be disclosed to viewers.
"Treasure Island" also is the exception to the longstanding prohibition on running ads for a product during a show featuring the product.
Chrysler, which says its only involvement in "Viper" is to provide cars for the series, won't be advertising any of its models during the show.
The Mirage says "Treasure Island" isn't meant to drive up near-term sales.
"Does it carry with it promotional value?
Of course it does," says the Mirage spokesman.
"But more in an image sense than in a direct advertising sense.
I think people will watch it and enjoy it, and along the way they'll have heard of a hotel called Treasure Island."
Last year, however, bookings skyrocketed at the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan after "Home Alone 2: Lost in New York" documented Macaulay Culkin's adventures there.
The Plaza says it didn't pay for its appearance in "Home Alone 2."
It's the subtlety of programs like "Treasure Island" that disturbs critics like Dr. Montgomery.
"We already know that kids don't know the difference between commercials and programming," she says.
"This is designed to look like a program.
It's designed to confuse."
The Mirage spokesman said the idea for "Treasure Island" began with plans to implode the Dunes hotel as part of the opening of the Treasure Island resort last October.
"Let's face it, it seemed like a pretty good publicity stunt," the spokesman said.
Efforts to include the demolition in a major motion picture didn't pan out.
So Mr. Wynn turned to Michael Ovitz and his Hollywood talent agency Creative Artists Agency to help develop a project highlighting the Dunes demolition.
The implosion of the Dunes is the climax of the "Treasure Island" special.
Mirage hired Finnegan-Pinchuk Co., a veteran television production company, 15 principal actors and the London Symphony Orchestra to record the score for the show.
Mirage says it will consider the venture a success if it can match the ratings of "seaQuest DSV," the Steven Spielberg series that it pre-empts.
According to A.C. Nielsen, "seaQuest" has attracted an average audience of 10.4 million viewers.
But marketing experts question whether that's a big enough audience to justify the cost of making the "Treasure Island" special.
No cost estimates were available.
"This is not the Super Bowl or the Academy Awards," says Charles Lisberger, president of Courtlemagne Communications, a Los Angeles firm that specializes in television and film placements for the travel industry.
"There is no guaranteed audience.
They are rolling the dice that they have cast it right and found the right director and ensured the right audience.
If they guess wrong, they will have made a major mistake."
Ad Notes . . .
General Media International account.
General Media publishes magazines including Penthouse, Longevity and Omni.
A multimillion dollar campaign for Penthouse starts next month.
