Is it time to say goodbye to the Texas rice industry?
As Texas rice farmers begin to plant their 1994 crops, it is with growing trepidation.
Once the largest rice producer in the U.S., the Lone Star State is now barely holding onto fourth place.
Last year, growers -- plagued by bad luck, bad weather and increasing costs -- turned out the smallest crop in 30 years.
The industry's struggles have forced the closing of dozens of mills, drying facilities and irrigation companies in recent years.
Things can't get much worse, industry officials say.
If the state's rice industry doesn't stage a comeback this year, it probably never will.
"If we're going to make it as an industry, this year is going to be make or break," says Jim Stansel, resident director of Texas A&M Research and Extension Center at Beaumont.
The stakes are high.
For starters, there are the 6,300 jobs that the industry provides, and the $850 million it contributes to the economies of the 17 Gulf Coast counties known as the Texas Rice Belt.
In addition, the state's 300,000 acres of rice paddies provide a winter habitat for wildlife, and act as a natural filtration system for the water supply.
In many ways, the Gulf Coast is an ideal setting for rice growers.
It's close to the ports of Houston and Freeport.
An unusually long growing season gives Texas farmers a late-season second crop known as the ratoon crop.
And because Texas is among the first of the six rice-producing states to harvest, growers here usually reap the highest prices.
But over the years, those advantages have been eroded by increases in the cost of production.
Because the state's rice industry is concentrated in the Houston area, the city's growth has pushed up land costs.
The Gulf Coast climate also has made it difficult for farmers to find alternative crops to subsidize them during the off-season, or during major price plunges.
In the past few years, unusually rainy springs have delayed planting and eliminated much of the valuable ratoon crop.
But the most critical issue for rice farmers is the scarcity of water in Texas.
Growers are forced to either pay high prices to pump water out of the ground, or purchase regulated surface water from the state's system of river authorities.
Jacko Garrett, who farms 1,300 acres in Danbury, pays an average of $70 an acre for water.
That compares with costs as low as $10 an acre for Arkansas rice farmers.
"The water supply for crops is not there," says Mr. Garrett.
"In the future, it's going to be harder and harder."
Over the past several years, the rising costs have been compounded by lower rice prices to growers.
A recent Texas A&M study found that Texas farmers, with their higher production costs, need to sell rice for about $9 a hundredweight to break even.
But rice prices in recent years have hovered around $4 to $5.
And to make matters worse, most Texas growers missed out on a spike in rice prices last fall caused by an emergency Japanese purchase.
(Texas farmers had sold their harvest just weeks earlier.)
As a result, other states collected twice the price for their crops than did Texas.
The toll on the Texas industry is clear.
In the past 10 years, the other five rice-producing states -- Arkansas, California, Louisiana, Mississippi and Missouri -- have increased production an average of 18%.
In the same period, Texas production slipped by 20%.
The drop in rice production has made it difficult for related businesses -- mills, irrigation companies and drying facilities -- to stay afloat.
Three years ago, P&S Rice Mill in Houston, one of the country's largest rice mills, shut down.
Growers say only two or three mills now bid at rice auctions, compared with seven or eight a few years ago.
Last year, Rice Belt Warehouse Inc. of El Campo mothballed a rice-drying facility in Rosharon because the rice crop wasn't large enough to justify keeping it open.
"Most of the mills seem to be holding their own, but there have been some problems keeping afloat," says Jim Pavlik, Rice Belt's seed-division manager.
"This is a very critical year."
Despite these woes, Texas rice producers and industry officials say they are optimistic.
Recent high prices are expected to increase planting by 15% this year.
Although too much rice on the market could cause prices to plunge again, growers are hopeful that increased demand will keep that from happening.
In addition, a Texas Rice Industry Task Force is considering forming a rice marketing cooperative in the next month to allow for a more orderly sale of Texas rice, and to protect individual growers from big price swings.
The task force has also stepped up research into alternative crops for dormant rice land, and ways to cut production costs for Texas farmers.
"A year ago I would have told you I was very worried about the Texas rice industry," says Steve Balas, an Eagle Lake grower who farms 1,000 acres and is a member of the task force steering committee.
"Today, I believe we can turn it around.
I think it's bottomed out."
