Two outside directors of Continental Bank Corp. bought shares in the company during talks that led to last week's proposed $1.9 billion acquisition of the Chicago-based bank by BankAmerica Corp.
News of the friendly bid Friday sent Continental up 22% to $34 a share from $27.875 that day.
Yesterday, the stock closed at $34.75, down 37.5 cents in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Director Bert Getz purchased 10,000 shares at $24 apiece Nov. 19 and director Gordon Segal bought 1,000 shares Oct. 29 at $26.38 each, Securities and Exchange Commission filings show.
Mr. Segal is president and chief executive officer of Crate & Barrel, a Chicagobased housewear retailer, and Mr. Getz is chairman and president of Globe Corp., a closely held investment company.
Mr. Getz's purchase was his first openmarket acquisition of Continental shares since registering as an insider in October 1992, and Mr. Segal's purchase was his first open-market purchase since he registered in April 1991, SEC data indicate.
The chairmen of the two companies began discussions in August, and those talks intensified during the past three months, culminating in Friday's announcement.
On Friday, a Continental Bank spokesman said the purchases by the two directors were made based on personal investment decisions.
He said the two directors received advice of the bank's general counsel and were assured that "nothing was in the works at that stage to preclude doing that."
Yesterday, Lisa Hewitt, a spokeswoman for the bank, said there were discussions but no deal when the purchases were made.
"The board hadn't been presented a deal," she said.
Mr. Segal said he bought shares in the open market "because I wanted a bigger percentage of my bank director's income to be in shares instead of cash."
He added that "there had been no discussion of BankAmerica at the time."
A spokesman for Mr. Getz said he buys stock in companies on whose board he sits, typically with director's fees.
The spokesman said Mr. Getz believes directors of companies should be owners as well.
Continental and its chairman, Thomas Theobald, have been in the forefront among companies requiring employees to purchase stock, tying, at least to some extent, their personal fortunes to their company's performance.
Continental directors are encouraged to purchase stock, Ms. Hewitt said, but not required.
SEC guidelines require that corporate executives and directors, as well as other insiders, abstain from buying or selling company stock when in possession of nonpublic, material information, or that they disclose that information before undertaking any such activity.
Precisely what insiders may or may not have known and when they may have known it are critical factors in determining whether insider activity bumps up against SEC regulations, securities lawyers said.
SEC officials wouldn't comment on whether they were looking into the matter.
"I could understand why, given the proximity of the purchases to the announcement of the bid, that a person might want to consider the possibility of a violation," said Peter Romeo, a former SEC attorney and now a partner with Hogan & Hartson, a Washington law firm.
Mr. Romeo said the "issue would be whether the information about the proposed sale of the company was material at the time the insiders bought stock."
Broadly, information is regarded as "material" if is important to investors in making an investment decision, he said.
"The Supreme Court has said that information about a speculative event is `material' if its magnitude to the company and the probability that it will occur are significantly great -- when balanced with each other -- and such that investors would consider it important."
Around the time that Messrs. Getz and Segal were acquiring shares in the open market, Richard Huber, vice chairman, exercised options to acquire 44,000 shares at an exercise price of $14.06 each.
He still holds those shares.
Mr. Huber, who currently holds 134,156 shares, has been a regular accumulator of company stock and says he typically exercises stock options at the end of each year for tax purposes.
Indeed, SEC data show, he exercised options to acquire 44,000 shares at $14.06 each in December 1992 and continues to hold those shares.
The bank's vice chairman said that, in November, there were discussions with BankAmerica under way but that nothing was certain.
He said, however, that he would have been "reluctant to buy stock" in the open market at the time-but there was nothing wrong with exercising options he already owned.
Mr. Romeo, the former SEC attorney, said the exercise of options does not present a possible violation of SEC guidelines under the circumstances.
"The option exercise is not a problem because the company itself is the other party to the option-exercise transaction," he explained.
"The SEC's regulations are to `disclose or abstain,' but you don't have to disclose if you know the other party has the information -- and the other party would be deemed to have that information because they're the ones doing the proposed takeover deal."
Separately, a group of Continental shareholders filed a suit in Delaware Chancery Court in Wilmington that seeks to put the company up for bid.
Terming the BankAmerica takeover price of $1.9 billion as "grossly inadequate," the suit seeks to enjoin Continental's directors from using any lock-up or poison-pill-type manuevers to prevent bids from other parties.
The suit seeks class-action status.
A spokesman for the bank said "we believe the suit has no merit whatsoever and we intend to actively defend against it."
