British Petroleum PLC yesterday said it will close its money-losing ethylene cracker in South Wales.
The British oil company said closure of the Baglan Bay facility, scheduled for the end of March, will result in the loss of 600 jobs.
Closing costs also will be the main component of a #200 million ($298 million) exceptional pretax charge in fourth-quarter results, BP said.
The announcement didn't surprise industry watchers, because a year ago BP added similar ethylene cracking capacity to its more efficient facility in Grangemouth, Scotland.
BP's decision reflects a wider need by West Europe's petrochemicals industry, under pressure from overcapacity and sluggish economies, to lower its costs and improve efficiency.
The Baglan Bay cracker had been running at about 55% of capacity since last October, when it reopened after a maintenance closure during the summer.
The plant has an annual capacity of 335,000 metric tons.
The plant produces ethylene, propylene, gasoline, ethyl benzene and benzene concentrate.
A BP official said the Baglan Bay cracker was racking up losses in the "tens of thousands" of pounds.
BP's profit has recovered sharply since the company reported a stunning #812 million loss for the second quarter of 1992.
It has cut costs and disposed of assets to reduce debt and concentrate on its core oil and gas activities.
The company hasn't been alone among major European petrochemicals producers in reporting losses from such operations while attempting to restructure them.
Yet, an industry initiative to cut ethylene capacity failed last month when the Association of Petrochemicals Producers in Europe found insufficient support for orderly reductions that would have been financed by a levy based on capacity.
"Most companies are loath to concede market share," Guy Phillips, European chemicals analyst at Paribas, said.
He doesn't see BP's move being followed by "a whole spate of closure announcements."
The APPE reckons a whole string of closures isn't needed anyway.
It calculated West European ethylene capacity last year was 18.3 million tons, and utilization was 80% to 85%.
In 1994, the industry association reckons new plants will raise capacity to 19.4 million tons, with some more being added through plant efficiencies.
In its aborted attempt to reduce output, the APPE had been aiming for a cut of at least 1.5 million tons.
