Bell Atlantic Corp. and Tele-Communications Inc. said yesterday they have resolved "the major issues" of their proposed combination and hope to sign a definitive agreement within two weeks.
Bell Atlantic, a regional Bell telephone company plans to acquire TCI, the nation's biggest cable-system operator.
They are still wrestling with a number of nettlesome points in their multibillion-dollar transaction -- including the critical question of how much financial protection to give TCI shareholders.
The companies, which were to have signed a final pact for Bell Atlantic's acquisition of TCI and its Liberty Media spinoff by last Monday, declined to set a new deadline.
Yesterday, the companies refused to say which "major issues" have been decided.
One executive familiar with the talks said Bell Atlantic is making progress in ironing out some crucial areas.
Last October, Bell Atlantic had proposed issuing 220 million new shares to acquire most of TCI's assets, essentially guaranteeing a value of $54 for each new share.
But the parties now are considering eliminating the $54-a-share floor, this executive said.
Instead, the companies are considering devising a plan that would give TCI shareholders price protection on the back end of the deal, after it is complete, the executive said.
One way to achieve that might be to offer TCI shareholders a greater stake in Bell Atlantic at some future date.
Other issues yet to be resolved include how to value the ownership stakes that TCI and Liberty have in a plethora of cable channels, including the Discovery Channel, Encore, and more than a dozen regional sports networks.
The companies are reportedly very close to resolving the valuation issue.
Bell Atlantic, TCI and Liberty all declined to comment.
People who have been following the negotiations attribute most of the delays to the sheer complexity of the proposal, rather than to any major obstacle.
"You know a transaction of this size is going to take quite a bit of time," said Marion Boucher, an analyst at Bear, Stearns & Co.
"I think everybody was anticipating that it was going to be a bumpy road."
