The National Association of Securities Dealers is gearing up for closer scrutiny of the advertising and distribution practices of mutual funds.
The self-regulatory group has had a mutual-fund task force working since last fall to determine "what are the problems and get on a preventive track," R. Clark Hooper, NASD vice president for advertising/investment companies regulation, said at a news briefing here yesterday.
In November, the NASD filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission a proposal to prohibit stock and bond mutual funds from using in ads and sales literature any ranking based on a period of less than a year.
Ms. Hooper said objections have already been raised to one part of the plan.
It would require any ad showing a total-return ranking of a mutual fund to include the same ranking entity's assessment of how that fund did over one, five and 10 years (or the life of the fund).
"There are questions about how practical that is," Ms. Hooper says.
For example, some fund trackers might only provide rankings for one year.
"The committee believes there is going to be some accommodation."
The NASD is adding staff.
This year, Ms. Hooper's group has 15 analysts reviewing advertising and marketing materials, up from 13 last year, and 11 in 1992.
She said the NASD will expand this group if the SEC approves a proposal to allow mutual funds to sell shares "off the page."
That means investors could clip a coupon from a fund's newspaper ad and mail in a check to buy shares of a fund.
Currently, investors who buy directly from a fund company, rather than through a broker, must wait to receive a prospectus, an offering document, before buying fund shares.
Based in Washington, the NASD is a group that watches all the marketing materials of mutual funds as well as financial-planning ads.
Of the more than 36,961 ad filings made with the NASD last year, about 88% were from mutual funds, Ms. Hooper said.
That's a big increase from 1985, when only 53% of 21,192 marketing documents were from mutual-fund companies.
All marketing materials are required to be filed with the NASD within 10 days of first usage.
Some firms submit ads earlier.
The NASD analysts can turn around a review in three days if requested.
The expedited process costs $200, on top of the regular $25 for ads up to five pages long.
The task force decided to focus the March issue of the NASD's monthly notice to members on concerns about distribution of mutual funds.
The notice, among other things, will remind NASD members about requirements for disclosure of risks and expenses.
