International Business Machines Corp. reported its first quarterly profit in more than a year, but it managed to disappoint Wall Street with lower-than-anticipated earnings and an unexpected decline in sales.
IBM reported fourth-quarter net income of $382 million, or 62 cents a share, rebounding from a year-earlier net loss of $5.46 billion on huge restructuring charges.
The company, which is based in Armonk, N.Y., thus posted its first quarterly net income since the second quarter of 1992, signaling that two years of big charges and restructuring may finally be taking hold.
Jerome B. York, chief financial officer, said in an interview that he expects at least a break-even first quarter for this year, and that profit margins and revenue, after steady deterioration, will remain level or increase slightly.
But IBM's earnings of 62 cents a share fell shy of Wall Street analysts' hopes for 75 cents a share.
The slight decline in revenue, to $19.40 billion from $19.56 billion a year earlier, sent IBM shares tumbling initially, down more than 5% in the first half hour after the earnings report.
The stock later recovered, closing at $58.25, down 37.5 cents, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The results had a sobering effect, pounding home the message that Big Blue's larger challenge of increasing revenue and restoring profit margins still lies ahead.
"Overall it's a good quarter," said Robert Djurdjevic of Annex Research in Phoenix.
"But I wouldn't recommend people at this stage suddenly become euphoric about IBM."
Indeed, IBM's Mr. York warned analysts that much work remains to be done.
"The battleship is starting to turn and sail in the right direction, but we realize we have one hell of a lot of work to do," Mr. York told analysts in a private session.
"This ain't a candy store on Main Street, and it won't be turned around in one or two quarters."
Mr. York said he is conservatively planning on flat revenue for this year and is setting budgets accordingly.
Sales of personal computers and workstations should make up for mainframe revenue declining by half this year, Mr. York said.
In addition, IBM will lose another $2 billion in revenue as a result of the pending sale of its Federal Systems division, which puts together computer systems for the federal government.
On the expense side, Mr. York said he and his team cut $2.8 billion out of IBM's expenses in 1993 and plan on taking out another $3 billion this year.
That, he added, should be enough to offset continued profit decline from the loss of mainframe sales.
In a planning error that Mr. York said was completely understandable, IBM actually has back orders for mainframes due to an unexpected, sudden demand late last year.
That means fourth-quarter revenue actually could have been higher than it was, had IBM been able to fill all mainframe orders.
Revenue overall in 1993 was hurt by deteriorating prices on both high-end and low-end products, as well as by slow sales in Europe and Japan.
Increases in unit volumes almost made up the difference, but currency translations in the end resulted in a decline, Mr. York said.
Overall hardware sales in the fourth quarter fell 5.4% from a year earlier, despite strong sales growth of 35% in PCs and a 4% rise in sales of RS/6000 workstations.
The overall decline was caused by slides in mainframe sales, which dropped 30%, and in sales of the midrange AS/400 line, which declined 10%.
The greatest revenue increase came from service sales, which rose 32% over the year-earlier period to $3.2 billion.
But software revenue declined 3.8%.
Based on fourth-quarter results, IBM hasn't turned around the cost side of the equation, either.
The company's gross profit, equal to revenue less the cost of goods sold, declined 3.5% in the quarter, and its gross profit margin dropped more than a full percentage point to 38.2%, compared with a year earlier.
That is down sharply from a margin of 55% in 1990, but Mr. York said he looks for stability this year.
The chief financial officer also said that Louis V. Gerstner Jr., IBM's chairman, will provide Wall Street with some "insight" into the company's strategic direction in March, when he meets with analysts for the first time as head of IBM.
For the full year 1993, IBM earned $148 million from operations before taxes and restructuring charges.
After the $8.9 billion charge taken in the second quarter, IBM had a full-year net loss of $8.10 billion, compared with a net loss (after a change in accounting principles) of $4.96 billion in 1992.
World-wide revenue for 1993 declined 2.8% to $62.7 billion from $64.5 billion in 1992.
IBM's world-wide work force now numbers 256,000, a decline of 45,000 from 1992.
An additional 10,000 employees will leave IBM after the sale of the Federal Systems division, which is expected to be completed in the first quarter.
