J.P. Morgan & Co.
Chairman Dennis Weatherstone responded to congressional inquiries about Morgan's involvement in a Spanish bank seized by regulators, writing that the bank's investment in Banco Espanol de Credito has lost 60% of its market value.
Mr. Weatherstone was replying to a request by House Banking Committee Chairman Henry Gonzalez for Morgan to answer a series of questions about its role in Banesto, as the Spanish bank is known.
Mr. Weatherstone wrote that the $1 billion Corsair Partnership L.PP closed-end investment fund wasn't a "vulture fund," as Mr. Gonzalez has described it, but rather a fund that takes minority stakes in banks needing financial assistance.
So-called vulture funds invest in sick companies that are expected to get well and prosper.
Last summer, Corsair invested $162.5 million for a 7.9% stake in the Spanish bank, after approval by the Bank of Spain and the U.S. Federal Reserve.
The letter said a separate money-management unit of J.P. Morgan with no ties to Corsair held at least 200,000 shares of Banesto.
Mr. Weatherstone said it was premature to assess the actual loss to Corsair, Banesto's largest shareholder.
Since late 1992, Morgan earned more than $26 million for various services to Banesto, and it had a one-year agreement to provide additional financial advice beginning in January 1994, according to the letter.
That mandate was terminated in light of the seizure of Banesto in December.
The letter also shed light on Morgan's relationship with Mario Conde, the ousted chairman of Banesto, and indicates that Mr. Conde, who invested $50 million in Banesto, would have been well compensated if Banesto had turned around.
First, Corsair and Mr. Conde agreed that neither would sell shares in Banesto for two years and that each party had the right of first refusal for any shares that they were selling.
Also, Mr. Conde had an option to purchase as much as 5% of Banesto's shares at the price Corsair paid, assuming Mr. Conde was still chairman.
Lastly, Mr. Conde would have received another 5% of Banesto's stock five years after Corsair's investment if the Morgan fund earned 40% or more on its investment.
Mr. Weatherstone said these were intended to provide an incentive for Mr. Conde to continue as chairman and work for the benefit of shareholders.
The agreements were terminated when Mr. Conde was fired.
