Everyone's talking about the "three strikes, you're out" law that President Clinton endorsed this week and is being considered by 30 states.
Now Washington state will soon put on trial the first defendant accused of violating that state's path-breaking "three strikes" law, approved by 76% of voters last November.
His story makes clear why the idea of sentencing someone convicted of three violent felonies to life is so popular.
Cecil Emile Davis, a 34-year-old Tacoma man, has a history of violence.
In 1986 he was convicted of a misdemeanor assault, the first of four misdemeanor assaults he would commit over the next few years.
He was convicted of his first violent felony later in 1986, and a court gave him an unusually long 36-month sentence for robbing a convenience store and using extreme cruelty in beating the clerk and a customer.
He was released with time off for good behavior after 24 months.
In 1990, Davis was sentenced for a second violent felony: He attacked two people with an ice pick.
His probation officer recommended an extraordinary sentence of 72 months because of "escalating assaults, concern for public safety and future dangerousness."
But the judge sentenced him to only 38 months.
He served 32.
A few months later, the day after this past Christmas, Davis is accused of abducting a mentally disabled Tacoma woman and taking her to his apartment, where he allegedly raped her several times.
He then took her to the recessed stairwell of a nearby church, beat her and slit her throat with a knife.
She fell down the stairwell and was left for dead.
When found she was unable to talk but drew a map to Davis's apartment and identified him from a photo lineup.
Under current law, Davis would spend many years in prison, but Pierce County Prosecutor John Ladenburg says his experience is that may not be enough for some sociopaths.
"These people can commit murder or sexually molest children into their 50s and 60s," he told us.
"The public is saying it wants those people off the streets," he told us.
Washington state officials report the three strikes law is likely to affect only about 30 to 60 hard-core criminals a year, a manageable burden for the state's prison system.
But it might snare some proven repeat thugs such as Cecil Davis.
Law enforcement officials agree that seven out of 10 violent crimes are committed by only 6% of violent criminals.
Sadly, the biggest cause of violent crimes in America today is the early release of violent criminals who commit more violence.
The authors of Washington state's "three strikes" law are now drafting a "hard time for armed crime" initiative.
It would increase the sentence for using a firearm in a violent crime by five years, double the base sentence if the offender has previously been convicted of using a deadly weapon during a crime, and eliminate time off for good behavior for the time tacked on for the use of a weapon.
Some criminologists object that tough sentencing laws have done little to reduce the crime rate.
But Dan Lungren, California's attorney general, thinks "incarceration does work."
He notes that his state's crime rate is now below what it was in 1980, when it began locking up more felons.
Others argue that a three strikes law would burden a state with many old prisoners whose crime-committing days are over.
John Carlson, president of the Washington Institute for Policy Studies, points out that a state governor can commute any sentence or pardon any criminal.
Finally, and most relevant to this latest turn in the politics of crimefighting, there is the "root causes" school of crime.
It has been around a long time.
Its adherents have run social service agencies, administered local criminal justice systems and occupied many judgeships at every level.
Our reading would be that in 1993 the American public concluded that this school had failed.
Their greater failure was in thinking they could still retain control of the issue by demonizing their critics as "ideologues" and "simplistic" even as the horror of specific criminal acts intensified.
This was political denial, and eventually a disgusted public shoved them aside.
Yes, it should still be possible to talk about improving economic opportunities and education, but here too the root-causes people are generally allied with the interests that are trying to thwart alternatives to the status quo, especially in education.
Those strategies, in any event, are operating on a longer time frame than the national 911 call the American people are sending out on violent crime.
With three strikes and you're out, the public has decided that their cities and neighborhoods will no longer be playgrounds for criminals.
