Last Friday, the Commerce Department pronounced the nation's economy stronger than at any point since late 1987.
No one had to tell the Southeast.
"Things are so good right now that I don't even want to talk about it," says Jim Diffee, president of Brookwood Furniture Co. in Pontotoc, Miss.
For the past 18 months, he says, Brookwood, which makes sofas, love seats and chairs for home-furniture companies, has been going like gangbusters.
Sales in 1993 were up 30% from 1992, and net income tripled.
The news is the same through much of the region.
Thanks largely to a unique mix of manufacturers that are able to take advantage of the nationwide housing boom, the Southeast's economy has been moving smartly ahead.
That mix -- of household textiles, appliances, furniture and construction products -- helped keep manufacturing-employment rates in the region level through the first nine months of 1993.
By contrast, manufacturing employment nationwide fell 1.6% through the third quarter.
Such industries, of course, can be found throughout the country.
But the concentration of those manufacturers in the Southeast, according to the recent regional update by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, means that Brookwood Furniture and its neighbors should continue to outpace the rest of the country "as national housing activity bounces back."
Last year, for instance, Brookwood added 68 employees to its rolls, boosting the number of workers 17% to 464.
The company would like to add more this year, says Mr. Diffee, but with unemployment in the area of only 4%, Brookwood is facing a rare labor shortage.
The carpet market "is up 5%," reports John Swift, chief financial officer of Mohawk Industries Inc., an Atlanta manufacturer of commercial and residential carpets.
"That's not a bad increase, since we've been at between 2% and 3% annual growth for a while," he says.
Mr. Swift sees the increase in residential carpet sales, which account for a bigger portion of Mohawk's sales increase, as directly tied to the housing market.
The Southeast's above-average economic performance is becoming something of a habit; the region has consistently attracted new businesses and created jobs at a pace well ahead of the nation, says Mark Vitner, an economist with First Union Bank in Charlotte, N.C.
That growing job disparity has brought job seekers to the area, which, in turn, has given the housing market a lift.
"Six Southeast states rank among the top 10 in terms of attracting new residents from other states," Mr. Vitner said.
Correspondingly, building permits for single-family homes were up nearly 12% throughout the region in 1993 and should rise an additional 7% in 1994, he says.
Also setting the Southeastern economy apart from the nation has been the normality of the region's economic recovery, economists say.
While the nation's gross domestic product shot up at an annual rate of 5.9% in the 1993 fourth quarter, according to figures released last week by the Commerce Department, the recovery has been lacking in job growth.
But not for the Southeast.
For one thing, corporate layoffs haven't been as big a factor in the region as in the rest of the country.
"When you take a look and say, `What are the factors making the economy shrink nationally?,' you'll see we don't really have those industries," says Donald Ratajczak, director of the Economic Forecasting Center at Georgia State University in Atlanta.
"It's the military, for instance.
Well, we've got military in the Southeast, but we don't make the equipment for them.
So we don't have the big drain a California or a Connecticut is taking."
Furthermore, a great deal of regional pride in the South, manifesting itself in the boosterish, pro-business attitude particularly prevalent in places like Atlanta and Charlotte, has helped the region recruit and retain businesses.
"You look at areas in the Northeast with a chronic revenue shortfall -- well they're always looking for businesses to pick up taxes," Mr. Vitner said.
"That's chasing a lot of businesses out of their states."
Still, the Southeast has its problems.
While metropolitan areas like Atlanta, Charlotte, Nashville, Tenn., and Jacksonville, Fla., are seeing huge population growth, rural areas aren't sharing in that growth.
These areas, economists say, which have long depended largely on a single company for employment, are finding that shifts to high-technology machinery are making hometown companies less labor-intensive.
In addition, the region's heavy reliance on manufacturing means that job losses in the apparel industry nationwide are felt particularly in the South.
Even those losses, however, should be offset by employment gains in factories that make construction materials and home furnishings, the Federal Reserve says.
The good times won't last forever, though.
"Construction isn't going to do better than other industry forever," says Tom Cunningham, an economist with the Federal Reserve.
"Then that single impetus for rapid growth will fade."
What's more, as the Southeast grows in population, it will begin to look more like the rest of the country.
"If you're a small area, it's easy to be different," Mr. Cunningham says.
"Once you get big, it's harder."
