Viacom Inc. appeared to gain victory in the takeover battle for Paramount Communications Inc., receiving the majority of Paramount shares required to win the contest, according to several people familiar with the count.
By mid-evening yesterday, Viacom's offer of roughly $10 billion for Paramount had attracted more than 60% of Paramount's shares, according to two of the people, well in excess of the 50.1% needed to win under bidding rules agreed to by Viacom and its bidding rival, QVC Network Inc.
It appeared that QVC's offer was swamped in the tally, receiving less than 10 million shares compared with roughly 75 million for Viacom.
Barring last-minute changes in the count, withdrawals by Paramount shareholders or a court challenge by QVC, the bidding rules for the Paramount auction require QVC to withdraw its offer and bow out.
The deadline for Paramount shareholders to tender their stock was 12:01 a.m. today.
QVC had no official comment.
But late last evening a high-level member of the QVC camp said that, judging from the paucity of Paramount shares tendered to the home-shopping concern, Viacom presumably had prevailed in the struggle.
A spokesman for Viacom said the company would have no official comment until this morning.
One person in the Viacom camp said, "Just like any presidential candidate, we'll wait until all the returns are in.
California hasn't come in yet."
The vote for Viacom was overwhelming among Wall Street professionals despite personal appeals from QVC Chairman Barry Diller that his offer provided superior long-term value based on his ability to create greater value from Paramount's assets.
"This was an economic contest, not a popularity contest," said one Wall Street executive.
One of Paramount's biggest shareholders, Mario Gabelli, whose Gabelli Funds Inc. owns four million shares of Paramount, said he tendered his stock to Viacom before last night's midnight deadline for Paramount shareholders to choose between the two bids.
Five other takeover stock traders, who said they each owned more than one million Paramount shares but who asked not to be identified, said they also had tendered to Viacom.
A few traders with a smaller number of shares said they were backing QVC.
Yesterday, QVC took a step that appeared to be aimed at possible future litigation if the contest was close or Viacom failed to gain the needed 50.1%.
The home-shopping company appealed to Paramount's board to reconsider its recommendation that shareholders accept the Viacom offer, noting that the QVC's cash-and-stock bid has risen in value.
One reason the QVC offer had gained in value is that QVC, which issued a statement Sunday vowing not to raise its bid, was looking like the likely loser.
Investors, assuming Viacom would win and issue millions of new Viacom shares to acquire Paramount, have been selling Viacom stock.
As a result, the board responded to the QVC request by reaffirming its recommendation of the Viacom bid.
Yesterday, QVC stock rose $1.625 to $48.50 a share in Nasdaq Stock Market trading, while Viacom Class B nonvoting shares fell $1.75 a share to $29.875 on the American Stock Exchange.
Both stocks moved in response to QVC's Sunday statement, which read like a concession of defeat.
Some Wall Street experts consider the Viacom-QVC battle for entertainment and publishing giant Paramount to have been one of the greatest takeover battles of the past 15 years.
It has pitted former Paramount studio chief Barry Diller, now chairman of QVC, against his former boss, Paramount Chairman Martin Davis.
At the beginning of the bidding battle, Mr. Davis appeared to have negotiated a friendly deal with Viacom in order to keep his company out of Mr. Diller's hands.
And it saw Mr. Diller and Viacom Chairman Sumner Redstone negotiate several billion-dollar alliances with other companies in order to strengthen their balance sheets to raise their Paramount bids.
Mr. Diller hooked up with five other companies, led by BellSouth Corp., which agreed to invest $2 billion.
And Mr. Redstone put together an $8.4 billion merger with Blockbuster Entertainment Corp.
Their effort was aimed at gaining control of the last major independent Hollywood studio at a time when competing would-be distributors of entertainment, from cable TV companies to regional Bell operating companies, are vying for control of programming in order to gain an edge for their distribution system as their competing technologies evolve.
Laura Landro contributed to this article.
