Like a debutante at the season's most prestigious ball, IBM and Apple Computer's much-watched software venture will finally strut its stuff here today .
Taligent Inc. will publicly demonstrate its cutting-edge product to the computer luminaries gathered here for PC Forum, one of the industry's highest-profile annual gab fests.
The new software, an operating system aimed at challenging Microsoft Corp., could change the way spreadsheets and other programs are created and used.
"It's hot stuff," says analyst Mike West of Gartner Group Inc.
But the audience may be a tough sell.
Many of the 500 or so techies here make their livings by using Microsoft's DOS and Windows to control the basic functions of the computers they produce or as the basis for the programs they develop.
Taligent won't deliver until next year.
By then, Microsoft is expected to have shipped its new version of Windows.
Codenamed Chicago, it could make Taligent's task even tougher.
And many Taligent features will appeal to programmers, not PC users.
Formed in late 1991 by International Business Machines Corp. and Apple Computer Inc., Taligent expects to spend several hundred million dollars on the new system in a high-risk and costly attempt to gain a piece of the huge market for PC software.
The Taligent system, like DOS and Windows, will act as the base layer of software.
But Taligent maintains that its new software will be able to run on myriad, incompatible machines.
It also will use a new, sleek technology called object orientation, which lets software developers write applications more rapidly by linking reusable chunks of software code, or "objects."
(Microsoft also is working on an object-oriented release, known as Cairo and also due next year.)
"Instead of writing 10,000 lines of code, you write 100," says Mr. West.
Each line is linked to a bundle of programming that performs a certain task, such as drawing a window on the PC screen.
That will also let linked-up computers swap data more easily, so that several PC users could work on the same document.
The changes each person makes would appear instantly on the other PCs.
"We think it's about time for computers to act the way people expect them to act -- naturally," says Joseph M. Guglielmi, chairman and chief executive officer of Taligent, Cupertino, Calif.
At the coming-out party today, he plans to show off a feature called "people, places and things."
Onscreen, images of a phone, fax machine, business cards and other items will appear.
To make a phone call, a user, manipulating the computer mouse, "drags" a business card and drops it atop the phone, and the software dials the number on the card.
Drag the card to the fax, and the software dials the fax number.
Alex Morrow of software developer Lotus Development Corp. says Taligent is more advanced than some rival object-oriented wares, but that also means it is far more complex to work with.
Ironically, in attempting to make software creation more efficient, Taligent may also have made some aspects of it more complicated.
Taligent's Mr. Guglielmi counters, however, that programmers will find it "profoundly simpler" to make later revisions to their designs.
A few objects could be updated without having to mesh the changes with the rest of the program.
The IBM-Apple venture later this year will begin distributing "tools" to let Lotus and other developers start writing new Taligent-geared programs.
Taligent also will license to IBM, Apple and Hewlett-Packard Co., the duo's new minority partner, a portion of the operating system so that the new applications can run on their computers starting next year, even before the full operating system is ready.
