"This is refreshment," blared the soft drink advertisement carried during the Lillehammer Games.
A great many people in the world must have been having roughly the same thought while watching the screen the past 13 nights, and they weren't thinking about Coca-Cola.
They were more than likely thinking about the sense of respite from everyday's more familiar -- and dreary -- concerns.
True, in these two weeks the world hasn't changed.
It does happen that the shelling of Sarajevo has at least momentarily ceased, with the Russians brokering the Muslim surrender.
Financial markets seemed out of sorts, but were not collapsing.
Sex allegations continued to rock London and Little Rock.
The American culture was in its usual disarray, a contrast particularly poignant watching the shining faces from Lillehammer.
In New York, Desmond Antoine, a recent immigrant from Trinidad who made it his business to take time out from his own job every night in order to walk his daughter safely home from hers, was shot to death shielding that daughter when muggers confronted the two.
Meanwhile, the Times published a telling interview on the reasons young college women seem to be drinking more.
Tiffany, 22, explained, for example, "I feel like I have to try twice as hard because I'm a woman."
She drank, we learned, to reduce "the stress" of being a woman in college, while another student told the reporter it was necessary to drink because women "still have more to prove."
So who wouldn't be grateful to be able to turn, even for a while, to contemplation of a world where violence takes the form of accidental spills and the biggest crime seems to be that of a handful of judges who -- in the eyes of an outraged audience at least -- failed to appreciate British ice dancers Torvill and Dean?
The latter, recall, brought down the house with an exquisite routine to the tune of Irving Berlin's "Let's Face the Music and Dance."
The judges instead rewarded a rock-'n-rolling Russian couple.
Lillehammer was clouded, it is true, by the shadow of one real and by now universally famous crime that threatened to occupy stage center of these Olympics.
There was the predictable struggle-to-the-death among reporters for word -- of any kind -- about Tonya and Nancy.
One enterprising journalist went so far as to ask skater Lily Lee if she would oblige him by wearing a wire to record any exchange that might take place between Tonya and Nancy.
(Come to think of it, reminders of our current life and times intruded in other ways: Journalists covering the Games were privileged to find, attached to their doors, gift packets of two condoms apiece along with advice on safe sex.)
Still, against the horrors of the real world, the physical assault on Nancy Kerrigan seemed almost innocent, especially since her skating seemed so perfect.
Indeed, one could almost feel sorry for Tonya Harding, whose stumble suggested she may have been the crime's ultimate victim.
Most of all, despite early forebodings, the Harding-Kerrigan to-do didn't manage to overshadow the Games.
The dark tones of the episode faded as eyes turned toward the snowy slopes and the bright skies, toward the skiers, the skaters, the wild-riding lugers.
Picabo Street captured a silver medal in skiing but about three golds as a television personality.
The high moments were numerous and included, not least, Dan Jansen's gold-winning speed-skating race.
Olympics Games watching was made for moments like the one in which Mr. Jansen skated the victory route, daughter in his arms and flowers in his hands, failure and hard luck -- the athletic kind, anyway -- behind him.
He had passed his test.
So had, in another way, many other young athletes here who had won no gold, nor silver nor bronze -- but who had struggled and trained single-mindedly to win a place in a competition where the testing was hard and where the rewards accrue -- give or take a blind ice-dancing judge or two -- only to the disciplined and the talented.
Again, a refreshing contrast to a time in which the notion prevails that everything is relative, including excellence -- indeed, when the very idea of merit is seen as a symptom of bias of one sort or another.
Surely, what we saw on our screens these two weeks was "multiculturalism" at its best.
Athletes from all the nations of the world, but everyone there to win on merit.
No woman complained of gender bias on the ski trails and those who didn't win proffered no excuses.
All those young people hurling themselves into their Olympic trials was an encouraging sight all right.
So there were plenty of reasons to cherish the Olympic Games.
Not only for entertaining us royally for two weeks, but for reminding us that for all our complaints about modern life, the human condition also embraces the wholesome.
