VF Corp., the long-time power hitter of the blue-jeans market, is batting with a two-strike count against it.
For two quarters, its earnings have disappointed Wall Street.
Yet some portfolio managers with excellent records have been accumulating the stock.
They think it's a good buy at Friday's closing price of $50 a share.
If the stock sags a bit further, because the earnings malaise continues through the current quarter, they say the shares would be an even better buy because a rebound is likely later this year.
Based in Wyomissing, Pa., VF provides about 30% of blue jeans in the U.S. (the largest share for any single company) and gets about half its sales and earnings from jeans.
Jeans are priced all over the lot from about $16 to $60, with midrange brands often fetching about $28.
VF brands include Lee and Wrangler in the midpriced range, Rustler and American Hero at the low end, and Girbaud at the pricey end.
The company also makes sportswear (Jantzen), lingerie (Vanity Fair and Vassarette), children's clothing (Healthtex), and T-shirts and sweatshirts (Bassett-Walker and the recently acquired Nutmeg Industries).
The weak quarters stemmed mainly from problems in "fleece" products (sweatshirts and sweatpants) and in the Girbaud high-end jeans line.
VF has said these problems will also affect first-quarter 1994 results.
Proponents say the troubles are temporary.
On the plus side, they say VF has a collection of highly regarded brands, great distribution channels through both discount stores and department stores, chances for fast growth in Europe and a solid balance.
The stock sells for a price/earnings ratio only 13 times the past four quarters' earnings -- cheap in the current market.
And it's only 12 times analysts' consensus guess of earnings for 1994 ($4.08 a share, according to First Call).
"You're paying a P/E significantly lower than the market, for a better-than-average company," says William Nygren, director of research at Harris Associates, Chicago.
Harris, with one of the best stock-picking records in the money-management business, owns about 300,000 shares.
First Pacific Advisors in Los Angeles owns a big chunk of the stock.
"I view this stock a little bit like I view Nike," says George H. Michaelis, chief executive officer.
Both companies, he says, have long-term records of outstanding profitability, but have stumbled recently.
He wouldn't chase VF stock above its current price, but would buy more on any weakness.
Vista Growth & Income Fund, which is among the top performing mutual funds for the past five years, owns about 200,000 VF shares.
"One more tough quarter, and then results should improve in the second half," says Gregory S. Adams, a manager at the Vista family of funds.
"I look at it as low-risk here.
I see 45 to 46 as a bottom, worst case."
To be sure, some holders are getting antsy.
"The earnings disappointed us the last couple of quarters," says one money manager who owns the stock.
"We were in the process of accumulating it, and we decided to just monitor it for a while."
One more subpar earnings report, and he might dump the stock, he says.
Alan Roness of Fahnestock, who had issued a glowing report on VF when it traded at 44 last fall, says it's only a "hold" at 49.
He asserts that management "didn't know they weren't going to hit their numbers."
(VF managers were unavailable for comment Friday.)
"The high-end jean market got clobbered.
They thought it was starting to stabilize, and it got worse."
Brenda J. Gall of Merrill Lynch, rates VF "above average," the second-best recommendation on Merrill's five-point scale.
"They have some terrifically strong brands," Ms. Gall says.
She believes that VF's ads for Lee jeans in winter Olympics broadcasts were effective and that the company has excellent growth prospects in Europe.
(Its European jeans brands include Lou, Bolero, Silhouette, Carina, Siltex and Variance.)
Josephine R. Esquivel of Lehman Brothers goes further, calling VF a strong buy.
"The synergies between Nutmeg and Bassett-Walker are incredible," she says.
Bassett-Walker can provide blank T-shirts and sweat shirts that Nutmeg (a specialist in licensed sports apparel) can emblazon with the names of popular sports teams.
This should help both businesses and relieve overcapacity problems at Bassett.
"That's really not going to happen until the second half of the year," Ms. Esquivel says; Nutmeg had previous contracts with other suppliers, but these will expire soon.
All in all, Ms. Esquivel and others say, VF could be a good fit in a lot of people's portfolios.
VF Corp.
Year ended Jan. 1, 1994:
Sales: $4.32 billion
Net Income: $246.4 million; $3.71 a share
Fourth quarter, Jan 1., 1994:
Per share earnings: 92 cents vs. $1.14
Common shares outstanding: 64.5 million
VF Corp.'s intimate apparel brands in Europe include Lou, Bolero, Silhouette, Carina, Siltex and Variance.
In yesterday's Heard on the Street column, these were misidentified as jeans brands.
VF's jeans brands in Europe are Lee, Wrangler and Maverick.
