Germany is set to privatize part of its national phone company, creating a giant to rival the likes of British Telecommunications PLC of the United Kingdom and U.S.-based MCI Communications Corp.
An accord reached late Monday between Germany's ruling coalition and the main opposition parties ended months of political wrangling over the future of Deutsche Bundespost Telekom, one of the country's biggest and most bureaucratic enterprises.
It paves the way for a constitutional change allowing the sale of shares to investors as early as 1996 and the opening of voice services in Germany to competition by the beginning of 1998.
The company, one of the most prominent symbols of Germany's technological decline, has been pushing for privatization as a way to modernize and improve services.
Raising capital on world stock markets could help Telekom rebuild eastern Germany's decrepit phone system and reduce charges for calls.
Numerous studies have shown that German phone service is both more costly and less advanced than that of many of the country's leading competitors.
"Telekom -- freed from political interference and forced to compete -- could be a major global force," said a telecommunications specialist at the European Commission in Brussels.
"This is not the image that it has at present, however."
Although Telekom earned 6.5 billion marks ($3.71 billion) last year on sales of 54 billion marks, profit has been eaten away by Germany's money-losing postal service, which is part of Telekom's monopoly.
Meanwhile, the expense of rebuilding eastern Germany's phone system has pushed debt to more than 100 billion marks.
Analysts say Telekom could raise as much as 15 billion marks through privatization, putting its total market value between 60 billion marks and 80 billion marks.
That would make it the largest listed company in Germany -- and place it among Europe's five largest.
A dispute inside the ruling coalition about the terms of the privatization bill threatened to throw it off course.
But the Free Democrats, the coalition's junior partner, agreed to drop demands to sell off the entire monopoly -- which includes not only telephone voice services and postal services but also the telephone-line network itself.
In exchange, the Free Democrats won an agreement that will allow Telekom to sell shares in its voice services as early as 1996, two years earlier than originally planned.
The German government will hold a majority of the new company's shares for five years, after which it may become totally controlled by the private sector.
It is still undecided when -- or if -- the phone network or mail services will be privatized or opened to competition.
The bill still must go through the full parliamentary process, but party representatives said they don't expect major problems.
A first reading of the bill is scheduled for next week.
