Video-game makers have been in the forefront of embracing new multimedia technologies, and their games have never looked better.
Faster, sharper, more detailed -- they're unlike anything that has come before.
Except they are also like everything that has come before.
And that's the problem.
Take away the glitter, and most of today's games are nothing but dressed-up retellings of yesterday's hits.
It shouldn't be that way: With the latest high-tech tricks and the creative resources of the entertainment industry at their disposal, critics say, game companies ought to be giving players "new" along with "improved."
"The big challenge for game producers is to push the envelope creatively," says Strauss Zelnick, chief executive of Crystal Dynamics, a game maker in Palo Alto, Calif.
"On a day-to-day basis we're asking, `How can we take this to the next step?'"
There's little doubt that the new technology has given the game makers a lot more to play with.
A big boost has come from CD-ROM players, which are being incorporated into computers and some game machines.
CD-ROMS give games the storage capacity to use full-color, high-resolution video images, while advances in data compression mean more-fluid moving images.
A future Crystal Dynamics game called the Horde will feature Kirk Cameron, the actor who starred in the television series "Growing Pains."
But instead of shrinking Mr. Cameron into one of the electronic "sprite" cartoon characters seen in most video games, the Horde will offer movie-style clips of the actor.
The capacity of CD-ROM also gives game designers access to high-quality stereo sound.
And more storage space means more permutations: A warrior's exploration of a dungeon can now encompass hundreds of different rooms, for instance, rather than just a few.
The brains inside video games are becoming more powerful, too.
The original game unit from Nintendo Co. of Japan was based on an eight-bit processor, in which the device's computer chip works on data eight "bits," or pieces, at a time.
The next generation, the Super Nintendo and Sega Enterprises Ltd.'s Genesis, moved up to 16-bit processors.
Now, machines based on formats created by 3DO Co. of Redwood City, Calif., use 32-bit chips, and Atari Corp., Sunnyvale, Calif., recently introduced a 64-bit machine called Jaguar.
Meanwhile, souped-up processors mean more speed, more colors (millions, vs. hundreds in older games) and more detail.
And specialized chips help out by performing the complex calculations needed to rotate objects and backgrounds, and to provide three-dimensional perspective.
All of those capabilities add up to a more realistic experience -- whether the game in question is a flight simulator, basketball match or ninja duel.
The more computing power, the more potential for a great game.
That was underscored by Sega's introduction of the 16-bit Genesis game Sonic the Hedgehog in 1991 -- a game that ended Nintendo's monopoly.
At its heart, though, Sonic is simply a well-executed rendition of what's known as a "scrolling" game, which essentially involves moving a character from the left of the screen to the right as different backgrounds scroll by.
Pictures may be prettier and obstacles may be tougher, but the 16-bit Sonic is basically a fancy version of Super Mario Bros., the game that drove sales of the original eight-bit Nintendo.
Designers and industry observers say it won't be easy to move beyond the staple genres of scrolling games, arcade-style shoot-'em-ups and sports games.
But this may be necessary in order to attract older players -- and women -- to a pastime mostly played by young boys.
"This is something we struggle with a lot," says Will Wright, creator of Sim City, one of the few games in recent memory to pioneer a new genre.
Written first for personal computers, then redone for a Super Nintendo cartridge, Sim City -- made by Maxix of Orinda, Calif. -- puts the player in charge of developing a new town.
Zoning must be decided, tax rates set and roads built.
Poor choices will prompt some of the Sim inhabitants to move away, weakening the tax base and making problems worse.
Sim City has spawned a number of sequels, including Sim Earth, which gives players control of the global climate.
Mr. Wright is nonchalant about the success of the genre he created -- "I'd like to break out of it," he says.
He hopes that new technology systems will allow more game designers to defy genre categorizations.
"We're still pretty ignorant of how to use this medium" Mr. Wright says.
At Wired magazine, a technology monthly in San Francisco, Managing Editor John Batelle is also on the lookout for imaginative games to replace the scrolling standbys.
"Scrolling games, while they haven't hit their end, have hit their maturity level in realism," Mr. Batelle says.
Further improvements in technology might allow players to substitute digitized pictures of themselves in the place of Sonic or Mario.
But, Mr. Batelle wonders, would that really be captivating?
One promising CD-ROM game cited by Mr. Batelle: Myst.
Published by Broderbund Software Inc. of Novato, Calif., for Apple Macintosh computers, Myst is an animated journey through fantastic worlds, each of which has puzzles that must be solved.
Unlike most games, which demand that players overcome one obstacle before moving on to another, Myst allows players to choose their own paths through the imaginary world.
The game also has been lauded for its detailed images (which are computer-created, rather than videotaped) and lush sound.
"It's just enough to trip your mind into believing you're there," says Mr. Batelle.
"It's a first step toward trying to create a new sense of entertainment.
We're developing a new storytelling here, a new way of interacting with a story."
Many game developers are looking forward to yet another technological innovation: "networked" video games, which allow players to sit in their homes and go head-to-head with other players, all linked by telephone or cable-television lines.
This already is possible with a few games, most notably San Francisco-based Velocity Development Corp.'s Spectre series.
Spectre is a straightforward tank-combat simulation game, with boxy graphics.
But it allows many players on a computer network to participate at once.
Dedicated gamers also can plug into head-to-head competition through the ImagiNation Network, an on-line service of Sierra On-Line Inc., Bellevue, Wash., that lets personal-computer users slug it out at everything from card games to a Red Baron aerial dogfight.
And American Telephone & Telegraph Co. plans a service that will let 3DO players link their machines via phone lines and play each other.
Another twist: The service will let players talk with each other while they are playing.
"It's a dramatic shift," says Jack Sorenson, general manager of LucasArts Entertainment, the San Rafael, Calif., computer-game and video-game portion of filmmaker George Lucas's entertainment businesses.
"You go from that individual, nerdy, geeky image to interactive.
People are completely unpredictable, whereas computers are just programmed."
After networking, the big step forward is likely to be the incorporation of voice-recognition technology.
Game designers expect the ability to sit on the couch and order a character through a fictional world to create an experience akin to becoming part of a motion picture.
Imagine a crime drama in which the bumbling detective would hear and obey such insights as, "No, no, no!
Look behind the drapes!"
Of course, games are more than just technology.
As images and sound become more true-to-life, and the level of interactivity increases, the demand for a realistic overall experience will grow.
Increasingly, the premise and story of a game will need to keep pace with the technological facade.
That's where Hollywood becomes important.
Spectrum HoloByte Inc., a game maker in Alameda, Calif., is developing game titles based on Paramount's popular "Star Trek: The Next Generation" television series.
For Ron Martinez, vice president of creative development for Spectrum, the "Star Trek" licensing agreement provides more than access to a hot property; it also brings in the people behind that property.
"Now a different range of talents is being attracted to the game medium," Mr. Martinez says.
"On `Star Trek,' we can work with people who are the screenwriters, the story editors, the guy who designed how the Starship Enterprise looks."
The company's most ambitious project under the "Star Trek" license is a CD-ROM game for the 3DO player.
The game doesn't use traditional character sprites, but neither does it rely on occasional live-action clips.
Instead it incorporates detailed three-dimensional renderings of the "Star Trek" crew, combined with voice recordings to produce what some industry buffs are already labeling "virtual actors," or "vactors" for short.
"Star Trek" also brings another asset to any game: the depth of its fictional world.
Over the course of many episodes, the series has portrayed an alternative universe with its own rules, organizations and science.
In that aspect, "Star Trek," "Star Wars" and a few other movies and television shows give the game designer a multitude of details to make a game more realistic, while at the same time giving the designer room to operate, says Steve Blank, president of Rocket Science Games Inc., a Palo Alto, Calif., start-up launched last year by engineers from Apple Computer.
"What makes a good interactive game is not necessarily a movie, but a movie environment like `Star Wars' or `Star Trek,'" Mr. Blank says.
"One can do a `Star Wars' game that doesn't have anything to do with the movie's plot."
Mr. Weber is a reporter for the Dow Jones News Service in New York.
