Bell Atlantic Corp. lined up another ally in its push into interactive services, agreeing with newspaper publisher Knight-Ridder Inc. to develop news, entertainment and advertising for delivery into the home.
The two sides expect to sign a final pact in a "few months," said Robert Townsend, vice president of the video services unit at Bell Atlantic, a regional operating company that provides local telephone service across the Middle Atlantic region.
But he said the partners had no idea when their collaboration might produce the first services, or where, or how much they would cost -- or even what the first offerings might look like.
The agreement marks the first time Bell Atlantic has allied with a major newspaper publisher for its interactive efforts and is further evidence "that the publishing industry appears to be turning to the Bells to help them look for new distribution ways," Mr. Townsend said.
The pact might also indicate Bell Atlantic, despite its pending acquisition of cable giant Tele-Communications Inc., still doesn't have enough programming to meet future needs.
"It says the TCI deal wasn't enough, that they're still scratching and reaching when it comes to content," said Marion Boucher, a Bear, Stearns & Co. analyst.
For Knight-Ridder, the pact marks a return to interactive services after a rude introduction in the 1980s.
The company had experimented with a videotex service called Viewtron, pulling the plug in 1986 after losing about $50 million.
"They learned what not to do," said Mr. Townsend.
A Knight-Ridder spokeswoman said the service flopped partly because "most people didn't use computers back then."
Bell Atlantic hopes to use whatever emerges from the collaboration to promote its new Stargazer brand of video products and services.
At the moment, it is an experimental service limited to a navigational tool that lets users sift through movie listings and interactive shopping services over Bell Atlantic's network.
Other newspaper companies have made recent moves to go "on line."
Last month, Washington Post Co. signed an alliance with Oracle Corp., which is a key supplier of the new technology to Bell Atlantic, to publish news and information using video and sound for on-line distribution.
Earlier, New York Times Co. announced plans to launch an electronic version of its newspaper on America Online, a computer service that already offers the Chicago Tribune and other newspapers.
Jared Sandberg contributed to this article.
