Six major airlines settled federal charges that they fixed prices in a scheme that may have cost consumers nearly $2 billion between 1988 and 1992.
Under a consent decree filed in U.S. District Court here, the airlines agreed that they won't use Airline Tariff Publishing Co., an industry-owned computerized fare-information system, to negotiate fare changes.
The Justice Department charged that the airlines had used coded messages showing prospective price changes as a way of communicating with each other about fares.
The airlines actually stopped the practice when the suit was filed more than a year ago.
But yesterday's agreement, which still must be approved by the court after a 60-day comment period, would prevent them from resuming it.
Anne Bingaman, assistant attorney general for antitrust, called the case a "critically important victory for American consumers and American business."
She said, "The airlines used the ATP fare-dissemination system to carry on conversations just as direct and detailed as those traditionally conducted by conspirators over the telephone or in hotel rooms.
Although their method was novel, their conduct amounted to price fixing, plain and simple."
J. Mark Gidley, a former Bush administration antitrust official who worked on the suit, said the case takes antitrust probes into the high-tech era by establishing that price-fixing agreements can be made using computers.
Airlines agreeing to the consent decree include Alaska Air Group Inc.'s Alaska Airlines, AMR Corp.'s American Airlines, Continental Airlines, Delta Air Lines, Northwest Airlines and Trans World Airlines.
Airline Tariff Publishing also was part of the accord.
The settlement is substantially the same as one reached with United Air Lines and USAir in December 1992 following a three-year Justice Department investigation.
Ms. Bingaman said yesterday's agreement provides for no refunds because the department isn't empowered to seek them.
She said the administration is considering asking Congress for such authority in future cases.
The airlines didn't shield their bitterness at what they thought was a baseless attack.
They said they settled to avoid the cost of litigation.
"We continue to believe that the pricing practices in question benefited the traveling public and were consistent with both the law and practice in many industries," American Airlines said.
Delta Air Lines said the Justice Department "presented no evidence the industry's practices were illegal or added costs to ticket prices paid by consumers.
It should be evident to anyone that the airlines are fiercely competitive in the pricing of their product."
Airlines have already shown that they can raise fares without the benefit of electronic signals.
Ticket prices have gone up at least a half-dozen times since airlines stopped the signals.
Instead, a carrier will raise fares on weekends, when few tickets are sold.
If rivals don't match the increase, the carrier withdraws the fare hike on Monday.
If everyone agrees, the increase sticks.
The process may not be as smooth as electronic signals, but the effect is the same.
Ms. Bingaman said the department identified over 50 separate price-fixing agreements by the airlines.
In one case, consumers paid $138 more for one-way travel between Chicago and Dallas because of the agreement.
If coordination raised fares 5% -- $8 on an average ticket -- the harm to consumers would have amounted to $1.9 billion, the department said.
Last year, nine major airlines settled a lawsuit that made essentially the same price-fixing allegations as the suit brought by the Justice Department.
The airlines denied wrongdoing in the civil case, but issued $396 million in ticket coupons, plus $14.4 million in cash for lawyer fees.
After the government's suit was filed, representatives of travel agents and consumer groups were critical of the department's actions against the airlines, saying consumers could be denied information about when ticket prices would increase.
But Ms. Bingaman said the information, more often than not, was bogus.
It really was intended just to negotiate prices, she said, noting that more than 50% of the time, prices ended up being different than what was quoted.
James Hirsch in Houston contributed to this article.
