Norman, Okla. -- The latest edition of The Columbia Encyclopedia arrived in our house on Christmas Day; by midafternoon, I had covered an envelope with notes.
The news wasn't good.
In full confidence I began by looking up the town where I live.
Surprise: It's "the center of a livestock and dairy region," even though we have fewer than 1,000 milk cows in the whole county.
I looked up the state, too, and read of Platt National Park.
The park is even shown on the little state map next to the text.
But there is no Platt National Park in Oklahoma -- or anywhere else.
Hasn't been for a long time.
I went over to Wyoming and learned that South Pass was "the only major pass through the Rockies for the Union Pacific."
At its closest, the railroad is about 50 miles from the pass.
I headed over to California and looked up Fontana, where steel is produced by "the huge Kaiser plant."
Not so: Kaiser hasn't produced steel at Fontana in donkey's years; last I heard parts of the mill were being shipped to China.
The East Coast?
"Pulpwood and petroleum products are the principle freight" on Maine's Penobscot River.
Except, of course, that log drives are a thing of the past in Maine.
I tried the Caribbean.
Here was Puerto Rico, where "sugarcane has long been the chief product."
Except that it isn't.
I hopped the Atlantic to read that crofting is among the chief industries on Skye.
Wanna bet?
I went to Africa and learned that in Sudan, according to the Fifth Edition (under Sudd), "{a} canal is being constructed to circumvent" the White Nile swamps.
Well, was being constructed: Work was discontinued more than a decade ago and left incomplete.
The encyclopedia is no more reliable for Asia.
It repeats, without qualification, the long-discredited assertion that the people of Hunza are noted for their longevity.
Down in Delhi, it says, we may find hotels in the northwestern corner of the old city.
Good luck!
While you're there, just try to find the coronation "amphitheater."
When last I looked there were a few statues bunched together, outdoors and unprotected, on a few unkempt acres.
The encyclopedia goes on to say that down in Peninsular India, "the former British cantonment of Secunderabad is now a park."
An absurd statement: Secunderabad does have a big parade ground, but Secunderabad's a fair-sized city.
And lest I forget the farther Orient.
Pinang, Malaysia, is "largely agricultural, with some rubber production."
Been to Pinang lately?
And China's Yellow River, Pinyinized to an entry under Huang He: The valley is "producing corn, kaoliang, winter wheat, vegetables, and cotton."
Where's the rice?
Clearly, the latest Columbia Encyclopedia is no authority on geography -- not even its own limited kind of geography.
But perhaps I understate the problem; perhaps the entire Fifth Edition is a wreck.
Certainly it's sloppy in ways that will amaze loyal readers.
Look up "evolution" and you'll find that a word's been left out in one sentence; two sentences later there's an error in subject-predicate agreement.
Worse, in the column to the right there's a sketch showing the evolution of the human skull, but there's no mention of hominids in the text -- only a cross reference at the end of the entry to "man, prehistoric."
Look that up, and you find only a reference to "human evolution," where there's no sketch of skulls -- and no mention of the fact that there is such a sketch 400 pages away.
And the problems go beyond carelessness.
Look up the Pennsylvania Railroad and you will find that the company's history is brought up through the formation of the Penn Central: There is no mention of Conrail.
There are long entries for other major railroads in this country, but there are no entries for United or American or Delta.
The Fifth Edition truncates other branches of history too.
You can look up the Homestead Act and learn everything essential, except that the act has been repealed.
New ground?
Yes indeed.
My old Third Edition (1963) made no mention of Frank Sinatra or Mick Jagger.
The Fifth has them both, along with Elton John and Madonna.
The editors seem in fact to have decided that the encyclopedia should echo our culture, not judge it -- should tell us who's famous, not who's important.
Hence an entry on Ted Turner but nothing on A.P. Giannini, who built the Bank of America.
Is the founder of a cable news network more important than the founder of the first bank welcoming small customers?
I doubt it, but Mr. Turner is undeniably better known.
This cultural echoing carries over to jargon too.
Look up homosexuality.
In the Third Edition there was nothing; in the Fifth there's more than a full column, and it gets off to a depressingly correct start by saying that "the term sexual orientation often mediates the discussion of sexual preference."
Where is the clarity that was the Columbia's?
I find some consolation in this catholic ruin, but the truth is that the Fifth Edition does handle geography more poorly than it handles most other things.
Or so it seems to me, and I ask myself why.
A hint comes from the many maps in the book, which are without a doubt the worst I have ever seen in a major reference work.
Small countries rate only location maps that are marked with a single word: the name of the country in question, which is connected with an arrow to a shaded blotch.
Try Kyrgyzstan.
One word on a map that shows nothing except country boundaries and a few bodies of water from the Caspian to Tibet, from Siberia to the Persian Gulf.
Thousands of readers won't have the faintest idea what part of the world they're in, and there's nothing on the map to help them: not even latitude and longitude ticks.
"Important" countries get their own maps, but the two-page spread on the U.S. puts Death Valley in Nevada and terminates the Snake and Yellowstone rivers in Idaho and Montana.
Why can't these rivers get to the great corner of Wyoming where they actually start?
And why should Portugal get a reference map, while bigger and more populous Malaysia is given only a location map?
The sad truth, I fear, is that nobody has paid much attention to the maps for the same reason they haven't paid much attention to the geographical information in the text.
And the reason?
Investors and businessmen: Well, they have to know what's going on in the parts of the world where they work.
The readers of the Fifth Edition?
Apparently they do not, or so the editors believe.
After all, those readers have spent a generation loading up on celebrities.
Now they're getting ready to live on an information superhighway that will exist, for all intents and purposes, nowhere.
The occasional escape to vacations in the real world will be "mediated" (God help us) by a pilot who flies blind to a destination that, often as not, will be simulated itself.
And as for Columbia University, where this once magnificent encyclopedia was conceived?
It's ahead of the curve, having abolished its department of geography years ago.
Mr. Wallach is a professor of geography at the University of Oklahoma.
