World oil prices rallied in the run up to the meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries that begins Friday in Geneva.
Although little change in OPEC's level of crude oil production is expected to result from the meeting, more buyers entered the market yesterday, just in case the oil ministers should decide on major output.
As oil prices rose, breaking through psychologically important levels, technical factors contributed to the rally, traders said.
Whatever the reasons, prices surged in late trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Crude oil for April delivery, which had been trading in a range of $14 to $15 a barrel, settled yesterday at $15.37, up 49 cents for the day.
Some of the pricing volatility may have been due to today's expiration of the April crude contract.
But May crude also rose 39 cents yesterday, settling at $15.23 a barrel.
The rally in U.S. futures trading led to similar gains in London.
Futures prices of Brent blend crude on the International Petroleum Exchange ended trading between 33 cents and 35 cents a barrel higher than Friday's settlement levels.
Many oil traders and analysts expect the rally to be short-lived.
The oil market was said to have drawn some strength yesterday from a weekend report in a Kuwait newspaper that OPEC may reduce its production by 700,000 barrels a day for the second quarter with non-OPEC producers contributing cuts of an additional 300,000 barrels.
But oil traders and analysts generally assume that OPEC is unlikely to change its level of output, now near 25 million barrels a day, for the second quarter, even though demand declines seasonally during that period.
As a result, the price of petroleum is widely expected to decline again.
"It will drop like a rock in a pond," said Tom Curtis, director of energy research at Pegasus Econometric Group.
GRAINS & SOYBEANS: Prices of most grain futures contracts slipped lower amid profit-taking and a lack of fresh news.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the corn contract for May delivery dropped one cent a bushel to settle at $2.8575 a bushel.
Soybean prices remain under pressure due to prospects for a record soybean harvest in South America.
About 20% of the harvest there is complete.
In the U.S., meanwhile, farmers in Texas and the Mississippi Delta region are beginning to plant corn.
Farmers as far north as Missouri are applying fertilizer to their fields in anticipation of planting soon.
PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices ended mixed.
Continuing political tensions in South Africa helped boost platinum prices.
South Africa, where national elections are to take place late next month, is the world's second largest producer of platinum.
Some traders fear a cutoff in supply, in the event that street unrest breaks out nationwide around election time.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, the active April platinum contract closed at $403 an ounce, up 70 cents.
Some analysts were skeptical, however, that political tensions could spill over into the mining regions.
"Historically, we have seen the metal leave the country in far worse conditions," said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist with Merrill Lynch in New York.
"But with the election five weeks away, the market is still cautious and nervous about the situation."
Meanwhile, the gold futures market remained choppy, with the market uncertain about the next interest-rate moves by the Federal Reserve.
(Higher rates tend to hurt gold prices, as the attractiveness of holding gold as a non-interest-bearing asset declines.)
On New York's commodity exchange, gold for April delivery closed down $1.30 to $386.30 an ounce; while silver for May delivery edged up a half-cent to $5.442 an ounce.
