Chicago -- I returned this week from the snowfields of Norway to those of Chicago to find a missive from the Chicago Bulls, my friendly neighborhood professional basketball team.
In August, the Bulls informed me, "the 21st century in Chicago sports and entertainment begins."
The gun-jumper, I was told, will be the opening of the shiny United Center, which will house the Bulls, the hockey Chicago Blackhawks and various troupes of strolling players.
The new stadium will be "state-of-the-art," "entirely different" from 65-year-old Chicago Stadium next door, where the teams now play, the Bulls said.
There'll be wider seats, aisles and concourses, unobstructed sightlines and "the very best in fan comfort and modern technology."
I was gonna love it.
Then the Bulls got down to brass tacks.
The two season tickets I've shared for more than 20 years were being "relocated" from the second row of the first balcony, just outside one basket and quite near the action, to an end-zone, nosebleed spot 10 rows from the very top of the vastly larger new structure.
The price of these tickets will be $30 each, up from the $25 per game we're now paying.
And -- this was the killer -- the people in the NEXT ROW behind us will be paying $20 each for their seats.
Incensed, a couple of the guys with whom I share the tickets phoned the team.
Were we being singled out for cruel and unusual punishment? they asked.
Oh no, was the reply, everyone in our seating area received similar assignments.
Was there an alternative?
Well, we could get in line for much-costlier "club" seats (more about those later).
They might have asked if this trip was necessary, but the answer would have been the verbal equivalent of a shrug.
To make an omelet, one has to break some eggs.
The 21st century already has come to places such as Auburn Hills, Mich., Milwaukee, Salt Lake City and Phoenix, in the form of recently built indoor sports arenas, and the new football stadiums that preceded them elsewhere.
Its main engines are the so-called luxury boxes, glassed-in domiciles of privilege that, subsidized by the tax write-offs afforded to business entertainment, command prices far in excess of what can be charged for ordinary tickets to sporting events.
Fans and players alike agree that Chicago Stadium, where the Bulls have performed since 1969 and the Blackhawks since it opened in 1929, is a great place, intimate and flavorful.
Its problem is that it has no luxury boxes.
The $175 million United Center, named for the airline that put up a goodly sum to affix its name over the door for 20 years, will have plenty of them, 216 on three levels, to be exact.
Priced from $55,000 to $175,000 a year, all the luxury boxes have been sold, and will contribute $24 million to the Bulls' and Blackhawks' coffers annually.
They're a reason the United Center will encompass about 1 million square feet of space, against 275,000 square feet for Chicago Stadium, thrusting the upper seats into the clouds.
Also contributing to the rousting of denizens of the present first balcony are the above-mentioned club seats.
Some 3,000 in all, they'll occupy what looks on the diagram to be the first balcony in the new building.
They're going for $40 per, plus an annual $1,000 "premium."
For the latter sum the buyer will get a close-in parking spot (in fact, most close-in parking is going to club-seat and luxury-box tenants, leaving other ticket holders to cruise the alleys of the center's rundown neighborhood for places), plus at-seat waiter service, a carpeted concourse and the "right" to purchase a meal at a Stadium Club dining room and shop at an "exclusive sportswear and novelty store."
It's yet another step toward the gentrification of the American sports arena.
Given the new center's ownership, which is the same as that of the Bulls and Blackhawks, no one should have been surprised at the moves.
The Bulls' chairman is Jerry Reinsdorf, who also heads the baseball Chicago White Sox.
In the wake of that team's 1983 divisional title he painted the railings around old Comiskey Park's 4,400 best seats gold (yellow, actually), jacked up their price and offered them on a season-only basis.
At about the same time he put White Sox games exclusively on cable TV.
Few in Chicago had cable then, and the decision caused a generation of local youngsters to grow up as the fans of the free-TV Cubs.
The Blackhawks are headed by yachtsman William Wirtz, whose late father, Arthur, was known as the Baron of the Bottom Line.
In 1935, Arthur Wirtz took Chicago Stadium, which had cost about $7 million to build, out of receivership for $300,000, and with partner James D. Norris went on to control most of the major indoor sports arenas in the East and Midwest.
The Wirtz-Norris International Boxing Club, formed to help fill those venues, was broken up in 1957 on antitrust grounds amid evidence of gangster infiltration.
The Blackhawks distinguished themselves in later years by a ticket-scalping scandal in which the scalpers were Chicago Stadium ticket-office employees, and by becoming one of the few companies to be convicted for violating the Federal Wage-Price Control Act, for a 50% hockey-program price increase in 1971.
In 1984, a federal judge assessed damages of $17 million against Wirtz and others in an antitrust case that hinged on Wirtz refusing to lease Chicago Stadium to a group seeking to buy the Bulls a dozen years earlier, and then using that leverage to take over the team itself.
Reinsdorf and others bought into the Bulls the following year.
An so, as Lenin put it, What Is to Be Done?
My seat partners and I haven't decided.
We might chuck it, or hold our noses, ante up and give the new place a try for a season.
Who knows?
Maybe Michael Jordan will come back.
And maybe, when nobody's looking, we can sneak down and ogle some of that "exclusive sportswear" on the club level.
