There can surely be no more damning charge brought against a feminist than to be called "Victorian."
Yet that is the word that is cropping up again and again to describe the school of feminism led by Catharine MacKinnon.
These are the feminists who would prohibit pornography, censor "hate speech," punish sexual innuendoes on the ground of sexual harassment, prescribe detailed codes of sexual conduct, make "date rape" as odious an offense as violent rape, and subject offenders (and potential offenders) to "sensitivity" and "consciousness-raising" sessions.
In a recent issue of Newsweek, Susan Faludi, a defender of Ms. MacKinnon and herself a militant feminist, hotly denied that either was any kind of "Victorian" or even "neo-Victorian."
As one with a proprietary interest in Victorianism, I must say that on this issue, if on no other, Ms. Faludi is right.
I know the Victorians, and these feminists are no Victorians.
There is all the difference in the world between the Victorian code of manners and morals, so deeply embedded in tradition and convention that it was largely internalized and very nearly unconscious, and one that is artificially contrived, officially legislated, and coercively enforced.
The Victorians would have been as much appalled by the overtness and formality of the new regulations about sexual conduct (explicit consent required for every stage of the sexual relation) as by the kind of conduct (promiscuity, they would have called it) implicitly sanctioned by those regulations.
They would also have been appalled by the new species of moralist undertaking this new moral reformation.
The New Victorian resembles nothing so much as Mrs. Grundy, a minor character in a minor play (a pre-Victorian play, at that) who intimidated her neighbor by the thought, "What will Mrs. Grundy say?"
But Mrs. Grundy was a figure of mockery in the play, and remained that when she was immortalized in the language as a symbol of the narrow-minded, self-righteous, self-appointed social censor.
The Mrs. Grundys of our day command the respect of those who profess to be in the vanguard of enlightened thought.
And some of them, the enforcers of the new morality -- "facilitators," as they are sometimes called -- enjoy all the perquisites of official, paid positions in corporations and universities.
The New Victorian brings to mind another fictional character, Mrs. Jellyby of "Bleak House," who is too engrossed in the affairs of the natives of Boorioboola-Gha to attend to her own brood of hungry, dirty, neglected children.
For Dickens she is the exemplar of "Telescopic Philanthropy," her eyes having the "curious habit of seeming to look a long way off, as if . . . they could see nothing nearer than Africa."
Today's moralists have that same faraway, fanatical glint in their eye -- "Telescopic Morality," we might call it.
Telescopic Morality disdains the values of everyday life as experienced by ordinary people -- the "bourgeois values" of family, fidelity, sobriety, civility, personal responsibility.
Instead it devises a new morality that is more intrusive and repressive than the old because it is more recondite, based not on familiar, accepted principles but on novel, remote ones, as if designed for another culture or tribe.
Thus the New Victorians do not condemn promiscuity; they condemn only those men who fail to obtain the requisite consent for every phase of sexual intercourse.
They do not denounce drunkenness; they denounce only those men who take "advantage" of their partners' drunkenness.
They do not expend their indignation upon those who commit the brutal rapes that are all too common in our society; they distract attention from that problem and even trivialize it by making a great issue of date rape, defined so loosely as to include consensual intercourse that is belatedly regretted by the woman.
They do not propose to do anything about the kinds of crime -- violent, irrational, repeated, and repeatedly unpunished crime -- that is the most pressing concern of most citizens; they propose only to pass new legislation to punish speech or conduct normally regarded as uncivil rather than illegal.
It is more than political correctness that is at issue here, although it is that as well.
It is the telescopic vision of academics who, like Mrs. Jellyby, "look a long way off" for causes to agitate them rather than face up to the realities of their own society -- even to the realities of their own academies.
The same professors who would expel a student for violating the new code of sexual conduct would be indignant if such a code were applied to their personal lives; one can hear their passionate appeals to academic freedom and the sanctity of tenure.
It is not so long ago that academic contracts included a clause permitting the dismissal of a professor on the grounds of "moral turpitude."
When was the last time that clause was invoked -- or even included in a contract?
Telescopic Morality has the effect not only of distancing the new morality from the old; it also distances moral responsibility from the moral agent.
This is not altogether new; we have long been familiar with the transference of responsibility from the individual to society -- from the criminal to the economic and social conditions that are the presumptive "causes" of his criminality.
What is new about the new morality is the shift of responsibility from one individual to another.
When society can no longer plausibly be blamed for the moral failing of an individual, another individual is made the "fall guy."
In cases of rape or racial conflicts, the New Victorian almost invariably places the burden of guilt upon the "privileged" or "hegemonic" person -- the man rather than the woman, the white rather than the black.
By the same token, the "victim" is defined as such by virtue of his (or, more often, her) "unprivileged" status.
Thus even when moral responsibility seems to be assigned to an individual, the individual functions not as an independent, responsible moral agent but as a surrogate for a class, race, or gender.
The New Victorians, it is evident, have little in common with the old.
Our latter-day Mrs. Grundys and Mrs. Jellybys find immorality and even criminality where there had formerly been impropriety and imprudence.
Their euphemisms are even more obfuscatory than the old; "limbs" instead of "legs" is relatively innocuous compared with "differently abled" in place of "handicapped."
And the code of behavior they so zealously monitor is both more permissive and more repressive than the old; casual sexual intercourse is condoned, while a flirtatious remark may be grounds for legal action.
It is a curious combination of prudery and promiscuity that is enshrined in the new moral code.
An old Victorian would call it censorship without morality.
What the New Victorians have created is a species of "moral correctness" designed to complement the prevailing "political correctness."
Their real kinship is not to the Victorians but to Orwell's "Big Brothers" (or "Big Sisters," it may be).
One need look no further back than to 1984 to find their place in history.
Ms. Himmelfarb, a historian of Victorian England, is the author of "On Looking Into the Abyss," an essay collection due from Knopf next month.
