New Jersey Gov. Christie Whitman is poised to sign into law today the first income-tax cut in the state's history, but nobody is quite sure how the state will maintain the cuts in the future.
Last week, the legislature approved a package of bills that would cut the state income tax by 5% across the board, retroactive to Jan. 1.
The legislation represents a first step by the Republican governor to make good on a campaign promise to cut the income tax by 30% by the end of her first term.
The tax cut, however, will reduce state tax revenues by $285 million.
Although the package identifies funding in the current budget to cover the lost revenue in 1994, it is unclear how the state will continue to make up for the cut in its next budget, which Gov. Whitman is to propose March 15.
Current funding for the tax cut will come from $150 million that was held in a special account for property-tax relief, $115 million in overfunded Medicaid and benefits accounts, and $20 million in nonpersonnel program cuts.
The battle over the budget promises to be difficult, with the governor needing to come up with between $1.5 billion and $2 billion to cover a projected budget deficit.
She is required by law to submit a balanced budget to the legislature, where both houses are Republican-controlled.
Some members had sought to delay a vote on the tax-cut proposal until after Mrs. Whitman had introduced her budget, to see just how she intends to close the gap.
"Why don't we wait 12 days for real numbers and real proposals instead of accepting vague assurances that everything will come out alright?" state Sen. Gordon MacInnes said last week.
"The solemn pledges we heard during and after the campaign that state aid for education and municipalities won't be reduced are not so firm now," he added.
Although Mrs. Whitman had told a conference of local officials in November that municipal funding would be held intact, and that the 5% tax reduction would be absorbed by cuts in the state bureaucracy, municipal officials say they are now hearing that "everything is on the table, but you're last on the list," said William Dressel Jr., assistant executive director of the New Jersey League of Municipalities.
While the governor has said she may reduce aid to municipalities, she also might offset such cuts by relaxing some state-mandated programs, a spokesman said.
Donald DiFrancesco, the Senate president, has promised mayors that municipal aid will stay intact.
The budget process "is going to be difficult, but we're going to do it," he said.
"It just means that something else might be affected," he said, noting that if the economy improves, there won't be a problem.
Overall, the tax-cut savings to the majority of taxpayers will be very slight.
Estimates by a state agency showed that the biggest group of taxpayers -- 1.5 million people who earn between $7,500 and $40,000 a year -- will save $24 a year as a result of the cut.
Those who earn $150,000 to $300,000 a year -- about 63,000 people -- will save about $517 a year in income tax.
The legislation enjoyed strong bipartisan support, passing by a vote of 73-0 in the Assembly and 33-4 in the Senate.
"Given the fact that she's a new governor, and nobody wants to be perceived as being negative, the vote wasn't surprising," said Joseph Doria, a Democrat and the Assembly minority leader.
