The operator of the tunnel beneath the English Channel announced its fares for Le Shuttle, the train service for transporting vehicles with passengers between Britain and France starting May 8.
Prices per car, no matter how many passengers, range seasonally between $330 and $465 round trip.
Eurotunnel, an Anglo-French consortium that built the so-called Chunnel for $14.93 billion, set an introductory $185 fare for June and July.
Tickets go on sale today through travel agents.
The fares were far higher than expected to be competitive with ferry prices between $185 and $345.
Eurotunnel is betting travelers will pay more for the high-speed, 30-minute trip in the 31-mile Chunnel unaffected by weather than for sea crossings of at least 80 minutes.
Eurotunnel said it wouldn't engage in a price war if ferry operators cut their fares.
Eurotunnel will begin operating a freight service in March.
Starting Sept. 5, Le Shuttle will transport buses, light commercial vehicles, trailers and campers.
Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan agreed to form a common market through the year 2000 and to start coordinating economic policies next year.
Next month, tariffs between the neighboring Central Asian countries will be abolished and border customs eliminated, allowing free movement of goods, services, capital and labor.
The two former Soviet republics, with a combined population of 39 million, said they can satisfy most of each other's trade needs.
Kazakhstan is rich in energy and agriculture, Uzbekistan in cotton production and gold.
Bilateral trade last year totaled about $500 million.
Thailand's cabinet approved a financial liberalization that immediately relaxes curbs on foreign-exchange transfers and allows foreign offshore banks to open branches outside Bangkok.
The package also allows Thai finance companies to separate financial and securities trading operations.
The rules are aimed partly at expanding rural firms' access to credit and financing for development projects.
Some foreign bankers saw expansion opportunities but others were unimpressed because retail banking is still restricted.
Western Germany's chemical workers accepted a small pay boost in return for vague vows to preserve jobs in the ailing industry.
The pact, the first this year for a major German industry, could set a pattern for other wage talks under way.
Politicians said the agreement acknowledges Germany's recessionary woes and may help dismantle rigid rules that are hurting industrial competitiveness.
The IG Chemie union, with 700,000 members, accepted a pay freeze through next January, then wages will rise 2%.
Annual inflation a month ago ran at 3.6%.
Workweeks, now 37.5 hours, may range from 35 to 40 hours, lessening overtime outlays.
Last year, 350 million Chinese bought life insurance and 100 million people bought family property coverage, representing 35% increases from a year earlier, the state-run People's Insurance Co. of China said.
The enterprise has a 90% market share and its 1993 premium income jumped 36% to $5.73 billion from 1992.
The government, which set up the state-controlled industry in 1982, has moved cautiously to open it to foreign firms, saying it wants the business to develop slowly.
North Korea, seeking to attract foreign investment to help its struggling economy, unveiled labor regulations for foreign-funded companies operating in the Communist state.
Workers will be provided by a North Korean labor-service agency.
The rules set minimum pay levels for a 48-hour work-week and extra pay for overnight shifts, cap overtime at 48 hours a month, and provide for pay raises based on productivity and qualifications.
Foreign-funded companies must pay fees into a social security fund for workers.
In 1993, Western Europe's auto industry had its worst year since World War II, as new passenger-car registrations in 17 countries plummeted 15% to 11.5 million units from 13.5 million in 1992.
Last month alone, the auto market crashed 19.6% to 783,570 units from a year earlier, when measures such as tax incentives skewed comparisons.
Only the British market, recovering from severely depressed levels after three years of recession, improved last year, rising 11.6%.
For this year, the European Automobile Manufacturers Association expects further declines as economies except Britain stagnate or shrink.
This assumes persistent painful business conditions and job losses, unless the auto industry and governments cushion attempts to improve productivity through layoffs that cut buying power and cause more economic ills.
The association urged European governments to stand tough on preventing further market-share gains by Japanese auto makers on the Continent.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Moving Germany's government, including parliament, to Berlin from Bonn by the year 2000 will cost $11.5 billion, the Finance Ministry said, reducing its previous estimate that ranged from $14.4 billion to $17.3 billion. . . .
China's government said the number of travel agencies in the country jumped 66% to 2,592 in 1992 from 1,561 in 1991.
