The House Ways and Means health subcommittee split sharply over proposed controls on private medical expenditures, and the panel's chairman signaled he could abandon the provisions to save his goal of ensuring health coverage for all Americans.
"I do recognize there will be much concern about this section," said the chairman, Rep. Fortney "Pete" Stark.
The liberal California Democrat implicitly challenged business to rally Republican support for some alternative cost-control mechanism.
Otherwise, he said, costs could be shifted further from government-insured to privately insured patients, adding to what industry must pay for health care.
The health-overhaul bill drafted by Mr. Stark would impose cost controls to hold down the rate of growth in both public and private medical expenditures.
Private spending caps wouldn't become effective before 1998, and even then, the controls would serve simply as a "backstop," taking effect only if prescribed cost goals aren't met.
Nevertheless, Republicans on the panel yesterday ridiculed the idea as a "troubling limitation" on the private sector and an open invitation to price controls for health care.
"Many of us believe it won't be a backstop," said Rep. Nancy Johnson (R., Conn.).
"It will be a front stop."
Supporters of virtually all the healthcare plans before Congress claim their plans would slow future expenditures.
The debate is over whether to rely on "market" solutions or add some type of back-up controls.
The issue is driven by how the Congressional Budget Office projects the impact of each plan on future health spending.
The stakes are high because the greater the projected costs, the more a plan would have to provide in subsidies to achieve universal coverage.
The Clinton administration is banking on so-called health alliances, or giant cooperative buying pools, to bring down costs by increasing the clout of buyers of health services.
If this approach fails, it would impose strict caps on insurance premiums, which would be enforced by the same alliances.
Since the proposed alliances have proved to be unpopular, Democrats in Congress have turned to other devices.
The Stark bill envisions a more direct federal role, but one tempered to give states and private industry some leeway to adjust to the spending goals.
The California Democrat's plan would set a goal of reducing the annual growth in overall health expenditures by two percentage points in 1996 and then one additional point in each of the next several years.
These proposed spending targets would allow private charges to continue to be significantly higher than fees paid by the government-run programs like Medicare.
And if states stay within their own approved spending targets, they could escape the federal cost-control system.
Whether the Stark plan would be a true backstop rather than an automatically triggered set of controls depends on whether it is realistic to assume the growth goals can be achieved.
Mr. Stark indicated that he is open to further adjustments to accommodate critics who see the plan as too burdensome.
The subcommittee debate was perhaps the sharpest in three days of often technical discussions over the details of the Stark alternative, which will be put to a test in votes next week.
One of the most liberal members of the House, Mr. Stark in many respects has moved the debate to the right.
More than other Democrats, the Californian has been willing to trim the cost of the Clinton plan by reducing the benefit package proposed by the administration and cutting business subsidies.
The heart of Mr. Stark's plan would be an expanded Medicare program, which would provide coverage for the poor and those without private coverage.
Ironically, by giving government a greater role in providing coverage for the uninsured than President Clinton proposes, Mr. Stark would rely less than the president on cost controls for private patients to hold overall health spending down.
Without private-sector controls, though, spending limits in the new, expanded Medicare program could lead health-care providers to charge higher prices to the very business interests who have resisted what they see as government interference in the private sector.
In remarks directly aimed at the Business Roundtable, which has criticized the president's plan, Mr. Stark said he remains committed to trying to preserve the proposed cost controls.
But he said dropping the provisions would have only a minor budget impact on his bill.
"The bill works without it," said the Californian.
Meanwhile, the health-care advertising wars continued, as the Health Insurance Association of America asked President Clinton to urge a group generally supportive of his plan to withdraw ads that accuse the insurance industry of jacking up rates, dumping people's coverage and opposing "real health-care reform."
The insurance association, which paid for the "Harry and Louise" ads attacking the Clinton health-care plan, called ads by the Health Care Reform Project "misleading, inaccurate and inflammatory."
"It's shameless for HIAA President Bill Gradison to spend $14 million attacking health reform and the president's plan and then accuse others of fanning the flames of division," responded Mark Johnson, a spokesman for the Reform Project.
The project is a coalition of business groups, health-care providers, labor unions and consumer organizations.
"If he's serious now about supporting reform, he has the power to put ads on the air next week, and have Harry and Louise read a positive script."
The insurance association also offered to co-sponsor with the White House ads "that mention our shared goals and our willingness to work together to achieve them."
A Clinton spokeswoman said the White House is legally prohibited from advertising.
Rick Wartzman contributed to this article.
