Prudential Securities Inc. yanked a controversial television advertisement starring a stockbroker who was sued by an 81-year-old Roman Catholic priest.
Prudential's concern: copycat suits by other clients of the broker, Jeffery D. Daggett.
The brokerage arm of Prudential Insurance Co. of America says the ad was pulled by mutual consent.
"To be honest, it was at his request, but we were going to do it anyway," says a Prudential spokesman.
Says Mr. Daggett: "I don't want to embarrass the firm."
As previously reported, 40-year-old Mr. Daggett -- who stars in Prudential's new "straight talk" TV ad campaign -- was sued by Msgr.
Maximos Mardelli, a former client, alleging fraud in his limited-partnership brokerage account.
The suit, filed last week in Los Angeles Superior Court, underscores the perils Wall Street firms face in touting brokers in ad campaigns.
With the explosion of securities litigation in recent years, brokers are vulnerable.
"We recognized all along that there was an element of risk in our straight talk advertising strategy," says a Feb. 17 memo written by Ronna Lichtenberg, Prudential's marketing director.
"But it's important to remember that straight talk means just that.
Straight talk doesn't guarantee investment performance."
Prudential says it took "a lot of care" in creating the ad campaign and in choosing the brokers who appear in it.
The TV and print ad blitz, launched this month, is a bid by Prudential to repair the damage from its limited-partnership scandal.
"Just because Mr. Daggett sold a partnership at some point is not a smirch on his record," the Prudential spokesman said.
Prudential has set up a $330 million reparations fund as part of an October settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission and state regulators.
Prudential has been accused of widespread fraud in selling $8.15 billion of partnerships in the 1980s.
In his suit, the monsignor says Mr. Daggett improperly prodded him to accept a small settlement involving a portfolio of Prudential real-estate partnerships, instead of advising him of other options.
The result, the suit says, was that Msgr.
Mardelli was deprived "of his legal rights to seek full recovery for his damages."
Mr. Daggett declined to comment on the suit.
But Prudential says Msgr.
Mardelli never complained to the broker or the firm about his account, which he moved in 1992 to Charles Schwab Corp.
Mr. Daggett's compliance history is "spotless," Prudential said; a check of his record with regulators shows no disciplinary cases.
Mardelli, who had unspecified losses from his $100,000 VMS Realty Partners real-estate investment, took part in a VMS class-action settlement in 1991, in which investors received pennies on the dollar.
