In a dramatic showdown moments before the final bidding deadline, rivals Viacom Inc. and QVC Network Inc. each made small increases in their takeover bids for Paramount Communications Inc.
Although several takeover-stock traders said Viacom retained a slight edge in the bidding, there was no knockout blow, and other traders said it was too early to determine which of the the complex cash-and-stock bids would prevail.
"No one has emerged as a clear winner," said Jessica Reif, an analyst at Oppenheimer & Co.
Investors have until Feb. 14 to decide which bid to select, and it appeared possible that neither bidder would gain the 50.1% majority of Paramount stock needed to win the contest under bidding ground rules set by Paramount.
At that point, those bidding rules would lapse and bids could resume.
QVC's bid appeared to be higher, with a value of roughly $10.3 billion, or $86 a share, while Viacom's bid had a value of roughly $10 billion, or $83 a share.
However, valuations varied widely, based on traders' expectations of where the bidders' stocks would trade if they won.
While QVC raised the cash portion of its offer for 50.1% of Paramount shares to $104 a share from $92, or $750 million, the home-shopping cable-TV channel operator reduced the amount of common and preferred stock being offered for the remaining 49.9% of Paramount.
QVC was aided by a $500 million stock sale to BellSouth Corp., which is already backing its bid.
QVC also ignored appeals from investors to provide some extra compensation that would increase if its stock doesn't perform well, a feature that helped Viacom's previous bid gain the backing of Paramount's board on Jan. 21.
In the new offer, Viacom improved the terms of that feature, known as a contingent value right.
As a result, media analyst Lisbeth G. Barron of S.G. Warburg & Co. said, "QVC's bid is higher, but Viacom's is more secure."
Viacom left the cash portion of its own offer unchanged at $107 a share for 50.1% of Paramount, but the cable-TV programmer boosted the value of securities being offered for the remaining 49.9%.
The small increases in the bids, coming just before yesterday's 5 p.m. EST deadline, suggest that both Viacom and QVC are worried about overpaying for the entertainment and publishing giant amid signs that its results have been deteriorating even as bids escalated during the 4 1/2-month takeover contest.
Paramount, one of the last independent TV and movie studios, became the object of the takeover fight because media companies are scrambling to acquire entertainment assets to feed a burgeoning multimedia universe.
Takeover stock traders said the bids are also difficult to value because of the variety of securities they contain.
In Viacom's case, five different securities are being offered for 49.9% of Paramount's shares.
One investment banker said the offers "read like two menus from Chinese restaurants."
Viacom is offering one security that will either be a debt security paying 8% interest if Viacom completes its proposed acquisition of Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., or a preferred stock paying a 5% dividend if the Blockbuster transaction isn't completed by Jan. 1, 1995.
Viacom and QVC each immediately began promoting its bid as superior, in what could be the start of a two-week solicitation campaign leading up to the Feb. 14 decision by traders and investors.
QVC Chairman Barry Diller said he felt his company had to respond to Viacom's previous increase in the cash portion of the deal.
"I did feel that to a normal person, the cash differential spoke loudly," he said.
"I felt we had an obligation to address it."
But the home-shopping company's chief vigorously defended his decision not to bolster the so-called back end of the offer, as Viacom did.
"It's unfair to our holders to put them in a position that could cost them an extraordinary amount of dilution" if additional QVC shares had to be issued under a contingent-value security.
Takeover-stock traders, who already favored the previous Viacom offer, said that Viacom's increase in the value of securities being offered for 49.9% of Paramount was greater than the increase in QVC's overall bid.
"Unless something dramatic happens in the interim, we'll be tendering our shares to Viacom, as will all the short-term investors," said Mark Dickstein, president of the investment firm of Dickstein Partners Inc.
QVC said it's financing the bulk of the increased cash in its bid with a planned $500 million stock sale to BellSouth, which had already agreed to invest $1.5 billion.
But some traders said the $42 a share that BellSouth agreed to pay, $2.75 below QVC's market price, could undercut Mr. Diller's argument that the stock is a good buy.
BellSouth also won a reduction in the prices it previously agreed to pay for QVC stock under the $1.5 billion commitment, indicating that the negotiation for the additional funds was hard-fought.
For example, one trader with a large Paramount position assumes that QVC stock would trade at $35 a share if QVC won the contest, and Viacom Class B shares would trade at $32 if Viacom won.
At those levels, he values the QVC bid at $79.30 a share, or $9.5 billion, and the Viacom bid at $81.25 a share, or $9.8 billion.
Mario Gabelli, whose Gabelli investment funds own Paramount shares, said that based on the closing price of the two stocks yesterday, QVC appears to have a $3 to $4 advantage over Viacom, though he acknowledged that traders may not value it that way today.
"The main thing is you still have two buyers -- they're both still there keeping the ball rolling," Mr. Gabelli said.
"But I don't think either has shown their best deal yet."
He added "This is what I call the highway chicken game that teenagers play -- only Viacom and QVC are playing it on the information highway.
The first one to let the other get 50% loses."
As of yesterday morning, Viacom was slightly outdrawing QVC under the companies' previous competing tender offers.
Viacom had received 21.7 million Paramount shares, or 18%, under its $9.7 billion offer, compared with QVC's total of 19 million, or 16%, for its $10.2 billion offer.
Neither bidder came close to receiving the 50.1% majority of shares needed to win the contest, because traders wanted to get a look at yesterday's final bids.
QVC stock rose 75 cents a share to $44.75 on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
Viacom Class B shares tumbled $1.125 to $34.125 on the American Stock Exchange.
The 18%-to-16% margin of shares tendered to each bidder was in line with an opinion by Paramount's investment adviser, Lazard Freres & Co., that the Viacom offer was "marginally superior."
