Twenty-five years ago, some 50,000 South Korean troops were at war in South Vietnam, helping the U.S. try to prevent communists from taking over.
They lost that round decisively.
Now, South Korea is fighting Vietnam one more time, though in a different sense.
It's competing against Hanoi for foreign investment and technology to keep its economy robust.
But it may lose this battle, too, unless something radical is done.
That's because South Korea has made itself about the least attractive nation in all of East Asia for overseas investors, while Vietnam just now is among the most beguiling.
But the South Korean problem extends far beyond Vietnam; China, Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia, just to name a few other Asian nations, all seem more inviting when investors balance opportunities against obstacles.
For many, doing serious business in South Korea promises more trouble than it's worth, especially with Asia's former communists so eager for capitalists and their capital.
Official attitudes in Seoul can seem downright unfriendly.
For reasons ranging from ancient history to modern economics, South Koreans keep sharp limits on what outsiders can do on their turf.
They don't want yet another group of foreigners dominating their lives, as has happened so often in the past.
Their protectionism helped build a modern economy able to meet most domestic needs and compete head-on elsewhere against the best the world can offer.
But it also creates great problems for the future, which new reform policies may not solve completely.
"The most dangerous byproduct of Korea's efficient export engine is its mercantilist atmosphere, which the public has been inhaling for 40 years," says Robert Zoellick, former U.S. undersecretary of state.
It leads to "an international image of Korea that is, to be frank, terrible.
The Korean public appears to be insular, even xenophobic, and hostile."
This state of mind can translate into complex regulations designed to repel or restrict foreign investors as if they were foreign invaders of old.
So U.S. and other businesses are going elsewhere; they no longer need South Korea to have an Asian presence.
In 1992, 220 foreign firms withdrew investments worth $369 million, with 52 leaving South Korea outright.
Those that decided to stay out or go away include General Motors Corp., Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., Dupont Co. and Atlantic Richfield Co.'s Arco Chemical Co.
"You can't name a single American joint venture there that's been a success," says one U.S. businessmen, perhaps overstating the reality, but not the perception.
Yet Seoul needs outside investors -- especially American -- as much as ever.
One reason is its need for advanced technology.
South Korea, which no longer has cheap labor, can't develop alone the modern technology needed to leap ahead.
U.S. and other companies could supply what's needed if conditions were right.
Yet some South Koreans talk wistfully of becoming self-reliant, probably impossible for any nation.
Joint ventures also can give greater market access overseas than South Korean companies might manage on their own.
The Ssangyong Business Group says South Korea needs more like those it has with Hewlett-Packard Co. in workstations and General Electric Co. in medical equipment, which both sell at home and abroad.
But to get more partners, the South Koreans must free the home market and cut red tape sharply.
There's also a political reason.
When -- not if -- unification comes, Seoul will need foreign friends to help defray costs and maintain stability.
Americans with South Korean operations could then be effective lobbyists in Washington, as they were for Germany.
Some South Koreans think they made a strategic blunder by not drawing more U.S. companies deeper into the local economy.
It's not too late.
The reform-minded President Kim Young Sam has an ambitious five-year plan for opening South Korea and plunging deeper into the world economy.
He wins much praise for this effort, which pits him against old attitudes and entrenched bureaucrats.
Gains have been made, and more are on the way.
Down the road, a united Korea could be an attractive place for business, with its 60 million people and access to Northern China and the Russian Far East.
But his plan may not go far enough.
Even if it takes hold fully, South Korea would remain less liberalized than most other Asian lands, says Edward Graham of the Institute for International Economics here.
Thus many firms could continue to look elsewhere for their Asian homes.
