Lawyers and clients who try to keep "smoking gun" documents from surfacing in lawsuits are getting singed in court.
When Fisons Corp., a unit of Fisons PLC, was sued in Washington state superior court, the plaintiffs requested that the drug maker turn over any information it had on the harmful side effects of one of its treatments.
Company lawyers, led by Bogle & Gates of Seattle, vigorously resisted.
The hard-line approach seemed "consistent with the way ethical, honorable lawyers in this community practice," recalls Fredric Tausend, a Seattle lawyer and former law school dean who followed the case.
But the Washington Supreme Court didn't see it that way.
In September, it found that the company's lawyers had violated their ethical duty to produce full and accurate information.
Fisons and the law firm agreed to pay sanctions of $325,000, one of the largest penalties ever incurred by a law firm in the state.
The Fisons case and others like it are changing the way lawyers and clients approach the crucial fact-finding stages of lawsuits.
Since the mid-1970s, the process known as discovery has evolved into an increasingly bruising business where each side typically does all it can to keep damaging or embarrassing evidence from the other.
But a growing number of courts have found that litigants have gone overboard, and they're cracking down.
The trend is affecting some big cases and proving costly to some big law firms and corporations.
"There is an accelerating incidence of judicial intolerance for obstructionist conduct," says Stephen Gillers, a professor of legal ethics at New York University law school.
"The courts are recognizing that the demands on limited judicial resources increase exponentially with discovery abuse, and that that is unfair to other litigants, judges and society in general."
Earlier this month, for example, Advanced Micro Devices Inc. successfully defended the retrial of a major copyright suit brought by chip rival Intel Corp.
A judge had dismissed a jury verdict in Intel's favor after finding that Intel had failed to produce internal documents that AMD felt supported its case.
In January, Suzuki Motor Co. was forced to settle a personal-injury suit stemming from a crash of its Samurai sport-utility vehicle after a federal appeals court found that Suzuki lawyers withheld safety-related data from the plaintiffs.
The court ruled that the conduct warranted holding Suzuki liable without a trial.
"Lying is lying.
That is not adversarial," says James Butler, a Columbus, Ga., attorney who represented the plaintiff.
The court held that Suzuki had given "if not completely false, at least misleading" answers to questions about a failed effort by Suzuki to have General Motors Corp. market the vehicles.
Suzuki says the ruling was based on "a misunderstanding of facts."
GM, meanwhile, has feuded for two years with plaintiffs' lawyers over access to documents in connection with suits alleging safety problems in GM trucks with side-mounted gas tanks.
A group of attorneys recently filed a $100 million suit in Detroit charging that the auto maker conspired to suppress evidence and destroy test data in an effort to keep plaintiffs in the dark about the trucks' alleged dangers.
GM vigorously denies the charge.
Some lawyers and academics believe the pattern of decisions has disturbing consequences.
They note that lawyers face a serious conflict whenever they come across potentially incriminating evidence in a client's files.
While their primary loyalty is supposed to be to the client, attorneys face sometimes ambiguous court rules on turning over such materials.
In situations involving any ambiguity, it's not surprising that they may err on the side of the client.
Also, self-incriminating evidence isn't always easily obtained, and may involve searching through millions of documents and files, raising questions about to what extent lawyers should be obligated to ferret out such evidence.
Then there are worries about the effect of disclosure pressures on corporate record-keeping.
The possibility that potentially damaging evidence will have to be disclosed "leads to terrific incentives not to have files in the first place," says Geoffrey Hazard Jr., a Yale Law School ethics professor.
"What does that mean for responsible internal controls?"
Messrs. Hazard and Tausend were among more than a dozen prominent lawyers and ethics specialists who filed affidavits in the Fisons case in support of Bogle & Gates.
The Fisons matter is a good example of the nuances that can enter into the disclosure question.
The case involved a two-year-old girl who suffered permanent brain damage after taking a dose of an antiasthma drug, Somophyllin Oral Liquid.
The drug maker and its law firm resisted for many months, on a variety of grounds, plaintiffs' requests for any information showing the treatment could be toxic.
The plaintiffs eventually learned from an anonymous source that Fisons had sent warnings to selected doctors that the drug's active ingredient had some lethal side effects for certain patients.
In effect, argues Stephen Saltzburg, a George Washington University law professor and a plaintiffs attorney in the case, Fisons's lawyers were "giving misleading responses that were intended to cover up information without revealing that they were actually covering up."
Fisons and the law firm said they didn't turn over the information on grounds that the evidence of harmful side effects was contained in files regarding a separate product, and that the company had indicated to the plaintiffs all along that its responses would be limited to the oral liquid.
But the state Supreme Court didn't buy the argument, saying the company and law firm had constructed a defense that made it impossible to uncover the critical information.
"It was our view that we were operating in a gray area, and that the Supreme Court clarified that," says Richard Wallis, managing partner of Bogle & Gates.
He says that in response to the ruling, the firm has conducted employee seminars on responding to document requests.
"Our firm has not had anything of this nature happen before-and has not since," he adds.
Bilingual people can be excluded from a jury if testimony in the foreign language that they speak will be translated into English during the trial, a federal appeals court ruled.
The decision, in a case in which five people who spoke Spanish were removed from a jury, apparently is the first at the appellate level on the issue.
The U.S. Supreme Court declined to address the question in a 1991 ruling involving bilingual jurors.
The recent case involved a criminal defendant whose Spanish telephone conversations were wiretapped by prosecutors.
The man said government translations of the conversations were wrong.
Prosecutors used peremptory strikes -- under which lawyers can remove a certain number of jurors without stating a reason -- to eliminate three Latino jurors, a former Spanish teacher and a non-Latino who spoke some Spanish.
A lower court said the prosecutors' strikes essentially eliminated people because of their race, a practice that the Supreme Court has declared unconstitutional.
But a three-judge appeals panel in Philadelphia disagreed, saying courts can't expect bilingual jurors to forget what they know and to accept a translation they believe is wrong.
For that reason, the appeals court said, dismissing bilingual jurors because they have "specialized information" is no different from eliminating accountants in a tax case.
The court added that although language is a component of ethnicity, it isn't the only one, so that removing all Spanish-speaking jurors isn't necessarily a race-based maneuver.
Alan L. Zegas, a West Orange, N.J., attorney for the defendant, said he will seek a rehearing by the appeals court.
"One of the things that I think is dangerous is that an entire race of people can be excluded on the basis of their spoken language," he said.
(Gabriel Pemberthy vs. Howard L. Beyer, Third U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, 92-5633)
