Kmart Corp., clobbered by charges and a failure to rev up its apparel sales, reported a larger-than-expected fiscal fourth-quarter loss and a loss for the year.
For the quarter ended Jan. 26, Kmart posted a net loss of $1.19 billion, or $2.61 a share, compared with net income of $535 million, or $1.15 a share, a year earlier.
Sales rose 8.7% to $10.27 billion from $9.44 billion.
The latest results include a previously reported after-tax charge of $862 million, mainly to alter Kmart's half-finished -- and so far disappointing -- $3.5 billion store-restructuring plan.
Kmart now will replace 500 of its 2,324 discount stores, originally slated for renovation only, with larger stores.
Kmart also took a $503 million charge related to the planned sale of PayLess drugstore chain, to be completed this month, and the 1993 sale of its Pace Membership Warehouse unit to WalMart Stores Inc.
Even without the charges, however, the nation's No. 2 retailer saw its net from continuing operations drop 50% to $247 million, or 53 cents a share, from the restated year-earlier $501 million, or $1.07 a share.
The fourth-quarter results capped three consecutive quarters of earnings declines in fiscal 1994.
The Troy, Mich., discounter is losing market share to No. 1 retailer Wal-Mart, as well as category killers like Toys "R" Us.
And attempts to distinguish itself by offering apparel with a more upscale feel haven't worked.
Instead, customers are bypassing Kmart's apparel departments and buying lower-margin goods for the home, like tools.
"Clearly, management's 1994 strategy of focusing on the upper price-point tier in apparel mix vs. its traditional moderate and promotional tiers bombed," said analyst Thomas Tashjian of First Manhattan.
He said he expects Kmart to alter that strategy this year by selling more-basic apparel.
Kmart has made dramatic moves in the last year to boost earnings and appease shareholders.
Primarily, the company emphasized that it intends to sell all or parts of its specialty-store units, which should help Kmart focus on its faltering core discount stores.
But Wall Street apparently remains skeptical; Kmart's stock was unchanged at $19 in composite New York Stock Exchange trading, near the 52-week low of $18.75.
For the year, Kmart posted a net loss of $974 million, or $2.15 a share, compared with net income of $941 million, or $2.06 a share, a year earlier.
In addition to charges related to the restructuring and sale of two units, the latest-year results included charges of $28 million for early debt redemption and $34 million for accounting changes.
Sales rose 10% to $34.16 billion from $31.03 billion.
Kmart blamed much of the profit shortfall on a shrinking gross margin, which narrowed to 24.9% of sales for all of the just-ended fiscal year, from 26.5% the year earlier.
The decline resulted from Kmart's big markdowns on apparel and its deferrals and cancellations of orders to control bloated inventories, the company said.
Because lower inventory levels -- especially of higher-margin, slow-moving goods -- are long overdue, analyst Jeffrey Edelman of C.J. Lawrence called the moves a "long-term positive."
With inventories in line, he said, Kmart can better use its computerized systems to automatically replenish the goods as they are sold.
"There is tremendous realization that Kmart has to execute better.
The company is pushing the urgency button," Mr. Edelman said.
