Bankruptcy filings aren't usually a magnet for investors.
But then again, Merry-Go-Round Enterprises isn't your average bankruptcy-court ward.
At least one savvy investor thinks the stock, now trading at 3, could be twice that within a year.
The Towson, Md.-based retailer is that curiosity among bankrupty-court denizens: a solvent debtor, with a net worth of nearly $200 million and cash well above $100 million.
Little wonder that this rare duck has a hunter on its tail: Daniel Harmetz of Fidelity Investments has been snapping up debt and stock of Merry-Go-Round since the federal bankruptcy-court filing in Baltimore Jan. 11.
Mr. Harmetz likes to buy scads of debt at a discount, to block any reorganization plan he doesn't like.
There's certainly enough debt to go around at Merry-Go-Round.
The retailer, which operates Cignal, Boogies Diner and Merry-Go-Round stores, owes $265 million, much of it taken on last summer when it acquired Chess King from Melville Corp.
At that time, mere months before the bankruptcy-court filing, Merry-Go-Round borrowed about $65 million through a private placement with insurers and about $42 million more from four banks.
But this time, Mr. Harmetz is playing a slightly different game.
He is not only buying debt, but stock as well, convinced that a quick resolution to the bankruptcy-law filing will buoy Merry-Go-Round's share price.
In the past two weeks, he has bought slightly more than five million shares, about 10% of the company's 53.9 million shares outstanding.
That puts Fidelity toe-to-toe with Merry-Go-Round Chairman Leonard Weinglass, who also owns about 10%.
But Mr. Harmetz's bargaining power comes from Fidelity's huge stake in Merry-Go-Round's unsecured debt.
So far, the mutual fund giant has swallowed around $90 million face amount, according to bank-debt brokers.
Indeed, say brokers, Mr. Harmetz has been such an aggressive buyer that he pushed the price of the debt up to about 88 cents on the dollar, from a low of about 80 cents.
"It's been a feeding frenzy," says T.K. Duggan, a founder of Delaware Bay Co., which specializes in distressed securities.
Mr. Harmetz dodged calls requesting comment.
Among the recent rueful sellers of debt is Principal Mutual Insurance, which lent Merry-Go-Round $38.2 million last August and never received a single interest payment.
"We felt that was the best resolution to a troubled situation," says a representative of the Des Moines, Iowa, insurer.
The other private-placement lenders, Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance and Aid Association for Lutherans, are hanging in for the time being.
In mid-December the four banks, Signet Banking, CS Holding's Credit Suisse, Boatmen's Bancshares and National Westminster, tightened terms for future borrowings by the company.
But within one month the company entered Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings and the banks bailed out, selling their debt holdings.
Mr. Harmetz won't give up so easily.
Mr. Weinglass says the fund manager told him in a telephone conversation this week, that he had "a lot of confidence in management."
But Mr. Harmetz isn't always so friendly.
As co-manager of Fidelity's Capital & Income fund, he agitated for a takeover of R.H. Macy & Co. in an effort to end that lengthy proceeding.
Mr. Harmetz now runs several Fidelity funds that are closed to small investors, but his appetite for Merry-Go-Round securities is so great that he has sprinkled them into several mutual funds as well.
The upside looks pretty good.
If the retailer nudges up cash flow and gets merchandise in the stores that customers want, Fidelity might see the stock double.
Some investors feel the banks were self-defeatingly rigid, undermining the retailer in the midst of the crucial holidays just because its fashions flopped one season.
But Merry-Go-Round isn't risk-free, to either Mr. Harmetz or any co-speculators.
Mr. Harmetz paid so much for his debt-86 cents on the dollar, according to one trader-that there isn't much upside left.
If it takes longer than a year for Merry-Go-Round to work out its kinks, Mr. Harmetz might reap 16% or so on the investment, not the heady 25% Capital & Income posted last year.
The debt acquired from Principal yields 7%, not much of a kick even if Mr. Harmetz can wrest post-petition interest from the company.
That situation leads some bankruptcy players to speculate that if a quick turnaround doesn't work, Mr. Harmetz's Plan B is to wrest more equity from the company, by voting his debt stake to block a reorganization plan.
If that happened, it could deflate the stock.
