Late last year, many analysts predicted that faster U.S. economic growth and the inflationary pressures accompanying it would propel gold to more than $400 an ounce early in 1994.
Instead, bullion has fallen more than 5% from its recent high of $397.10, set on Jan. 4, and now slouches near a three-month low.
Gold for April delivery settled yesterday at $376.90 an ounce, down $1.70, on the Commodity Exchange in New York.
One of the main culprits in this decline -- although not the only one -- is selling by hard-pressed hedge funds that recently took a beating in international bond and currency markets.
Many traders say that if gold falls below the $374-to-$375 level, it could tumble to $365.
Some are even more pessimistic.
"My downside target for gold is $360 or lower," says James M. Connors, a vice president at Kidder, Peabody & Co. in St. Louis.
He notes that in 80% of the years since the first futures contract began trading in 1976, gold and other precious-metal prices have climbed to their highs in the winter and fallen to their first significant low of the year in either March or April.
"I like trades that are 4-to-1 in my favor," says Mr. Connors.
"I'm not going to bet this is the one time out of five that it doesn't happen."
Already big losers on their gigantic wrong-way bets on Japanese and European bond markets and the dollar this year, smaller hedge funds have been selling their gold holdings to meet margin calls on other investments, say traders.
The funds "have got to take their profits where they can," says an investment strategist at a big U.S. securities firm that counts the bigger hedge funds among its clients.
But even those funds that aren't squeezed for cash have been sellers.
"They don't think there is much upside potential for gold right now," says the London-based head of commodities for a large U.S. bank that trades and lends money to the bigger hedge funds.
Noting gold's failure to rally strongly on the recent inflation fears that sent global stock and bond markets tumbling -- and especially its inability to climb above $386 and hold -- he said: "That failure has sparked some liquidation."
As an alternative play on U.S. growth, he says that some hedge funds have been investing in base metals such as copper.
Hedge funds "were gold's best friend last year," says Andrew Smith, a gold analyst at UBS Ltd. in London.
Analysts say the funds played a big part in pushing gold prices to $407 an ounce from a low of $326.30 during the past 12 months.
But that surge ran out of steam, souring some hedge funds on bullion.
"People expected that with U.S. growth and renewed economic activity in Europe and Japan, gold would pick up," says a senior proprietary trader at a U.S. investment bank.
"The problem is gold made a move last year and hasn't followed through."
In some ways, hedge funds' image as the bogey-men of global financial markets is as significant as their actual buying and selling.
"It's the perception of what funds may be doing, rather than what they actually are doing, that is all-important," says one London trader.
If it weren't for buying by the Chinese, "I could see gold back down to $360, and there is a possibility it could still do it," says another London trader.
"Five times in the last few weeks, gold tested the $374-$375 level and each time bounced back, but each bounce has been more dead."
To be sure, gold has more than just hedge funds weighing it down.
"Uncertainty in bonds and currencies is generally a plus for gold, but it seems there is too much uncertainty for it to be a good thing," says Mr. Smith of UBS.
Other analysts point to reports that, in the past six months, Russia has sold a few hundred million dollars of gold and Estonia $120 million worth.
What's more, inflation remains low in major industrial countries despite recent scares.
Some traders point out that the hedge funds, not wishing to send gold prices plummeting, have so far been more discreet than last year, when their purchases were well telegraphed and triggered a world-wide buying spree.
"It is very important that we hold" at current levels, says Mr. Smith.
If gold prices stay below $376, breaking a 200-day moving average, "the trend will be down, and the funds will look to sell then."
Nonetheless, some analysts predict gold will recover and rise later this year.
Referring to charts that many traders use to forecast currency and commodity-price movements, Alan Baker, head of bullion at Deutsche Bank Sharps Pixely in London, says: "We've had a 13-year bear market; the change in sentiment began last year and will continue for some time to come."
And while many Asian investors and jewelers stopped buying gold during last year's runup, some analysts contend they will resume when they become more accustomed to its higher price.
"The final consumer's demand in Southeast Asia is a function of his disposable income; and over time, that demand is rising with his income," says John Bergtheil, a mining analysts at James Capel & Co. in London.
"These guys are likely to come back into the market at $360 to $370.
Because of their acclimatization with higher prices and their rising income, Southeast Asian and Chinese buyers are likely to back in at a higher level."
But "right now, it's sitting on hands and holding your breath, which is very uncomfortable," says Mr. Smith of UBS.
In other commodity markets yesterday.
ENERGY: Oil prices fell sharply in a sell-off triggered by disappointment that key oil ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries didn't signal any move to cut production at a meeting held in the Persian-Gulf region during the weekend.
Members of the Gulf Cooperation Council, the most powerful lobby within OPEC, offered little indication of what direction OPEC output policies would take in the second quarter.
Disappointed traders had held out hope that the group would show some willingness to support cuts in output to help bolster oil prices, which are hovering around five-year lows.
The group did renew a call for producers outside OPEC to reduce their output, but market participants say such a reduction is unlikely.
Analysts said the result of the Council's talks indicates that Saudi Arabia remains unwilling to cut production from its ceiling of 8.0 million barrels a day.
Such a position by Saudi Arabia would ruin the chances for OPEC to make the meaningful cuts many analysts believe are needed.
COPPER: Copper-futures prices fell on disappointment that the price of the active May contract failed to remain above 90 cents a pound.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, May-delivery copper fell 1.05 cents to 88.50 cents a pound.
The May price had reached 90 cents a pound in a Friday rally, said Bernard Savaiko, senior analyst for PaineWebber Inc.
But lack of follow-through buying yesterday disappointed traders holding "long" positions, or wagers that prices would continue to rise.
Many of these traders liquidated their own positions, depressing futures prices.
Copper's price is nevertheless about 17% higher than it was late last year.
