New York -- W.H. Auden had it easy.
All he had to do was write some of the greatest verse of the 20th century.
Edward Mendelson has the job of figuring out how to pass those poems on to posterity -- accurately, in ideal texts chosen from the poet's many versions.
Even the simple matter of a semicolon can keep him up nights.
"Auden said, `I let my friends do my punctuation for me.'
Then he got annoyed when his friends changed it," says Mr. Mendelson, who is Auden's literary executor.
"You lose sleep over it, but you have to decide one way or another.
Let me rephrase that.
You have to use your judgment."
Since Mr. Mendelson has devoted most of his adult life to getting someone else's words right, it's not surprising that he takes a lot of care with his own.
Tapped to be Auden's literary executor at the tender age of 26, he has spent his career writing about Auden, teaching Auden, and editing Auden.
Now Mr. Mendelson is in the midst of editing a massive eight-volume series for Princeton University Press that will be the definitive edition of Auden's huge and multifarious body of work.
So far, Mr. Mendelson has edited Auden's "Plays" (680 pages, $55) and "Libretti" (758 pages, $49.50).
They retrieve many rare and previously unpublished fragments of Auden's writing: lyrical verse written for British documentaries of the '30s, dramatic collaborations with Christopher Isherwood, radio plays, and full-blown libretti for Benjamin Britten's "Paul Bunyan" and Igor Stravinsky's "The Rake's Progress."
Few, if any, Auden fans had read or even knew about much of this material until Mr. Mendelson dredged it up from dozens of dark literary corners.
He ferreted out no less than seven sources for the Auden-Isherwood drama of metaphysical alpinism, "The Ascent of F6" -- including a dogeared promptbook from the Old Vic.
Britten's original music for Auden's 1941 radio play, "The Rocking Horse Winner," was lost.
Lost, that is, until Mr. Mendelson managed to locate a bootlegged recording through "semiclandestine" connections.
Backing up his crafty detective work with lucid scholarship, he presents readers with texts that are very close to what Auden's original audiences heard -- right down to inaudible but insomnia-inducing mistakes in punctuation and spelling.
Reasoning that they are essential to Auden's "verbal rhythms" and a component of his style, Mr. Mendelson has left many of those mistakes intact: He has even restored some authorial misspellings.
Auden was also an obsessive reviser.
Mr. Mendelson, ever a respecter of the poet's intentions and quiddities, has published every known variation on the texts in the back of each volume -- along with essays, notes and letters.
Leafing through these handsomely produced books, a reader sees what Auden meant when he said of Mr. Mendelson, "He knows more about me than I know myself."
That was a long time ago.
Mr. Mendelson has spent more than two decades deepening that acquaintance, making a life for himself out of Auden's life's work.
In his comfortable Upper West Side apartment near Columbia University, where he is a professor of English and comparative literature, Mr. Mendelson recently took a break from editing the third Princeton volume -- "Prose, 1926-38" -- to explain how he fell down this scholarly rabbit hole.
"When I was an undergraduate and wrote poems, a teacher said, `You ought to take a look at the early Auden,'" he recalls, still looking trim and boyish at 47, with more than a glimmer of the brainy former University of Rochester student.
"And that was pretty much the end of my writing poetry.
I was so impressed, not only by the verbal power, but the intelligence with which he understood the world."
As a college senior, Mr. Mendelson paid a visit to Auden, who held afternoon "office hours" in his East Village apartment.
Although the future Audenologist was too tongue-tied to say much, the poet kindly talked at him until the visit was over: "He had no recollection of me afterward."
But Auden was to become an evermore-dominant figure in Mr. Mendelson's life.
He wrote his doctoral thesis on Auden's poetry, and as a 24-year-old teacher at Yale, began compiling a bibliography of Auden's work with B.C. Bloomfield, a British scholar.
"I had heard from other people that he wanted to put together a book of essays, but claimed he didn't remember what he'd written," Mr. Mendelson says.
"People told him about a graduate student who was going around Xeroxing everything."
When Auden visited Yale, Mr. Mendelson was assigned to be his chaperone on campus.
He steered the poet to his complete collection of the essays, leaving him in his apartment for several hours to browse in his files.
The two began exchanging letters and about a year later Auden sent him a check for $150.
"Dear Mr. Mendelson," he wrote, "I've come to the conclusion you should select my articles and not I. Here is a check for Xeroxing."
When Mr. Mendelson was wrapping up work on the book a few months later, another letter arrived.
At the end, Auden had written, "P.S.
Would you be my literary executor?"
On the face of it, the two men couldn't have been more different.
Auden was a gay man who became a committed Christian; Mr. Mendelson, a native New Yorker, is Jewish and heterosexual.
(He is now married, and has a 2 1/2-year-old son.)
They never socialized much.
In one of their more intimate exchanges, the poet suggested that Mr. Mendelson try a brand of dairy creamer he liked.
But Auden saw in the younger man someone he could trust to do the right thing by his work.
In 1972, a year before Auden's death, Mr. Mendelson paid him a visit.
They discussed a new edition of collected poems Auden wanted to publish.
"I think he knew he was going to die," he says.
"I asked, `What do you want to do about such and such a poem?'
He said, `You must use your judgment.'"
For the past 21 years, Mr. Mendelson has done exactly that.
On Auden's death, his first task was to publish a notice on both sides of the Atlantic "requesting any friends who have letters from me to burn them when they're done with them and on no account to show them to anyone else."
He did so.
But did he burn his own letters from Auden?
"No, of course not," he declares.
It's safe to assume he will never be done with them.
The job of executor has dovetailed neatly with Mr. Mendelson's own scholarship: The author of the respected critical book "Early Auden," he is now at work on "Later Auden."
The title of executor has been the kind of passport scholars dream of, even winning him entree to London's St. James Palace, where government files about Auden's plays -- viewed suspiciously in the mid-1930s for their mockery of Hitler -- were kept.
"I went up in my ratty suit," he says.
"It was certainly the nicest furniture on which I've ever done research."
To pay for his plane tickets to Auden-related sites, he reviews computers and software for PC Magazine, where he is a contributing editor, and for various literary publications.
"It has no moral intelligence," he shrugs of the work -- unlike his noncybernetic research on Auden's prose, which will fill the next four volumes.
He has saved the hardest part of the Princeton edition -- two volumes of poetry, which will appear early in the next millennium -- for last.
Auden heavily revised and in some cases repudiated poems as "dishonest," years after he had written them.
One of his most famous poems, "September 1, 1939" (the date Hitler invaded Poland), originally ended with the line, "We must love one another or die."
Auden came to view that line as a piece of false rhetoric, and dropped the last stanza.
In the '60s, he disowned the poem altogether.
For the forthcoming edition, Mr. Mendelson has decided to print all the poems, in the versions that readers first encountered, or the revised versions published soon after.
Later revisions will be printed in the back of the volume.
The volumes will include everything from Auden's juvenilia to a famous piece of never-acknowledged pornography.
As ever, the challenge for Mr. Mendelson will be to create the book that Auden himself -- an eternal Auden, standing outside of time -- would have wanted.
`Am I talking for the writer, or am I imposing my own views?" he says.
"The goal is to let the author speak for himself.
You're never totally successful."
