If you can't beat 'em, join em.
That is evidently the tack that Fidelity Investments is taking by trying to issue as much as $1 billion of a new derivative investment backed largely by volatile developing-nation debt and junk bonds.
The privately placed investment, known as the Global Yield Trust, potentially puts the Boston mutual-fund giant in direct competition with leading Wall Street investment bankers who sell similar "structured" bonds to institutional investors, including Fidelity's own mutual funds.
"They are definitely cutting out one service that Wall Street provides, which is structured finance," said an official at one investment bank.
Returns on Fidelity's derivative investment will be linked to -- or derived from -- returns on the underlying portfolio, including not only foreign securities and junk bonds, but also other derivatives, such as options and futures on interest rates, currencies and other assets.
Borrowing the financial engineering used to create such derivatives as "collateralized mortgage obligations" and "kitchen-sink bonds" -- another type of mortgage issue, Fidelity's new trust will repackage the cash flows of the underlying portfolio into new securities intended to be more palatable to insurance companies and other qualified institutional buyers.
The fabulous performance of developing-nation bonds in recent years is a powerful lure for institutions pinched by low yields in the U.S., but many pros believe all the big gains have been squeezed out of those markets already.
"Double-digit total returns are no longer possible without derivatives," says Ignacio Sosa, managing director in charge of emerging-market sales at leading derivatives dealer Bankers Trust.
Bankers Trust has repackaged about $1.3 billion in debt from developing countries such as Argentina, Mexico, Morocco and Turkey in deals meant to juice up returns, which essentially compete with Fidelity's Global Yield Trust.
Fidelity didn't wish to comment on the record, but insurers and others familiar with Fidelity's marketing efforts, said the trust has anticipated yields of 11% to 13%.
However, investors will shoulder considerable risks for the chance to make such returns.
Among the hazards are lack of liquidity, or the ability to get out of the investment, and exposure to foreign markets that may have few big gains -- and potentially harrowing setbacks -- in the future.
The Global Yield Trust will issue bonds that enable insurance companies to skirt certain regulations, such as those that force them to put up extra capital against holdings of risky foreign and junk bonds, or, in some cases, prohibit them from owning such securities at all.
In effect, the trust would provide a loophole for insurers to own more risky securities than would be permissible if they bought them directly.
On average, insurance companies and pension funds hold less than 5% of their total assets of over $6 trillion in foreign securities, analysts estimate.
Those institutions would hold as much as 8%, say the analysts, if it weren't for the capital rules.
For instance, insurers must set aside as much as 9% of the value of any Venezuelan Brady bonds they purchase, compared with no reserve requirements for U.S. Treasury bonds.
(Brady bonds are developing-nation loans that have been repackaged into bonds, under guidelines developed by former Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady.)
Fidelity's derivatives are intended to lower the overall capital charges against holding risky debt, people close to the deal say.
Even so, the Global Yield Trust has been a hard sell.
Although at least one insurance company has made plans to invest in the trust, a number of large insurers say they plan to pass it up since they can structure their own portfolios to get the same, or better, results.
Mark Arnold, chief operating officer at BEA Associates, a large New York investor in Brady bonds, says, "It is the liquidity issue that is keeping us out" of many structured deals.
Derivative bonds, while they deliver powerful upside returns, can also dive dramatically depending on how they are structured, he adds.
Insurance companies and others familiar with Fidelity's marketing efforts say that, while there have been a number of changes to the trust's design since last May, most of its major components are essentially the same: In a marketing memorandum sent out in May, Fidelity said it hoped to raise $1 billion for the trust, of which it will initially invest 30% to 60% in developing-nation securities, 20% to 50% in global bonds and as much as 20% in U.S. junk bonds.
The trust would initially have 50% of its assets in securities rated triple-B or lower by Standard & Poor's Corp., the New York rating agency.
Unlike most structured notes on the market, the portfolio that backs the Global Yield Trust will be actively managed, like a normal mutual fund.
Fidelity plans to buy the securities it needs for the trust in the open market, since in-house rules prohibit it from taking the securities out of the portfolios of its mutual funds.
The trust does have some restrictions: It can't put more than 25% of its assets in a single issuer's securities; and it can't invest more than 60% of its money in a single foreign currency.
But otherwise, the trust can buy practically anything it wants, including some investments that could rev up potential returns -- and risks -- even further.
For example, "the Trust may invest in options and futures based on any type of security, index, or currency related to its investments, including . . . those not traded on exchanges," reads the memorandum.
Indeed, 10% to 25% of the trust will be initially invested in structured notes and other derivatives, the document says.
Fidelity's trust, which would be set up much like a closed-end fund, will issue a fixed number of Class A and Class B derivatives, which are essentially like seven-year bonds.
The Class A bonds are guaranteed the first 30% of returns from the trust's portfolio, and would be protected from potential losses.
Fidelity pledges to redeem Class A bonds at par value, except if the trust's whole portfolio loses more than 40%.
These senior securities would qualify for NAIC-1 ratings from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, so they'd enjoy just a 3% capital requirement, the memorandum says.
But buyers can't hold just the safe stuff.
For every Class A they purchase, they must also buy 1.5 Class B bonds; and they may not sell either type of security separately, or sell them at all without the approval of the trust's other investors.
(Those terms are designed partly to preserve the issue's status as a private placement.)
The Class B bonds receive the remaining 70% of the trust's returns, but shoulder 100% of losses up to a certain maximum amount; in effect, they act as shock absorbers for the Class A shares if things go awry.
Fidelity is obligated to buy back investors' bonds in order to keep the trust's portfolio from falling below 80% to 90% of its initial value for a certain period of time, said to be one month.
If Fidelity can't keep the portfolio's value above that floor, it must liquidate the trust.
U.S. Treasury notes and bonds managed to carve out moderate gains Friday before trading was cut short by the snowstorm that hit the East Coast.
The price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond rose more than 1/2 point, or more than $5.00 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to yield 6.40%, down from 6.45% on Thursday.
Over the course of the abbreviated session, prices went on a wild ride.
"Trading was very choppy," said Cary Leahey, senior financial economist at Lehman Government Securities Inc.
"There was a lot of early bouncing around, and there was limited demand in the afternoon."
Initially, the market spiked higher following what analysts termed neutral economic news.
After a week of worrying about the January producer price index report, the data came in close to what analysts had forecast.
The PPI gained 0.2% overall and 0.4% excluding food and energy.
Retail sales, meanwhile, were weak, dropping 0.5% during January.
According to analysts, the sales data were depressed by the unseasonably harsh winter weather and the Southern California earthquake.
But after the initial move higher, the market collapsed back into negative territory as some accounts used the higher levels to unload securities.
Eventually, however, investors who had had cash pile up over the course of the week began to nibble at the market, taking prices higher through midday.
At the recommendation of the Public Securities Association, trading ended at 2 p.m. EST.
