House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt signaled that Democrats in Congress will significantly alter the mechanics of the Clinton health plan, and could accept a more gradual approach toward achieving universal health coverage.
Mr. Gephardt said it was "hogwash" to portray the president's plan as dead in Congress.
But he acknowledged that modifications must be made to move the legislation through House committees this spring and achieve universal coverage in a timely fashion.
"We're saying we're interested in the goals being achieved," said the Missouri Democrat.
"We're not interested in all the mechanisms being achieved."
Mr. Gephardt suggested gradually phasing in elements of the White House proposal, including proposed cost controls on health-insurance premiums.
And while predicting that lawmakers eventually will recognize the president's arguments for requiring companies to help pay for their workers' insurance, Mr. Gephardt went so far as to say he could vote for a plan that abandons the so-called employer mandate in favor of one that first puts the burden of obtaining insurance on individuals.
His comments are the strongest and most detailed statement yet by anyone in the party leadership on the need to alter the president's program.
As majority leader, Mr. Gephardt invested considerable effort in the last Congress trying to frame a Democratic health-care bill, and he comes to the fight now with a better understanding of the difficulty in reaching a consensus.
An array of House panels are slated to draft portions of the bill this spring, but the most crucial arenas will be the Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce committees.
Mr. Gephardt indicated that the Democrats may rely increasingly on the Ways and Means panel, where the leadership has greater strength.
And while outwardly hopeful that the Energy and Commerce panel can report a companion version of the bill, he said the party is prepared to take legislation to the floor if only Ways and Means is successful.
"If you can get a bill out of the Ways and Means Committee," Mr. Gephardt said, "You may have a bill that can get 218 votes on the House floor."
The top leadership of the Energy and Commerce Committee has been among those most loyal to the president's plan, but the makeup of the committee makes it difficult to move legislation without Republican support.
Because the panel includes a number of conservative southern Democrats, the House leadership has trouble commanding a majority of the committee without some Republican support.
The problem was underscored yesterday when 30 House members -- including Rep. Roy Rowland (D., Ga.), an Energy and Commerce panel member -- proposed a bare-bones alternative to the president's plan.
The measure would attempt only insurance reforms about which there is wide agreement; for instance, it would limit clauses in insurance policies that deny coverage based on pre-existing conditions.
"I don't know why we have to do it all at once," Mr. Rowland told reporters.
Unless the leadership can demonstrate some movement on the president's program, incremental bills like Mr. Rowland's will have some appeal as political cover for lawmakers afraid of having nothing to show voters in November's election.
Such problems have encouraged some in the House to look longingly toward the Senate.
Mr. Gephardt himself said that if the Senate could come up first with a bipartisan bill that meets the president's goals, it would help the House.
Senate Republicans are more divided on the issue than the House GOP.
For the administration, the best hope of some compromise rests with moderates who share the president's commitment to universal coverage.
A plan sponsored by Sen. John Chafee (R., R.I.) seeks to achieve this goal through a combination of subsidies and a requirement that all individuals buy insurance.
Mr. Gephardt appeared to be reaching out to this group in his comments on employer and individual mandates.
Business interests have been most active in opposing the employer mandates sought by the administration.
But as Republican and Democratic lawmakers look more closely at the individual approach, they admit it, too, will be a difficult sell to voters, and that some compromise may be needed.
Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.) acknowledged as much yesterday, saying the average worker may want his employer to share in any mandated coverage.
Senate Republicans, joined by several members of the House GOP leadership, began a retreat last night in Maryland to discuss strategy and the differences among them.
Mr. Dole didn't rule out the Senate acting on the bill before the House does, if some consensus can be reached.
But the Republican leader is plainly reluctant to get too far ahead of his party and make himself vulnerable to conservatives in the House.
"Dole wants to make sure that any bipartisan plan has a very wide Republican imprint," said House GOP Whip Newt Gingrich of Georgia.
