SOMETIMES A SIMPLE birthday card just isn't enough.
If you're a straight single woman, for instance, looking for a card for a gay male friend, you might want something a little different.
Possibly a card that says: "You've got everything a girl like me desires in a guy: charm, sensitivity, color-coordination . . .
Know any straight men like you?
Happy Birthday, Handsome!"
Cards oriented to a gay clientele -- or their friends and relatives -- are virtually impossible to find.
They've tended to be the exclusive purview of specialty stores and "alternative" boutiques.
Soon, however, four Dayton Hudson stores -- two Dayton stores in Minneapolis and two Marshall Field's stores in Chicago -- will begin testing a line of cards designed to be sent between straight and gay people as well as between gays.
The cards are made by a small Chicago-based company called Cardthartic and sold under the brand name Through Our Eyes.
Dayton Hudson believes it's one of only a few mainstream retail chains to carry such cards.
"It's the first line that really works with the alternative lifestyles of these people and puts together a really nice, fresh sentiment," says Mary Joseph, senior buyer of stationery for Dayton Hudson's department store unit.
Cardthartic started a year ago making gay-to-gay cards but has expanded into what it calls straight-to-gay or "pro-gay" cards.
"Traditionally, the gay greeting card category has been built on the homoerotic or beefcake cards," says president and founder Jodee Stevens.
"That's still the majority of the market.
But our crossover cards are new."
Ms. Stevens says the first batch of pro-gay cards were for straight women and gay males to send to each other.
"In the next release, there'll be cards for gay men and their moms, siblings and other family members to send to each other."
She says there doesn't appear to be much demand for cards for straight men to send to lesbian friends.
In That Jar?
NEW REDUCED-FAT peanut butter products are driving peanut growers nuts.
The goober industry claims the brands shouldn't call themselves peanut butters because peanuts represent less than 90% of their ingredients and thus violate the Food and Drug Administration's definition of peanut butter.
Peanut farmers want the upstarts to be labeled "peanut spreads," with the exact peanut percentage on the labels.
The Atlanta-based Peanut Advisory Board, which represents southeastern peanut growers, has filed a complaint with the FDA about ConAgra's new Peter Pan Smart Choice, whose label includes the words "reduced-fat peanut butter."
And Procter & Gamble, which makes the No. 1 peanut butter Jif and doesn't plan a reduced-fat version, has asked the FDA "to clarify" the issue.
CPC International's Skippy Reduced Fat peanut butter is just hitting stores.
"As soon as we see it, we'll probably file a complaint on that as well," says the peanut board's executive director, Mitch Head.
ConAgra and CPC International are fighting back, claiming the products comply with FDA rules though they're less than 90% peanuts.
Moreover, a ConAgra spokeswoman says it's unwise for the industry to challenge the new products because they might help revive the $800 million peanut-butter category, which has seen sales slip in recent years.
An FDA spokesman says the agency is pondering the matter.
No. 2: A New Analgesic
VISIT A DRUG STORE and you'll find shelves crammed with pain relievers -- enough to give shoppers a powerful headache.
So why would shoppers want to try a new nonprescription analgesic when they can buy big brands like Tylenol, Advil and Bayer or cheaper, private-label products containing ibuprofen, acetaminophen and aspirin?
That's a question Procter & Gamble and Syntex must tackle this spring when they introduce the first nonprescription pain reliever containing a new analgesic ingredient in about a decade.
The upstart brand, called Aleve, contains naproxen, the main ingredient in Syntex's Naprosyn, a widely prescribed analgesic.
P&G, which is marketing Aleve, wants to become a major player in the analgesic industry, though it failed in the mid-1980s with Encaprin, a coated aspirin in capsule form.
Moreover, P&G is moving to beef up its prescription and over-the-counter health-care lineup.
Analysts expect heightened couponing, trade promotions and advertising by competing brands in the analgesic market.
But they also believe patients will try Aleve because most pain sufferers are willing to experiment with remedies.
Moreover, Aleve bottles will have a newly patented squeezable cap, which is easy for arthritis sufferers to open and is child-resistant.
Early ads for Aleve are expected to target several audiences, including people with sports-related aches and pains, a group that has been virtually overlooked by the industry, according to analyst James Keeney of Mabon Securities.
And P&G is already making much of the fact that Aleve is taken every eight to 12 hours, while competing analgesics last between four and eight hours.
LYRRUS, FOUNDED BY guitar-playing former engineering students, markets software called G-Vox that gives guitar lessons.
Students can plug guitars, acoustic or electric, into personal computers. . . .
A Baltimore dentist wants fellow practitioners to buy his dinosaur-like cartoon character, Relaxadactyl, and use it on small giveaways -- like magnets and T-shirts -- to soothe patients.
"Going to the dentist should not be a ptero-fying experience!" says the dentist, Robert N. Spiegel. . . .
Aware that more people are eating pungent foods at their desks, Davstar California has introduced Adzorbstar, which it says eliminates unpleasant odors and comes in small sizes to fit on a desk or bookshelf.
