It has been snowing -- a lot.
Yes, and why not?
It's winter.
This simple fact seems to have evaded the legions busy both in TV and print, bemoaning the inclement weather in terms more appropriate to an earthquake or some similar large natural disaster.
Some of us, in fact, can't help feeling that there is something at least a little clement in weather that produces all those stunning white landscapes.
Day and night for over a week, we have heard and read of "the dreadful battering" of "this cruel" winter.
Weather-forecasters babble breathlessly of whether they will have to bring more "bad news" and more "punishment."
Let us stipulate here that, yes, snowstorms do cause hardship.
Cars get stuck in drifts, commuter trains don't run, planes don't fly, salt spread on sidewalks gets in dogs' paws.
What we object to is the notion -- put forward by all the weather-newsfolk -- that snow is a dread curse and the likelihood of precipitation of any kind, an unwanted calamity.
The fact is that many otherwise businesslike adults walked around American cities last Friday -- the occasion of a heavy storm -- looking exhilarated as they navigated snowbanks and buried sidewalks.
If snow is so terrible, how come so many people went about New York City's storm-blown streets with big smiles and dancing eyes last week -- even as they were being pelted?
This sort of weather is what is supposed to happen in winter, but go tell that to the weather broadcasters carrying on as though the nation were confronting the gravest of national emergencies.
Tune in where you will, and you'll get the word about the "misery" about to befall us, or that we've just avoided because the storm shifted, etc., etc.
If the storm comes, we're assured, the well-known weather reporters Blither, Humbug and Blather stand ready to provide team coverage.
Those weather teams out there palpitating about what a miserable snowy day it is and how miserable tomorrow is going to be and how sorry they are to have to bring us the crushing news of it all don't, of course, have reason to feel quite that miserable themselves.
What with all the air time they've been getting, this should be, indeed, the winter of their content.
So it is too for lots of other grown-ups, ourselves included, who haven't yet learned to look at snow as a grim event -- and who feel, forecasters' gloom notwithstanding, as excited about the piles of white swirling down as when they were children.
