A news photo from Tokyo Friday said it all.
Japanese legislators were on view cheering defeat of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's effort to cut off their access to graft.
Political arrogance is not unique to any country, but seldom has it been captured on film with such clarity.
While Japan's lawmakers were guarding their inalienable right to boodle, Russia's newly elected Duma was displaying almost equal concupiscence.
Led by exCommunists, members got right down to the important business of self-enrichment.
They voted themselves salaries equal to those of cabinet ministers, 48 days of vacation, free air and rail transportation, bonuses for work of "special intensity," luxury housing and chauffeured cars.
Courtiers of the czars would have applauded the disdain these worthies showed for any opinions the poverty-stricken masses might have of their exercise in self-aggrandizement.
The greed of the Japanese and Russian political classes is enough to weaken anyone's faith in democracy.
But keep one thing in mind.
The corruption has always been there, in both countries.
What is different now is that it finally has been put on public display.
The old Soviet Communist Party -- with the press under control and KGB thugs on call to charm would-be critics with blackjacks -- had little need to worry about news of party plundering making the morning headlines.
Japan's long-ruling Liberal Democratic Party was far more subtle but not much less effective.
Now, however, Russia's neo-Communists and the LDP both have strong political opposition.
The reformist bloc in the Duma, Russia's Choice, called those who voted for the pay and perquisite package "irresponsible."
The Russian press was not amused.
In Japan, the boodlers still have Mr. Hosokawa, his governing coalition and public opinion to contend with.
Neither the Russian neo-Communists nor the Japanese old guard will be able to put the lid back on their doings anytime soon.
The combination of adversarial politics and economic difficulties means that politicians will be observed closely both by their own electorates and the international community.
What the consequences will be are not knowable, but the fact that both countries now have open, more democratic political systems certainly will have consequences.
The politicians in both places can expect to be held to higher standards than in the past.
For good reasons, the world is more concerned about the future of reform in Russia than in Japan.
Russia, for all its economic disorder, still is a dangerous nuclear power.
It is only now emerging, rather chaotically, from the darkness of totalitarianism, whereas Japan accomplished that nearly a half-century ago.
It is poor and hence relatively unstable, whereas Japan is rich and for all its problems, has essentially sound political and economic institutions.
The news that Russian voters themselves showed strong reactionary tendencies in the December parliamentary elections was unsettling to the world at large, as it should have been.
One is tempted to ask if Russian voters, after nearly a century of oppression and grief, are incapable of learning from experience.
Their deep suspicions of each other and the outside world seem to incline them toward the appeal of demagogues.
But it is by no means true that an end of Russia's reform has been signalled by the strength of the Zhirinovsky bloc in the Duma, the emergence of Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin as a new political force and the presence of apparatchiks in key posts in the Chernomyrdin cabinet.
Reformer Boris Fyodorov, whose resignation from government sent the ruble tumbling last week, said on the weekend that this reactionary swing only means that reform has been set back a year.
It will not be reversed.
Barring any unexpected political upheaval, he is most likely correct.
What Mr. Chernomyrdin doesn't seem to have figured out yet is that he is walking into a trap.
If he follows the path he has suggested -- and will describe in greater detail today -- he will create more misery for the Russian people.
There is simply no way he can have a sound economy while subsidizing the state's industrial dinosaurs and the state farms his new agriculture minister wants to preserve, while at the same time meeting the military's weapon demands.
Whereas Mr. Fyodorov and Yegor Gaidar by the end of last year had managed to sharply reduce the inflation rate, stop the decline in industrial output and raise real incomes, Mr. Chernomyrdin's program if followed will collapse all those gains.
With the willing aid of central bank chief Viktor Gerashchenko, Mr. Chernomyrdin has an excellent chance of sending Russia into hyperinflation before mid-year.
Mr. Chernomyrdin knows all the wrong moves of economic policy and none of the right ones.
As inflation begins to rage, he will apply price controls and Russians will be queuing to buy bread and shoes again.
At that point, the reform parties in the Russian parliament, led by Mr. Gaidar and the popular Mr. Fyodorov, will go on the attack, accusing Mr. Chernomyrdin of destroying the progress reform made in its early stages.
Russians will begin to see the benefits of open political debate, something they have glimpsed only briefly in the past.
Their own circumstances will be a clue to who is right and who is wrong.
By giving Mr. Chernomyrdin the helm at this crucial juncture, Boris Yeltsin either deliberately or unwittingly gave him the means for destroying himself and the other reactionary forces in Russia.
"The age of market romanticism is over," blustered the prime minister last week.
What Mr. Chernomyrdin doesn't understand is that there is nothing romantic about the market.
It is a cruel taskmaster, one that lurked in the shadows of even the old command economy.
It destroyed communism and can destroy him as well.
In the new open system, Mr. Yeltsin will have little choice but to fire him.
None of this is to suggest that the outer world's fears are unjustified.
Economic adversity also could give rise to a new burst of revanchism as the reactionaries desperately seek a rallying cry.
Russia's neighbors have some reason to tremble.
But the good news is that in two important countries, politics now has become much more of an open book.
In Russia, there now is public debate.
Japan's politicians can no longer subordinate the general interest to that of industrial and banking elites.
That picture of chortling Japanese lawmakers may soon become a collector's item.
