CLINTON'S BUDGET plays to generally favorable reviews, but some fights loom.
With no big tax rise to shoot at and the budget within spending caps, Republicans find little to attack.
Liberal Democrats probably will soften Clinton's cuts in housing and home-heating aid programs, but they eschew a major challenge.
Rep. Blackwell, who represents some of Philadelphia's black neighborhoods, tells Treasury chief Bentsen: "I'm not arguing with you."
But Clinton's plan to cut $267 million for light rail systems may be derailed by key lawmakers.
Some $62.5 million is for a project in New Jersey, home of Sen. Lautenberg, the chairman of an appropriations subcommittee.
Massachusetts Rep. Frank moves to line up Democratic support to eliminate a $2.5 billion increase in defensebudget authority over last year.
Some cuts, such as eliminating $50 million for sunflower- and cottonseed-oil exports, may pass because their congressional backers are gone.
BOSNIA ACTION soothes U.S. relations with the U.N. as funding requests near.
U.S. officials cheer Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's decision to pressure NATO members into threatening force against Bosnia's Serbs.
They expect him to help keep allies in line if the Serbs resist.
They say U.S. Ambassador Albright has been "pounding on" the U.N. leader for crossing the U.S. on issues from Somalia to Bosnia.
Within days, Clinton will sign his long-delayed peacekeeping doctrine, which limits but doesn't rule out placing U.S. troops under U.N. control.
That exception will raise congressional ire as the White House seeks more money to pay the U.S. share of growing U.N.-peacekeeping costs.
Also hard to swallow, an official concedes: The doctrine puts the Pentagon "in the peacekeeping business to stay."
LOBBYING HEATS UP as sweeping telecommunications bills move on a fast track.
A new coalition of long-distance phone companies hires a public-relations firm and a grass-roots lobbying outfit.
Their message: Competition would be stifled if the Baby Bells are allowed to offer long-distance service while still controlling local phone networks.
The Baby Bells push for a final bill that would let them start making telecommunications equipment immediately.
Overall, the major bills to revamp telecommunications regulation pick up support from diverse industry groups, including the Bells, long-distance carriers and cable-TV companies.
Backers now expect Congress to pass legislation this year.
"Congress has gotten the communications religion and is ready to act," says Montana Sen. Burns.
One possible hitch: a hotly disputed provision to let the Bells offer intrastate long-distance service, a boon to Pacific Telesis in California.
DECLINING HEALTH of House appropriations chairman Natcher at age 84 sets off a scramble for a successor.
Liberal Wisconsin Rep. Obey may challenge elders, including Iowa's Smith.
Obey would symbolize a new generation of leadership for a panel that controls much of Clinton's investment agenda.
But Pennsylvania's Murtha may be a rival.
MISSION IMPOSSIBLE?
The Democratic National Committee enlists pollster Stan Greenberg and political consultant James Carville to find a "united theme" that all Democrats can run on this year.
The first decision is to rule out last fall's theme, "personal security."
FAREWELL TO ARMS: Preparing to leave Somalia, the U.S. plans to turn over to the Somali police 5,000 rifles, 1.8 million rounds of ammunition, 5,000 .45-caliber pistols with 500,000 rounds of ammunition, and 5,000 sets of handcuffs and nightsticks.
TOP T-MAN: To highlight the Treasury's role in fighting crime, Bentsen plans to elevate assistant secretary Ronald Noble, the agency's chief law-enforcement official, to undersecretary.
That title usually is reserved for officials who oversee domestic and international finance.
SLOW SENATE confirmations leave many holes in the Clinton roster.
At last count, 231, or nearly one-third, of the 741 people nominated had yet to be confirmed.
Among those caught in the backlog has been new U.S. Treasurer Mary Ellen Withrow.
That means Bush Treasury Secretary Brady's signature still appears on dollar bills, much to the chagrin of current Treasury chief Bentsen.
With a year-end rush, Clinton brought his record of political nominees up to a par with predecessors.
But about 150 slots still lack appointees.
There still isn't an IRS chief counsel.
SEC Commissioner Mary Schapiro is under strong consideration for Commodity Futures Trading Commission chairman, a post that has gone unfilled for more than a year.
The White House personnel office privately complains to nominees that its own understaffing is causing delays.
MINOR MEMOS: Asked how he was preparing for testimony to Congress on the Clinton health plan, CBO director Reischauer said: "I'm standing in the kitchen and having my wife throw pots and pans at me." . . .
Touchtone warrior: White House aide George Stephanopoulos has his left pinkie in a splint after some overzealous phone-button punching. . . .
Among 81 "experts" signing a letter to Clinton backing a tough trade stance with Japan is Michael Crichton, author of "Rising Sun" and "Jurassic Park."
