The heads of small, black-owned banks charged that the Resolution Trust Corp. isn't carrying out a congressional mandate to help them buy failed savings banks in minority neighborhoods.
Last year, Congress directed the RTC, which is responsible for selling the assets of failed savings and loan institutions, to grant a preference to bids from minority-owned financial institutions for such properties.
The lawmakers reasoned that the minority bankers are more likely to keep bank branches open in those neighborhoods.
But minority bankers say that interim rules adopted by the RTC to carry out the law don't sufficiently enable them to compete with large, nonminority financial institutions for the properties.
Under the rules, "minority banks simply will not be able to outbid majority acquirers," said Emma Chappell, chief executive officer of United Bank of Philadelphia.
"Minority banks will lose every time."
The advisory panel's chairman plans to present the minority bankers' concerns to the oversight board next month and has requested a meeting with Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, a member of the corporation's main oversight board.
The bankers, who have asked the RTC to extend an earlier moratorium on accepting bids for the savings banks at issue, said their concerns became more urgent yesterday amid reports that the RTC accepted bids last week on one institution in a minority neighborhood and plans to open bidding on another this week.
Such action suggests "obvious disdain" for the minority bankers' position, a spokesman for the bankers said.
An RTC official said the agency is complying with the letter and the spirit of the current law.
The bankers said they need a preferential policy that would let them acquire a thrift located in a predominantly minority area if they can match the best offer after all the bids are in.
They also want the RTC to require that both minority and nonminority purchasers of failed thrifts in minority neighborhoods continue to operate there for at least four years.
The interim regulations offer more limited assistance.
Under those rules, if a minority bidder makes an offer within 10% of a nonminority bidder's best offer, the RTC will allow the two companies to again submit their "best and final bids" and then choose the higher one.
In addition, the RTC said it will lend minority bidders as much as two-thirds of the capital necessary for a purchase.
An RTC spokeswoman said officials won't comment on the bankers' complaints because the interim rules are subject to revision after a public comment period ends today.
But she said the agency must follow the basic directive of selling its assets and institutions in a way least costly to taxpayers.
In their testimony to the RTC advisory panel, the black bankers stressed a recent study showing that the RTC has favored big banks in the sale of core deposits from failed thrifts.
The study concluded that those sales were more costly to taxpayers than most sales to smaller institutions.
The study by the Southern Finance Project, a consumer-oriented research group based in Charlotte, N.C., shows that 10 big financial institutions bought more than half of the core deposits the RTC sold from 1989 through 1993.
The same survey showed that nearly 25% of core deposits sold during the same period went to BankAmerica Corp.
The black bankers called the RTC's record of sales to minority acquirers "despicable."
Minorities have bought only 16 of the 680 institutions sold by the agency so far, and individual branches of only two other institutions.
They said their institutions should be able to expand as a result of the thrift sales, just as larger institutions do.
"We have special treatment for farmers, for Israel, for Cubans and Haitians," said Louis Prezeau, president-elect of the National Bankers Association, the trade group for minority-owned banks, and president of City National Bank of New Jersey.
"But every time a minority gets preferential treatment, it's a big deal.
Why can't the RTC just comply with the law?"
Mr. Prezeau, Ms. Chappell and several other heads of black-owned banks presented their complaints to an advisory panel that is part of the RTC's oversight board.
