A study of residential segregation in the U.S. reports a "modest" but "pervasive" trend toward integration, with cities in the South and West having more racially mixed communities than some in the Northeast and Midwest.
The study by Reynolds Farley and William H. Frey of the University of Michigan's Population Studies Center used census data for 232 metropolitan areas.
The researchers found a decline in segregation in 194 areas.
At the same time, the number of "moderately segregated" localities rose to 68 in 1990 from 29 in 1980.
While the researchers predict the continued decline of residential segregation, they conclude: "Where there is a history of racial antagonism, a ring of white suburbs surrounding a black central city, and little new housing construction, segregation is likely to persist, despite more liberal white attitudes and government policies."
The study dealt only with black-white residential segregation in metropolitan areas with at least 20,000 blacks, or areas where blacks were at least 3% of the population.
The cities were ranked on a scale from 0 to 100, with 0 representing total integration, and 100 a city that was either all black or all white.
Several factors -- social, economic, geographic and historical -- contributed to the degree to which a city was segregated, the researchers say, with a decrease in the number of whites who support segregated housing playing a major role.
In Detroit in 1974, about 41% of whites said they would leave a neighborhood that was one-third black, the researchers say.
In 1992, only 29% said they would leave.
Among the least-segregated cities are some adjacent to military bases, where housing was assigned randomly, Mr. Farley says.
Size and healthy economies also make a difference.
Integration occurs more easily in small-to-midsize communities.
Places where the income of blacks approximated that of whites are less segregated, and the presence of Asians and Hispanics mitigates discrimination against blacks.
Segregation also seems low in university towns and state capitals, where, researchers say, a link can be drawn between more tolerant attitudes and more education.
Government employees living in state capitals are thought to be more familiar with and observant of fair housing laws.
Communities with a lot of housing built after passage of the Fair Housing Act of 1968 also tend to be more open than those with neighborhoods that might have at one time been subject to restrictive "whites only" deeds and "federally supported red-lining," the study said.
The researchers also found that, "unlike the Northeast and Midwest, where local towns and suburbs had a great deal of autonomy and used it to exclude blacks, power in the South was vested in county-wide governments, subject to state control."
As a result, they say, white-flight suburbs didn't sprout up in the South as they did in the North after courts ordered schools desegregated.
"Southern whites had no place to flee," they said.
