Japan's cabinet moved to clear away one of the most nettlesome trade disputes with the U.S., endorsing a broad-ranging plan to open the nation's public-works market to foreign construction companies.
The new government plan replaces Japan's unique closed bidding procedures on large-scale projects with a more U.S.-style "open bidding."
In Washington, U.S. officials said that they had begun a preliminary review of the construction plan and that it appeared to address most major U.S. concerns.
The Clinton administration had threatened to impose sanctions against Japan if it didn't make requested changes in bidding procedures by Thursday.
It is highly unlikely that the U.S. will impose sanctions now.
U.S. negotiators have been working with their Japanese counterparts since October to reach a mutually agreeable system.
In addition, the U.S. realizes that a sanctions battle would wreck efforts to persuade Japan to reach agreement in a broader set of trade negotiations, called the "framework" talks.
The new Japanese plan shows that, at least in some areas, Japan's political transformation can benefit U.S. industry.
Japan's construction industry was the major contributor to the Liberal Democratic Party, which had ruled Japan for 38 years until last summer, and which actively protected contractors.
The party's fall stemmed, in part, from a wave of construction-related money scandals.
A month ago, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa also took on another LDP-related special interest, Japan's farmers, and agreed to end the country's ban on rice imports.
The U.S. is also hoping that Mr. Hosokawa will ultimately side with its demands in the wide-ranging framework talks.
The two countries are aiming to reach an agreement by Feb. 11, when Mr. Hosokawa is scheduled to meet with Mr. Clinton in Washington.
But so far, U.S. officials say, major philosophical differences remain.
The construction dispute has been one of the most tense bilateral trade spats over the past decade, with U.S. officials claiming that the industry has been a microcosm of the closed, cozy nature of the Japanese system.
U.S. construction, engineering and design companies say it has been almost impossible to get business in Japan, where formal and informal policies discourage newcomers; bid-rigging has been rampant; and projects are often assigned years before a formal bid is announced.
The Japanese, in turn, have argued that U.S. companies haven't tried hard enough to gain business here.
Under a 1988 affirmative-action-type agreement, U.S. companies did win some business on some specially designated major projects. but they soon complained that progress was slow, leading to the Clinton administration's latest demands for more sweeping changes.
The new plan, which goes into effect April 1, will introduce an open-bidding program for public-works projects ordered by the central and local governments, as well as for 84 public corporations.
Until now, most Japanese public-works projects were awarded through "designated bidding," a murky system through which companies had to meet unclear specifications before they could even submit a bid.
Representatives of foreign construction companies in Japan were guardedly optimistic about the program.
"In principle, it sounds fine," said John Dickison, general manager at Schal Bovis in Japan.
"But it remains to be seen whether this is anything more than just an undertaking on paper."
The new plan will throw open to competition central-government projects that are worth more than a threshold of $6.4 million, at current exchange rates.
For projects commissioned by regional governments and public corporations, the new plan will apply to projects of more than $21.4 million.
U.S. officials had said earlier that they wanted the threshold to be low enough to allow a meaningful increase in foreign business.
It wasn't clear whether the cabinet's plan met U.S. expectations.
The U.S. officials had also been pressing Japan to make clear that the market would be more open to foreign construction materials, such as glass.
It isn't yet certain how that will be addressed.
