One of the most dramatic themes of our era is a world-wide confrontation with corruption.
Governments have fallen in the midst of money scandals in Italy, Japan and France.
BCCI represents the biggest bank robbery in history, victimizing Pakistani immigrants in London and equally innocent central banks.
In South America, governments are consumed in pitched wars with gangs of drug lords.
This global background should be kept in mind in appointing -- or assessing -- a special prosecutor to investigate the President of the United States.
For our own part, as we've said before, the Whitewater issue ought to be the subject of a Congressional investigation rather than a criminal inquiry.
A special prosecutor will have irreconcilable mandates; if he sticks too strictly to the law the public will remain unsatisfied and skeptical; but if he exposes everything of legitimate public concern he will look abusive by normal prosecutorial standards.
Only a public airing, the purview of Congress, can settle the ultimate issue, which is whether Bill Clinton has breached his claim to our trust.
By the same token, if some lonely Diogenes does undertake this search, there is no telling where it may lead.
Even if Bill and Hillary Clinton are eventually seen as somehow culpable in Whitewater, of course, it was penny-ante on the scale of global scams.
Still, Mr. Clinton does hold the most powerful and most complicated office on the globe.
He comes from a state, it becomes increasingly evident, not well attuned to contemporary standards of conflicts of interest.
And at the same time, the tentacles of global corruption seem to reach nearly everywhere.
We may yet get a dramatic lesson on this latter point from the remarkable settlement just reached in the BCCI case.
The sheik of Abu Dhabi has finally agreed to extradite the former BCCI chief executive, Swaleh Naqvi, and to give U.S. investigators access to BCCI records spirited out of London to the gulf emirate.
The settlement represents a singular achievement for New York District Attorney Robert Morgenthau and Harry Albright, the court-appointed trustee who took over Washington's First American Bank when it was severed from BCCI ownership.
They were once told by eminences of the establishment that further Abu Dhabi investment was the only recourse for First American.
And after the acquittal of Clark Clifford acolyte Robert Altman, that the whole BCCI matter should be dropped.
Yet the investigations are already rolling forward with the new records, which can be cross-checked against newly uncovered records in Luxembourg.
Mr. Altman's acquittal leaves us without an answer to the question of how a clan of crooks came to own the biggest bank in Washington.
The hot-button question in the search of the newly available records will be whether American regulators or politicians got payoffs.
It's a long way from the Persian Gulf to the Ozarks, of course, but then, on their way to buying First American the BCCI surrogates found their way to Little Rock, where Stephens Inc. handled their brokerage.
Worthen Bank, controlled by the Stephens family, also was the most important source of loans for the Clinton campaign, and also held a lien on James McDougal's interest in Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan.
Oh, by the way, the BCCI case is also related to the BNL case, a major embarrassment for the Republican Justice Department.
In that case, remember, the Atlanta branch of Italy's Banca Nazionale del Lavoro made loans, backed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, that funded Iraq's war machine.
BCCI lent a friendly hand with overnight deposits.
When the judge wanted to know why the branch manager was prosecuted without much study of whether anyone back in Rome knew, the Bush Justice Department chartered its own special investigator.
Judge Frederick Lacey concluded that BCCI was involved, but only through the local manager.
But this has not stilled suspicion, especially since it seems implausible that the bank headquarters wouldn't find out what was happening with more than $2 billion in loans.
So, where will Floridian Janet Reno now look for her fountain of trust?
The Attorney General must find someone prominent enough to command immediate respect, and Clark Clifford is no longer available.
She has to look for someone who has no Democratic Party conflicts of interest, but no Republican Party ones either.
She has to look for someone untainted by the least connection with any of the scandals around the globe, the full extent of which are still under investigation.
And the duty of this Diogenes will be either (1) to impugn the President, or (2) tell the people: take my word and stop asking questions.
Somehow it seems to us that an open Congressional probe, for all its predictable imbecilities, is a more viable alternative.
