Dell Computer Corp. reported better-than-expected fiscal fourth-quarter earnings, but sluggish sales fueled concerns that the personal-computer boom may be quieting.
Dell, an Austin, Texas, computer manufacturer and mail-order vendor, said net income for the quarter ended Jan. 30 was $17.7 million, or 39 cents a share, down 43% from $31.3 million, or 77 cents a share, a year earlier.
The earnings, however, were still about a nickel a share more than Wall Street expected, sending the price of Dell's stock up 8.5%, or $2.125, to $27 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
While analysts praised Dell for keeping its costs down and boosting its profit margins, they fretted that the company's fourth-quarter sales of $742.9 million -- up 20% from $620.3 million a year earlier -- were about $50 million below estimates and slightly lower than the company's third-quarter showing.
The quarter-to-quarter decline came at a time when the rest of the PC industry was reporting record Christmas sales thanks to a surge of home-computer buyers and glitzy new technologies such as multimedia machines and CD-ROM software.
Many analysts read the Dell numbers, along with a warning earlier this week from competitor AST Research Inc. that its fiscal third-quarter sales could be weak, as a sign that the red-hot PC industry may finally be settling down.
Walter J. Winnitzki, a computer analyst at Dillon Read & Co. in New York, said he expects world-wide PC shipments to increase 10% to 12% this year, down from 20% in 1993.
"It's clear that the market growth is moderating," he said.
"It's going to get a little tougher."
Although Dell officials backed the 10% projection for growth industrywide, they said they expect their own sales to pick up later this year.
Dell blamed its sales slowdown primarily on a 58% drop in government business from the third quarter.
Michael Dell, the company's chairman, downplayed prospects of a broader PC-sales slowdown.
"I don't think the end of the world is upon us," he said in a telephone briefing to reporters.
"We see the demand trends being reasonably healthy."
Mr. Dell said he expects his own company's sales to jump later this year thanks to a spate of new products, including a revamped line of computer servers and Dell's first batch of notebook PCs since exiting that business last spring.
Costs associated with phasing out outmoded notebooks, along with repairs to Dell's internal management-information systems, resulted in a fiscal-year loss for the company, its first ever.
Dell reported a net loss of $35.8 million, or $1.06 a share, compared with net income of $101.6 million, or $2.59 a share, a year earlier.
Sales for the year jumped 43% to $2.87 billion from $2.01 billion.
