It is about to get a lot more difficult for foreign businesses in China to repatriate their profits.
In early April, the Beijing government plans to replace its array of "swap markets" across the country with a national inter-bank currency exchange center based in Shanghai.
Chinese bankers and foreign analysts say the new foreign exchange system will enable financial markets to operate more efficiently and will lay the foundation for full convertibility of the Chinese yuan into dollars and other hard currencies.
Those are long-term goals, however.
In the short run, the reform is likely to cause headaches for many foreign companies based in China -- as well as for some Chinese companies engaged in foreign trade.
The People's Bank of China, the country's central bank, for example, is expected to tighten restrictions on which companies can convert yuan and in what quantity they can do so.
The bank also intends to scrutinize every transaction to determine if it adheres to the business charter negotiated by the company and the government, according to people familiar with the new exchange system.
"Beijing will directly manage the operation.
The transactions will have to be more closely matched to policy," says Mao Yingliang, president of the Shanghai Branch of the People's Bank.
Access to foreign currency "will become more standardized," he adds.
Creation of an inter-bank currency market is a key part of China's plan to overhaul its financial system.
The first step was elimination of the country's dual-exchange rate on Jan. 1, but analysts say a range of other long-debated changes, including the establishment of a Western-style central banking system and the expansion of capital markets, are likely to be phased in more slowly than originally envisioned.
Indeed, the launch of the new foreign exchange system has been delayed for three months by indecision over its accessibility and by glitches in setting up a six-city computer link.
The new exchange system will fulfill a requirement of the General Agreements on Tariffs and Trade, which governs most world trade, by setting up a framework for the yuan's eventual conversion.
Its immediate impact will be to consolidate control of foreign exchange in the hands of central planners.
The change comes during a campaign to reverse the country's soaring trade deficit and stem the flight of capital.
Under the new Western-style system, designated Chinese banks will handle all currency trading.
The People's Bank will limit the volume of transactions and will intervene on the market whenever necessary to keep the exchange rate of the yuan within a narrow range against foreign currencies, Mr. Mao says.
Access to the market takes on particular importance in light of the recent wave of investment by foreign companies hoping to cash in on sales to the Chinese.
Such companies want to be able to convert Chinese yuan so that they can repatriate their profits.
China theoretically requires all foreign-funded companies to "balance" foreign exchange, meaning they should not contribute to a net outflow of hard currency.
But many companies have found the existing swap market system relatively flexible in practice, allowing them to trade Chinese currency for foreign exchange well before they meet targets for earning hard currency through exports.
"Many of the foreign companies are concerned about how the new system will impact their business," says Lai Chi-Sun, chief representative of Motorola Inc.'s Motorola China Inc.
"We get the impression that the Chinese see this as an enforcement mechanism" for clamping down on the export of hard currency.
Motorola's Tianjin-based manufacturing operation depends heavily on imports of raw materials.
It sells finished goods primarily to the China market, making conversion of yuan-denominated profits a necessity.
To date, Mr. Lai says, the company has had "liberal access" to swap markets.
He says government officials have failed to provide concrete details on how quickly his company will be required to balance its currency earnings, a process that he said will take at least several years.
Manufacturing operations in China typically spend more hard currency than they earn in the initial stages of operations, because the operations often have to import machinery and raw materials.
