The Environmental Protection Agency proposed developing a plan for "reducing or prohibiting" the discharge of chlorine and chlorinated compounds into bodies of water.
The proposed study, which surprised and delighted environmentalists, was one of several administration recommendations on how to rewrite the Clean Water Act.
A Senate subcommittee is expected to consider clean-water legislation today.
The administration endorsed a number of other provisions in the bill, including ones to: increase federal funds for state efforts to improve water systems; reverse a 1987 Supreme Court decision limiting the scope of lawsuits brought by citizens against industries that have violated the clean water law; give states and cities more flexibility in complying with federal controls on the discharge of storm water and sewage; and establish a new program-crafted largely by the states -- to reduce runoff of pesticides and other pollutants from farms.
Chlorine, which is widely used in the manufacture of pulp and paper, is an issue of growing concern to environmentalists.
Its byproducts include dioxin and other "organochlorines," which may cause health effects ranging from cancer to birth defects.
An EPA official said the proposed study would differ from a current agency review of the health effects of dioxin because it would take into account how chlorine and chlorinated compounds are used by industry, and the degree to which the public is exposed to the chemicals.
"This is the first time we've been able to give unqualified praise to the administration since they took office," said Rick Hind, legislative director of the Greenpeace toxics campaign.
Environmentalists were critical in the fall when the administration dropped a proposal to reduce federal use of chlorine-bleached paper.
Under the administration proposal, a task force to examine the health effects of chlorine and chlorinated compounds would be convened within six months after a revised clean-water bill is passed.
The study also would examine the impact of the chemicals on wildlife, the EPA said.
After reviewing the task force's study, the EPA added, the EPA administrator should consider any number of "appropriate actions," including restricting or prohibiting use of chlorine and chlorinated compounds.
Under the proposal, the EPA administrator would be required to make this decision within 30 months of the clean-water bill's passage.
Although chlorine is widely used to treat drinking water, environmentalists have focused their concerns about health effects on waste-water discharges of the chemical by manufacturers, which end up in the food chain through fish and other animals.
A Senate subcommittee will vote today on a clean-water bill sponsored by Sen. Bob Graham (D., Fla.).
The Graham bill doesn't include the chlorine provision.
At a news conference yesterday, however, EPA administrator Carol Browner, Sen. Graham and other key lawmakers all said they were in agreement about most parts of the bill.
Indeed, Sen. Graham's bill was developed in consultation with the EPA, and most of yesterday's recommendations duplicate provisions in the bill.
"There is not any philosophical difference here," said Ms. Browner.
Under both the EPA recommendations and Mr. Graham's bill the cost of the clean-water law to industry and government would increase to $70 billion a year, according to the EPA.
This is $10 billion more than the estimated current cost, but the EPA figures that if the law isn't changed the cost will rise to $100 billion a year in the near future.
The EPA plan and Sen. Graham's bill also would extend a state revolving loan fund through September 2004 at as much as $2 billion a year.
The fund, which is due to expire this year, is used by state and local governments to build waste-water treatment plants.
A separate provision in both Sen. Graham's bill and the EPA plan would overturn a 1987 Supreme Court ruling that the law allowed communities to sue business only for existing violations of the Clean Water Act and not for past ones.
In addition, funding for grants to farmers aimed at reducing runoff of chemicals would increase to $300 million from $130 million a year.
The bill would also require states to develop methods for prosecuting farmers who don't comply with the clean-water law.
