After 13 hours of futile negotiations, U.S. officials held out the tiniest glimmer of hope that they still might reach a trade deal with Japan today.
But late last night, none of them knew exactly how.
Instead, on the eve of a summit meeting today between Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and President Clinton, the two sides were locked in a game of high-stakes brinksmanship.
Japanese Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata, who arrived for negotiations a day early, spent all day yesterday shuttling between U.S. cabinet officials -- and getting rebuffed at every turn.
Officials ranging from U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor to Vice President Al Gore to Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen told Mr. Hata that Japan had to agree to import goals and ways to measure progress toward those goals.
Mr. Hata, just as resolutely, told the U.S. officials that Japan wouldn't make any such concessions.
At 9 p.m., Mr. Kantor told the Japanese that the talks again were suspended.
But Mr. Kantor was banking on hopes that Mr. Hata would meet with his boss, Mr. Hosokawa, who arrived in Washington around dinner time.
The U.S. hoped that Mr. Hata's bleak report would put pressure on Mr. Hosokawa to make concessions.
In that case, they expected Mr. Hata to try one more round of talks.
President Clinton and Prime Minister Hosokawa are supposed to wrap up the so-called framework trade talks today.
The two leaders are to confer for about 2 1/2 hours and complete a pact covering autos, auto parts, insurance, medical equipment and telecommunications.
But the two sides remain deadlocked over U.S. insistence that Japan agree to numerical targets.
The only cause for optimism that U.S. officials could cite is history.
Since the end of World War II, the two sides have never reached a deadline for a trade pact and walked away without one.
Indeed, some U.S. officials believe the Japanese are hanging tough because they believe that the U.S., in the end, will accept a cosmetic agreement rather than face a rupture in relations.
That's one reason that U.S. officials adopted a common strategy of banging on Mr. Hata.
If the Japanese accept that the U.S. is finally serious, they believe, they may make last-minute concessions.
The day started more pleasantly.
After an 8 a.m. meeting with Mr. Hata, Trade Representative Kantor called off a Wednesday suspension of talks.
Mr. Hata indicated some flexibility on the question of numerical goals, U.S. officials said.
At the same time, the U.S. side searched for substitutes for the term "quantitative" indicators, which is contained in an earlier framework document, but which Japan takes as fighting words.
The Japanese complain that the U.S. will later interpret such indicators as firm commitments and try to impose trade sanctions if Japan doesn't meet the numbers.
For their part, Japanese negotiators were cheered by rumors that the U.S. would soon introduce a new plan.
But by midday, both sides were glum.
Japan balked at any plan that used numbers.
The U.S. didn't come through with another plan.
The rest of the day was spent in tedious, ritualistic negotiations.
"It isn't clear whether we'll have any agreement at all," said a senior U.S. negotiator, in a sentiment that was reflected by his Japanese counterparts.
In some ways, the two sides seemed to be preparing for a breakdown today by trying to contain the damage.
Each emphasized the "friendship" between the two countries and expressed hope that the trade dispute wouldn't poison relations.
But negotiators weren't giving up, and left open the possibility that some sort of breakthrough could still be achieved.
In an effort to strengthen Mr. Clinton's negotiating position in his meeting with Mr. Hosokawa, the Senate Banking Committee yesterday approved a bill designed to open foreign markets to American financial companies.
The Fair Trade in Financial Services Act, which Congress is expected to pass quickly, would give the U.S. new powers to retaliate against banks, insurance companies and brokerage firms from countries that close their markets to U.S. firms.
The bill would allow the U.S. to block the expansion of foreign banks and financialservice companies in the U.S. if the Treasury finds that those firms operate from countries that restrict American access to their markets.
