The Arctic cold front sweeping across much of the country put a freeze on business and consumers, closing offices, crippling mass-transit systems and causing widespread electrical blackouts and brownouts.
The huge high-pressure system hovering over much of the nation, which has brought record subzero temperatures, has held the Midwest in its grip for several days, prompting even rugged Minnesotans to close down most state offices and many businesses.
Residents in other regions, less prepared for the frigid conditions, faced power cutbacks, natural gas curtailments and many school, public office and business closings.
In Atlanta, the cold cracked aging water mains, and nearly a million residents were asked not to wash clothes or take showers or baths until the line was fixed.
Pennsylvania and Washington, D.C., declared a state of emergency, while Kentucky extended a state of emergency into a third day.
Transportation problems affected many businesses, particularly in Kentucky, where ice and snow shut down the entire interstate highway system.
Hundreds of rigs jammed the parking lot of a mall in Florence, Ky., awaiting the highways' re-openings, while others camped in restaurants, service stations and emergency National Guard Centers.
"People are getting pretty testy," said Major John Witt of the state police.
Meanwhile, United Parcel Service of America Inc.'s Louisville, Ky., hub, which sorts more than 60% of UPS deliveries, was shut down early in the week, holding up more than 400,000 packages.
With many of its Louisville employees stranded, UPS rerouted thousands of packages on trains and trucks, and rented a fleet of Lear jets to handle overnight deliveries.
The weather-related problems are expected to cost the shipping giant more than $100 million in additional expenses and lost business before the system is running "full blast" today, said Kent C. "Oz" Nelson, the company's chief executive officer.
Not every business was upset about the cold.
"We absolutely love this weather," said a spokesman for Johnson Controls Inc. of Milwaukee, one of the largest makers of automotive batteries, including the DieHard line.
"When the temperature drops, our battery sales go up."
James Keyes, Johnson Controls' chief executive officer, has instructed the receptionist at corporate headquarters to "remind employees who come in complaining about the cold what business we're in," the spokesman said.
Similarly, Quaker Oats Co. said its hot oatmeal was enjoying huge sales this week.
But such upbeat reaction was rare.
For some insurance companies, claims from collapsed roofs and fallen gutters could exceed the losses from Monday's earthquake in Los Angeles.
Deductibles for such claims are only a few hundred dollars rather than several thousand dollars for earthquake coverage.
"If pipes burst, that's covered," said Sean Mooney, economist for the Insurance Information Institute.
Utilities were hard pressed to cope with the weather problems.
Gas and electricity use surged to records, forcing utilities to resort to unusual methods of maintaining balance on their systems.
Officials with PJM Interconnection Association, a power-sharing system for many mid-Atlantic electric utilities, said the situation was the worst in more than 20 years.
Power companies in many Eastern states reduced voltage to customers, imposed controlled outages and urged customers to turn their thermostats down to reduce the drain on energy supplies.
Gas utilities took interruptible business customers off their systems to ensure residential users could remain warm.
And as roads, sidewalks, steps and overpasses iced up, supply problems made rock salt more and more scarce.
Akzo Salt Inc., a unit of Akzo NV of the Netherlands, said it has enough salt, but it was having trouble getting portions of its two million tons of salt on the ground to municipalities in the Northeast.
"It's been difficult, but we're not ready to call uncle yet," said Catherine Bolton, a spokeswoman for Akzo.
Pathmark Stores Inc. has frequently been out of stock of several cold-fighting items: rock salt, windshield-wiper fluid and fluids to keep auto gas lines from freezing up.
Many of the company's stores have also seen a run on cat litter -- used to help give cars traction -- cold medicines, and prescriptions for antibiotics.
Conrail Inc. said the severe cold is causing widespread breakdowns and delays throughout its 14-state rail system in the Northeast and Midwest.
Among the problems: cracked rails, signal failures, locomotive breakdowns and an inability of crews to drive to work.
The railroad is running shorter trains because air brakes don't work properly in the extreme cold; the railroad also was experiencing some shortages of crews.
"You would have to go back to the winter of 1977-1978" to equal the effects of the current weather, said a Conrail spokesman.
"It is affecting us everywhere we go," he added.
"We're getting the freight through but it is taking longer."
Many freight and rail shipments were delayed 12 to 36 hours.
Manufacturers that have adopted "just-in-time production schedules" are being hurt as a result, said J. Scott Hamilton, senior associate of Arthur D. Little Inc., a consulting firm in Cambridge, Mass.
"Some manufacturers have shut down for a shift or two when shipments of critical parts were delayed."
However, Mr. Hamilton says the slowdowns will be "imperceptible to most consumers."
Ford Motor Co. was among the hardest hit among manufacturers, closing two plants in Louisville, Ky., and 11 other plants in four states and Ontario.
Other major auto makers also shut plants.
In Washington, many federal government offices closed, and even the Energy Department lost energy.
A steam plant that supplies heat to several federal offices broke down, and by late yesterday morning, shivering employees at the Energy, Agriculture and Commerce departments were headed home.
But by yesterday, there were signs that nearly a week of punishing cold was relenting in the Upper Midwest.
In Chicago, winds declined and temperatures inched above zero -- after hitting a low of 21 below zero -- and a high for the day on Tuesday of 11 below.
A spokeswoman for the city of Chicago noted that on Tuesday more than 500 O'Hare flights were canceled, including more than 400 by UAL Corp.'s United Airlines alone.
Because of the relatively low number of seats that had been sold, she noted, carriers frequently chose to consolidate a number of flights to certain destinations.
But "we're back on track now," she added late yesterday.
