Foreign investors in Mexico are showing a preference for longer-term investments here, a trend that could provide an important boost to the stock market this year.
Last year, it seemed as if investors in Mexico could do no wrong.
The Mexican Bolsa's IPC index soared 49.9% in local-currency terms last year, with several stocks up 100% or more.
Even investors in short-term treasury bills did well in 1993, taking advantage of the country's very high interest rates.
For 1994, strategists are expecting at least a 20% rise in Mexico's IPC index.
Yesterday, the index rose 10.53 points to a new high of 2693.71; year-to-date, the IPC is up 3.5%.
Changes in Mexican fiscal and monetary policy, and in the type of investor approaching Mexico today, are likely to make stocks and long-term Mexican bonds the favored investments of the year, providing strong support for both markets, while demand for short-term government securities fades.
The new appetite for long-term Mexican assets is fueled by several factors.
The approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement is expected to provide a base of economic growth for Mexico during the next several years.
Also, yields on Mexican treasury bills, known as "cetes," continue to fall to their lowest levels ever, pushing many short-term-yield players out of the Mexican market.
J.P. Morgan, for example, expects an average return on 28-day cetes of 9.5% in dollar terms this year, down from 13.5% last year.
But this same decline in interest rates should boost corporate profits for many Mexican companies, and help stimulate consumption and growth here.
"The cetes game is over," says Carrie Schloss, co-manager of the Kemper International Fund.
Investors are "rolling out of the cetes market into the stock market."
Adds Joyce Chang, director at Salomon Brothers: "People are not looking at Mexico now as a 28-day cetes play.
You have a different investor base going into the market," a base that has "a longer-term perspective."
Take Fidelity Management & Research Co., the giant Boston money manager, as an example.
Lincoln Anderson, the firm's director of economic analysis, says Fidelity has been shifting to purchases of stocks and longer-term Mexican bonds.
"We were a big cetes holder," Mr. Anderson says.
But now "we are moving into equities and into longer-term debt markets."
He adds: "We have really beefed up our analyst coverage of Mexico."
Among the signs that the appetite for Mexican stocks are rising: In December alone, Mexican companies raised $1.83 billion in new capital through offerings of American depositary receipts, according to the magazine LatinFinance, more than they sold in the previous 11 months.
Foreign ownership of Mexican stocks at year end rose to $56.8 billion, about 28% of the market's value, from $28.5 billion, or 21% of the market's value at the start of 1993.
More offerings are on the way.
Investment bankers here say the following Mexican companies are considering U.S. listings: furniture retailer Salinas Y Rocha; Grupo Financiero Bancomer, holding company for Mexico's second-largest bank; El Palacio de Hierro, a specialty retailer; Comercial Mexicana, a supermarket chain; Empresas La Moderna, a tobacco company; and Iusacell, the cellular-phone company.
Business and the government take great pains to monitor foreign-investment flows into Mexico.
Foreign inflows are critical because the economy is deeply dependent on them.
Mexico doesn't have enough domestic savings or export earnings to finance what it spends on foreign goods.
Consequently, the country has to borrow foreign savings by attracting investors to markets or investments here.
With the North American Free Trade Agreement in place, the demand for foreign goods -- from computers to factory equipment -- is likely to increase.
J.P. Morgan economist James Nash, for example, predicts that Mexico's current account deficit -- which includes trade -- will rise $1.5 billion this year to $22.9 billion, or 6% of gross domestic product.
To cover that increase, J.P. Morgan predicts Mexico will attract an additional $1.4 billion into its "capital account" this year, the category that measures, among other things, the inflow of foreign savings.
Mexico's capital account is expected to reach $23.5 billion this year.
Certainly, cetes will continue to pull in some foreign investment.
But Mr. Nash believes investors will begin to favor longer-term investments.
"Since 1992, Mexico's reliance on short-term inflows has increased substantially," he says.
But now "the composition of capital flow will be hopefully more biased toward long-term assets."
Mexican investors, too, are showing a preference for longer-term assets, says Arturo Acevedo Aceves, director of research at Mexican brokerage firm Vector.
"There is a domestic market for 20-year paper now," he says.
There are two clear risks to investing in Mexican stocks this year, however.
First, Mexican inflation could accelerate.
In response to the uprising in Chiapas, the Mexican government will spend 53.9% of the federal budget on social programs, more than any past administration.
Secondly, not all Mexican companies will fare well under Nafta.
Ms. Schloss, the co-manager of the Kemper International Fund, which posted a total return of 35.4% last year, says several Mexican companies offer earnings growth potential in 1994.
She likes Grupo Carso, the conglomerate with interests in Telefonos de Mexico, and in retailing through its Sanborn Brothers unit.
Cigarettes, mining, auto-parts and construction stocks are high on her list.
Among other holdings, she has stakes in the food concern Grupo Herdez, the construction company Cemex, tile maker Interceramic and contractor Bufete Industrial.
Among financial stocks, Ms. Schloss owns shares in Mexico's largest bank-holding company, Banacci.
She also owns Grupo Financiero Inbursa, the brokerage and newly formed banking unit controlled by Mexican billionaire Carlos Slim.
"I think they have a niche, and I think they will have very fast growth," she says.
She also owns Grupo Financiero Serfin, the third-largest Mexican banking company, as a "turnaround story."
Ms. Schloss sold bottlers such as Grupo Gemex, Panamco and Coca-Cola Femsa "because they were too expensive."
But she still has a stake in Coca-Cola Femsa's parent, known simply as Femsa, which also has a large brewing business.
"I think you will see fairly strong economic growth in 1994 and that will translate into fairly strong earnings growth," she says.
"I would expect a total return of at least 25% in 1994" in Mexican stocks.
