New Jersey's new governor has proposed a financial plan that "continues a pattern" of one-time measures that led to a lowering of the state's bond rating in 1991, Standard & Poor's Corp. said.
The ratings agency currently rates New Jersey general obligation bonds double-A-plus, but has a negative outlook on the rating of $3.5 billion in general obligation debt.
Earlier this month, Gov. Christine Todd Whitman signed into law the state's first income-tax cut in history.
The provision to cut income taxes 5% across the board retroactive to Jan. 1 represents a first step for the governor in making good on her campaign promise to reduce income taxes 30% by the end of her first term.
Last week, Mrs. Whitman called for a second cut in the state's personal income tax, to take effect next Jan. 1.
The second round of cuts would mean that starting next year, personal income taxes for families earning less than $80,000 and individuals earning less than $40,000 would be reduced by 15%.
Families earning $80,000 to $150,000 and individuals earnings $40,000 to $75,000 would see tax reductions of 7.5%, and those in the highest tax bracket would see 6% cuts.
Mrs. Whitman also last week signed a law exempting from state income tax families with incomes of less than $7,500, and individuals earning less than $3,750.
S&P noted that Gov. Whitman proposes to balance reductions in income and corporation taxes "largely by numerous one-shot resources."
To close a $2 billion budget gap, her proposed budget transfers $827 million of one-time resources plus $400 million of a projected surplus.
"The governor heavily relies on tapping surpluses generated in fiscals 1993 and 1994, and recalculating the funding requirements for pensions, as well as post-retirement health-care benefits," S&P commented.
"Although professional actuaries may find both the state's current process, as well as the proposed revisions, acceptable, there is some degree of risk for the longer term beyond 2000 that funding levels may have to be increased as the pool of beneficiaries grows.
Also, to the extent that funding is reduced, the pension and health-care liabilities on the state's balance sheet may grow."
S&P Managing Director Hyman C. Grossman added that "of course, as the state keeps digging into one-shot revenue sources, the fiscal hole just gets deeper."
