Salesman Don Heche was a devoted husband, a strict but loving father of four, and a pillar of his Baptist church in Cleveland and, later, in New Jersey.
He also lived a hidden life of homosexual promiscuity, and he died of AIDS at age 45 in 1983 (when the newly identified disease was still mysterious but already associated with homosexual men and intravenous drug-users).
Heche's doctors called it cancer and pneumonia, but his family recognized his symptoms in news reports about AIDS.
Now Heche's eldest child, Susan Bergman -- who is in her mid-30s with four children of her own -- has written a memoir of her often bizarre life with father.
Avoiding the opportunities for self-pity as well as for warmhearted tolerance and forgiveness, "Anonymity: The Secret Life of an American Family" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 198 pages, $20) is an unusual tale -- candid, psychologically revealing and bristling with intelligent anger.
Ms. Bergman is an award-winning poet and essayist.
In this, her first book, she draws on interviews with family and friends and on her own recollections and journal notes.
With a mix of sympathy and disdain, she shows how Don Heche wrecked his family by dementedly pretending that everything was fine.
A breezy charmer with "a talent for the way things sounded and the way things looked," Heche seems to have been genuinely caught between two loyalties -- to his American dream of upper-middle-class security and to his subversive hidden life.
Rather than lose one or the other, he bridged the gap by deceiving his at once refined and naive wife.
When she finally asked him, before he died, if he had ever had homosexual encounters, he denied it.
"I can sympathize with his lying," Ms. Bergman writes.
"It's hard to tell the truth in front of people whose lives we think depend on illusions."
Similarly, Heche spent years trying to ignore his steady loss of income (due to business failures and illness), finally leaving his wife and children nearly impoverished and stunned by their own complicity in his illusion-making.
"He'd pretended and we'd all played along," she remembers.
The children drifted badly after his death.
The 18-year-old son hit a tree in his car and was killed.
The 17-year-old daughter, Abigail, fell into depression and drugs.
When a friend of Heche's afterward claimed, "It's none of your damn business what your father did in the bedroom," the author replied, understatedly, "His behavior had an effect on all our lives, don't you think?"
"Anonymity" treats its somber material in a calm, meandering way.
Chapters in mixed-up order open into different themes -- Dad's love of music and theater, teenage Susan's attraction to older men.
The book very occasionally uses terms such as "queer" and betrays a distaste for the excesses of certain gay male lifestyles.
Although this may strike some critics as backward, Ms. Bergman's viewpoint seems, given the circumstances, understandable and honestly expressed.
Climbing up from lower-middle-class origins and an abusive father, young Heche became a 1950s Indiana high-school athlete and a self-taught pianist and church organist.
He married well, winning the daughter of a prominent local family.
After inexplicably dropping out of medical school, he held a series of sales jobs before pursuing a career in interior design.
Odd aspects of these years included Heche's expensive gifts from men and a mysterious case of hepatitis.
Business often took him alone to Manhattan, where he would cruise for sex.
On Sundays, back home, he served as music director of the family's church.
Appearances counted for much in the puritanical Heche household.
"In order for God to see your inner life you had to keep polishing the surface," Ms. Bergman recalls.
Heche habitually assured his children of their moral superiority and financial safety.
As his world collapsed, his hype turned to pure fantasy.
"He was searching for a $10 billion loan for Mexico, collaterized by oil, for which he had been guaranteed one percent, or $100 million, as his finder's fee," Ms. Bergman recalls, in one eerie passage.
"He had a buyer on the hook for the Empire State Building . . .
At a folding card table in the downstairs family room, he had set up a telephone and a makeshift file system . . .
He must sort through his small slips of paper for the phone number, where is it?"
Ms. Bergman's book has flaws, including patches of overwriting and lapses in journalistic inquiry.
We never learn if Heche had a life-insurance policy or how his wife faced the possibility of her own infection (surely the most frightening aspect of the whole story).
In general, Mrs. Heche remains a puzzling figure whose myopia toward her husband is not clearly explained.
Still, "Anonymity" offers a haunting portrait of a divided man who recklessly brought disaster onto his family and himself.
"What unimagined appeal must his life away from us have offered?"
Ms. Bergman wonders.
"How alone he must have been."
Mr. Sacks is a free-lance critic.
