Consumers dropped fewer private-label products into their grocery carts during the fourth quarter, perhaps signaling the end of the steady gains that have rattled marketers of national brands.
Unit sales of private-label goods in supermarkets dropped 0.3% during the 13 weeks ended Jan. 2, according to Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.
Dollar sales of store brands increased 1.1% to $7.68 billion during the quarter, because of increasing prices of some brands.
The slight decline in unit sales indicates that the defensive maneuvers of some big marketers have paid off, according to analysts.
Such companies as Philip Morris Cos. and Procter & Gamble Co. have chopped prices of some of their flagship brands.
Many other marketers, from Johnson & Johnson to H.J. Heinz Co., responded to the threat of private-label products by spending more on promotions and advertising, or by spinning out new products meant to give them a clear quality advantage.
"Big brands are battling back," says John McMillin, a food analyst with Prudential Securities.
"But the war is far from over."
In fact, private-label goods actually eked out small increases in market share during the quarter, largely because total grocery sales were even more sluggish.
Total dollar sales in supermarkets inched up only 0.5% during the fourth quarter, while total unit sales declined 0.4%.
Private-label goods accounted for 14.9% of total dollar sales and 19.5% of all items sold in grocery stores.
Sales of private-label goods continued to rise in categories that were once considered bastions of brand loyalty.
For example, quarterly sales of private-label cold remedies grew 26.6%, while sales of store-brand analgesics grew 19%.
In addition, sales of private-label sanitary-protection products increased 31.4%.
Conventional wisdom has held that consumers prefer familiar brands of those products because of their personal nature.
"Private-label goods are undergoing a subtle change in the marketplace," says Brian Sharoff, president of the Private Label Manufacturers Association.
"They're shifting from commodity items to more upscale products."
Mr. Sharoff adds that sales of store-brand goods are growing more quickly in other retail outlets, including mass merchandisers and warehouse clubs.
But even Mr. Sharoff concedes that the momentum of store brands has slowed sharply from the boom years between 1988 and 1992, largely because of price-cutting by marketers of big brands.
Supermarket unit sales of all private-label products increased 0.8% in 1993 from the year before, according to Information Resources, compared with growth of 4% in 1991 and 3% in 1992.
"Grocery manufacturers today fully understand that the name of the game is value," says C. Manly Molpus, president of the Grocery Manufacturers of America, an industry trade group.
The organization is poised to kick off a year-long public-relations campaign that will attempt, among other things, to convince retailers that national brands can be more profitable than store-brand goods.
"We're very competitively positioned."
Indeed, the efforts of some big marketers to combat their budget rivals are clearly working.
In May, Philip Morris cut prices of its premium cigarettes by 20%, and other manufacturers quickly followed.
While cigarettes ranked second on Information Resources' roster of fast-growing private-label categories during the third quarter of 1993, growth slowed significantly during the fourth quarter.
"As the price of premium cigarettes has become more competitive," says a spokeswoman for Philip Morris, "more consumers are opting for brand-name cigarettes."
Based on supermarket sales during the 13 weeks ended Jan. 2 of product categories with annual private-label sales of more than $20 million
Source: Information Resources Inc.
