A ZULU MARCH TURNED violent, killing at least 31 people in Johannesburg.
Many deaths occurred when guards at African National Congress headquarters fired on protesters, many armed with spears, advancing on the building.
More than 200 people were injured.
Zulu nationalists called the march as a show of strength in South Africa's largest city as the government weighs measures to ensure security for voters in the Zulu homeland.
Zulu leaders are boycotting next month's all-race elections and demand autonomy for KwaZulu.
Leaders of South Africa's main parties were trying to arrange a meeting between de Klerk, Mandela and Inkatha leader Buthelezi to defuse the situation.
Berlusconi appeared set to become leader of a new Italian government after a landmark vote.
Projections showed the tycoon's right-wing alliance, which includes a neo-fascist group, running well ahead of a left-wing coalition.
A poll said Berlusconi's group could take as many as 380 of 630 lower-house seats.
Mexican authorities detained a second suspect in last week's killing of the ruling party's presidential candidate and said they were investigating possible links between the confessed assassin and radical groups based in southern Los Angeles.
With uncertainty high, the Mexican stock market declined almost 3%.
Israel's army will be ready to pull out of the Gaza Strip by April 14, Israeli TV said, and Foreign Minister Peres said an autonomy accord with the PLO could be completed by then.
Despite signs of progress in restarting peace talks, a new obstacle was thrown up when undercover Israeli troops killed six members of Arafat's PLO faction in Gaza.
Bosnian Muslim and Croat leaders met in Sarajevo, and both sides expressed confidence the joint assembly would draft a constitution and form an interim government for a planned federation.
Meanwhile, U.N. officials said Serb artillery remained within an exclusion zone around the city despite promises it would be withdrawn.
A Clinton broker was disciplined by regulators both before and after Hillary Rodham Clinton earned $98,000 trading cattle futures in the late 1970s.
The broker was accused, among other things, of allocating trades to investors after he had determined whether the trades had made or lost money, regulators say.
France's Balladur retreated in the face of widespread protests and dropped a bill that would have allowed employers to hire youths at reduced wages if they provided job training.
The conservative premier also has yielded to demands by labor groups recently, blunting his efforts to attack a 12.2% unemployment rate.
Voters in Ukraine handed a setback to Kravchuk with a heavy turnout in elections Sunday.
Though runoffs will be needed in most parliamentary contests, the showing makes it hard for the president to cancel results or boost his powers.
Meanwhile, Donbas and Crimea voters backed stronger Russia ties.
The Supreme Court let stand Montana's 1979 abolition of the insanity defense for criminal defendants.
Although the justices' action isn't a ruling and so does not preclude the possibility that they may consider the issue someday, other states are now free to follow Montana's lead.
So far, only two other states, Idaho and Utah, have done so.
Somali gunmen clashed with U.N. peacekeepers guarding Mogadishu's port as fighting mounted after the withdrawal of U.S. troops last week.
In Kismayu, two Indian peacekeepers were killed in a battle with gunmen.
At talks in Kenya, two clan leaders agreed to end factional fighting in Kismayu and hold a peace conference next week.
The U.S. apologized to Japan for the killing of two Japanese students who were shot during a robbery in Los Angeles Friday and taken off life-support systems Sunday.
The killings reinforced Japan's image of the U.S. as a violent land.
Ambassador Mondale issued the apology on Clinton's behalf.
The death toll in Southeast storms rose to at least 43, with 21 deaths resulting from the collapse of an Alabama church in a tornado.
Clinton conferred with emergency officials.
Died: Eugene Ionesco, 81, Romanian-born writer of absurdist plays, in Paris.
