Consumers are borrowing heavily again.
But is that an ominous sign that another 1980s-style binge -- and bust -- is on the way?
Or does it signal that the consumer is finally confident in the future again and therefore willing to take on debt?
Most economists believe the latter is closer to the truth, and see that as good reason to remain optimistic about the economy over the next few months.
Debt, after all, means people are spending, and thus contributing to economic activity.
Consider James Holcomb, a Bloomfield Hills, Mich., salesman of building materials.
He's about to buy a new car and just used his credit card to line up a Caribbean cruise.
Mr. Holcomb isn't worried about the extra debt.
"I know my business will be good," he says.
"People are buying and retail outlets are placing new orders."
Analysts expect next week's Federal Reserve Board report on February installment debt will show another large increase in debt accumulation by consumers.
And they say the recent rise in interest rates will have only a moderating effect on consumers' thirst for new autos and furniture.
"People are not as apprehensive about the future," says Richard Curtin, director of consumer surveys for the University of Michigan.
Consumer confidence measured by the Conference Board is at its highest level in several years, which usually bodes well for further borrowing and more economic expansion.
Yesterday the Board said confidence for March jumped seven percentage points to 86.7% on an index of 100 -- the highest level since July 1990.
But Federal Reserve Board Governor Laurence Lindsey is worried.
Taking note of consumers' low savings rate and increasing debt levels, he said in a recent speech that "the financial condition of much of the household sector poses one of the most significant downside risks to the current economic environment."
The nation's savings rate has fallen to about 4% of disposable income at latest count from 5.2% in late 1992.
He also warned that the savings Americans do hold are less available for emergencies because an increasing share of savings are tied up in tax-sheltered retirement assets.
Mark Zandi, an economist with Regional Financial Associates in West Chester, Pa., thinks the true savings rate is not as low as it looks because many people took equity out of their homes when they refinanced mortgages.
The savings rate is defined by disposable income minus spending.
When those people who refinanced their mortgages and took equity out of their homes got the windfall, they spent some of it.
Overall spending thus went up, but it didn't come out of income.
He thinks the true savings rate basically stayed flat at around 5%.
Also, the extra debt that consumers are taking on doesn't seem to be crimping their available cash.
Even though total consumer debt as a percentage of disposable income is back to the levels of the late 1980s, low interest rates have made that debt much more affordable.
The amount of disposable income individuals allocate to debt service each month fell last year to an average 15.9% in the fourth quarter, from 16.3% a year earlier and 18.3% in late 1989.
As a result, delinquencies on bank loans are at their lowest level in 10 years.
Delinquencies on credit card loans are at their lowest level in 15 years and delinquencies on mortgages haven't been this low in 20 years.
Moreover, personal bankruptcies are down 20% from the record one million in 1991.
And auto repossessions as a percent of total loans outstanding have never been lower says Ford Motor Credit Co.
The drop in loan delinquencies leads to a "greater willingness by banks to extend more credit," says James Chessen, chief economist of the American Bankers Association.
Indeed, installment debt rose to $796.1 billion in January, from $743.6 billion a year earlier.
That's helpful for the economy in the shortrun; it may hurt the economy in the longer term if consumers again find themselves in over their heads and cut back sharply on spending.
Kmart Corp., for one, doesn't see that happening anytime soon.
In most regions where the retailer's 2,300 stores are located, says manager of special projects Robert Hayes, "you see an improvement in employment and higher incomes," making debt a little safer.
The new home Daniel McGill is having built in Raleigh, N.C., for example, is one reason debt is rising and savings are headed down.
Two weeks ago he doubled his existing mortgage to $120,000 and he plans to tap savings to pay for new furniture and landscaping.
"I'm in a hot industry," the 35-year-old salesman for a health maintenance organization explains.
"That gives me a lot of confidence about future possibilities."
Nonetheless, the heady pace of debt accumulation in the fourth quarter is expected to begin slowing in the coming months.
Edward McKelvey of Goldman, Sachs & Co. believes consumers took much of the savings they got from refinancing their mortgages to pay interest on new loans for autos and durable goods, such as appliances.
Now that refinancing is declining because of rising interest rates, "The mechanism that created the cash flow for other loans is getting weaker," he says.
George Eads, General Motors Corp.'s chief economist, agrees.
He expects that, as consumers save more and refinance less over the coming months, his industry's annual sales rate will decline from the current brisk pace of 15.6 million vehicles to about 15 million vehicles annually.
The question now is whether consumers will merely moderate their debt accumulation or cut back drastically on borrowing as they did in 1990 when they were over-extended and when banks were clamping down on new loans.
A lot "hinges on their willingness to drop the savings rate further," says Mr. McKelvey.
And it hinges on the ability of the economy to continue producing new jobs, raising existing income levels, and boosting consumer confidence.
Mr. Zandi, for one, believes the elements are in place to keep spending at stimulative levels, and keep consumers out of too much trouble.
"It's not like the 1980s when people kept spending money on vacations, meals out and things they didn't need until they got in over their heads," contends Mr. Zandi.
Now, consumers are buying autos and furniture.
"They are like a company making an investment in its future," he says.
"The lending spigot will stay open longer as a result."
