"Going to the feelies this evening, Henry?" inquired the Assistant Predestinator.
"I hear the new one at the Alhambra is firstrate.
There's a love scene on a bearskin rug; they say it's marvelous.
Every hair of the bear is reproduced.
The most amazing tactual effects."
We're not there . . . yet.
But a world of striking innovation seems these days to be not lurking around the corner, but hurtling toward us.
If we're not fondling bearskin at the feelies, the fur indeed is flying, as billions of dollars are being bet on a story whose opening scenes are just now unfolding.
What's the plot?
How will it play out?
Perhaps it's all far less mysterious than we think.
We've always wanted to be entertained and enlightened.
Maybe the path to the digital future has been paved by our collective memories of snippets from stories told in the past.
Looking at what's been written and filmed over time, a multimedia/interactive/high-technology future somehow becomes more familiar, if not entirely welcome.
Imagine, for example, a device with crisp pictures and a smooth voice.
It talks to us, greets us in the morning.
Our omniscient companion is a source of information on request.
It pinpoints the location of family members.
It devises meetings.
It even offers unwelcome wisdom, telling us at times what we don't want to hear.
In a time before silicon chips and television, folklore invented this magical instrument.
Snow White's wicked stepmother looked to her mirror on the wall.
It knew all, told all, as a companion and perfect interactive device.
And virtual reality?
The ancient Greeks invented the sculptor Pygmalion, who so loved his ivory creation, Galatea, that he wished her alive -- a virtual bride.
We've seen far stranger dreams fulfilled.
The improbable act of flight is now common.
What's hot can be made very cold.
Sound and pictures can be projected through millions of miles of space.
"The history of man is dream and experience," notes writer Ray Bradbury.
Four decades ago, Mr. Bradbury imagined a children's nursery room that could transform itself into any world the kids chose.
In Mr. Bradbury's short story "The Veldt," the children's malevolent answer was an African plain, full of parent-eating beasts that were all too real:
The lions were coming.
And again George Hadley was filled with admiration for the mechanical genius who had conceived this room.
A miracle of efficency selling for an absurdly low price.
Every home should have one.
Oh, occasionally they frightened you with their clinical accuracy. . . .
More benignly, our interactive imagination has amused us.
When awake, Woody Allen's "Sleeper" got an eyeful of the year 2173, including white cylinders about the shape and size of big water heaters.
In the "Orgasmatron," frigid women made virtual love to frigid menunless, of course, the men were Italian.
We've been introduced to interactive "friends" most of us would happily avoid.
Hal, the oily-voiced computer of the movie "2001: A Space Odyssey," plays a chatty game of chess, then later tries to kill his human opponent and nominal controller.
And there is a cinematic Martian "vacation" in "Total Recall" that may or may not have happened.
There seems little doubt that we can one day create a convincing world in a computer, a world sculpted in a digital stream and piped down a tiny glass fiber.
Arthur C. Clarke, who wrote "2001," was asked recently if such electronic dislocation could ever be convincing.
"I think something like that is inevitable," he mused.
"Then of course people will say, `Don't bother me with reality.'"
In Dr. Clarke's own 1956 novel "The City and the Stars," citizens of the earthly city Diaspar rarely meet each other physically, but gather in a virtual surround.
They act in "sagas" -- extraordinarily convincing make-believe games where participants may find themselves anywhere from mental mountaintops to imaginary caves.
In the end, however, it is a life more persuasive than satisfying.
Our recurrent nightmare is not that we won't have enormous power to interact at will with almost-magical devices, but that the power will be our downfall.
In the movie "Forbidden Planet," a race of people called the Krell lose all affection for reality, depending instead on a curious headset -- the absurdly named "plastic educator" -- and on a world whose innards are devoted to expanding upon their every whim.
As the movie's frames pass and a willing suspension of disbelief fades, audience members are left with a reality defined by Walter Pidgeon, Anne Francis and Leslie Nielsen, actors in a human script.
But briefly they have accepted the story's premise.
What can we know to be true?
"One day, a college student in Canada asked me to define reality for her," the late Philip K. Dick, writer and science-fiction aficionado, recalled.
"I thought about it and finally said, `Reality is that which, when you stop believing in it, doesn't go away.'"
We're not there yet.
It still takes belief to think that we are hurtling toward something.
But soon -- perhaps very soon -- it will be there even when we doubt it.
Mr. Rose is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Los Angeles bureau.
Queen: "Magic mirror on the wall, who is the fairest one of all?"
Mirror: "Famed is thy beauty majesty, but hold.
A lovely maid I see.
Rags cannot hide her gentle grace.
Alas, she is more fair than thee."
(Earl Holliman as Doc and Walter Pidgeon as Prof. Morbius)
Doc: "What's this?"
Prof. Morbius: "On this screen may be projected the total scientific knowledge of the Krell, from its primitive beginning to the day of its annihilation -- a sheer bulk surpassing many million earthly libraries."
Doc: "You're able to read this?"
Prof. Morbius: "A little, it's my profession."
An Unwelcome Bobby Fischer?
HAL: "Queen takes pawn."
(Frank moves)
Frank: "...
Rook to king one."
HAL: "I'm sorry Frank, I think you missed it.
Queen to bishop 3.
Bishop takes queen.
Knight takes bishop.
Frank: "Oh.
It looks like you're right."
Virtual Sex . . .
Luna: "You want to perform sex with me? . . .
I just thought you might want to know that they have a machine here."
Miles: "Machine?
I'm not getting into that thing. . . .
I don't like anything with moving parts that are not my own."
Doug listens to a voice from television set in subway: "Do you dream of a vacation at the bottom of an ocean, but you can't float the bill?
Have you always wanted to climb the mountains of Mars, but now you're over the hill?
Then come to ReKall Inc."
