Do Americans have an inalienable right of access to fancy new telephone, text and video services that don't yet exist?
The question isn't merely academic; how it is answered will help shape the ground rules for the administration and Congress as they strive to eliminate barriers to competition among cable-television and telephone companies.
Battle lines are already starting to form.
On one side is an emerging coalition of social-justice groups, rural interests and some Clinton administration advisers, who warn of the creation of an "information underclass" if poor or rural residents can't afford or can't hook up to services such as electronic job listings and video health hotlines.
Some, such as the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, are organizing lobbying efforts to ensure that the notion of universal telephone service is extended to the digital two-way communications of the future.
"We cannot tolerate -- nor in the long run can this nation afford -- a society in which some children become fully educated and others do not; in which some adults have access to training and lifetime education, and others do not," Vice President Al Gore told a telecommunications conference Tuesday.
"Nor can we permit geographic location to determine whether the information highway passes by your door."
But others say there's no guarantee the services will rise beyond multiple-choice movies, home shopping and glorified video games, and that assuring access would amount to a huge new entitlement program based on a shaky hypothesis.
"This specter of haves and have-nots I think is more a specter today than a real danger," says Peter Huber, senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute.
"It seems to me before one solves the problem, one should make sure the problem is there."
The best way to assure access, others say, isn't through government mandates but through the lower prices that will result from increased competition.
"It is a thorny issue, it is a difficult issue, but it is a key issue as we move into the new era," says Assistant Commerce Secretary Larry Irving; Mr. Gore was asked about it during an on-line discussion with members of the CompuServe information service.
Some states are pointing to universal service as a reason to maintain local-telephone monopolies.
Inner-city residents are expected to address the subject during a hearing with Mr. Irving in Los Angeles next Thursday.
The administration is currently trying to come up with a plan for all carriers, including long-distance and cable companies, to contribute to universal service.
But Mr. Gore didn't say how the administration would structure a subsidy plan or how policy makers should decide whether a service is worthy of subsidy; those details would largely be left to the states and the Federal Communications Commission.
For advocates of government-guaranteed universal access to the information services of the future, the current approach to telephone service provides a rough analogy.
A hodgepodge of subsidies, some open and some hidden, keeps rural and residential customers from paying high telephone bills.
For example, federal surcharges on long-distance companies help fund a pool for phone companies in high-cost rural areas, thus lowering the average rural bill by more than $300 a year but raising the average urban bill by almost $80 a year, according to one industry study.
Local phone companies also claim they shift $20 billion a year to reduce residential rates at the expense of high-volume business customers; though many people dispute the figure, they acknowledge that residential rates are artificially low.
But with freer competition, the sources of those telephone subsidies are starting to defect.
In such big cities as New York, wireless companies and cable operators are poaching lucrative business users.
And long-distance carriers such as MCI Communications Corp. are striving to set up their own local phone networks.
Figuring out how to subsidize rural and inner-city residents without creating a cumbersome new entitlement system won't be easy, particularly if regulators add fancier technologies to the list of guaranteed services.
Already, many states require touch-tone capability for basic phone service, and some are considering requiring lines clear enough to carry electronic information.
Some administration advisers, including Columbia University Professor Eli Noam, have argued for a sort of value-added tax on telecommunications suppliers, with the funds distributed to companies that sign up subsidized customers.
Others, including American Telephone & Telegraph Co., favor paying the subsidy directly to consumers -- perhaps through "telephone stamps" -- so that benefits only go to poor people, and not, say, wealthy horse-farm owners in "rural" areas.
However, convincing established companies to fund a subsidy program won't be easy, and Mr. Gore has already said new communications companies would bear a smaller share of the burden.
Also, deciding whether a service is worthy of subsidy is tricky.
Along with the educational and health programs that will presumably be carried on the two-way video services of tomorrow, there is sure to be much of dubious social value.
For example, cable-TV giant Tele-Communications Inc. recently showed a trade show a video of its vision of the multimedia future, featuring two boys in separate living rooms, hooking up for a game of "Sewer Shark."
"I don't want to be forced to pay for the interactive video games or movies on demand of my neighbor down the street," says Bradley Stillman, legislative counsel of the Consumer Federation of America.
He says telephone companies promote a broad definition of universal service because it allows them to lay miles of fiber-optic wire at customers' expense.
His group has the support of the powerful American Association of Retired Persons, which wants to ensure that rates for basic telephone service aren't raised to subsidize more speculative services.
But Barbara O'Connor, director of Alliance for Public Technology, a group that backs a strong universal-service policy, says courts won't let local governments launch services such as electronic voting, vehicle registration and libraries unless the services can reach a broad swath of the population.
One compromise could be using public institutions as a way to spread digital services into most neighborhoods.
Mr. Gore is asking companies to wire all schools, libraries, hospitals and clinics by the year 2000, and during last night's CompuServe session he said the companies should provide "free access to every classroom in their service area."
On Wednesday morning, Mr. Gore watched as students in a Cupertino, Calif., high school used Apple Computer Inc.
Macintosh computers, wired to the Internet, to send electronic messages to scientists and German pen pals and to retrieve the sound and video of another recent Gore speech.
"The time is not far off when every teacher and every school will be doing this on a regular basis," Mr. Gore told the students.
Sources: The White House; Link Resources Corp.
