GE Capital Corp., in its $2.2 billion bid for Kemper Corp., faces an unusual takeover obstacle: a bizarre wrinkle in mutual-fund law that in the past has all but prohibited hostile takeovers of mutual-fund advisers.
Nevertheless, many people think the acquisitive General Electric Co. unit can overcome this barrier, which puts great power in the hands of the outside directors or trustees on mutual-fund boards.
At least one such Kemper fund trustee says he'd be willing to approve an investment contract with an unwelcome acquirer of Kemper, as long as it doesn't hurt fund performance.
"If Kemper's not happy" with a hostile takeover, "that's not the issue," says Lewis Burnham, a Kemper fund director for 17 years.
Reached by phone in Tampa, Fla., where he is a management consultant, he said: "We really are completely removed from Kemper.
We contract with them to manage the assets of the fund in the best interests of the shareholders."
If GE Capital succeeds in the first hostile takeover of a fund-management company in memory, Kemper fund shareholders can expect a growing role for GE in the management and administration of their mutual funds.
GE money managers might launch and run some new Kemper international funds, an area where Kemper has been slow to introduce new funds.
A few years down the road, some say, the name of the funds could change to GE from Kemper, making it easier to persuade brokerage-house rivals of Kemper's securities business to sell the funds.
(However, GE has said that it feels the Kemper brand name has value.)
Kemper, with $47.5 billion in mutual-fund assets at the end of February, ranked as the nation's 12th-largest mutual-fund group at the end of 1993, according to Dalbar Financial Services.
At the end of 1993, GE had only $5.6 billion in mutualfund assets, mostly in money-market funds, according to Dalbar.
A combined GE-Kemper organization would have been the 10th-largest fund group at the end of 1993, according to Dalbar, larger than Smith Barney Shearson in the mutual-fund realm and smaller than Dean Witter's Intercapital Group.
All told, including institutional accounts as well as mutual funds, Kemper manages some $70 billion.
Fund analysts and investment bankers can't recall any successful hostile takeover of a mutual-fund company.
A hostile takeover "would have to be very carefully managed by the GE Capital folks," says Mary Pat Thornton, a partner at Putnam Lovell Inc., an investment bank specializing in money-management firms.
"If the outside directors are uncomfortable, they can just disagree" and move the mutual-fund assets elsewhere.
The money can up and leave because, technically, Kemper doesn't own its mutual funds.
Like every other fund adviser, it owns only the company that employs the fund managers.
That company can be fired by mutual-fund trustees -- another name for directors under some state laws -- if they are unhappy with a change in ownership.
Mutual funds are, by law, owned by their investors, the fund shareholders.
And the funds' boards have a fiduciary duty not to Kemper shareholders but to the shareholders of the funds.
In Kemper's case, the fund trustees have to vote on a change of ownershipand the issue isn't the price of Kemper stock.
Their interest, says Bruce McEver, president of Berkshire Capital Corp., an investment bank specializing in moneymanagement firms: "Do the shareholders have a better deal with GE Capital than they had before" with Kemper?
Practically speaking, fund directors are hardly disinterested observers.
Because of longtime ties between fund advisers and the directors they nominate, directors "are more likely to be on the side of existing management," says Molly Butler Hart, executive editor of industry newsletter Fund Action.
"If Kemper is opposed to the merger, I would think they would be working their trustees."
Kemper had no comment on whether it was in discussion with its fund trustees.
The same group of trustees serves on the boards of the bulk of the Kemper funds.
Though it is rare, mutual-fund advisers have been stung on occasion by independent mutual-fund directors.
It happened last year to Kemper, when the directors of the Selected mutual-fund group voted to oust Kemper and move the funds to what now is called Selected/Venture Advisers.
Why is GE willing to take on the risk of a revolt by fund directors?
Kemper has been "a company in turmoil for the past five years," says Putnam Lovell's Ms. Thornton in New York.
Kemper has had numerous changes in management.
Kemper's mutual-fund performance has lagged.
Its stock-fund managers invest in "growth stocks," or pricey companies with fast-growing earnings.
This investment style hasn't fared as well lately as the tactic of investing in inexpensive stocks, or investing in companies whose earnings turn up with the economy.
Kemper Growth Fund, its largest stock fund, had a total return, including reinvested dividends and price change, of only 1.63% in 1993.
Kemper has also seen customers depart.
Kemper funds had an outflow of about $1.6 billion in 1993, according to Dalbar, despite record growth in the mutual-fund industry.
Outflows from Kemper's money-market funds outweighed the growth of its stock and bond funds.
"Primarily they're not drawing enough in" to stock funds, says A. Michael Lipper, president of Lipper Analytical Services Inc.
It would be easier for Kemper fund directors to rebuff GE "if Kemper were really cooking with gas and had been growing at industry-like rates," says Ms. Thornton.
With GE's sterling reputation for management, GE has "has a good shot" at convincing the directors.
"No one's done" a hostile takeover, says Stephen Treadway, president of Smith Barney Shearson mutual funds.
But "if a well-capitalized, qualified buyer comes in . . .
I see no reason why someone couldn't take over another fund" adviser.
Others aren't so sure.
In a hostile deal, the possibility that outside directors might balk "is a good tactical defense to throw up," says Julie Allecta, an attorney at Heller Ehrman White & McAuliffe.
Acquirers looking to bulk up their mutual-fund business have been preying on a number of weakened fund companies.
Deals were announced last year to buy Lieber & Co., manager of Evergreen Funds, and Dreyfus Corp., the latter to be bought by Mellon Bank Corp.
Both those fund groups, like Kemper, have had trouble expanding their assets despite the boom in the fund industry.
It is understood that Kemper itself was beginning to look around for acquisitionsperhaps to add more funds investing overseas, which have been popular with investors.
