A sudden dollar free-fall in New York shook sluggish currency markets awake and the mostly technical collapse raised questions about whether the dollar's short-term bull run is over.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7295 marks, down from 1.7450 marks late Wednesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 108.55 yen, down from 110.05 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.5090, up from $1.4945.
About midday Friday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 108.85 yen and at 1.7291 marks.
Currency markets have been slow all week, with volatility limited and volume low.
Amid the torpor, however, there has been quiet pressure on the dollar.
German interest rates remain well above those in the U.S., and during the week several senior officials of the Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, have suggested that they won't be lowered anytime soon.
That hampered the dollar as it bounced repeatedly against the top of its recent range against the mark.
U.S.-Japan trade talks, meanwhile, remain at an impasse, and many traders fear that if there isn't any progress soon, the U.S. again will call publicly for a stronger yen as a means to reduce its trade deficit.
And weakness in the Japanese government -- capped by Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's declaration Thursday that he will quit if a political reform law isn't passed -- has had markets wondering whether the U.S. will face a partner unable to strike a deal.
On Thursday, those pressures on the dollar exploded.
Late in a mostly uneventful day, a chain reaction triggered by comments made by German Chancellor Helmut Kohl sent the U.S. currency plunging through one support level after another.
In a speech to the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, Mr. Kohl said Germany's economic problems were structural and not the result of a normal business cycle.
Some traders took that as a suggestion that Mr. Kohl was disavowing rate cuts as a way to revive German growth.
"People have already been getting a sense for several days, from the Bundesbank comments, that rate cuts are a way off," said Christopher Bourdain, a corporate trader at Credit Suisse in New York.
"But it definitely helped that Kohl was repeating what we've been hearing."
The comments sent the dollar plunging, setting off stop-loss orders at 1.7430 marks, and set the stage for more dollar vulnerablity.
Less than two hours later, as European players went home and markets thinned, traders began to attack the dollar's value against the yen.
A few large orders -- rumored to come from options-market players seeking profit on dollar puts -- were sufficient to push the dollar through the 109-yen level, traders said.
That set off manic selling by banks and funds, they added.
The dollar's weakness against the yen translated back into selling for marks, and when the U.S. currency broke below a closely-watched level at 1.7350 marks, it fell even faster.
Traders said that players who had been buying the dollar on dips in recent days in anticipation of a rally were abandoning those positions, thus accelerating the dollar's decline.
The plunge, ironically, came on a day that saw the release of yet more positive U.S. economic data.
December durable-goods orders were up 2.2%, compared with expectations of a 1.2% rise; for all of 1993, they were up 8.6%, the largest rise in five years.
Meanwhile, the U.S. trade imbalance with Japan, and the resulting negotiations on opening Japanese markets, continue to be a major question.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen spoke twice during Thursday's trading on the need for open markets, and he addressed the issue almost every day this week.
