Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization reached agreement on some nettlesome security issues that have stalled their accord for Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho, but may need several more weeks to work out other details.
Concluding a meeting in Cairo, Egypt, Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres said that he and Yasser Arafat, chairman of the PLO, had settled "five or six of the most complicated issues" involved in turning over control of the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip and West Bank town of Jericho, according to wire-service reports.
But he added that, "We didn't complete our work."
An Israeli official in Washington said the two sides still need to resolve economic issues, including questions about currencies and foreign investment rules, as well as issues concerning the transfer of authority, such as who will provide various medical services for people in the territories.
"I'm sure that resolving the security issues will facilitate moving forward.
But there's still a lot of work to be done, and I'm afraid that it won't come quickly," the official said, estimating that the process could take several more weeks.
The Israelis and Palestinians are already nearly two months behind the schedule that was agreed to when they signed their historic accord on the White House lawn Sept. 13.
The euphoria of the handshake that day between Mr. Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin soon was replaced by a wave of violence in the occupied territories.
As the weeks dragged on beyond the Dec. 13 date when implementation of the agreement was supposed to begin, support for the plan dropped precipitously among both Israelis and Palestinians.
U.S. officials are hopeful that yesterday's agreement on security issues will begin to brake the pessimism, and spur the peace process.
President Clinton, who learned that Messrs. Arafat and Peres had signed the partial agreement in Cairo as a group of Jewish leaders were being hosted in the White House, said, "Another big milestone has been achieved today."
The disagreements over security issues stemmed from the tension between the Palestinians' efforts to stretch the definition of the limited autonomy being granted by Israel, and the Israelis' determination to confine that effort.
Specifically, the two sides were quarreling over control of the crossings from Gaza and Jericho to Egypt and Jordan; security for Jewish settlers who remain in Gaza; and how much land around Jericho would be included in Palestinian control.
In resolving one of these disputes, according to U.S. officials, it was agreed that Palestinians crossing into Gaza or Jericho would first go through a Palestinian screening process, and then, to give the Israelis an "invisible presence," would pass by a one-way window from which Israeli officials would observe them.
Those Palestinians deemed to be "suspicious" by the Israelis would be subject to Israeli interrogation and would have access to a Palestinian lawyer before being turned back.
When the economic and civil issues are worked out, it will trigger the beginning of the Israel withdrawal from Gaza and Jericho that should have begun Dec. 13.
Then the clock will begin ticking on a five-year interim period that is supposed to lead to a final resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
No later than the end of the second year, negotiations will begin on the permanent status of the lands that Israel occupied after the 1967 Six Day war.
Those talks are expected to be thorny and protracted.
