A survey testing levels of world affairs knowledge in eight nations has caught our eye.
Americans, it has been reconfirmed, don't do very well on current events.
Only half the Americans tested could name the president of Russia, whereas 94% of the Germans could do so.
An amazing 72% of the American sample didn't know it is the Serbs who have conquered most of Bosnia and laid siege to Sarajevo, despite the almost daily television diet of news about the bloody doings in that trouble spot.
The Koreas should be of much more interest to Americans, given the 36,000 U.S. troops stationed in South Korea.
But only 22% of Americans knew that North Korea has threatened to drop out of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
A similar outcome applied to a question about who the Israelis had recently signed a peace agreement with.
Though Israel figures far more heavily in American politics than in what happens in the Bundestag, 79% of the Germans knew the answer, compared with only 40% of the Americans.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali presides over the U.N. at its east side Manhattan headquarters, but only 13% of the Americans could identify him.
That was the lowest percentage for any of the eight nations.
Mexico and Spain, with large populations preoccupied with merely squeezing out a living, scored slightly higher than Americans on Boutros-Ghali.
The study, covering 10,000 people in Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Mexico, Spain and the U.S., was conducted by the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press.
The newspapers El Pais in Spain, Liberation in France, La Repubblica of Italy and El Norte of Mexico assisted.
As polls go, this one was credible enough if you assume a reasonably scientific selection of the cross section polled.
The respondents were asked simple, one-answer questions.
This, plus the fact that newspapers, magazines and broadcasting channels proliferate in the U.S., makes the poor American showing all the more remarkable.
Some 3% of the Germans got all five questions wrong.
That compares with 37% of the Americans.
Television is the news medium most people cite as their main source of information about the world.
Clearly, Americans take second place to few people when it comes to the time spent gazing at the tube.
Whether a people should be condemned for choosing instinctively to watch, say, the University of Arkansas compete in the Final Four rather than some politician's speech is a debatable point.
But it remains true that American TV networks often place more importance on the personalities of the anchorfolk than on the quality of their reporting.
And we suppose it's true that if the American sample inevitably included respondents addicted to Oprah and Donahue, their knowledge of arcane social relationships might exceed their grasp of the real world.
A no less troubling explanation might be sought in wondering what has happened to the quality of American public education these past 20 years.
What with all the current emphasis on grade schoolers learning about condom technology, local polluters, the rape of the American West, chemically poisoned apples and the like, who has time to learn much of anything about Boris what's-his-name in whatever they call that place nowadays?
