Financial troubles roiling a little-known California state insurance program may signal potential problems in a backwater of the tax-exempt markets: hospital bonds.
The problems have been cropping up in Cal-Mortgage Loan Insurance Division, an insurance fund set up 25 years ago to guarantee bond issues by financially shaky health-care providers.
The program now backstops about 210 projects in the state with about $2 billion in bonds outstanding.
Now, the fund is facing its first test.
Earlier this month, Triad Healthcare Inc., an Encino, Calif., hospital company, filed for bankruptcy-law protection after a series of problems triggered by its default last summer on $167 million of bonds.
Earlier this week, Dennis Fenwick, Cal-Mortgage's deputy director, identified three more health-care providers that may put another $35 million dent in the fund.
"This is making visible a problem that has been hard to see," says Steven Renn of Ambac, a municipal-bond insurance company.
Most hospitals are nonprofit, so they are able to take advantage of tax exemption to raise funds.
But the number of hospitals that have defaulted on their obligations, while still small, has been growing.
Since 1979, about 20 issuers have defaulted, according to Mr. Renn.
But more defaults are expected as hospitals struggle to find alliances amid increasing pressure from managed-care providers.
That worries Mr. Renn and others who try to monitor this murky area of municipal finance.
Mr. Renn estimates that perhaps 2,000 hospitals, of the 5,300 licensed in the country, have bonds outstanding.
Despite the lack of information about many of these issues, hospital bonds, because they pay about half a percentage point more in interest annually than other types of municipal bonds, have been a favorite among individual investors.
Only California has a state fund to enhance the credit of weaker hospitals.
But private backing is available to others outside of California in the form of bond insurance.
That means that while many bonds carry a single-A credit rating, the hospitals issuing the bonds may in fact be much weaker.
About half the $100 billion in outstanding hospital bonds have some form of credit enhancement, says Christopher Conley, a senior vice president of public finance at Lehman Brothers.
That's why municipal-bond experts and mutual funds that invest in hospital securities are watching to see how the state fund deals with its problems.
Triad Healthcare was formed three years ago by a small investor group to purchase the Sherman Oaks Hospital and Health Center and the West Valley Hospital and Health Center in the San Fernando Valley northwest of Los Angeles.
The investors were led by Stuart Marylander, a former executive of Nu-Med Inc., a troubled hospital chain that owned the two hospitals.
Triad's purchase of the hospitals was backed by Cal-Mortgage loan guarantees, over the objections of some Cal-Mortgage officials.
The company raised $167 million, including a $12.8 million reserve for the first year of interest payments.
"They insured something they shouldn't have," says Paul Thompson, a vice president of Ambac.
Earlier this month, the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection to thwart the state from foreclosing on it.
Since then, the federal bankruptcy court in Los Angeles has appointed a trustee to operate the hospitals.
If the hospitals can't get back on an even keel, the losers will be the state's taxpayers, who are on the hook to make good on principal and interest payments to holders of the company's bonds.
The fund already has fielded inquiries from Nuveen and the Franklin Funds.
The insurance fund has $120 million available.
The problem also has generated political heat in California.
The Triad deal "was permeated with conflict-of-interest issues that raise questions about how the Cal-Mortgage program operated," state legislator Burt Margolin said.
The state assembly health committee he heads has called a special hearing in Sacramento next week to investigate the Triad transaction.
The conflict of interest revolves around the dual roles of a Goldman, Sachs & Co. investment banker, Vincent Forte, who was an adviser to Cal-Mortgage at the same time he represented Triad in the purchase of the hospitals.
The fact that he didn't vote on the Triad loan deal doesn't mean that he didn't influence the decision, critics charge.
A Goldman Sachs spokesman said all Mr. Forte's actions were "proper and ethical."
