One recent Friday evening, President Clinton dined with a small group of friends, watched the movie "The Hudsucker Proxy" with them and chatted for 20 minutes with one of the White House's most important informal advisers, former Rep. Tony Coelho of California.
The scene isn't unusual.
Mr. Coelho, who resigned from Congress under a cloud of scandal in 1989, is back roaming the halls of power in Washington.
Only this time, the halls are located at the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue at the Clinton White House.
The 51-year-old investment banker in some ways is a surprise choice as confidante to the senior Clinton staff.
After all, he resigned as the House's third-ranking Democrat in the wake of a controversy eerily reminiscent of the Whitewater flap: It involved a personal investment (in his case a junk bond) that was completed with the help of a savings and loan executive.
But in other ways, Mr. Coelho's frequent presence is a natural outgrowth of his 24-year career first as a congressional aide and then a member of Congress.
His own former staffers, and a slew of other admirers, are sprinkled throughout the upper reaches of the White House staff.
As a result, he is on the telephone with someone there almost daily, and, even though he is based in New York, participates in White House meetings two or three times a month or sometimes even more frequently.
"A lot of people value his advice, including myself," says Patrick Griffin, the president's top congressional lobbyist.
"I talk to him whenever I get a chance."
The former congressman's unusual role reflects the degree to which the Clinton White House, with a staff short on Washington experience, relies on outsiders for help.
Mr. Coelho declines to discuss the counsel he has given.
"When I call them with advice or when they call me and ask for advice, they're not afraid it's going to appear in the newspaper," he explains.
"That's a tremendous value to have."
Still, the members of his network both inside and outside the White House say his fingerprints have shown up on many of Mr. Clinton's tactics and strategies over the past several months, ranging from matters of scheduling to significant questions of policy.
Take the anticrime bill that is making its way through Congress.
The president, of course, is responsible for designating the issue a priority.
But Mr. Coelho is behind the thinking for some of Mr. Clinton's crime-related public events.
Since increasing the number of police on the streets is a Clinton idea, Mr. Coelho urged, the president should appear as often as he can with police in his presence -- and that has been his pattern for months.
Mr. Coelho also was active in planning the president's strategy last year for winning passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement, meeting weekly with the Nafta "war room" staff.
His contributions: to broaden the argument for the trade pact into national security concerns, and to persuade the White House to tread lightly when talking about the opposition to the pact by the well-regarded House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.).
At the same time, not all of Mr. Coelho's advice is heeded.
Since late last year, Mr. Coelho has been pressing anyone at the White House who will listen to disclose everything available about the continuing Whitewater controversy.
Self-disclosure, he reasoned, would be easier to control than incremental disclosures by others.
Last spring and summer, Mr. Coelho met almost every Friday with Thomas McLarty, the White House Chief of Staff, to talk about a range of issues.
Later, Mr. Coelho was in the running for a senior White House job, perhaps even Mr. McLarty's.
But it came to naught partly because Mr. Coelho warned the White House his appointment would create a spate of bad publicity, even though he was exonerated of wrongdoing by the Justice Department.
According to his White House allies, Mr. Coelho took pains to say his appointment might hurt not only himself but the president, and the White House should be wary.
So instead, Mr. Coelho has taken the nonstaff route for his advice-giving, and both the former congressman, who is making more than $1 million a year on Wall Street, and the White House seem pleased with the arrangement.
"Tony has been a very good resource and friend of this administration," Mr. McLarty says.
And Harold Ickes, a deputy chief of staff, says he talks to Mr. Coelho about once a week on issues ranging from health care to the 1994 midterm elections.
"He's a person with an extraordinary amount of experience and insight.
I find that useful on a fairly regular basis," Mr. Ickes says.
Neither Messrs. McLarty nor Ickes has worked for or with Mr. Coelho previously.
But a lot of people at the White House have.
Mr. Coelho's former staffers include Marcia Hale, assistant to the president for intergovernmental affairs; Thomas Nides, chief of staff to the president's trade representative; and Rahm Emanuel and David Dreyer, who are senior communications advisers.
In addition, George Stephanopoulos, who is one of Mr. Clinton's closest advisers, worked with Mr. Coelho when Mr. Stephanopoulos was a Democratic aide in the House, and continues to reach out to him.
Mr. Coelho considers these disciples -- and many others who hold substantial jobs on Capitol Hill and as lobbyists downtown -- his extended family.
And they all accept the appellation.
After Mr. Dreyer was offered his White House job, he says he first called his wife, and next called Mr. Coelho.
"I thanked him and told him I wouldn't be here unless it were for him," Mr. Dreyer recalls.
It isn't surprising then that when Mr. Dreyer and other top Clinton aides turned to outside experts for help writing the State of the Union speech this year, Mr. Coelho was dispensing wisdom by speaker phone.
Nor is it out of the ordinary for Messrs. Griffin, Ickes and Stephanopoulos to ask Mr. Coelho how best to approach lawmakers on any given initiative.
He served separate stints as the House Democrats' chief fund-raiser and vote counter.
"He knows the physics of the House," Mr. Stephanopoulos says.
"He knows what's going on as well as anybody."
Mr. Coelho stunned his colleagues when he left Congress in 1989.
His main problem was a charge that he used campaign funds to buy a $100,000 junk bond.
Compounding the hints of scandal was the fact that he bought the hard-to-get bond from the controversial Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. in part with an undisclosed loan from a thrift association that was a Drexel customer.
Mr. Coelho said he didn't buy the bond with campaign funds, and ultimately the Justice Department said it didn't find that he had broken any law.
Mr. Coelho isn't the only outsider consulted by the White House.
Others include Jody Powell, President Carter's former spokesman; Kirk O'Donnell, a former top aide to House Speaker Thomas O'Neill; Harry McPherson, former senior adviser to President Johnson; and Vernon Jordan, former head of the Urban League.
But unlike these people, the firm for which Mr. Coelho works, Wertheim Schroder & Co., doesn't do any lobbying or government-directed public relations work.
And that gives Mr. Coelho a freer rein.
"When you have a friend like that who doesn't have a personal agenda," says Mr. Nides of the trade representative's office, "his advice is worth listening to with open ears."
