Just two days after losing the battle for Paramount Communications Inc., QVC Network Inc.
Chairman Barry Diller has cast his gaze inward, restructuring the home-shopping company to better position it for future growth.
Besides shortening its corporate moniker to QVC Inc., the West Chester, Pa., company created several new divisions and announced numerous staff changes.
Among other things, it created QVC Electronic Retailing as its principal operating unit and named as its president Douglas Briggs, previously a QVC executive vice president.
The company also unveiled another new unit, dubbed QVC-Interactive, which will develop new interactive services, such as on-line computer shopping services.
Stephen Tomlin, a former Walt Disney Co. executive who joined the company five months ago, will head that unit.
QVC said it expects to launch the first interactive services in early 1995.
As part of the reorganization, QVC's longtime president, Michael Boyd, announced his retirement, having delayed it for five months while QVC was engaged in the losing battle with Viacom Inc. for control of Paramount.
Analysts had been expecting the reorganization, and some said the timing of the announcement was intended to emphasize that QVC plans to aggressively tend to its core business in the wake of the Paramount distraction.
"It's just to say we're here and getting on with life," says Craig Bibb, an analyst with PaineWebber.
In addition, QVC unveiled a new division called QDirect, to produce 60-second and 120-second direct-response ads and 30-minute infomercials.
The moves are an ambitious attempt to expand the home-shopping market beyond its current audience to more-affluent customers.
Currently, fewer than 10% of home shopping viewers actually buy anything sold on such shows.
QVC promoted several other executives in almost every division, from merchandising to marketing, with an eye toward expanding the network as the future of interactive shopping evolves.
QVC said it plans to be a "electronic greenhouse," of sorts, that will test new program concepts and channels.
It said it would roll out the first of these new services later this year with a channel called Q2, a "lifestyles" service devoted to more-active -- and more-affluent -- TV shoppers.
The company also has launched home-shopping ventures in Mexico and London, with plans to continue its global expansion.
