What to do?
Beijing wants low tariffs on all those goods it ships to the U.S., while the Clinton administration wants more human-rights progress in China.
How to have both?
Perhaps the Voice of America, and a potential face-saving settlement over longstanding U.S. claims that the Chinese are jamming VOA transmissions, can show the way.
And what works for the VOA, America's official propaganda radio, could be applied elsewhere in the dispute if both sides will try.
That would avert a trade war of global consequences, and bring relief to both a worried U.S. business community and a frazzled Clinton administration.
All this suggests the worst won't happen in late May when Mr. Clinton must either extend present duties or impose punitive rates dating from the 1930s because Beijing treats some citizens so harshly.
Instead, he may be able to declare victory and move on, leaving normal (confusingly called Most Favored Nation) tariffs in force.
Then he could try to halt these divisive annual MFN showdowns that bring the U.S. and China such grief.
That also would end squabbles between businessmen who fear they'll lose the rich China market and politicians who fear the U.S. will betray its basic ideals.
That's why many in both Congress and administration want to promote human rights in less frenzied fashion.
"There's a bloc of congressional members who would like to see exactly that -- a way to get beyond this annual agony," says a Capitol Hill staffer.
The bustle of Chinese markets "is a sound none of us wants to dim.
Not extending Most Favored Nation status would certainly mute those noises," warns Sen. Claiborne Pell, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
Thus the VOA example seems relevant.
Beijing began interfering with VOA newscasts after the Tiananmen riots of 1989; Washington says this helps put MFN renewal at risk.
Beijing flatly denies that jamming occurs and insists (correctly) that many Chinese do hear VOA programs -- including those who negotiate with Americans.
But having said that, China suddenly seems ready to fix a problem that officially doesn't exist.
Officials asked Secretary of State Warren Christopher during his harried recent visit to submit "technical" broadcasting data about the matter.
They suggested regular Chinese stations may be crowding VOA frequencies, which they probably do -- on purpose.
The Chinese left a distinct feeling that China will act without conceding that its policy has changed.
"We're willing to treat this as a technical issue, if that makes it easier," says Winston Lord, the State Department's senior Asian hand.
So too with other items on the U.S. list of seven human-rights grievances.
China could release political prisoners, or be less tough on Tibet, without acknowledging anything new.
It's already taking steps to prove that prison-made products aren't exported, and seems willing to let families of political dissidents emigrate.
This means China could meet U.S. criteria without admitting past sins or endangering its autocratic system -- as long as Washington doesn't demand more.
Then Mr. Clinton could slip by the June MFN deadline, neither confronting nor coddling the Chinese dictators he lambasted while running for office, and claim victory on the way.
But what happens next is the key question.
Many in Washington want to decouple human rights from tariff rates, but not drop the issue altogether.
So they seek less-abrasive ways to keep up pressure without risking major economic interests, or damaging overall ties.
Given Beijing's potential role in the North Korean nuclear dispute, the latter point is gaining importance, as Sen. Sam Nunn said.
One proposal is to give China another year of MFN and promise further extensions if things don't get worse.
Another would extend present tariffs for several years, avoiding annual reviews.
Then there's talk about forming a quasiofficial joint commission to discuss human rights problems discreetly and without firm deadlines.
Or a new United Nations human-rights office could deal with them in an international context.
Many believe the explicit link between human rights and MFN is bad foreign policy.
All these ideas have critics, and they need cooperation from China.
But that seems possible.
As one Chinese analyst noted recently: "I think that after much public posturing by both sides, Beijing will cut a deal with the Americans and retain its MFN status."
