When Japan's mightiest manufacturer reports earnings today for its first half ended Dec. 31, analysts expect Toyota to turn an operating profit of 10 billion yen ($91.5 million) or more.
That figure would represent a plunge of 83% from a year earlier.
But last summer, when the yen was soaring, some analysts said Japan's premier car maker might post its first loss since 1949.
As the recession deepened in the autumn, pundits chided Toyota for failing to cut costs fast enough.
Nonsense, replied Toyota President Tatsuro Toyoda .
"We're doing pretty much everything we ought to be doing," the soft-spoken Mr. Toyoda said in a recent interview.
"There are also some people who say we're going too fast."
Such is the strength of Japan's best manufacturers.
While the nation's worst postwar recession has forced plenty of companies into the red -- including auto makers Nissan Motor Co. and Mazda Motor Corp. -- other businesses such as Toyota are still turning a profit.
That's true in spite of their go-slow approach to restructuring.
So far, some of Japan's strongest companies have been able to sweat out the slump without the layoffs and plant closings that many had feared.
"I would think that the half just ended is the bottom" for Toyota, said Peter Boardman, auto analyst at UBS Securities Ltd.
Toyota's ability to remain in the black, he added, shows that it's "a very strong company, very well managed."
Toyota isn't out of the woods yet.
The yen could soar against the dollar, hurting Toyota's overseas sales.
Japan's recession could linger, further crimping domestic demand.
Some analysts say Toyota is in for another steep drop in earnings in the January-to-June half, and earnings won't start rebounding until July or later.
What's more, Toyota's very ability to avoid making painful cuts could come back to haunt it.
Because of Toyota's strength, "they have less demand on them to make those cuts than other makers," said Mr. Boardman.
"That means when recovery does come, they may never return to peak profits."
Indeed, despite Mr. Toyoda's professed nonchalance, this downturn has rocked Toyota to the core.
Company director Ryuji Araki said Toyota "is studying the possibility" of closing a factory in Japan.
But he quickly added: "As long as we don't go into the red, we'll never do it."
For now, at least, it looks as if Toyota may dodge the bullet.
Toyota forecasts a parent-basis operating profit of 10 billion yen for the latest half, down from 58.22 billion yen a year earlier.
It expects net income of 40 billion yen, down 45%, on sales of four trillion yen, down 12%.
Analysts say earnings could come in higher than those estimates, however.
Luck is playing its part.
Last August, the yen rocketed to near 100 yen to the dollar, but retreated to about 112 yen by year end.
Had the currency stayed at its peak levels for most of the half, say analysts, Toyota would almost certainly have posted a loss.
Toyota's muscle has also cushioned it from the bumps that have sidetracked Nissan and Mazda.
As Japan's largest car maker, Toyota enjoys some tremendous economies of scale.
Its Corolla, Japan's bestselling car, sold more than 273,000 units here in 1993.
That's twice the volume of Nissan's biggest seller, the Sentra, according to Toyota's figures.
Having deep pockets helps, too.
As of June 30, Toyota had 1.054 trillion yen in cash on hand, a sum that explains why the company is nicknamed "Toyota Bank."
With the cash, Toyota can avoid costly borrowings.
The interest the money earns also helps shore up Toyota's balance sheet.
While Toyota hasn't made any painful cutbacks, it has had a strategy of steady cost savings.
It is economizing on parts and trimming back the number of variations on the models it offers.
Toyota has also quietly pruned its Japanese work force through attrition.
Toyota had a full-time payroll of 73,000 people in June, down from 75,000 a year earlier.
Toyota's conservative executives get queasy when the talk turns to more dramatic cuts.
Late last year, they backed down from an effort to trim the customary winter bonus: Japanese consumers would panic if the nation's No. 1 auto maker cut payouts, the company figured.
That concern for public image is likely to continue to restrain Toyota in the future.
Indeed, the image issue could get even more important, as Toyota Chairman Shoichiro Toyoda has just been named the next head of Keidanren, Japan's most prestigious business lobby.
The company is also nervous about demoralizing its own employees.
Toyota is carrying out its so-called BR program, an effort to identify ways to improve white-collar efficiency.
Initially, said President Tatsuro Toyoda, BR stood for "business revolution."
But revolution was a bit much for buttoned-down Toyota.
"It would make people feel that we're going to fire half the employees," Mr. Toyoda said, slashing at his neck with his hand.
"So now we say reform."
The question is whether reform will be sufficient to return Toyota to the profit level it enjoyed in 1990.
In the U.S. market, American auto makers have opened up a huge price advantage over Toyota and other Japanese car makers.
Chairman Toyoda said his company has little hope of closing that gap anytime soon.
"The yen is too high," he noted.
The company hopes that making its new Avalon sedan and other cars at its expanded plant in Kentucky will help it hold down prices in the U.S.
In Japan, say analysts, Toyota has an overcapacity problem that may worsen as the company shifts more production overseas.
Jonathan Dobson of Jardine Fleming Securities Ltd. figures Toyota has one million cars' worth of overcapacity in Japan.
"I think they have to close a factory," he said.
"Something has to give."
