The dollar was given a boost against major European currencies yesterday on a run of strong U.S. economic data that suggested the Federal Reserve may need to increase interest rates again to head off inflationary pressure.
But the dollar's early rise against the yen was reversed by renewed fears that U.S.-Japan trade tensions are far from over.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.6965 marks, up from 1.6900 marks late Monday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 106 yen, down from 106.10 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4905, down from $1.4960.
About noon Wednesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 105.90 yen and at 1.6965 marks.
U.S. government data at midmorning yesterday showed U.S. factories were operating at a seasonally adjusted 83.4% of capacity in February, the highest rate since June 1989.
That number surpassed market expectations of 83%, and was above January's 83.1% level.
In addition, February industrial production rose 0.4%, its ninth straight monthly rise and in contrast with market forecasts of no change from January.
"All this is stronger-than-expected economic data that points toward inflationary pressures," said Joseph Francomano, a trader at Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank in New York.
The factory order and industrial production data overshadowed earlier news of a seasonally adjusted 0.5% rise in the U.S. producer price index, or PPI, for February.
The rise was slightly above market forecasts for a 0.4% rise and chiefly due to a surge in energy prices.
"There was nothing in the PPIs to make the Fed tighten faster," said Dave Glowacki, senior trader at the National Bank of Detroit.
Yet, on balance, the day's data led to renewed attention on a possible rate increase by the Fed, possibly timed to the Federal Open Market Committee meeting next Tuesday.
With the market expecting a further, albeit token, easing by Germany's central bank of securities-repurchase rates today, the dollar went on to an intraday high of 1.7025 marks.
The Bundesbank is expected to reduce its key repo rate anywhere from four to 14 basis points to between 5.80% and 5.90%, Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank's Mr. Francomano said.
The repo rate is the Bundesbank's preferred tool for fine-tuning the economy.
"If repo rates remain above 5.90%, the market will be very disappointed," Mr. Francomano said, adding that such a decision would probably prompt another dollar sell-off.
Meanwhile, optimism over a possible easing of U.S.-Japan trade tensions that followed the weekend's agreement to allow Motorola Inc. greater access to Japan's cellular-phone market, was dashed by U.S. official comments criticizing Japan's trade surplus.
Ahead of the comments, the dollar hit 106.67 yen, its highest level since the plunge that followed the Feb. 11 collapse of U.S.-Japan bilateral trade talks.
But it then gave away its steady gains on U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor's congressional testimony that he remains "deeply concerned" about Japan's trade imbalance.
