Birds do it.
Bees do it.
Lizards, on the other hand, do not do it.
Neither do dandelions or amoebas.
And can we really blame them for their abstinence?
What is the point of sexual congress, anyway?
There are, after all, far more efficient ways of reproducing oneself: budding, fissioning, cloning, virgin birth.
What is the advantage of having two genders?
Men are a waste: They do not produce babies.
Wouldn't we be better off as hermaphrodites?
Or with 10,000 different sexes, like the toadstool?
Then almost everyone you met would be a potential partner.
But given that we do come in precisely two sexes, how deep is the evolutionary divide between the male and female psyche?
And the greatest mystery of all: Why do gentlemen prefer blondes?
Believe it or not, scientists only started sorting out these vastly important matters a couple of decades ago.
That was when they realized that evolution is more about breeding than survival.
"Survival of the fittest" really applies to genes; our bodies are merely the evolutionary vehicles for these self-replicating little molecules.
As far as nature is concerned, the sole goal for which humans are designed is reproduction.
The implications of this neo-Darwinian revolution for our understanding of sex are taken up by Matt Ridley in "The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature" (Macmillan, 405 pages, $25).
Mr. Ridley, a former science editor and Washington correspondent for The Economist, has written a terrific book: witty and lucid, and brimming with provocative conjectures.
It is, in a word, "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex but Were Too Unscientific to Ask."
So what is the point of sex?
Of the several competing hypotheses that have emerged, the one with the most evidence in its favor is also the least obvious (and, in the present age, the most ironic).
Sex evolved because of its value in thwarting disease.
As Mr. Ridley ably explains, the sexual mixing of genes is analogous to changing the locks constantly against invading microbes.
So "men are not redundant after all; they are woman's insurance policy against her children being wiped out by influenza and smallpox."
Sex, then, would seem to be a zero-sum contest that we play against parasites over the generations.
Like the Red Queen that Alice encountered in "Through the Looking-Glass," we must run as fast as we can simply to keep from losing ground.
The same principle applies to the evolution of courtship, contends Mr. Ridley -- although there the competition is between guy and doll, not host and disease: "The female needs to know the truth about the male: his health, wealth, and genes.
The male wants to exaggerate the information.
The female wants the truth; the male wants to lie.
The very word seduction implies trickery and manipulation."
It was precisely to become smoother at this game of charm and deceit that we evolved our extraordinarily enlarged brains.
How else to account for the rise of human intelligence?
The traditional explanations -- the need to make tools, to learn language -- just won't do, as Mr. Ridley shows.
"It is a disquieting thought," he writes, "that our heads contain a neurological version of a peacock's tail."
There is no sexual mystery, it seems, that does not yield to the neo-Darwinian logic of "The Red Queen."
Why is a woman likelier to conceive a child by an adulterous lover than by her husband?
How does nature ensure that incest occurs but rarely?
And why is it true, as Henry Kissinger once observed with awful smugness, that power is the greatest aphrodisiac?
The author's insistence that there are deep psychological differences between men and women puts him squarely in the Camille Paglia camp -- except, unlike Ms. Paglia, Mr. Ridley has science to back him up.
He even advances an argument in favor of affirmative action for women: Evolutionary pressures may have made men better at clambering up political hierarchies, but historical evidence suggests that women are better equipped by nature to run countries.
Should you bridle at his conclusion, Mr. Ridley will not be offended.
Ever the undogmatic scientist, he cheerfully concedes that "half the ideas in this book are probably wrong."
For many of us errant humans, the joy of sex is not infrequently followed by the melancholy of regret.
(And not just humans: As the old Latin proverb goes, every animal is sad after intercourse.)
Regret is the moral sentiment that stabs you when it is too late -- and then you wallow in it.
Yet there are plenty of good things to say about regret, and Janet Landman says them with eloquence and erudition in "Regret: The Persistence of the Possible" (Oxford, 366 pages, $25).
Ranging with equal assurance over literature, philosophy, economics and her own field of psychology, Ms. Landman probes the experience of regret from every imaginable angle.
There is nothing neurotic or irrational, she argues, about dwelling on a lost love, a missed opportunity or a botched investment; indeed, if properly transformed, regret can be the beginning of wisdom.
Just the news to buck you up on the compunctious morning after.
