Private stock deals.
Few investors understand them.
Fewer still are invited to buy them.
But mutual-fund managers are among those who can get a lucrative piece of the action.
A look at one investment, by fund manager Alan G. Carr, sheds light on how such private deals work and the networking behind them.
Mr. Carr is the chief stockpicker for two publicly traded health-care stock funds managed by a Boston money-management subsidiary of Hambrecht & Quist Inc.
Both health-care funds hold stakes in the biotechnology company Gilead Sciences Inc., which Mr. Carr also has held in his personal account since 1988, regulatory filings show.
Like many private-financing deals, Gilead's 1988 private stock sale took place years before the company went public.
Early investors such as Mr. Carr are taking a big risk because there's no guarantee the stock will ever reach the public market.
Mutual-fund managers who buy such deals aren't doing anything wrong as long as they comply with their companies' disclosure policies, industry lawyers say.
But the potential for a conflict of interest arises if the value of the company's stock increases as a result of purchases by the mutual fund.
"Just because there is a potential conflict-of-interest doesn't mean there is one," says Mr. Carr, who declares in an interview that more than half of his personal assets are invested in the two funds.
"It is public knowledge that I own these shares, and everything has been fully disclosed."
Mr. Carr says he has complied with all in-house rules, checking with the funds' counsel about his personal stake in Gilead, a Foster City, Calif., company seeking to create a range of drugs that will target the culpable genes and proteins involved in viral infections, cardiovascular disease, cancer and inflammation.
"The mere fact that these deals are offered to mutual-fund managers is in and of itself not a sin," says Roy Adams, a lawyer at Heller, Ehrman, White & McAuliffe in San Francisco.
Only if managers accept a personal deal "with the understanding that they will buy the company for the fund" later does a legal problem arise.
There has been no such suggestion in Mr. Carr's case.
The Gilead investment began with a friendship between Mr. Carr and the upstart biotech company's chief financial officer, who had previously worked as an investment banker at Hambrecht & Quist.
Mr. Carr bought shares of Gilead for himself, and about three years later for one of his funds, in separate "private placements."
That's Wall Street jargon for a stock sale made to a select group of sophisticated investors, usually by a company too young, small or risky to make a public stock offering.
Mr. Carr got in cheaper and earlier.
In 1988, he paid a split-adjusted $3.75 a share for preferred stock that was offered almost exclusively to so-called venture-capital investors.
Then in 1991 his H&Q Healthcare Investors ventured in, paying a split-adjusted $10.50 a share for similar preferred.
H&Q Healthcare Investors is an investment vehicle known as a closed-end fund that trades on the New York Stock Exchange.
Also a holder of Gilead is H&Q Life Sciences Investors, a younger closed-end fund trading on the Big Board.
Together, as of Sept. 30, the two funds held about 127,000 shares now valued in the stock market at $1.6 million, according to Morningstar Closed-End Funds, a Chicago newsletter.
Gilead made its initial public offering in January 1992 at $15 a share.
In the IPO, all preferred holdings were converted into common stock.
The funds couldn't buy the IPO at that initial price because Hambrecht was co-manager of the offering, and such a purchase would be barred.
But they did buy shares after the offering, Mr. Carr says.
Soon after the IPO, the stock traded as high as $24.25.
But now it is way below that level.
Gilead closed at $12.875, up 75 cents, yesterday in the Nasdaq Stock Market.
Both Mr. Carr and the funds still hold Gilead shares.
"In general I don't invest side-by-side with the fund, but a good friend of mine Michael Bigham, who is Gilead's CFO had recently joined the company and asked if I wanted to make an investment," Mr. Carr says.
"I tried to talk him into letting the fund invest at that time, but he would not take the money."
Mr. Bigham was traveling and couldn't be reached.
H. DuBose Montgomery, a director of Gilead who served as chairman when the company went public, says the 1988 round of financing got done basically through "word of mouth" among venture capitalists.
Mr. Montgomery is a founder of Menlo Ventures, a Menlo Park, Calif., venture-capital firm that provided seed money for Gilead.
Back in 1988 the biotech company "was still just getting started, and the financing was coming from other venture capitalists," Mr. Montgomery says.
"Individuals could have come in through their contacts: knowing scientists or a friend or neighbor."
Mr. Carr's original, personal investment of $5,000 had good company, judging by the list in regulatory filings of other 1988 private investors and their jobs at the time.
Investments included $25,000 from Gordon E. Moore, chairman of Intel Corp.; $10,000 from James M. Denny, senior vice president and chief financial officer of Sears, Roebuck & Co.; $25,000 from Michael McCaffery, director of investment banking at San Francisco-based Robertson Stephens & Co., which would later be lead-underwriter of Gilead's IPO, and $10,000 from William B. Welty of brokerage firm Volpe, Welty & Co., who had just left his position as research director at Hambrecht & Quist.
This lineup of investors is nothing unusual in the world of private investing, where friendships can bring in a lot of money.
"An awful lot of what is done is done because people think, `I might need a friend someday,'" says Mr. Adams, the San Francisco lawyer.
"I've been offered all kinds of stuff, because folks will say, `Hey, Roy is good guy and we like taking care of our friends.'"
Gilead isn't the only company in which both Mr. Carr and his funds have invested.
Before either fund was up and running, Mr. Carr says he bought private shares in Vencor Inc. in late 1986, at about $2 adjusted for splits.
Based in Louisville, Ky., Vencor provides long-term care to chronically ill patients.
In September 1989, Vencor went public at a split-adjusted $4.53.
Mr. Carr says H&Q Healthcare Investors bought some shares after the offering and still holds the stock, now trading at $30.875.
Hambrecht & Quist, based in San Francisco, was a co-manager of Vencor's IPO.
Of Mr. Carr's personal holdings of 20 stocks, about five are also in the funds, he says.
In the case of Gilead, Mr. Carr's $5,000 personal investment is now valued in the stock market at about $17,000.
Mr. Carr says he hasn't sold any of his Gilead shares and can't do so until after the fund gets out of the stock.
He has given some of his Vencor holdings away to charity in increments over the past three years.
Does sitting with such a nice personal paper profit on a holding make him more reluctant to yank Gilead stock out of the funds than he might otherwise be?
Mr. Carr doesn't think so.
"Within the last year, I have even bought more Gilead stock for the funds," he says.
Earlier this month, star fund manager John Kaweske was fired from Invesco Funds Group of Denver for allegedly failing to report some personal trades to his employer.
At that time, Mr. Kaweske said he was shocked by the firing and indicated he believed Invesco may have dismissed him because it suspected he was getting ready to leave anyway.
Invesco's parent company is Invesco PLC of London.
Mr. Kaweske's lawyer has previously said that any violations by his client, if they occurred, were "highly technical in nature."
The British parent company has had its own reporting problems in the past.
In 1992, the British company was fined $175,000 by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission for violating federal rules requiring disclosure of bulk stock purchases, Denver-based Invesco says.
And in mid-1993, British regulators said they had fined the United Kingdom company #750,000 and ordered it to pay #1.6 million in costs, largely for failure to have adequate systems of control and compliance arrangements.
