The Venezuelan government presented Congress a tax package designed to raise $2.67 billion through new luxury and sales levies at the wholesale level and a temporary bank tax.
The measures are part of a strategy to derive revenue from productive activity and reduce state reliance on oil.
The measures could cut the budget deficit to 2% of gross domestic product from 6% otherwise.
Half the new revenue would come from the 0.75% tax on bank transactions through Dec. 31.
The stock exchange in Caracas has expressed alarm, saying the levy could cost the market more than $100 million this year, as equities dealings involve bank processing.
The government, which took office Feb. 2, is pushing tax reform because the previous budget was based on higher oil prices and faster sell-offs of state enterprises.
Big protests scuttled an earlier decision to raise gasoline prices.
When the bank tax expires, the government plans big spending cuts and changes in income taxes, including an increase in the top rate to 34% from 30%.
Venezuela also plans to open up parts of its economy, such as base metals, to foreign investors.
Trials began in Indonesia for 21 students who could be jailed as long as six years if convicted of insulting President Suharto during a demonstration last December.
Prosecutors said the defendants, between ages 20 and 27, insulted Mr. Suharto by putting up posters calling for him to be held accountable for human-rights violations during his 27 years in office, and reading a poem accusing the president of oppression.
Last month, a human-rights activist was sentenced to four years in jail on similar charges.
Western German bank employees, whose HBV union is negotiating a 1994 accord, staged warning strikes and protests in several cities.
Their contract expired Jan. 31.
After three rounds of talks, employers haven't made an offer to the 430,000 workers, who want a pay raise and a workweek cut to 37 hours from 39.
A slowdown by the bus drivers union in the South Korean capital to press for higher pay is having an unintended effect: public approval.
The drivers, known as street villains in muscling dangerously among Seoul's 1.8 million vehicles, are strictly observing work rules -- halting at designated stops, giving way to vehicles and pedestrians, and obeying traffic signals.
This has made fiction of timetables, but passengers, accustomed to cavalier treatment and accidents, welcomed the union's vow to continue the safe approach after wage talks end.
The city's image could benefit, too, as tourists in surveys have faulted Seoul's traffic chaos.
Its tourism industry reeling because of attacks by militant Muslims, Egypt created a $41 million print and television advertising campaign.
The ads aim to "correct the image of Egypt and put terrorist incidents in their proper context," the tourism minister told an Egyptian newspaper.
They will run in Britain, Germany, Italy, France, Japan and the U.S. Tourism, once a main source of Egypt's foreign-currency earnings, has fallen sharply in the past two years of violence, including attacks on foreign travelers, by fundamentalists fighting to overthrow the secular government.
In a widening scandal, Japanese prosecutors accused a Liberal Democratic Party legislator and former construction minister, Kishiro Nakamura, of selling his influence to an industry executive.
Authorities sought to arrest Mr. Nakamura, 44, for allegedly accepting $95,000 from a Kajima Corp. official in January 1992 in return for pressuring Japan's Fair Trade Commission not to pursue a case of possible Kajima bid-rigging on public contracts.
The agency dropped the case in May 1992, but any role by Mr. Nakamura in that decision wasn't clear.
The charges are the first filed against a national lawmaker since the LDP was forced from a 38-year rule last summer under a cloud of scandals.
Until now, local politicians and about 30 construction executives have been arrested.
Mr. Nakamura's arrest requires majority approval by parliament's lower house, which hasn't been granted since 1967.
He said he was prepared to be arrested and to disclose facts of the case.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Japan will melt down four million gold coins, issued in 1986 to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the reign of the late Emperor Showa, and convert them into gold ingots for public sale.
A third of the coins were returned to Japan's central bank because their resale value didn't rise. . . .
To alleviate a chronic telephone shortage for the 13 million residents of Shanghai, China, 315,000 phones were installed last year, bringing the total to 1.1 million, as well as a tide of new complaints of rude, threatening and obscene phone calls.
