Boris Yeltsin should know better than to take vacations.
The last time he took a break, in the summer of 1993, rumors first began to surface that he had a life-threatening liver condition.
His frailty was forgotten by October, of course, when the president sent tanks and troops to storm Parliament into submission.
Now that Mr. Yeltsin is away from Moscow again, the rumor circuit is working overtime.
This week alone, Mr. Yeltsin has been reported to be the victim of a coup plot, preparing to resign, and dying from his (now rapidly worsening) liver condition.
Unbecoming a man said to be on his death bed, Mr. Yeltsin, who is still on a "working vacation" in the Black Sea resort of Sochi, announced plans to travel in the coming months to Spain and Germany.
He obviously hasn't heard the rumors.
"We're still making long-term plans," Georgi Satarov, one of Mr. Yeltsin's closest advisers, says with a playful smile.
Mr. Satarov last saw Mr. Yeltsin just before the president left for Sochi, on March 14.
He says the president seemed fine physically, though he has been tired in recent weeks from eight months of work without a break.
Chronic Reports on the Liver What is known for sure about Mr. Yeltsin's health?
Very little, it turns out.
Mr. Yeltsin is known to have back problems, and he often moves stiffly.
His occasional puffiness is thought to result from medication for back pain.
The president's office has confirmed that he had a cardiac condition a few years ago that was serious enough to require hospitalization.
Mr. Yeltsin is also thought to occasionally drink too much, though there is little concrete evidence to prove that it affects his ability to work.
The drinking, inevitably, prompts speculation about the state of his liver.
Western and Russian diplomatic sources reportedly told U.S. television networks this week that Mr. Yeltsin has an advanced case of cirrhosis of the liver, a life-threatening disease.
It isn't clear if the diplomats have access to Mr. Yeltsin's medical records, which the president doesn't make public.
The last time Mr. Yeltsin had to fend off rumors that he was gravely ill was during an aborted holiday last July.
He returned to work and, meeting with journalists, proclaimed his fitness and said, "I don't know where these rumors are coming from that my health is waning."
The rumor that time, as well, was liver disease.
Now, as then, Mr. Yeltsin's supporters are dismissing the rumors as intentional disinformation that traces ultimately to the president's opponents.
That, too, can't be proven.
But surely the opposition, which is demanding early presidential elections this year, stands to gain from reports that Mr. Yeltsin is gravely ill or facing an imminent coup.
"I assume all of this is a provocation," says Mr. Satarov.
Rumor-mongering in Russia has always carried special political significance.
In Soviet times, all official information was suspect, so the rumor circuit was believed to be the closest avenue to the truth.
In many ways, that attitude still persists, fueled partly by Mr. Yeltsin's style of ruling.
The president has a penchant for secrecy and an alarming tendency for sudden, unexplained absences from public view.
The president's inability to appear on television from Sochi to refute the current rumors only adds to the sense that something isn't right.
Says Mr. Satarov: "I've got to talk to Yeltsin about his PR when he gets back."
In the absence of reliable news, commentators have to read between the lines.
ABC News noted this week that a Russian TV report on the state of Mr. Yeltsin's health, while showing footage of the president at Sochi, also included some archival material, filmed months earlier.
However, observers here think inclusion of the older footage appears to have resulted from sloppy news judgment, and not from any state-orchestrated plot to make the president look healthier than he really is.
The rumor mill has built up momentum ever since an apparently bogus anti-Yeltsin coup scenario began to circulate in parliament and in government circles late last week.
Several Russian journalists saw the document and initially discarded it, deeming it far too clumsy to be taken seriously.
Only when a small-circulation Russian weekly published the document -- with a disclaimer casting doubt on its authenticity -- did it blow up into a political issue.
"I had to spend virtually a whole day telling my government back home that this wasn't anything to worry about," says a Western diplomat in Moscow.
As the rumors multiplied, an Asian military attache phoned an American correspondent with the latest.
Mr. Yeltsin, he had heard, had been shot.
"Do you actually believe the report?" the correspondent asked.
"Well, no," the attache responded.
Still, in the current climate, the urge to spread the latest gem is hard to resist.
And much of it gets into print.
What is this doing to Mr. Yeltsin's public image?
As usual, there is probably far more concern about Kremlin affairs inside the Beltway than there is on the streets of Moscow.
Still, there are opinions.
"Yeltsin's a corpse," says a Moscow taxi driver.
He quickly corrects himself.
"Yeltsin's a political corpse," he says.
