When giant U.S. retailer Wal-Mart Stores Inc. crossed the border into Canada, the last thing the company expected was another Wal-Mart staring it in the face.
It turns out that Winnipeg businessman Edward J. Nych calls his business Wal-Mart, too -- not after the discount chain but, he says, after his cousins Walter and Martina.
Mr. Nych and two partners claim first dibs on the name Wal-Mart Canada in Manitoba: They registered their partnership that way with that province's government two years ago.
That was 23 months ahead of the American Wal-Mart, based in Bentonville, Ark., which sought to register the name Wal-Mart Canada Inc. last month, after it bought 122 Woolco stores across Canada from Woolworth Corp.
Undaunted by the retailing Goliath approaching from below, Mr. Nych asserts his rights to the name in no uncertain terms.
Just what is his business?
He says he would have to consult his lawyers before saying, or before saying whether he would be willing to let the U.S. outfit use the name in Manitoba.
Asked if Walter or Martina could be interviewed, he says, "Oh, no, they're in Poland."
His cousins, he explains, recently moved there from their native Ukraine, and he communicates with them only by mail.
"We exchange Christmas cards, Easter cards and so on," he says.
Besides, Mr. Nych adds, he hasn't yet told them about their namesake.
Jane Arend, a spokeswoman for the Wal-Mart in Arkansas, says lawyers for the two Wal-Marts haven't talked yet.
But she adds, "That name is important for us to carry on business in Canada . . . and we've been advised by legal counsel we have the right to use it in Manitoba.
We feel the two businesses can coexist."
Myron Pawlowsky, director of Manitoba's corporations branch, which oversees patents, incorporations and registrations of businesses, said the big Wal-Mart, despite being second in line, may use the name for now, while he reviews both claims.
His office has the authority to order either company to change its name.
One possible solution comes to mind.
Mr. Nych, asked whether Walter is a common Ukrainian name, conceded that he, well, anglicized it from his cousin's real name, Vladimir.
Maybe, soon, Canadians could pop down to their local Vlad-Mart.
