The European Union Commission demanded that five member states lift bans on night work for women, while Britain challenged an EU law limiting the workweek to 48 hours for men and women.
The EU began proceedings against Belgium, France, Greece, Italy and Portugal for failing to comply with EU legislation that guarantees women equal treatment in the workplace.
The five governments have encountered domestic resistance to altering labor rules.
But with 18.5 million EU citizens jobless, the commission insisted the bans amount to bias that could hurt or kill many women's job prospects.
The commission's action could wind up in the European Court of Justice, which ruled in 1991 that it was discriminatory to exclude only women from night shifts.
Britain asked the EU court to examine a measure approved last November that sets working hours, capping night shifts at eight hours and workweeks at 48 hours, starting in 1996.
The EU court typically takes two years to issue rulings.
The Solidarity trade union began warning strikes to protest Poland's deteriorating living standards.
Northern factories suspended work for a few hours.
Walkouts are to roll through the steel, mining, power, rail and communications sectors.
The 1.8 million-member union opposes planned increases in energy and heating prices, and wants tax protection for the poor.
Government and union leaders have indicated willingness to negotiate, but Parliament last weekend rejected social-spending proposals in a strict budget.
More than 90% of Moldovans in a referendum Sunday voted to keep the former Soviet republic independent.
The results dealt another setback to Moldova's ethnic Romanians who want reunification with Romania.
The Soviet Union in 1940 forced Romania to give up the Moldovan region.
Voters also approved pursuing "mutually beneficial relations" with other countries that were part of the U.S.S.R.
In parliamentary elections a week earlier, Moldovan parties seeking closer ties to Russia outpolled nationalists favoring reunification with Romania.
China's southern Guangdong province plans to allow an additional 10 foreign banks to open branches this year in the cities of Canton, Shenzhen, Zhuhai and Shantou.
Guangdong already has 77 branches or offices of overseas banks-24 in Shenzhen alone.
Nonetheless, "Competition among foreign banks to squeeze into Guangdong is fierce now," an official of the provincial branch of the People's Bank of China said.
Business confidence is improving in the European Union, where companies believe the worst of the economic downturn is over, but consumers remain pessimistic, an EU Commission survey in January found.
For the first time since June 1992, the number of firms in the 12 EU countries that expected to increase production in coming months exceeded the number that planned output cuts.
Consumers were less pessimistic in January than in December but didn't signal any sustained upturn in confidence, boding ill for consumer spending to pace economic recoveries.
France last year recorded fewer vehicle accidents than a year earlier, but the crashes were more serious, the government said, because motorists drove faster.
The total number of mishaps fell 4.1% to 137,500, which also represented about a 50% drop from 1973, thus continuing a long-term decline.
But the Transport Ministry said the 9,052 deaths linked to the crashes in 1993 were a negligible drop from the previous year because average speeds increased.
In road-safety rankings of six European countries, France was second to last, ahead of Spain but behind Britain, Italy, Germany and Belgium.
Vietnam plans to computerize and automate its banking industry, a central bank official said, in an effort to speed transactions and bolster banks' ability to compete with foreign institutions.
The World Bank is providing technical help for the project, to be completed by the year 2000.
The cost of the first phase, through 1995, was estimated at $73 million, with some of the money to come from the Vietnamese government and most from multilateral lenders.
Most people in Vietnam don't have bank accounts, which by one estimate leaves as much as $2 billion of personal cash holdings unproductive.
Modernizing banks could help improve their efficiency and enhance their popular appeal.
While foreign bankers approved of the government's strategy for banking, they also said Vietnam must develop its capital markets to modernize its financial sector.
Eight foreign financial institutions now have branches in the country.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
The German Bundesbank used to burn as much as 1,000 tons of worn-out mark banknotes a year, but cooled its ovens because of environmental concerns.
The central bank might turn its growing pile of shredded currency over to wine growers for use as fertilizer. . . .
Between 50% and 60% of adult Mexicans are overweight, a physician and nutritionist at the National Medical Center in Mexico City said, blaming fat in the country's traditional cuisine and lots of contemporary junk food.
