Whatever deprivations Los Angeles residents may feel as they recover from this week's earthquake, they won't suffer from any shortage of Clinton administration officials offering assistance.
President Clinton himself climbs aboard Air Force One today to head to Los Angeles to inspect the earthquake damage.
But he'll only be joining a growing crowd of his aides already on hand to help.
Two Cabinet members -- Transportation Secretary Federico Pena and Housing and Urban Development Secretary Henry Cisneros -- flew to Los Angeles Monday.
Also dispatched were highway administrator Rodney Slater and federal aviation administrator David Hinson.
A senior White House aide and a top assistant to Commerce Secretary Ron Brown, who has spearheaded continuing administration efforts to help California's wobbly economy, also are on hand.
Some 2,000 federal employees already are working on the relief effort, and federal assistance checks are expected to start moving to Los Angeles residents in five days.
This instant attention says something about the grave problems Southern California now faces in the earthquake's aftermath.
But it also underscores an important political fact of life: In many ways California is the most important state in the union to the Clinton White House, and it simply can't afford to drop the ball on earthquake damage relief.
Mr. Clinton was the first Democrat in 28 years to carry California in a presidential election, and holding onto the nation's most populous state is central to Democratic strategies for securing a new, long-term base of support in the West.
Long before the earthquake hit Los Angeles, the administration had assigned a team of officials to look for ways to help the state's economy recover from defense-spending cutbacks and a long-lasting recession.
Officials from six federal departments and agencies meet daily to discuss helping California's economy, and among other things they have helped speed disbursement of funds to help convert California's defense industry to nondefense applications.
In addition, two full-time Commerce Department officials have been stationed in California to look for ways to help.
Now, administration officials argue that the network of officials focusing on California should help it respond more quickly to the new disaster.
"The most important thing is that there is a mechanism now," Commerce Secretary Brown said in an interview.
"There is a mechanism for feeling the pulse."
Mr. Brown estimated he has made a dozen trips to California in the past year, and Mr. Clinton himself has traveled there eight times.
And now that disaster has struck Los Angeles again, the administration has no intention of repeating what they perceived as a mistake made by President Bush in failing to go to the city quickly after riots there in 1992.
Of course, responding to the earthquake is an equally big challenge for two Republicans -- Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan, who took office last summer, and California Gov. Pete Wilson, who faces a tough re-election campaign this year.
Ironically, many political analysts think that if Gov. Wilson mounts a strong and successful re-election campaign this year, he will be in a position to challenge Mr. Clinton in the 1996 presidential race.
But for now, the two potential adversaries will be forced to work together, and the stakes are so high that there seems little likelihood of partisan bickering over the effort to help Los Angeles recover from the earthquake.
"All the federal agencies are standing ready to help," said Richard Krimm, the Federal Emergency Management Agency's senior disaster-response official.
"We're just waiting for requests to come in from the state."
Mr. Krimm says that, for now, FEMA is "financially able to handle the disaster," noting that a federal disaster relief fund has $1.5 billion available.
But he also said FEMA may have to ask for supplemental spending.
Already, FEMA employees are operating "teleregistration centers," which Los Angeles area residents can call to request grants of as much as $12,200 for clothing and food.
If FEMA does manage to start issuing checks within five days, that would be about twice as fast as it did after Hurricane Hugo in South Carolina in 1989.
FEMA also has mobilized four search-and-rescue teams from the Miami; Seattle; Phoenix; and Washington, D.C., areas.
But FEMA officials said yesterday that California seems to be doing fine with its own eight teams.
So two of the federal teams haven't departed for California and the other two are in the state awaiting assignments.
The key to Los Angeles disaster relief may lie in the ability of the state and federal governments to move rapidly in getting the area's vital highways rebuilt.
The Transportation Department has ordered highway engineers from other parts of the country to Los Angeles to inspect freeways.
There aren't any reliable highway damage estimates yet.
Overpasses on at least three freeways have collapsed, though, and an aide to Gov. Wilson noted that aftershocks were continuing to threaten bridges yesterday afternoon.
Repairing highways is certain to be expensive: Almost $1 billion in federal funds have been spent rebuilding highways damaged in the 1989 earthquake in the San Francisco area, and construction is continuing.
For now, the Transportation Department has about $40 million in emergency funds that could go toward highway reconstruction in Los Angeles, and the state also could borrow about $100 million against interstate-highway funds that various states have left unspent.
Beyond that, President Clinton will have to ask Congress for supplemental spending, and that will pose tricky political problems.
While Mr. Clinton could seek an exemption from budget caps on domestic spending, as he did with Midwest flood relief last year, that would mean that spending on California's quake relief would increase the deficit.
On the other hand, shifting funds from other states' programs to stay within the budget caps could anger the other states, many of which are already seeking to increase their share of transportation outlays.
Even before the earthquake, California officials were struggling with severe budget constraints because of the state's economic problems.
As a result, they say it's particularly important to them that full federal coverage of highway-rebuilding costs be extended beyond the normal 180-day period for disasters under existing laws.
Normally, after that period the federal government would cover as much as 90% of the costs of building new highways.
Transportation Department officials say they haven't yet received a formal request for an extension.
Meanwhile, the earthquake is almost certain to cause the Clinton administration to back off from its recent threat to withhold from California as much as $800 million in federal highway funds because of the state's failure to comply with the 1990 Clean Air Act.
The Environmental Protection Agency informed the state earlier this month that it would cut off the funds this spring if the state didn't bring its automobile inspection program in line with new federal requirements.
But even before the earthquake, many questioned whether the EPA would carry out its threat against a financially strapped, politically important state that is generally viewed as being on the cutting edge of clean-air regulation.
