Even among Wall Street's cutthroat stock crowd, feelings carry a lot of weight.
That's why every year Wall Street firms from investment banks to money managers spend thousands of dollars trying to gauge investor sentiment, the high-falutin' term Wall Streeters assign to how investors feel.
It's widely held that sentiment is one of the major drivers of stock prices.
Some stock strategists take sentiment at face value, contending that when investors are happy, they are likely to be plowing more money into the stock market.
But other stock strategists look at sentiment from the contrarian perspective, arguing that a heavy dose of bearishness can be a bullish omen for stocks.
With stocks stuck in a rut, some analysts are using sentiment surveys to buttress their view that the market is poised to rise in the coming weeks.
They cite the latest poll by Investors Intelligence, a newsletter that tracks sentiment among 140 investment advisers, that shows 34.8% of the advisers are bullish while 40.2% are bearish.
That's the lowest number of bulls since late November, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average stood at 3694.01.
Similarly, a survey by the American Association of Individual Investors shows that in the week ended Thursday, 37% of investors were bearish, up from 27% the previous week and 24% in mid-February.
"With fewer people being bullish, it's positive for the stock market," says Michael Burke, editor of Investors Intelligence.
At the very least, contrarians argue that if investors are downbeat, it suggests that they have completed most of their selling and aren't in a position to inflict much more damage on the stock market.
At best, it indicates that investors are sitting on mountains of cash which, if deployed, could propel stocks sharply higher.
During the past three years, bullish sentiment has fallen as low as 32% and Mr. Burke says a low level generally coincides with market bottoms.
Yet some stock strategists say that with so many investors primed to look at sentiment indexes like Mr. Burke's, tracking sentiment by simply following surveys could be a self-defeating exercise.
"Yes, people say they're bearish but you have to look at the facts: what are they doing with their personal and professional money," says James Kennedy, director of equity research at T. Rowe Price Associates, a Baltimore-based mutual fund concern.
Mr. Kennedy says a portfolio manager may be bearish but only have a small amount of cash in his fund.
That's why some money managers prefer to track what investors do rather than look at what they say.
"Mutual fund cash flows seem to be the new sentiment indicator," says Steven Norwitz, a spokesman at T. Rowe Price.
Analysts believe that as long as money is pouring into the stock market, it's only logical that stock prices will power higher.
"I've asked a couple of portfolio managers whether they think investors are getting more bearish about the market and they say you wouldn't think so, judging by the money that is coming in," he says.
Of course, many stock analysts think it wiser to gauge sentiment by following the behavior of professional traders.
Richard Eakle, who heads an investment advisory firm that bears his name, says his favorite sentiment indicator is the volume in put options, which confer on the owner the right to sell stocks at specified prices.
In recent weeks, investors have been loading up on put options, bearish bets on the market.
The buying has been so frenzied that at times the volume in put options has exceeded the volume in call options, which confer on the owner the right to buy stocks at specified prices.
"The numbers in the options pits continue to record very high put-call readings," says Mr. Eakle.
"Usually, the number surges and then backs down."
Mr. Eakle, a contrarian at heart, likes to see such sustained put buying because it suggests that the market is on the brink of a rally.
The stronger the conviction of the bears, he says, the heartier the rally, when it occurs.
Since sentiment is intangible, many analysts choose to look at it subjectively.
Richard Hoey, portfolio manager of Dreyfus's Growth & Income Fund, likes to take the temperature of the market by sounding out Wall Street underwriters.
When stock prices are rising and investors are snapping up everything in sight, equity salesmen on Wall Street are relaxed.
But when investors are bearish and it's tough to sell stock, the tension level among the hawkers on Wall Street rises.
"My key indicator is how high is the tremor in the voice of the salesman when he says he may have a few more shares for me," says Mr. Hoey.
A few months back, when emerging markets were all the rage, Mr. Hoey says Wall Street underwriters were very laid back.
"For a while, the attitude was if you are polite we might let you have a few shares," says Mr. Hoey.
But charting the rising tension level of the salesmen he talks to these days, Mr. Hoey is coming to the conclusion that the enthusiasm for emerging markets is waning.
Mr. Hoey says he takes anecdotal evidence like this and combines it with objective data about initial public offerings to size up investor sentiment.
When IPOs are rocketing in price regardless of the quality of the company, Mr. Hoey knows there's too much speculation about.
But if the IPO market is "pretty grim going" as it is now, Mr. Hoey concludes that investors are more tempered.
Meanwhile, savvy stock strategists like Lehman Brothers' Elaine Garzarelli aren't ready to dismiss sentiment surveys altogether.
"People always make the same mistakes," says Ms. Garzarelli.
"At market tops, they are always bullish."
Ms. Garzarelli, who uses sentiment surveys as one of the four key indicators in her stock market model, says that she has generally found that corrections of between 10% and 15% occur when 70% or more of the investment advisers are bullish.
"If sentiment is very bearish, as it is now, that could prevent a correction from occurring," she says.
A rebound in bonds calmed nervous investors and sent stocks sharply higher.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average jumped 32.08 points to 3862.70, with nearly one-third of the rise coming in the final minutes of trading.
Standard & Poor's 500-stock index gained 2.54 points to 466.44 and the Nasdaq Composite index added 0.11 to 789.20.
Advancing issues outnumbered decliners, 1,137 to 962.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange eased to 303,211,000 shares from 333,481,000 Thursday.
Grumman jumped 3 to 64 3/4 as investors bet that a bidding war will develop for the company.
Late Thursday, Northrop disclosed plans to bid $60 a share for the company, which earlier last week agreed to be acquired for $55 a share by Martin Marietta.
Shares of Martin Marietta skidded 2 to 44 1/2.
CS First Boston analyst Peter Aseritis cut the stock to "hold" from "buy," citing the risk that the Bethesda, Md., company could lose the bidding, or end up paying too much for Grumman.
Northrop slipped 1/8 to 41 3/8.
Many bank issues rallied along with the bond market.
Citicorp jumped 1 1/8 to 39 3/8, Chemical Banking rose 1/2 to 36 3/8 and Chase Manhattan gained 1 1/4 to 32 3/4.
Brokerage stocks also fared well.
Merrill Lynch rose 2 3/8 to 43 1/4, PaineWebber 3/4 to 18 1/2 and Charles Schwab 3/4 to 28 3/8.
Utility stocks were strong, with the Dow Jones Utilities Average up 1.64, or 0.79%, to 209.79.
Insurers were mostly higher.
Ohio Casualty rose 1/2 to 63 on Nasdaq, while Allstate added 3/8 to 24 3/4 and General Re rose 1/4 to 104, both on the Big Board.
Unisys jumped 1 3/8 to 15 3/4 after a Lehman Brothers analyst upgraded the computer company's stock to "buy" from "outperform."
Shares of Amdahl added 7/8 to 6 3/4 on the American Stock Exchange.
Lehman lifted its rating on the computer concern to "buy" from "neutral."
Intel slipped 1 1/2 to 68 5/8 on Nasdaq after losing 1 1/2 Thursday on news that a jury found Advanced Micro Devices hadn't infringed on Intel patents.
Shares of Advanced Micro slipped 5/8 to 28 1/4 on the Big Board.
Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing shed 1 1/4 to 103 1/4.
This newspaper reported that a decision by the St. Paul, Minn., company against joining a global settlement of silicone breast-implant cases could prove costly.
A jury in Houston recently awarded more than $30 million in a case involving Minnesota Mining and two other companies.
Thomas Gallagher, director of capital commitment at Oppenheimer & Co., said the rally accelerated as many investors were forced to cover short positions.
Investors go short by selling borrowed shares in the hope of buying them back later when prices fall.
When the market rallies, many investors who are short hasten to cover their positions by buying stock before prices rise much higher.
Dave Pettit contributed to this article.
