BERLIN MAY GET U.S. ACADEMY
An agreement could be completed this summer to set up an American Academy in Berlin, modeled on the century-old American Academy in Rome.
The proposal, backed by the U.S. Congress and the Smithsonian Institution, is intended to demonstrate the U.S. commitment to the German city following the U.S. troop withdrawal later this year.
The academy would support research and creations by visiting scholars, artists, writers and others in the humanities.
It also would have a center for research on Eastern European history and culture.
Steven Mansbach, a professor at the Center for Advanced Studies in the Visual Arts at Washington's National Gallery of Art, is to be the academy's director.
The project, to be funded by private and corporate sources, has been coordinated from the Smithsonian.
Of the $44 million endowment needed to fund operations, about $2 million has been committed, and more pledges are contingent on securing a permanent home in Berlin.
As French fishermen widened a two-week-old strike to Mediterranean ports, the government vowed to block fish imports until June.
The fishermen, whose protests often turned violent, requested more aid for smaller operators hurt by high costs and inexpensive fish imports; the government has granted $75 million in aid so far.
Fishermen yesterday sought to block shipping traffic in some passenger, oil and fishing ports, while fishermen from Brittany stopped trucks on highways to Paris to check for imported fish and dumped some cargoes.
The U.S. sells $130 million of fish a year in France.
At least 25% of Chinese married women have had one abortion and 8% two or more, a survey by the government-controlled All China Women's Federation found.
Such data hadn't been available in China, which controls population growth by limiting couples to one child.
Cities, where birth rates are the lowest, had the highest abortion rates; lower rates in rural areas reflect relatively more sterilizations after couples have one child.
As childbirth outside marriage is socially unacceptable, single women accounted for 25% of the abortions in Shanghai and Beijing.
The number of potential investors who visited Vietnam last year increased 23% as a result of last fall's resumption of multilateral lending to the country.
The government said 7,400 prospective investors met with the agency that regulates foreign investment.
Japanese visitors led the parade, followed by those from Taiwan, the U.S., South Korea and France.
The influx, preceding the lifting of the U.S. economic embargo against Vietnam, stemmed largely from resumption of lending by agencies such as the World Bank to help rebuild roads, bridges and ports.
Regional officials in Vladivostok approved building tanks in Russia's Far East for temporarily storing nuclear waste instead of dumping it into the Sea of Japan.
The tanks are to be installed about 125 miles east of Vladivostok, Russia's main Pacific port.
Japan has agreed to finance Japanese firms' construction of a Far East waste-reprocessing plant if Russia discontinues ocean dumping.
The IG Metall metalworkers union in Germany, ruling out longer workweeks as a concession to employers, said it would resume warning strikes this week.
A full strike could begin in March.
The Gesamtmetall employers group, seeking to cut its costs 10%, has proposed a wage freeze and benefit cuts.
The union said it wouldn't cast aside 15 years of labor policy to break the deadlock that caused negotiations to collapse, though it would accept smaller wage boosts in return for job guarantees.
The European Union Commission is expected this week to fine 17 steelmakers for alleged price fixing.
The move could raise tensions about plans to overhaul Western Europe's ailing steel industry.
Officials said the penalties would reflect cartel-like activity dating back to the late 1980s for collusion on prices and corporate data on market demand and trends.
Under EU competition law, fines can amount to as much as 10% of a company's annual revenue.
Industry officials were outraged by the planned action as they prepared for production-cutback talks today with the EU antitrust and industry commissioners.
Steelmakers and the EU have been at loggerheads since last autumn on how to reduce the sector's surplus capacity.
In December, the EU approved $7.52 billion in government subsidies for steelmakers owned by Germany, Italy, Spain and Portugal.
Other producers said the EU was letting subsidies distort competition, while pressing them for costly plant closures.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
China's pharmaceutical imports in 1993 rose 20% to $600 million from 1992 and almost doubled from 1991.
They accounted for at least 7% of China's pharmaceutical market, while foreign joint ventures' products represented 35%. . . .
The U.S. advised Americans traveling to or living in Egypt to be security-conscious and keep a low profile.
It cited threats and violence by Islamic extremists against foreign investors and tourists, even though U.S. citizens haven't been singled out as targets.
