George Mitchell doesn't talk like a lame duck, he doesn't act like a lame duck and, contrary to some expectations, he's not a lame duck as the Senate majority leader.
When the Maine Democrat stunned the political world earlier this month by announcing he wouldn't seek a certain re-election in the fall, it was widely assumed his considerable clout would wane.
Yet today Sen. Mitchell remains a central player in the major battles occupying Washington: health care legislation, the China trade dispute and the Clintons' Whitewater woes.
That's attributable to the special brand of Mitchell leadership.
When Lyndon Johnson ran the Senate more than three decades ago he could a) reward and punish his Democratic senators by controlling committee assignments, b) decide whether there'd be a roll call vote on most amendments and c) parcel out campaign dough to supportive senators in the pre-election reform era.
The majority leader today has none of those perquisites of power; unlike most of his fellow Democratic and GOP congressional leaders, Mr. Mitchell doesn't even have his own political action committee to curry favor.
He has few carrots and almost no sticks.
"I was asked if senators would no longer be afraid of me," he recalls in an interview this week.
"The answer is no senator has ever been afraid of me."
But the 60-year-old majority leader possesses unusual skill and infinite patience.
He can be fiercely partisan, single-handedly defeating President Bush's proposed capital-gains tax cut and giving the Democrats the tax fairness issue for the 1992 campaign.
He also is exceptionally thoughtful and persuasive.
Operating with archaic rules in a body of giant-sized egos, he commands extraordinary respect and credibility.
Many colleagues realize he not only makes the place work as well as possible, but not infrequently protects senators from themselves.
That prowess is little affected by lame duck status.
"I haven't detected the slightest diminution on my influence with colleagues," Sen. Mitchell says of the three weeks since he bowed out.
"Maybe it has even been enhanced on issues like health care."
That is an issue that he knows thoroughly and cares about passionately.
He expects that separate Senate Finance Committee and Labor Committee bills will reach the Senate floor in June or July -- assuming earlier House passage -- and he then will lead the tricky task of trying to stitch it all together.
Any successful bill will need some Republican support.
Sen. Mitchell has served on the Finance Committee health subcommittee for 14 years with GOP Sens. John Chafee and David Durenberger, who are the type of Republicans more interested in accomplishing something than in making an issue or placating interests.
"Not a single thing occurred on that subcommittee in 1987 and 1988 {when Mr. Mitchell was chairman} that would not have occurred" under Sens. Chafee or Durenberger, he pointedly noted at this week's Finance Committee health care retreat.
The sine qua non of successful health care legislation is universal coverage, and Sen. Mitchell knows that's possible only with mandates.
Thus he sees no compromises with a GOP faction that opposes any mandates, but he's clearly flexible on how any requirements should be fashioned.
Senate Finance Committee Chairman Pat Moynihan has worries about Republicans' threats to filibuster a health care bill they don't like.
George Mitchell's astute political antenna tells him this is a bluff: "A number of Republicans have told me they would be very concerned about" any filibuster, he says.
"Politically, it'd be a dynamite issue."
He's no less involved in the highly sensitive issue of whether to deny China most-favored-nation trade status if significant progress isn't made on human rights by early June.
George Mitchell was the chief Senate advocate of linking MFN to China's human rights record when President Bush vacillated after Tiananmen Square.
Sen. Mitchell says that unless China clearly improves its human rights performance in the next 10 weeks, President Clinton will have no choice but to revoke its trading status.
He acknowledges this is a "blunt instrument," but adamantly insists: "It is very important not to capitulate to the pleas of businessmen who want it {MFN} renewed at any cost."
Yet, behind the scenes, he's encouraging efforts by a bipartisan group of senators, led by Democrat John Kerry of Massachusetts and Republican John McCain of Arizona, to try to shape a new approach that would get by the June deadline without capitulating on human rights or returning to the laissez-faire human rights policies of George Bush; the hope then would be to find levers other than trade to pressure China on basic human rights.
He's engaged in similar high-level private consultations with the administration; without the active support of George Mitchell, these efforts are doomed.
On the touchy Whitewater scandal the Maine Democrat already rescued congressional Democrats and the White House from a steady drumbeat of stonewall allegations when he engineered a unanimous Senate vote to hold hearings at some unspecified future date.
By then a lot more will be known about progress of the outside counsel's investigation.
The Senate Republican leadership now is demanding a special investigatory panel; Senate GOP leader Bob Dole doesn't want the lead on Whitewater to be taken by the Banking Committee, where the ranking Republicans would be New York's Alfonse D'Amato, an ethical embarrassment, and Texas's Phil Gramm, a likely 1996 Dole rival for the GOP presidential nomination.
Sen. Mitchell suggests he's very unlikely to accommodate his friend and adversary Bob Dole.
George Mitchell, assured his place in history as one of the more effective Senate leaders of this century, privately is mentioned for every prominent position imaginable, ranging from secretary of state to baseball commissioner.
With his background as a judge and leader of an egocentric legislative body, he's ideally suited for the Supreme Court, especially to be the next chief justice.
But as a man of principle, it would be a travesty if he worked for the likes of George Steinbrenner.
When he decided to retire, Mr. Mitchell went to the White House to inform the president privately.
After meeting for over an hour in the family quarters, Bill Clinton took the Senate majority leader down to the Oval Office to try to talk him out of it.
A few hours later he telephoned Sen. Mitchell once more, again to no avail.
Aides say the president is deeply saddened that Mr. Mitchell is leaving, fearing this will leave a huge void.
He's right, but the good news for the White House is that the void won't open for six months.
