Mother nature has been busy visiting fires, storms and floods upon the Australian insurance industry, but so far that hasn't been enough to keep FAI Insurances Ltd. in red ink again this fiscal year, its chief executive, Rodney Adler, said.
In an interview, he said the insurer is looking forward to posting a profit for the fiscal year ending June 30, its first in four years.
For the six months ended Dec. 31, Mr. Adler said he expects the company to "certainly" report an after-tax profit.
"We're in profit," Mr. Adler says.
"We're back."
The company expects to disclose those results in mid-February.
By comparison, FAI posted a loss of A$6.5 million (US$4.6 million) in the year-earlier half.
For all of fiscal 1993, FAI reported a loss of A$10.8 million on operating revenue of A$1.13 billion.
Will the profitable trend continue throughout this year?
"We don't like to make forecasts, but I imagine the answer is yes," Mr. Adler said.
However, he adds the caveat: "We're in the risk business, so you never know.
But we don't like to make losses."
So far this fiscal year, "claims have been worse than anticipated," he said, mainly because of a hailstorm and the recent bush fires that swept across the state of New South Wales.
Adding to the string of bad news for insurers on the payout front, he said, are flash floods in the state of Tasmania and a cyclone in Queensland state.
FAI isn't directly exposed to the Los Angeles earthquake, but even that is having an indirect impact: The Australian insurer expects the bills from that disaster to add to the pressure world-wide to boost the cost of reinsurance.
Final figures aren't in for some of the disaster-related claims in Australia.
But Mr. Adler says claims from the recent bush fires are likely to cost FAI between A$2 million and A$2.5 million, which he indicated would have a minimal impact on the company's results.
Still, Mr. Adler says, "our recovery continues" and "premium income continues to grow."
Commenting on FAI's potential performance, Rob McWilliams, an analyst who tracks FAI at brokerage firm McIntosh & Co. said in an interview that he "wouldn't be surprised" if FAI posts a small profit, but he's looking more for a "break-even" result in the full year.
The insurer's shares sank to lows in April, trading around 42 Australian cents each on the Australian Stock Exchange.
They have rebounded since, closing Thursday at A$1.22, up five cents from the previous close.
Given that FAI "still has a lot of hurdles" to overcome past underwriting and investment mistakes before it proves itself to investors, Mr. McWilliams is telling his clients that at the current price, "it's too early to pay that much."
For his part, FAI's Mr. Adler argues that at this stage of the company's recovery, the stock would be "fairly valued" at between A$1.20 and A$1.50 a share.
To those shareholders looking for dividends, Mr. Adler said they'll be out of luck, at least for the first half.
"Depending on the size of the profit for the full year," though, he said "the board will consider paying a dividend."
FAI last paid an annual dividend in 1991 of four Australian cents a share.
Since August, FAI has raised A$43 million through placements of its shares.
Among them was an issue of new stock announced in October that raised A$26 million from Quantum Emerging Growth Partners C.V., giving the unit of financier George Soros's U.S. investment group a 10% stake in FAI.
Mr. Adler said FAI currently doesn't have any plans to offer more equity.
The Australian share market surged 40% last year and has gained an additional 3.5% since Jan. 1.
Mr. Adler said FAI is currently "cashed up," having taken advantage of the strong stock market to realize some of its investments.
"I've taken the view that the market is expensive and we've taken a lot of profit," he said.
In Asia, FAI has bought a small licensed insurer in Hong Kong that it renamed FAI First Pacific Insurance Co., which writes specialized insurance business such as workmen's compensation and company directors' liability insurance.
As for expansion in Asia, Mr. Adler said: "It's slowly, slowly for us."
While FAI intends to expand, mostly in general insurance, it currently doesn't have any plans to target the China market, unlike many other international insurers.
