Watching "Midnight Cowboy" on a big movie screen is both exhilarating and depressing.
Now 25 years old, it hasn't lost its power to shake you up as only a powerful movie can do.
That's the exhilarating part.
The depression sets in later, when you realize how rare that experience has become.
"Midnight Cowboy" will almost certainly be the most exciting "new" movie this year.
Mr. Voight's portrayal of Joe Buck remains astonishingly touching.
Mr. Hoffman's Ratso Rizzo is all you remember, and possibly more.
With "Schindler's List" Mr. Spielberg has created something that falls outside the ordinary, or even extraordinary, in movies.
There is enormous passion and artistic integrity throughout this film about a hedonistic German industrialist who found a moment of grace by saving more than a thousand Jews from the Nazis.
"Schindler's List" emphasizes Mr. Spielberg's real genius: His poetic visual imagination, his intelligence and the sense of humanity that so profoundly informed his earlier films and became less noticeable after the huge success of "E.T.: The Extraterrestrial."
Filmed in black and white, it has both the deep feeling and hypnotic beauty of the Italian neorealist films made after World War II, by filmmakers who had lived through the brutality of war -- the emotional truth of experience.
It started out as a musical but got its songs axed and was left a mess, but entertaining, and only partly because James Brooks has written some funny jokes about the movie business.
The movie's fascination also lies in its weaknesses, in its uncertain tone, its wavering between niceness and bitterness.
Its big ambitions and scattered accomplishments make it perplexing to watch but interesting to think about.
The characterizations, usually the mainstay of a Brooks creation, are surprisingly glib, though Albert Brooks is hilarious as a minor movie mogul.
A harrowing, fascinating account of a true story: A young Irishman and his family, wrongly convicted of terrorism and murder by the British authorities.
The young man, Gerry Conlon, spent years in prison before a lawyer, believing he was wronged, gets the case reopened.
Mr. Day-Lewis gives Gerry's confusion and political awakening (and his disillusionment) gritty authenticity.
Though the subject is politics, the film's heart is its exploration of the relationship between Gerry and his father, a moral man given the strength of saints by the man who plays him, Mr. Postlethwaite.
With sensuous grace this film captures the hothouse life of a bourgeois household in the Saigon of 1951 -- both the beauty and the rot within, as seen through the eyes of a young girl named Mui who comes to work there when she is 10.
At first she thinks it may be paradise, as she marvels at the papaya tree outside her window, or the struggle of an ant to move a crumb from here to there.
But it soon becomes apparent to her that there are inner disturbances.
Upstairs the grandmother prays for the dead; downstairs the rich owners live the life of the dead.
The man of the house never leaves because of the evil he has done and the evil he thinks he's done.
His wife suffers and their sons react with small cruelties toward insects and servants.
It's a thriller about a pretty musician named Emma who regains her sight after 20 years of blindness just in time to witness a murderer leaving his victim.
Though this leads to the usual spasms of thriller victimhood, the movie is surprisingly scary and emotionally convincing -- especially in the first half, before the plot wears itself out.
Ms. Stowe proves again that she is one of the most exciting young actresses working today.
She gives the illusion of having all the right stuff: guts, sexiness and the inner tension of a thinking person.
She is nicely paired with Mr. Quinn, who may or may not be a convincing street cop but he's a good match in the guts, sexiness and thinking-person department.
