The U.S. Treasury securities market shrugged off news of stronger economic growth, with prices posting an impressive rally late in the session.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond rose 5/8 point, or $6.25 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 99 25/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, dropped to 6.26% from 6.30% on Wednesday.
The bond market managed to weather two economic reports that, on the surface, could have spelled trouble.
The Commerce Department reported that new orders for durable goods jumped 2.2% during December, slightly more than expected.
The Labor Department, meanwhile, announced that initial unemployment claims fell 56,000 to 309,000 last week.
Bond investors often react negatively to reports of a stronger economy because they fear higher inflation, which reduces the value of investments with a fixed rate of return.
David Greenlaw, economist at Morgan Stanley & Co., said the durable goods report not only reflected economic strength at the tail end of 1993, but also gave hints of how the economy should perform in early 1994.
The data confirmed "that there was some momentum at the end of the fourth quarter, but we really already knew that," Mr. Greenlaw said.
The report also "sets the stage for some momentum in the factory sector in the first quarter."
But traders and investors, meanwhile, chose to view the December data as old news, and the jobless claims data were written off as muddied by problematic seasonal factors and distorted by the bad weather.
As a result, an early attempt at pushing prices down faded quickly.
Prices drifted for most of the session before spiking up late in the session.
Supporting Treasury prices and helping to provide a launching pad for the market was a small but steady flow of investor interest in the market.
"There are accounts that just have money they need to put to work," said Tim Heaton, a bond trader at Nikko Securities Co.
International Inc.
Much of that cash had been invested earlier this month in securities maturing in two years and less, but some of that money is now beginning to work its way into longer issues, according to dealers.
Traders, meanwhile, scrambled to replace Treasury securities that had been sold to customers or to unwind hedges that had been set against other fixed-income products.
And as the market worked higher, it broke through technical levels, drawing even more buying into the market and extending the rally.
There are some signs, however, that there is a limit to the amount of cash on the sidelines.
Figures from the Investment Company Institute released yesterday showed that although investors continued to pour more money into mutual funds in December, less of that cash is heading into the government-bond market.
The ICI data showed government-bond funds experienced a net outflow of $782 million last month, following a $708 million outflow in November.
In contrast, investors placed a net $704 million into government funds during October.
Jeff Tyler, a portfolio manager at Benham Group, said that although there has been solid interest in municipal-bond funds and equity funds, "we have seen very little interest in the government sector."
In fact, he said, "we lost a little bit of money out of governments."
The bond market also has two nearterm hurdles to face.
This morning, the government will release its initial reading on fourth-quarter growth in gross domestic product.
Traders are bracing for a strong reading of a 5% to 6% rate of growth.
Then on Monday, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan is scheduled to go before the Joint Economic Committee of Congress to discuss the Fed's economic outlook.
Traders and analysts will carefully comb through his remarks for any signs of when the Fed might raise interest rates.
Ontario's debt was welcomed into the corporate-bond market for the second time this week, as the Canadian province sold $2 billion of floating-rate global notes yesterday.
Syndicate officials said the deal went "extremely well," as the size of the offering was increased by $500 million from an original $1.5 billion.
Ontario sold the 5 1/2-year notes at 99.595.
The notes will float at a rate 0.08 percentage point above the three-month London interbank offered rate.
Ontario's deal, the province's first floating-rate global offering, followed its 1.25 billion Canadian dollar (US$951 million) global 30-year issue on Monday.
Global offerings are sold simultaneously in the world's major markets and are intended to be easily traded in all of them.
Ontario's assistant deputy minister of finance, John Madden, said the province opted for a global floating-rate note as a means of diversifying its financings.
The issue was done at a lower cost than a comparable domestic issue, he said.
More than half of those buyers were money managers, while banks and pension funds also bought into the offering, said Mr. Jack of Lehman.
"There's a real demand for floating-rate securities," Mr. Jack said.
Because the issue floats on a quarterly basis, it provides protection from rising interest rates, he added.
While uncertainty about Ontario's fiscal outlook led Standard & Poor's Corp. to downgrade the province's debt to double-A-minus from double-A in November, investors, especially in Europe, continue to flock to Ontario's paper because of its name recognition, one analyst said.
"Even though their credit standing diminished, they are still double-A.
And that's still investment-grade," the analyst added.
The notes are rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc.
Although investors gave them a warm reception, the 30-year bonds brought to market by Ontario on Monday traded down slightly in the secondary market.
The 7.5% coupon bonds maturing in 2024 dropped 0.17 point, or $1.70 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 98.25.
The yield rose to 7.65% from 7.635%.
Proceeds from Ontario's offering will be used to fund its operations for the 1994 fiscal year, which ends in March 1995.
Ontario's Mr. Madden said the province's total borrowings for the year are expected to be C$10 billion.
Overall, Ontario has more than C$76 billion in debt outstanding.
In the investment-grade market, prices rose in lock step with Treasurys.
The junk bond market continues on a hot streak, as new issues are being priced with extremely low coupons and are trading higher in the secondary market.
"There's no end to this market.
It's unbelievable," one trader said.
Yesterday's junk offerings included a $360 million offering of 10-year notes from Playtex Family Products Corp. and a $125 million offering of 12-year notes from Riggs National Corp.
However, yesterday's biggest mover wasn't a new issue.
Kaiser Aluminum & Chemical Corp.'s 12 3/4% coupon bonds, due 2003, jumped 3.5 points, or $35 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 107.5.
The yield to the first par call dropped to 11.18% from 12.715%.
Kaiser is a unit of Kaiser Aluminum Corp.
Municipal bonds continued their advance yesterday and generally closed 3/8 to 3/4 point higher.
Muni specialists say the market is drawing strength from a slowdown in issuance.
Among the few offerings priced this session was Illinois's $100 million of sales-tax revenue bonds.
That issue was won by a Merrill Lynch & Co. group with a bid setting the true interest cost at 4.9593% and given yields that range from 2.75% in 1995 to 5.30% in 2019.
In secondary dealings, the Harris County, Texas, 5.30% bonds due 2013 closed 1/2 stronger at 99 7/8, yielding 5.30%.
The New York State Medical Care Facilities Finance Agency's 5.50% bonds due 2024 finished 3/4 higher at 100, yielding 5.48%.
Although munis seemed to be independently strong this session, they were helped by the Treasury bond market's climb, traders say.
Both tax-exempt bonds and Treasurys strengthened despite news about the unexpectedly large 2.2% increase in durablegoods orders last month, and uncertainties about the fourth-quarter gross domestic product data to be released today.
Economists surveyed by Dow Jones Capital Markets Report estimate that GDP grew at a 5.2% annual rate in the fourth quarter after expanding at a 2.9% rate in the third quarter.
Despite signs of renewed economic vigor, Lebenthal & Co.
Managing Director Denis Galle said concerns about Federal Reserve tightening appear to be on the back burner.
Chrysler Corp. priced $1.5 billion of auto-loan debt and Society Corp.'s Society National Bank issued $234.7 million of student-loan securities, as asset-backed activity overshadowed the mortgage-backed market.
Separately, the Federal National Mortgage Association announced one new real estate mortgage investment conduit and an increase of a deal for $800 million of new securities.
Collateral was 30-year 6 1/2% and 7% securities.
Also, Fannie Mae issued a $1.1 billion stripped mortgage securities deal that used 15-year 6 1/2 securities as collateral.
In trading, mortgage securities ended a featureless session with moderate price gains, with 6 1/2% securities for February delivery all up 5/32, half the price increase posted by 10-year Treasury notes.
Ginnie Maes closed at 100 8/32, Freddie Mac Golds ended at 100 11/32, and Fannie Maes finished at 100 5/32.
Chrysler's Premier Auto Trust 1994-1 offering was the second major deal this week to benefit from investor demand for top-rated asset-backed paper.
The offering was backed by auto and light truck receivables originated by the company's Chrysler Financial Corp. unit and was managed by Bear Stearns & Co.
CS First Boston priced the $234.7 million deal for Society National, which was backed by loans to law students.
The deal is the second publicly offered security backed by student loans to be offered by the Cleveland bank.
The largest portion of the Society offering was a $158.6 million floating-rate class priced with an initial coupon of 3.455% at par to float 0.33 point above the one-month London interbank offered rate.
Andrew Willis contributed to this column.
