It wasn't quite the great day for the Irish that many had hoped for.
Gerry Adams, leader of the Sinn Fein political party, used his 48-hour visa to the U.S. to deliver a dense history lesson, but failed to pack a clearly identifiable olive branch in his overnight bag.
Speaking at the Waldorf Astoria to a mostly Irish-American audience, including lawyers, academics and polticians, assembled by the National Committe on American Foreign Policy, Mr. Adams repeated his call for the British government to clarify its joint declaration of last December with the Irish government, to accept the principle of national self-determination and to set out a time frame for its realization.
This formulation in essence repeated the call for a united Ireland, a position that the Protestant majority of Northern Ireland and the British government oppose.
Although granted a visa by President Clinton on the grounds that his views on violence and a political settlement of the conflict in Northern Ireland had changed markedly in a meeting last week with American diplomats, Mr. Adams refused to call specifically on the Irish Republican Army to lay down its arms.
He asked instead for an end "to all armed actions and a total demilitarization" including the withdrawal of British troops.
There are 20,000 British troops and 12,000 armed police in Northern Ireland.
Sinn Fein (We Ourselves) is a political party closely linked with the IRA and supported by about 40% of Northern Ireland's Catholic minority.
Although Mr. Adams, 44 years old, says he hasn't any role in the IRA, the British government describes him as a terrorist.
Until now, he had been excluded from the U.S. on those grounds.
But many Irish and Irish-Americans hail the former bartender and prolific short-story writer as a tireless fighter for a just peace for Northern Ireland's Catholics.
Mr. Adams, whose father was an IRA fighter shot by Protestants and who has himself been shot, held without charge in British jails and beaten in police cells, said he's prepared to negotiate with anyone -- "even the man who pulled the trigger on me" -- to bring peace.
He attended the conference in New York with representatives from two other Northern Ireland political parties, Dr. John Alderdice, the Protestant leader of the Alliance Party, a moderate force in the political spectrum, and John Hume of the Social Democratic and Labor Party, which represents 60% of Northern Ireland's Catholic voters and disassociates itself from violence.
Leaders of two more-extreme Protestant parties declined invitations.
One, the Rev. Ian Paisley of the Democratic Unionist Party, told the conference organizers that the mere fact of Mr. Adams's invitation precluded his taking part.
"It's important to realize that the people who represent more than 50% of opinion in Northern Ireland aren't here today," said Dr. Alderdice, a 38-year-old psychotherapist.
He said Mr. Adams's remarks "far from furthering the dialogue, actually took it back a step to statements he was making before the joint declaration."
