Trumbull, Conn. -- "Can you tell how to get to Clavier Music," asked a visitor, lost in the maze of the Trumbull Shopping Park.
"Turn left at the bank and follow your ears."
Today, passersby are listening to the song stylings of the store's assistant manager Adrian Muir, who's standing in front of the Lowrey "Genie" organ at Clavier's entrance playing, now "Alley Cat," now "It Had to Be You," now "Melody of Love," songs carefully chosen for their ability to soothe the savage breasts and open the wallets of the sixty- and seventy-somethings traversing the southwestern Connecticut mall.
Almost certainly after that guaranteed crowd pleaser "Lara's Theme," better known as "Somewhere My Love," Mr. Muir will hear from a senior citizen -- or two or three -- what is music to his ears: "I've always wanted to learn to play the organ."
The would-be E. Power Biggses have come to the right place.
In an effort to boost flagging organ sales, Clavier, like several other music stores around the country, has established on-site, ongoing music group lessons for golden-agers.
The purchase of an organ guarantees free lifetime classes.
Those who aren't quite ready to buy an instrument pay only a nominal fee, around $1.50 per class.
Currently, 20,000-25,000 seniors in major retirement states like Florida, California, Arizona along with Texas, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, New Jersey, Missouri and Connecticut are involved in the program.
Included are monthly newsletters, graduation exercises at the end of each 10-week session complete with potluck dinner and, depending on a student's progress, a chance to perform at hospitals and retirement centers.
"We promise them that in the first six weeks they'll be playing six songs with both hands," said Clavier's regional manager Larry Godwin.
Among those half dozen tunes: "Marianne" with a Latin beat, "When the Saints Go Marching In," Dixieland style, and a Big Band-flavored "In the Mood."
In Level I, students also do some composing.
"An 82-year-old man who a few weeks ago didn't know C from Gee Whiz just wrote a composition for organ," Mr. Godwin noted.
The program is the brainchild of Robert Zadel, former head of the San Diego music company Organ Exchange, and founder of Link Us International, a Mission Viejo-based consulting firm for the senior citizens' market.
"I could see that the organ business was changing and was getting tougher," he said.
"I had noticed over the years in the home organ music that most of our clients had gray hair.
I went to organ concerts and saw that the audience was 100 percent gray hairs.
That began to trigger my imagination.
The seniors were attracted by the product.
So I started specializing in attracting the seniors.
Mr. Zadel makes it all sound as simple as do-re-mi but there was plenty of need for fine-tuning along the way.
"When you teach seniors you have to walk a fine line between education and fun," he said.
Instead of the original concept of having six students per class, Mr. Zadel and his clients found that 25-30 made for a better social experience.
They also found that recognizing achievement was very important.
Thus, the frequent graduation ceremonies and the "student of the month" award.
According to Mr. Zadel, the success of the program encouraged the Italian company General Music, S.p.A. to design an American organ specially for the senior citizen market.
The printing on the display panel (students call it the dashboard just as they call the volume control the gas pedal) is larger than on conventional organs.
The buttons that control various features are also bigger to help accommodate arthritic hands.
"The sound is big, broad beautiful tones rather than strident heavy metal sound," said Mr. Zadel.
"And the rhythm patterns are reminiscent of the 30', 40' and 50's music rather than today's sound.
"Prior to this program the organ business was ready to hit the bricks because we were designing organs for tech-heads.
They were becoming more like computers than good old-fashioned instruments," added Mr. Zadel who estimates the organ business has annual sales of $100 million with seniors accounting for 70% of the market.
"The senior market is of significant value to us," said Frank West, national advertising manager for the Chicago-based Lowrey Organ Company whose $2995 "Genie" is the model of choice for seniors starting out in the program.
"But," he adds, "If they don't learn how to play it's of no use so the educational program has been very helpful to us."
Clearly, the program has been of equal benefit to the stores.
One branch of the Kansas City, Mo.-based Jenkins Music Company chain had been slated to close "but the success of the program has been so staggering that the store is thriving," said Jenkins's president Hal Cowan.
"Now, we're thinking of opening more stores to expand the program."
"It's a win-win situation," said Jim Sowell, sales manager at Holcombe Music in Houston.
"We find if we truly service these people, teach them how to use the instrument, then either on a direct or residual basis that's where our sales will come from.
And our customers get something out of it.
They get a hobby.
It's life enhancing."
For a price.
While the entry cost can be as low as $299 for a used organ, the average sticker price for a first time buyer, according to Mr. Zadel is $1600.
A student at Clavier Music who started with an $800 used organ recently traded up to a $20,000 model, an expense he justified because of his eight-hour-a-day practice habit.
His classmates are equally enthusiastic.
"But we don't use the word `practice,' We use the word `play,' "said 69-year-old Ev Herbert, a retired machine designer who plays many hours a day.
"I put on the big band sound and groove."
One woman who needed gall bladder surgery scheduled her operation so as not to conflict with graduation from Level III.
Others have insisted that playing the organ has helped their insomnia and arthritis.
The one thing all this practicing hasn't done is catapult any of these late-onset organists onto the stage of Carnegie Hall -- or any other professional venue.
"I don't think anybody in the program expects to go out on the road and perform," said Holcombe Music's Mr. Sowell.
But, he points out, seniors aren't being patronized with watered-down instruction.
While the songs are printed on extra-large sheet music (a nod to failing eyesight) and while the students begin the program using easy-play notation (the letter C, for example, is printed under a C note), they progress quickly to standard notation and are taught correct fingering, timing and harmony.
"It's a real musical education," insisted Hal Cowan.
"It's not some hokey-pokey thing."
You could see what he meant in the glass fronted classroom just off Clavier's sales floor, where Level IV students were discussing their progress on "After You've Gone."
"How did you all do with your practicing?" asked instructor Linda Hastings.
"There were a lot of new chords.
Now who wants to play it?
We'll take it real slow."
"I can't do it slow," mourns one septagenarian.
Using an overhead projector, Ms. Hastings displayed a scale and invited her charges to come up with some chord progressions.
"C minor," she encouraged.
"Any guess on how we would play that?"
"Softly." came a voice from the back of the room.
The students, who are constantly -- and proudly -- reminding Mr. Hastings just how old they are, fall into two categories.
Either they had music lessons forced on them as children and never had the freedom to play for pleasure or they grew up in families where music study just wasn't in the budget.
Such was the case with Kay Telesha, 67, who's bought two organs since enrolling in the Clavier program.
"I've always wanted to play `The Star Spangled Banner' at Yankee Stadium, she said.
"If Roseanne can sing it, I can play it."
Ms. Kaufman is a free-lance writer in New York.
