Teachers' unions hoped that after spending more than $16 million last year to defeat a California school voucher initiative they had buried the idea nationally.
Instead, community leaders in state after state are breaking ranks to support full school choice.
Most troubling for the educational establishment is that the movement includes many blacks, Hispanics and Democrats.
This week, the Hispanic Community Forum, Arizona's largest grass-roots Latino organization, joined with the state's Hispanic Chamber of Commerce and several other minority groups to endorse a sweeping education reform bill that's now only one or two votes shy of passing the legislature.
The bill would allow self-governing public charter schools and a pilot voucher program that would include 8,000 children by 1999.
Democratic Rep. Linda Aguirre was a public school teacher for nine years and then a school board member before being elected to the legislature.
She is tired of excuses about why public schools don't work.
"The education community hasn't given my voters the full story," she told us.
After she decided to back school choice, the local teachers' union warned choice would "bankrupt" schools in her district.
"They imply public schools will collapse if we allow a few parents some freedom," she says.
"If they really believe schools are that bad, then what kind of system are they defending?"
Across the country, State Rep. Eddie Garcia, a Democrat who represents part of Hartford, Conn., is asking the same question.
This week, he joined with Tom Luby, the Democratic House Majority Leader, and several GOP legislators to introduce a bill to allow local-option choice programs.
The Washington-based Center for Education Reform reports Fairfield and Waterbury are likely to adopt choice plans once they get the green light.
Elsewhere, Bret Schundler, the Republican mayor of Jersey City, N.J., reports he has significant Democratic support for his choice proposal.
Both Messrs. Garcia and Schundler have powerful state Democrats as potential allies.
Last month, U.S. Senators Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut and Bill Bradley of New Jersey voted for a pilot federal voucher choice program.
Still, the growing number of Democratic dissidents on choice can't hide the reality that the party remains dominated by its teachers' union allies, who supplied nearly a fourth of its 1992 convention delegates.
Some pro-choice Democrats say the pressures on them are so intense they wonder if they can remain in their party.
Indeed, last week Georgia State Senator Roy Allen, who has represented Savannah in the state legislature for 12 years, left the Democratic Party to become a Republican.
He says voters in his 55% black district support school choice and workfare, but Democratic leaders want to preserve the status quo.
"Many of my black colleagues told me privately they like school choice, but they can't buck the unions," he told us.
"So I'm now in a party I believe truly wants opportunity for all."
Senator Allen says he is particularly offended that many politicians who oppose choice nonetheless exercise that option when it comes to their own kids.
President Clinton is the most famous example, but a recent Heritage Foundation survey of Congress on choice found he isn't alone.
Nearly 90% of the Black and Hispanic Caucuses in Congress responded and the results were eye-opening.
The survey found that seven out of 10 Hispanic Caucus Members with school-age children send their children to private schools.
Eight out of 27 Black Caucus Members with children -- or 30% -- do the same.
Nationwide, only 6% of Hispanics and 4% of blacks send their children to private schools.
Legislators such as Linda Aguirre, Eddie Garcia and Roy Allen are showing genuine courage when they buck the pressure groups and side with parents on education reform.
One can't say the same for those officeholders who practice the same educational choice in their personal lives that they block for their constituents.
