On the political trail toward what could become Eastern Europe's next war, it's a euphoric moment.
Waving a bunch of carnations under the new blue, white and red flag, Yuri Meshkov celebrates his inauguration as the first president of Crimea, currently a quasi-autonomous republic within Ukraine.
The Crimean parliamentary chamber is packed; the lean, white-haired Mr. Meshkov gets four standing ovations before he even starts to speak.
He vows to lead Crimea to independence, and his platform included a promise to hold a referendum on the issue.
"I would like to consider my inauguration the beginning of the process of Crimea joining the United Nations," he says.
Such a break from Ukraine would free Crimea to achieve Mr. Meshkov's final goal in that process, "unity with Russia."
In Ukraine's capital of Kiev, the reaction is threats, warnings and a ban on Crimea's holding the promised referendum.
However, Crimea cares less and less what Kiev decrees.
Ukraine's unreformed economy is in collapse, and Crimeans are desperate to link up with the relatively richer Russia.
Crimea's friction with Kiev demonstrates the political and economic fault lines opening across many of the newly independent states spun off from the Soviet empire.
This rocky peninsula in the Black Sea is one of such places as Kazakhstan and the Caucasus where the Soviets redrew borders and shuffled populations to fragment dissent.
When the Soviet Union shattered in 1991 into 15 independent nations, the result was that many ethnic Russians were marooned in foreign states such as Ukraine.
The need to protect them gives Russia the right to intervene in the former Soviet states it calls the "near abroad," say Russia's Defense Minister Pavel Grachev and Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev.
Russian voters in December gave hefty support to the ultra-nationalist head of the misnamed Liberal Democratic Party, Vladimir Zhirinovsky, who has promised to assemble under Russian rule an empire bigger than even the Soviets acquired.
Crimea is a natural target for Russia's acquisitive itch.
Some 70% of Crimea's 2.5 million people are ethnic Russians; indeed, Crimea was part of Russia for the better part of two centuries after Catherine the Great pried it from the Turks in 1783.
Nikita Khrushchev handed Crimea over to Ukraine in 1954 in a token of Russian-Ukrainian friendship, a rather meaningless gift in a Soviet empire controlled by Moscow.
But in 1991, Crimean voters approved, by 55%, Ukraine's exit from the Soviet Union, hoping free Ukrainian rule might deliver them a better life.
Since then, inflation fed by Kiev's unreformed bureaucracy has climbed to about 90% a month -- more than three times worse than in Russia.
Fuel once lavished on Ukraine by Soviet central planners is now costly and scarce.
People paid in bundles of fast-devaluing Ukrainian coupons yearn for rubles, and many see Russia, for all its troubles, as the promised land.
So, in a heavy turnout on Jan. 30, Crimean voters delivered a 73% mandate to Mr. Meshkov.
It was seen here as a preview of support for his promised referendum, which might be held on March 27, the same date as Ukrainian and Crimean parliamentary elections.
Crimea's defiance is a lit fuse as Kiev politicians struggle to hold together their bankrupt and increasingly restive nation.
Ukraine is polarized between nationalists, concentrated heavily in the west, and ethnic Russians concentrated in the east.
Last fall, Ukraine's Transcarpathian region near the Hungarian and Slovakian borders made a failed bid for independence, inciting nationalist militia to start drilling in the area.
The eastern coal-mining center of Donetsk, near the Russian border, has been demanding economic autonomy.
In this climate, secession by Crimea could trigger civil war, and Russia could prove to be the wild card.
In Washington, Central Intelligence Agency Director James Woolsey warned last month that Ukraine, with its 52 million people and 1,800 nuclear warheads, has reached a stage of potential crisis.
"Secessionist forces would probably appeal to Moscow for support," and Russia might join the fray, he told the Senate Select Intelligence Committee.
When the Soviet Union fell, the West hoped Russia, the linchpin state, would focus on internal reform and let its neighbors alone.
Instead, with reform on the ropes, Russia has been turning to its old, interfering ways -- fighting to prop up an anti-Muslim Communist regime in Tajikistan, dabbling in conflicts in Georgia and Azerbaijan and seeking economic supervision over countries such as Belarus and Uzbekistan.
Long a favorite seaside retreat for the Russian elite, Crimea is a particularly tempting target for intervention: Control of the peninsula brings control of Sevastopol, home port of the former Soviet Black Sea Fleet, and access to the Mediterranean Sea.
Ukraine and Russia have been squabbling over rights to the fleet, with its roughly 300 warships, 70,000 personnel and extensive shore facilities.
Half a dozen summits between presidents Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine and Boris Yeltsin of Russia have failed to resolve the dispute.
The fleet has been left rusting in undersupplied and unhappy limbo.
Meanwhile, Russian support was amply displayed during the Crimea's presidential elections in January, during which five of the six candidates campaigned for Crimea to leave Ukraine and join Russia.
When Mr. Meshkov won, he was inundated with messages of congratulations and support from such Russian dignitaries as Konstantin Zatulin, chairman in the Russian Parliament's lower house of the Committee on Affairs of the Commonwealth of Independent States and Links With Compatriots.
Mr. Zatulin's committee plans to send a delegation to Crimea later this month.
Mr. Meshkov, a gentle speaker with a soft handshake, has long been more closely tied to Moscow than to Kiev.
Born while his parents were moving from Russia's Don region to Crimea, the 49-year-old Mr. Meshkov once served as a Soviet border guard in Armenia.
"I was the best automatic-weapons marksman in the KGB," he claims.
He later studied law at Moscow State University and rose through the Communist Party as an investigator in the Crimean prosecutor's office.
In 1990, he says, he left the Communist Party.
It isn't clear, however, that Mr. Meshkov has left behind his old ties to Russian military and security networks.
He ran his presidential campaign from the clubhouse of the local Society of Afghanistan Veterans, though he never served in Afghanistan.
The society's leader, Vladimir Klichnikov, explains that some of his organization's main assets are its cross-border connections with Russia.
Another of the society's original financial backers is Russian-born Valery Awerkin, who helped found Mr. Meshkov's Republican Party of Crimea.
Mr. Awerkin runs a business conglomerate based in the Crimean capital, Simferopol, called Impex55.
It has been under investigation by Kiev as an alleged channel for Russian money into Crimean politics.
Mr. Awerkin says his company does business with Russia, and explains that for Crimean entrepreneurs, reunion with Russia is necessary to provide a market, because "nobody is going to buy our products in the West."
Mr. Awerkin also believes that Russia is the rightful heir to all former Soviet territory: "Our idea is that the state of Russia, which was called the Soviet Union for 70 years, will be re-created."
He notes that trying to reunite with Russia has its risks: "Chernobyl and Yugoslavia will be child's play compared to the potential conflict in Crimea," he says calmly.
Nonetheless, "It's impossible to leave things as they are."
But many of Crimea's pro-Russian leaders seem sure they are immune to a Balkan-type conflict.
War "can't happen here," says the president of the Russian Society of Crimea, Anatoly Los.
Surrounded by a crowd of pro-Russian revelers in front of Parliament on the day Mr. Meshkov's victory was announced, the bearded Mr. Los explained that "this is not Yugoslavia" because "people are smarter here."
Some foreign observers note hopefully that Mr. Meshkov has been watering down his rhetoric since the elections, playing up hopes of economic union with Russia and ducking questions about his promised referendum.
"He's mellowing out," says Ian Brzezinski, a consultant to the Ukrainian Parliament's council of advisers.
But Mr. Meshkov faces intense pressure from voters and pro-Russian politicians to keep his word.
"No compromise with Kravchuk and Ukraine," says the Russian Society's Mr. Los.
Another deputy to Crimea's Parliament, Aleksandr Kruglov, says that in the March 27 elections, "the main purpose is to bring as many Russian patriots as possible to the Crimean Parliament, to make Meshkov fulfill all his programs."
The Russianborn Mr. Kruglov believes that "Russian troops should be sent to Sevastopol if necessary" to reclaim Crimea.
He says it would be worth the risk of conflict, because "we will suffer less from war than Ukraine."
In practice, Russian armed forces are massively present in Sevastopol right now, under the flag of the old Soviet Black Sea Fleet.
Aboard one submarine support ship, moored along a Sevastopol wharf, Captain First Class Vladimir Vasukov warns, "We are armed to the teeth."
He then sorts out his loyalties: "I'm Russian.
I live in Ukraine.
I serve the Black Sea Fleet."
He hits the bottom line: "I'm registered as a Russian officer.
And Russia pays me."
Kiev's weakening hold over Crimea is underscored by the fate of Mr. Meshkov's rival in the Jan. 30 two-man presidential runoff election, pro-Ukrainian Mykola Bagrov.
A veteran Ukrainian apparatchik from Kiev, and speaker of the Crimean Parliament until he resigned last week, Mr. Bagrov was the architect last fall of the legislation that created a presidency in Crimea.
His aim in setting up the office was to appease Crimeans demanding autonomy by turning the peninsula into a somewhat more independent pro-Kiev enclave, run by himself.
But he lost.
Mr. Bagrov's program gained him only 23% of the final vote, coming mainly from the frightened minorities of ethnic Ukrainians and Tatars.
The Tatars are indigenous to Crimea, and their leader, Mustafa Cemiloglu, is most worried by the pro-Russian movement.
"Democracy in Russia usually stops where nationalism starts," says the wizened 50-year-old.
His Tatar people, who would like their own semi-autonomous state in Crimea, reluctantly backed the pro-Kiev Mr. Bagrov.
They fear a repetition of their past bitter experience of Moscow rule.
In the 1940s, Stalin deported Crimea's entire Tatar population of about 400,000 to Central Asia.
Some 250,000 Tatars recently have returned to Crimea, Mr. Cemiloglu among them.
Speaking from his small family home in the Crimean town of Bakhchisarai, Mr. Cemiloglu says that Ukraine must fight for Crimea "if Ukraine wants to remain an independent state."
Ethnic Ukrainians in Crimea share his anxieties.
"The situation is very similar to before World War II, when the West couldn't stop Hitler," says Yuri Ilyin, chairman of the Sevastopol branch of a Ukrainian cultural society.
An oceanographer working in an icy, fuel-starved research institute by the Sevastopol harbor, Mr. Ilyin shows off the sunset view of his weapon-filled city and sums up, "I am afraid."
