The International Olympics Committee is expected to announce today that CBS Inc. has won the rights to televise the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan.
The expected win -- for an estimated $375 million -- follows CBS's stunning loss in December of the rights to a package of National Football League games that the network had held for 38 years.
CBS was outbid by News Corp.'s Fox network, which bid $1.58 billion over four years, $400 million more than CBS was willing to offer.
By contrast, CBS won the rights to the 1998 Nagano games -- the network's third consecutive Winter Olympics -- without a fight.
General Electric Co.'s NBC and Capital Cities/ABC Inc.'s ABC decided to pass on the games because they were too expensive, given what CBS was willing to bid.
And the IOC and Fox decided mutually that Fox, which initially expressed an interest in the games, would not bid, said Richard Pound, a member of the IOC's executive board.
"We agreed with Fox that at this time in their evolution and ours, the best thing for us would be to negotiate with CBS and see if we could reach an agreement," Mr. Pound said, adding that Fox still needs to show that it can "do a terrific job with the properties they have now."
CBS's winning bid of $375 million is an increase of 27% from the $295 million it paid for the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway, which begin Feb. 12.
While CBS's competitors felt they couldn't make money at that level of bidding, CBS believes other factors can make up for potential financial losses.
For example, the network is trying to sustain a sports division that suddenly is bereft of several top-flight events, including Major League Baseball and the NFL.
In addition, the Winter Games, a combination of live and taped events, will help CBS affiliate stations, which depend on February ratings to set ad rates.
The affiliates agreed last week to give the network some financial support for the games.
CBS's seven owned television stations will also benefit from higher ratings during the Olympics.
CBS is also betting that the economy will improve and that it will be able to recoup from advertisers the rights fees, as well as production expenses that are expected to be high, considering the cost of doing business in Japan.
