And now, straight from the outer limits of law enforcement, a fuzzy yellow angst machine and a 12-ton bucket of bolts -- Duckman and Robocop.
These two would have trouble getting arrested on the networks, but roaming the lunatic fringe of cable and syndication, they fight for truth, justice and American television.
Let me start by stating for the record that I am (in the parlance of the street) down with the Duck.
A very adult primetime cartoon that blows away competitors like "The Critic" and "The Simpsons" with its twisted imagination, "Duckman" (USA, Saturdays, 10:30-11 p.m. EST) is the tale of mallard, P.I. -- a bitter, pathetic crime-fighting waterfowl who doesn't know where he fits in the scheme of the cosmos.
"I'm just one more duck detective who works with a pig, lives with the twin sister of his dead wife, three sons, two bodies and a comatose mother-in-law with so much gas she's a fire hazard," Duckman complains.
Living in a run-down, overcrowded house by the side of the freeway, this duck is trying to raise his kids as he grapples with crime, and frankly, both jobs seem a little beyond his abilities.
Duckman will battle supercomputers run amok, religious charlatans and a mad bomber who has mistaken him for another duck detective.
He will nearly meet his end in an art gallery, suffocated in cellophane by Crisco, "our greatest wrap artist."
But this hard-boiled detective with his taste for snarling bon mots ("play with tigers and you get covered in yellow hair") and X-rated flicks (like "Howard's End") is on the trail of something more than just bad guys.
Our hero -- just your average duck -- keeps stumbling on clues to the big questions, the ontological ones: "I'd dream I fell and hit my head on a fishbowl and hurt myself just bad enough to work the graveyard shift at a convenience store.
A group of Hare Krishnas always came in at 4 a.m. and bought 16 gallons of Mr. Slushee and a package of banana-flavored Ding Dongs.
Then the Swedish Bikini team jumped out of a magazine and read `Moby Dick' to me inside a giant carton of cottage cheese.
I'd ask myself.
What could it mean?
Am I mad?
Or is the world simply a mystery too complex for me to understand?"
Wittgenstein meets Walt Disney?
This animated film noir -- or film jaune -- owes a debt to everyone from Sartre to Bogart to Howard the Duck.
The writing is wry, smart, often biting, sometimes gloomy, but always with tongue planted firmly in feathered cheek.
Cartoons are a surreal world where anything can happen.
Animators have used that malleability to send the action to improbable physical extremes (as in the death-defying antics of Road Runner).
But most exciting is when they go interior -- drawing states of mind (as in the two-minute excursion into the dark recesses of Duckman's cranium when he chooses between orange and tomato juice).
"Duckman" has a sensibility that's just as offbeat and scratchy as its animation, thanks to creators with remarkable pedigrees -- executive producers Gabor Csupo, Arlene Klasky, Jeff Reno and Ron Osborn, who served on shows from "Moonlighting" to "The Simpsons."
Jason Alexander ("Seinfeld"), as the voice of Duckman, hits just the right blend of anger, nebbishness and lovability that Jon Lovitz misses in "The Critic."
And any show that features a theme by the late great Frank Zappa has got to be cool.
Meanwhile, the man of steel -- the other man of steel -- returns in "Robocop: The Series" (showtimes vary; check local listings), moving from the big screen to the small screen without losing any of his metal parts.
The perfect hero for the Rust Belt, Robocop is a Detroit detective/cyborg -- half man, half robot -- and loaded with more optional features than a Maserati.
He's got the bullet-resistant plating, the built-in magnum and crowd-dispersal spray, and the electronic camerascope complete with LED readout, to remind him and us of his "prime directives": "1/Serve the Public Trust 2/Protect the Innocent 3/Uphold the Law."
At best, Robocop (Richard Eden) is much more than a walking erector set and "Robocop" more than another shoot-em-up.
Michael Miner and Edward Neumeier -- writers of the first "Robocop" film -- returned to inject the series premiere with campy fun and social satire.
In their mondo futuro, meat-packing plants are owned by the Ecoli Brothers, residents are erecting a "Beverly Hills Wall" to create a "poverty-free environment" and a mega-corporation brings out "cyber-safe" concepts that are anything but.
Wacko Wagnerian villains like Dr. Cray Z. Mallardo (Cliff DeYoung) stalk Delta City: "Can you have any notion at all as to the range of my genius?
That's a rhetorical question -- no need to answer.
I tower . . .
I loom . . .
I stand like a colossus."
The premiere was such a deft mixture of humor and action, wit and dynamite, that the series will be hard pressed to match it.
Already, in fact, in moving to the one-hour format, "Robocop" seems to have become a little more cartoony, the plotting a little more predictable.
With its glitzy sci-fi hardware, this program will always attract the teens who watch "The A-Team."
The trick is to keep it sophisticated.
Interestingly, both "Robocop" and "Duckman" derive much of their offbeat humor from media parodies.
"Robocop" sends up the news while Duckman parks himself in front of the TV, flipping past "the All-Sports Network . . . the All-Potato Cakes Network . . . the Skin Disease Network."
He finds "This Could Be Your Life -- the show that each week takes a memorable personality we can cross-promote with the evening news and asks the burning question: What makes him or her so unique, so special, so one-of-a-kind we'll watch them on TV rather than go out and have a life of our own?"
"Duckman" and "Robocop" are two cult hits in the making.
A web-footed gumshoe-philosopher and a bald hunk of metal -- they're a dynamic duo for the '90s.
