The 1980s ushered in a Gilded Age of greed and selfishness, of irresponsibility and excess and of neglect.
-- BILL CLINTON ANNOUNCEMENT SPEECH FOR PRESIDENT, OCTOBER 3, 1991.
The 1980s were about acquiring -- acquiring wealth, power, privilege.
-- HILLARY CLINTON IN THE WASHINGTON POST, MAY 6, 1993.
Whitewater Etc. has many unsolved mysteries, but few more curious than Hillary Clinton's cattle-futures trading in the late 1970s.
It's been a wonder this Wellesley-cum-Yale legal activist for children would make a brief but apparently sensational venture into the commodity pits.
The mystery, raised by a New York Times revelation of nearly $100,000 in trading profits, took a few days to grow into yet another crisis on the White House doorstep.
This delay was probably a measure of how removed the commodities business is from the Beltway consciousness.
Yesterday the spinmeisters at 1600 Pennsylvania were scrambling to knock down a Newsweek story suggesting Hillary had put no money into the deals, piggybacking instead on the trading success of an attorney for one of Arkansas's biggest companies.
Yesterday afternoon the White House released some previously unavailable records to substantiate her commodities position.
No doubt the folks who do this business for a living are going to be heard from in coming days as to what questions these records do answer and what they don't.
But our initial look at these documents reveals that she made an instant splash, apparently walking away with $5,300 a day after depositing $1,000 in a margin account.
From there it was up and down -- mostly up -- over a nine-month span in one account and subsequently five months in another.
She later branched out from cattle to trade a half-dozen commodities, including hogs, soybeans, lumber and copper.
Come again on the '80s?
The White House has now added documentary support to the contention that Mrs. Clinton incurred her own risk in accounts that led to more than $26,000 in reported profits in 1978 and nearly $73,000 in 1979.
But the handling of her main account is still something to wonder about.
The broker for that account, Robert L. (Red) Bone of Springdale, Ark., has a record that is checkered even by commodity-industry standards.
The most pertinent to this matter may be a December 1979 disciplining by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (which handles cattle futures) for "serious and repeated violations of record-keeping functions, order-entry procedures, margin requirements and hedge procedures."
Whether Mrs. Clinton knew the sort of man she was dealing with, we don't know.
But Jim Blair, the Tyson Foods lawyer who got her into commodities, was Mr. Bone's lawyer, too.
Mr. Bone in 1972 was an official of Tyson Foods when he, Don Tyson, the company and half a dozen other parties were accused of manipulating the egg futures market.
They ultimately settled the case in 1977 with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, not admitting or denying guilt.
Mr. Bone was suspended from trading for a year as a result of that.
Meanwhile, in 1975, as the case was in limbo, he had become a broker and joined Chicago-based Refco Inc. to run its Springdale branch, according to Securities Week.
This was a fateful match.
Refco was as rough and tumble as they come in the commodities world.
But, under the chairmanship of Thomas Dittmer, a cattle trader extraordinaire, it would enjoy a historic bullish play in that particular futures market during 1978-79.
The remarkable story of Refco's rise in commodities under Mr. Dittmer was described in a long March 13, 1984, profile in the Journal.
Hillary Clinton and Jim Blair were along for the ride.
Their gains may, in that context, be perfectly explainable, though their exit timing had to have been good as well.
Apparently Red Bone was so gung-ho with Refco that he couldn't wait out the year's suspension he'd been given in 1977.
In a case filed in 1980, he was accused of having traded (quite profitably) through an associate, Roy Woods, during the 1977-78 period, just prior to his business with Mrs. Clinton.
For this he was fined $100,000 in 1981, a severe sanction, and barred again from trading.
Reportedly he was bankrupted around that time, as the market turned against him, and his license expired in 1984.
(Mr. Bone couldn't be reached.
We did catch up with Mr. Woods, who was also sanctioned in 1981.
He said he'd been in the trucking business for 12 years, didn't remember much of anything about trades, and had to hang up because his dinner was getting cold.)
We dwell on Mr. Bone because as Mrs. Clinton's broker he is crucial to any resolution of the remaining murk around this deal.
And for that matter, the record of Mr. Blair's own trades with his broker.
But even if Mrs. Clinton's records tell the full story and all was square in the Springdale office of Refco, this dated tale has a connection to American politics in 1994.
If commodity speculation, where there's a loser for every winner, was the basis for the Clintons' rise to affluence, what has all the moralizing about the Decade of Greed been about?
In any event, the '80s weren't even born when Hillary was cleaning up in cattle.
For several months this past fall and winter, the Clinton Administration enjoyed a streak of seeming successes that was beginning to rival Hillary's commodities cornucopia for its audacious improbability.
Now, in both policy substance and personal image, this White House appears to have topped out.
As fast as fortunes can change in these times, the First Couple might begin to weigh how much political capital they have to meet a margin call.
