Barely a year after they were dismissed as retail's relics, old-line computer dealers are back.
Once written off amid dismal earnings and weak showings from the big-name brands they carry, traditional computer dealers -- from small storefront operations to national distributors with armies of salespeople -- have in recent months become some of the biggest winners in the personal-computer wars, analysts say.
The revival comes despite the recent success of computer superstores, which have dominated the wildly growing home-PC market.
Many analysts predicted that the superstores, along with mail-order vendors and general-interest retailers such as department stores and price clubs, would kill off traditional dealers, as consumers of all types flocked to the lower prices of the no-frills competition.
In some respects, those predictions were right.
Hundreds of independent computer dealers have gone out of business while certain chains such as BizMart Inc. and BusinessLand Inc. have stumbled.
And the superstore has cemented its position as the favorite shopping destination among home-computer consumers and small businesses seeking a handful of new machines.
But none of that has affected the thousands of large and midsize businesses that buy crateloads of new computers to replace aging PCs.
"There's a large corporate market and a large home market and they shop in different places," says Liz Buyer, an analyst at T. Rowe Price in Baltimore.
After a period of seeking out manufacturers of high-quality clones, the biggest customers are once again buying from traditional dealers whose mainstay are blue-chip manufacturers such as International Business Machines Corp. and Compaq Computer Corp. -- victors in the recent computer price wars.
"These retailers have become a proxy for the brand names," Robert Anastasi, an analyst at securities firm Robinson Humphrey in Atlanta, says of the dealers.
"The stuff these guys are selling is suddenly in demand."
In the third quarter, for example, operating profit at market-leader Intelligent Electronics Inc., based in Exton, Pa., doubled, and net income quintupled at MicroAge Inc. of Tempe, Ariz.
The dealers' return to prosperity has come from more than simply pushing boxes of PCs.
Most dealers are completely transforming their businesses.
At ComputerLand Corp., once the granddaddy of computer retailing, officials have largely abandoned the company's storefront operations.
The revamping, complete with a name change due in the next month, has turned the closely held company into a distributor with a technical division that does a booming business installing PCs and PC networks and training companies how to use them.
Edward Anderson, president of CompuCom Systems Inc., which is run similarly and has seen its shares jump 81% over the past year, says many of the national chains have borrowed some of the tactics of mail-order vendors such as Dell Computer Corp., delivering advanced systems to big corporate customers that call a toll-free telephone number.
The dealers' advantage over Dell is that they can offer many different brands of PCs, and can deliver the technical expertise to hook up the systems and make them work.
"It's not that customers like us better as people," Mr. Anderson says.
"It's that we make their life easier."
For most dealers, the service segment has become their fastest growing niche, as companies try to move from large mainframe systems to networks of PCs.
CompuCom, for instance, can now run companies' computer networks via a sophisticated monitoring system at the company's Dallas headquarters.
"There used to be an underlying assumption that technology all of a sudden became simple to use," says Alan P. Hald, vice chairman and co-founder of MicroAge.
"In fact, it's complex as hell."
Analysts say this technological complexity has contributed to proving the death-of-the-dealer theory to be dead wrong.
Particularly dubious, they say, is the assertion that big companies -- with their large, complex networks and complicated software -- would turn away from a longtime dealer who has helped them along.
Such a shift would almost have required a purchasing manager from, say, Ford Motor Co. to drive out to a superstore, load PCs into his trunk and haul them into a freight elevator for his buddies in accounting.
"The conventional wisdom is just stupid," says Peter J. Siris, an analyst at UBS Securities in New York.
Alan Bush, president of Computer City superstores, a unit of Tandy Corp., Fort Worth, Texas, says he isn't worried about the recovery of many of his older competitors.
"We're not experiencing any additional pressure at all," Mr. Bush says.
"We continue to be all smiles."
In fact, most analysts give Computer City credit for the recent turnaround at Tandy, which plans to build 24 superstores this year as part of its biggest expansion ever.
Most experts still agree that dealer growth is bound to slow.
The consumer PC retail business will remain the PC industry's fastest growing segment, jumping from 19% of total PC sales last year to nearly 23% by 1997.
By comparison, International Data Corp., a computer market research concern in Framingham, Mass., predicts traditional dealers will account for 36% of the total PC pie by 1997, down from 44% last year.
Most analysts see the market becoming increasingly segmented, with home users and small businesses turning to the superstores, large and midsize businesses continuing to depend on the big dealers, and the Fortune 500 companies teaming up with monoliths like Electronic Data Systems Corp. to run all their computer operations.
Ms. Buyer of T. Rowe Price cautions that possible pitfalls remain, even with dealers' recent success.
Another dip in the fortunes of IBM and Compaq, for instance, could again send many of the dealer chains into a funk.
For now, many of the dealers are reveling in the simple fact that they're alive.
"It used to be a foregone conclusion that Dell and CompUSA were going to wipe people like us out," Mr. Anderson says.
"Now look who is doing the soul-searching."
