Armco Inc. plans to virtually eliminate its involvement in a carbon-steel joint venture with Kawasaki Steel Corp. of Japan by allowing the venture to sell shares to the public.
The move will free Armco to concentrate its resources on its more profitable speciality steel business.
Stock in the joint venture, called Armco Steel Co., is being offered to the public now, while the market for steel is still relatively strong and the venture is on an upswing.
"Steel stocks are marketable at the moment," said Charles A. Bradford, an analyst with UBS Securities.
"It could be a good opportunity for Armco.
And in the steel industry, you may only get the chance once every five years" to sell stock because of the industry's cycles.
Armco last year said it planned to keep the joint venture, in spite of the fact that its entire investment had been wiped out by Armco Steel's losses.
But just this month, Armco President James F. Will, whose experience is in specialty steel, succeeded Robert L. Purdum as chief executive officer, suggesting that the company would accelerate its shift away from carbon steel.
Under the plan, the venture intends to sell about 15.8 million common shares at $20 each through an initial public offering and $275 million in debt through a senior note offering.
Proceeds would be used to restructure and recapitalize the venture, primarily by reducing its debt and unfunded pension liability.
Under terms of the plan, Armco's obligations to make certain cash payments to the venture would be eliminated and its ownership reduced to less than 1%.
Kawasaki would be left with a 21.6% stake.
Mr. Will said in a statement the company had been exploring options with Kawasaki to improve the venture's financial position, while at the same time limiting Armco's exposure.
Liabilities Cut "We believe this proposed plan benefits all, despite the reduction in our equity interest," he said.
"It relieves us of any further cash infusion and eliminates certain outstanding liabilities to the venture and any direct liability associated with the business of the new company."
The liabilities relate to such things as the purchase of raw materials.
The proposed recapitalization is expected to benefit Armco in the longer term by substantially improving the financial condition of the venture, Mr. Will said.
He noted that Armco would maintain access to the venture's hot-strip mill through an existing long-term agreement to roll stainless steel for Armco Inc.'s finishing facilities.
Thomas C. Graham will remain as chief executive officer of the newly public company.
Mr. Graham, who was credited with turning around USX Corp.'s U.S. Steel Group, was hired by Armco Steel in 1992 to turn the joint venture around by cutting costs and improving productivity.
Analysts say he has succeeded, and that now is the time to sell the venture.
The market for carbon steel, used in everything from automobiles to washing machines, has benefited in the past year from the economic upturn.
