The Congressional Budget Office sharply scaled back its estimate of the federal budget deficit, putting it even smaller than the White House has projected in recent days.
In testimony before the Senate Budget Committee, CBO director Robert Reischauer said the deficit will shrink from $223 billion in the current fiscal year to $171 billion in 1995 and even narrower in 1996, as President Clinton faces re-election.
Mr. Clinton said this week that his budget will project a 1995 deficit below $180 billion.
The deficit in the year ended Sept. 30 was $255 billion.
The new estimates are slightly smaller than those made after the passage of the deficit-reduction bill last year.
Back then, for instance, the CBO projected the 1995 deficit would be $196 billion.
Mr. Reischauer ascribed the brightened outlook to an improving economy, lower-than-expected growth in Medicare and Medicaid spending, and other re-estimates for spending on such things as federal deposit insurance.
The deficit-reduction program -- estimated at $433 billion over five years by the CBO and about $500 billion by the White House and congressional Democrats -- "seems likely to achieve the desired outcome," Mr. Reischauer testified.
But the CBO also warned that the deficit will begin growing again after 1996 unless action is taken to restrain health-care spending, among other things.
By the year 2004, the CBO estimated, the deficit will be $365 billion; measured against the size of the economy, that's roughly the same as it will be this year.
The good news cheered Democrats such as Sen. Kent Conrad (D., N.D.), who declared "we did the right thing" last year.
And the Clinton administration celebrated, too.
"We've been telling people all along that we're getting the deficit down -- and getting it down faster than we thought possible -- and now there's independent confirmation of that," Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen told reporters at a White House briefing held while Mr. Reischauer was still testifying.
Reducing the deficit, Budget Director Leon Panetta added, "didn't take any gimmicks.
It didn't take a constitutional amendment.
It took leadership."
Citing the CBO's projections that the deficit will begin rising again at the end of the decade, both officials underscored the need for health-care reform this year to slow the growth in future Medicare and Medicaid spending.
Republicans, meanwhile, complained that most of the initial deficit reduction resulted from the tax increases in the Democratic-passed packages, not spending cuts.
And they warned that the administration's pending health-care package would soon worsen the deficit outlook.
Mr. Reischauer himself underscored the point, at least for the short term.
"Adopting a plan that substantially reforms the nation's health-care system might slow the future growth of such spending," Mr. Reischauer said, "but that positive effect on the deficit could be largely offset -- at least in the short-to-intermediate term -- by the costs of extending health-care coverage to people who are currently uninsured."
In response to a question, Mr. Bentsen acknowledged the need for additional deficit-reduction measures in the future.
