Maybe it's just cold weather that's frozen consumer spending and put a slight chill on the moods of Americans.
After nine months of solid gains, consumer spending fell 0.5% in January to $180.96 billion, the Commerce Department said.
January was also one of the coldest on record, and many analysts point to that as the main reason spending declined.
Consumer confidence also seems to have dipped along with the temperature.
The University of Michigan consumer sentiment index fell to 92.9 in early February from 94.3 in January.
The small decline comes after a string of increases matched by rises in the Conference Board's consumer confidence measure.
Separately, the Labor Department said producer prices of finished goods climbed a modest 0.2% in January after falling 0.1% in December.
There is some uncertainty about the "bad weather" theory concerning sales, however.
In the last quarter of 1993, the economy grew at a fast 5.9% annual rate -- an unsustainable clip by most accounts.
The consensus is that growth will slow in the first part of this year, which it has so far.
Along with falling retail sales, jobs grew by only 62,000 last month after averaging close to 200,000 in the previous five months.
It is difficult to separate how much of this slowdown is a weather thing and how much is an unsustainability thing.
"It's hard to tell for sure," said Laura Tyson, head of the President Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers.
One bright spot is that the manufacturing sector seems unscathed by the frigid temperatures.
A survey of purchasing managers suggested that manufacturing activity expanded in January and, despite small job gains overall last month, factory jobs grew at a respectable pace.
Analysts say that's a sure sign the economy hasn't lost its footing.
The weather, and the California earthquake, will depress first-quarter economic growth, though.
"It is beginning to look like we will not make this growth up because time is running out," said Ms. Tyson as snow and freezing rain continued to fall in the nation's capital Friday.
C.J. Lawrence chief economist Ed Yardeni says that if bad weather persists consumption could actually decline in the first quarter.
Much of the drop in retail sales last month came in areas where weather can play a big part.
Building materials, hardware, autos and furniture were hardest hit.
Gasoline sales and drugstore sales posted the largest gains.
Analysts pointed out that the recent upward revisions in retail sales growth -- to 1.2% in December and 0.7% in November -- suggest underlying consumer strength.
Joseph Liro, chief economist of S.G. Warburg in New York, said at least some of the sales lost in January should be recaptured in February and March.
Wholesale prices in January were moderate but the 0.2% rise was still the fastest pace since September.
Excluding the volatile food and energy sectors, wholesale prices rose a stronger 0.4%, the fastest clip in a year.
Much of the rise was concentrated in computers and tobacco.
In recent years inflation has tended to blip up at the start of the year, only to level off later on.
The Labor Department has made an effort to smooth away that statistical problem this year.
But Stephen Roach, senior economist at Morgan Stanley, said the large rise relative to recent months in producer prices minus food and energy suggests the process hasn't completely worked.
Prices of intermediate goods rose 0.2% after falling in December.
Crude prices jumped 1.3%, after falling 2.4% the month before.
Private economists and the administration believe prices will remain well-behaved this year, even as the economy becomes more healthy.
The consumer price index is scheduled to be released Thursday.
All figures have been adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
Here are the Labor Department's producer price indexes (1982=100) for January, before seasonal adjustment, and the percentage changes from January 1993.
