Your company needs the work, so you agree.
What have you done?
If you're an American, you've committed a felony and face up to five years in prison if the cops find out.
But if you're German, Dutch or Japanese, among others, you've merely booked another corporate tax deduction (the value of the bribe) and you've got the contract as well.
That's unfair, the Clinton administration insists.
It wants the leading industrial nations to adopt strict antibribery laws like those of the U.S. -- the most comprehensive ones anywhere -- in hopes that tough new rules will raise corporate morality world-wide.
It also would let U.S. companies compete on an equal basis for those fat contracts.
"The U.S. has taken a step no one else has, and it puts our business people, regarding illicit payments, in a difficult position," complains Mickey Kantor, the chief U.S. trade negotiator.
"Companies which don't pay bribes because of legal constraints or corporate practice are unfairly disadvantaged," says Daniel Tarullo, assistant secretary of state for economic and business affairs, and point man for Washington's campaign.
U.S. businessmen welcome the effort, because the problem is getting worse.
They say European companies in particular, battered by recession, are extra hungry for overseas work because there's so little to do at home -- so they do more bribing.
It's compounded by the fact that much of the available work is for huge infrastructure projects in developing lands, where poorly paid (and susceptible) officials decide who gets the business.
One U.S. executive says his company recently was told it had won a big Mideast power project.
But after some last-minute "funny business," he says, the contract went to Europe.
A retired British executive with long experience in Asia, Africa and the Caribbean once graded bribes this way: "5% of $200,000 will be interesting to a senior official below the top rank," while "5% of $200 million justifies the serious attention of the head of state."
In the 1990s, he added, rates of 10% and 15% "are more often heard."
(In the U.S. case cited above, the "commission" was 20%.)
Stopping this is difficult.
Leading industrial nations such as France, Germany and Britain cite many reasons why they can't adopt U.S. laws such as the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which outlaws bribes of foreign officials.
They suggest further study by committee.
That's no longer good enough for the Americans; a committee has been at work for four years without notable result.
So in December, the U.S. asked that panel, formed by the 26-nation Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development in Paris, to draft strong and specific recommendations quickly to outlaw bribes of foreign officials and end their tax advantages.
"The time is ripe for action," the State Department says.
But action is a relative thing at the OECD.
First it will host another meeting Feb. 14 to consider the U.S. proposal; if officials agree on a text, ministers will meet in April or May to consider approval.
That could produce guidelines to help all member states draft their own antibribery codes along similar lines.
Yet things aren't likely to move that fast.
Some reasons are legal and political.
Many governments claim anticorruption laws might be seen as meddling in other countries' affairs.
And unlike the Americans, many aren't eager to regulate their own citizens overseas, especially in business or tax matters.
"We cannot accept the idea of this OECD recommendation somewhat obliging Japan to change its criminal-law system," says a foreign ministry official in Tokyo.
But don't forget greed and distrust.
Companies want more business and suspect their rivals won't play fair, so they oppose efforts to legislate idealism.
Not long ago, a German attempt to abolish tax credits for foreign bribes was rejected by the Bundestag.
Industrial nations have plenty of domestic corruption; think of Japan and Italy.
Yet much bribery also occurs where local officials finance major projects with foreign aid.
And that may continue until taxpayers who supply those funds get angry enough to demand a halt or the U.S. acts against big-time bribers on its own.
