It is 20 degrees below zero and approaching midnight as the human icicles ski into camp.
They stash their skis in a snowbank and roll up their Norwegian flags for the night.
But before crawling into their tents, it's time for some mitten-slapping Gospel music.
"We're going to see the King," they sing.
"No one's freezing there."
The next morning the Young Christians of Norway awake still shivering.
Their milk is frozen.
Their caviar breakfast paste is frozen.
Their bread is frozen.
Their hot dogs are frozen.
This is heaven?
"For us it's as close as you can get on Earth," says 17-year-old Siri Dalsmo.
"The race is about to start."
Make that THE race.
The 30-kilometer men's cross-country race is the opening Olympic showcase for Norway's skiing idols.
And Norwegians will put up with almost anything -- even frozen caviar -- to wave a flag or ring a bell in support of their heroes as they ski past.
"If Norwegians win," says Ms. Dalsmo, stomping her feet to ward off frostbite, "it's all worth it."
It is, of course.
Thomas Alsgaard and Bjorn Dahlie, their lungs burning from the polar air, capture the gold and silver medals and are serenaded on television by a young boy singing a Norwegian folk song.
Mr. Alsgaard blushes and dedicates his medal to the legions who cheered him on.
"Inspiring," he says.
The Norwegians' attachment to cross-country racing is akin to the American mania for the home football team.
But the Norwegians take tailgating to extremes.
Not content to throw a couple of burgers on a grill in the parking lot, they ski into the forest, pitch tents in the snow alongside the race course and party for days.
"You may find this peculiar," says Bjarne Hjelmtvedt, who markets sewing notions, "but you must remember that we Norwegians are born with skis on our feet.
Of course, this is hard on our mothers.
But that's the way it is."
A generator hums behind his well-appointed pup tent, providing electricity for his television.
"It was 17 below in my tent when I woke up," he says, swelling with pride.
A more typical tent -- a tepee, actually -- is that of Arild Sandsten, who shares his space with friend Truls Ruud and this reporter.
Messrs. Sandsten and Ruud dig a hole in the snow floor for a wood-burning stove and then extend the chimney through the pointed roof.
Next, ledges are carved in the snow and covered with reindeer skins.
The sleeping bags are unrolled on top of the skins.
"Can't do better than reindeer skin for keeping warm," says Mr. Ruud, a former sheep farmer who annually heads to the mountains to hunt elk.
"A little bourbon helps, too," adds Mr. Sandsten, a management consultant who also heads an Oslo outdoors club.
"Let's say skoal," he says, passing around glasses filled with Jim Beam.
He introduces more antifreeze -- a bottle of Aquavit, the Norwegians' potato-and-caraway schnapps -- and proceeds to deftly deal out slices of dry-salted lamb leg, elk sausage and a Norwegian version of Spam called Bog.
Once the sun goes down, the feast continues with a pot of vegetable soup.
"We're three lucky guys," he says, ladling out the steaming soup.
"It's minus 25.
It's the Olympics.
We've got soup.
This is great."
The 50-year-old Mr. Sandsten was the one who first proposed to the Lillehammer Olympic Organizing Committee that the Norwegian tradition of tailgating cross-country races be extended to the Games.
"This is a good occasion for families to go out and be in nature," he says.
"It will help inspire them to take care of our green areas."
Organizers estimate that several thousand Norwegians will be camping out along the race course before the Olympics finish.
On this night, as the temperature plummets, Messrs. Sandsten and Ruud visit the tents in their area to see that all is well.
Nine young men who walked 25 miles over the mountains keep warm with a heated discussion over the etiquette of cross-country cheering.
"Booing is bad sportsmanship," says Carsten Johansen.
"We cheer for everyone."
"Even the Swedes?" asks one of the others.
"Yes, even though last year the Swedes booed the Norwegians at a race in Norway," insists Mr. Johansen.
"Of course, we cheer more for the Norwegians."
The friends pass around a bottle of stomach-warming Jagermeister, a German libation.
"Let's say `Skoal,'" says Mr. Sandsten. "skoal," says everyone.
Next stop is a tent full of 14 Girl Scouts.
They are warm and gobbling down beef stew.
"It's good for the girls to stretch their limits and know they can live comfortably in minus 15, minus 20 weather," says scout leader Sissel Kristin Ostby.
Mr. Sandsten, cheered by that attitude, asks for a song.
The girls happily respond with a folk song about a man going fishing.
Nearby is the Oslo Adventurers Club.
Co-founder John Mosvold shows off the party tent, complete with a television and stereo.
After a couple of days of lambada dancing on skis and playing volleyball on skis, his group is eager for the real races to begin.
And to get warm.
"The big thing for tonight is that we're going into Lillehammer for showers," he says.
"A sauna, too."
The cold drives most of the campers into their sleeping bags shortly after midnight.
"We'll have bacon and eggs in the morning," Mr. Sandsten tells his tent mates.
"If you get cold tonight, think of bacon and eggs."
In the morning, just after the bacon and eggs, three college students from the southern part of Norway, lured by the smell, stick their heads into the tent asking if they can come in and warm up their feet.
They had driven 200 miles during the night and had pitched a tent too small for a stove.
"This is a once-in-a-lifetime experience," says Torgeir Nilsen, speaking of the Olympics, not the cold toes.
"In Norway, you just get up and head for the cold.
You don't have much choice in Norway.
It's always cold."
He and his friends decide to build an igloo.
But only after the race is over.
As the starting time nears, the host of campers, and thousands of countrymen who have come up only for the day, search for places warmed by the late morning sun.
They do the wave.
They shout encouragement to all the racers, even the Swedes.
But they save the flag flying and bell ringing for the Norwegians.
The Young Christians again break into song.
"Victory is ours," they sing over and over.
"Victory is ours."
