New York -- The Richard Avedon show at the Whitney Museum of American Art opens on a defensive note.
Before we even step inside, we've been primed by posters and signage to think of the photographs in this retrospective of a 50-year career as "evidence" (the full title of the exhibition is "Richard Avedon: Evidence 1944-1994").
The word is rife with associations, and we may find ourselves envisaging a tense courtroom drama.
Mr. Avedon indeed has a case to make.
He sees his photographs as incontrovertible proof of his artistry and believes if we just paused long enough to look, we'd reverse the verdict that long ago judged him a lightweight.
What does Mr. Avedon want?
You might think he'd be content to be a world-class fashion photographer who has socialized with Marilyn Monroe, Audrey Hepburn and Charlie Chaplin.
You might think he'd be tickled to be the first and only photographer for the New Yorker, where his contributions are listed in the magazine's table of contents under the bold-faced heading "Avedon."
(Not even John Updike gets such treatment.)
But, no, Mr. Avedon is not happy.
He doesn't want to be just one more star in a crowded galaxy.
Rather, he wants to be recognized as "a major figure in post-war American art," as a Whitney press release optimistically identifies him.
To be sure, Mr. Avedon, who's 70, is one of the most influential magazine photographers of his generation.
While he began his career in fashion photography at Harper's Bazaar, and went on to define the look of advertisements for companies such as Revlon and Calvin Klein, he remains best-known as a kind of court photographer to America's only royalty: the famous.
His portraits are easy to recognize, and can be as arresting as a shriek.
Typically, they're done in arty black and white, and cropped to show a face in dramatic close-up.
The backgrounds are blank, an uninflected white square that simultaneously emits an ethereal light and the low-grade glare of a television screen.
Mr. Avedon's portraits capture something basic about our increasingly intimate relationship to celebrity.
By purging his pictures of the furnishings that clutter more conventional portraits -- the bookshelves and Barcelona chairs looming in the background -- he removes his sitters from their natural habitats and thrusts them into our space.
His magnified heads convey a sense of instant familiarity, like a guest on a talk show.
In reality, of course, the confessional air is just a sleekly calculated strategy, and the heads reveal nothing.
Flat and gray, with an insistent frontality, they at times make me think of tombstones.
The Whitney show, which was organized by Jane Livingston (it remains up through June 26, before traveling to museums in Cologne, Milan, London, Minneapolis and Los Angeles), has little to recommend it to the serious eye.
Still, it's fun: a yuppie nostalgia fest offering up faces from our communal past.
The show is infused with the spirit of the '60s, in part because many of the photographs are tacked unframed to the wall like posters in a college dormitory or banners commemorating a revolution.
And all the heroes of the counterculture are here, along with their opposite numbers from the ruling class.
It's as if the human race could be neatly divided into hipsters and squares.
A portrait of George Wallace shows the Alabama governor with his hair slicked back and his lips curled into a disparaging frown (a square).
The young Bob Dylan poses in knee-high boots (a hipster).
In a room reserved for mural-size photographs, the bearded beatnik Allen Ginsberg presides over a family gathering in New Jersey, surrounded by his Aunt Hannah, Uncle Leo and a dozen other relatives (he's hip, they're unredeemably square).
For all his love of the shaggy-haired '60s, Mr. Avedon came of age in the late '40s and has often said that his work remains rooted in the existential ethic of that era.
There may be some pictorial truth to this.
His subjects are usually posed alone, solitary actors flung against a white void.
Still, somehow it's hard to imagine models like Twiggy and Veruschka, or the fashion designer James Galanos as down-and-out existentialist heroes consumed with dread and angst over something besides the color of their shoes.
In an effort to escape the implicit lightness of celebrity portraiture, Mr. Avedon has occasionally ventured into less glittery realms.
A large gallery of the Whitney exhibition is turned over to his Western portraits from the early '80s, when he left Manhattan to immortalize miners, waitresses and other working-class people with his signature white-ground style.
The photos dwell on the physical scruffiness of their subjects, with stubble on chins and stains on T-shirts offering less a characterization than a caricature of the American low-life.
But perhaps there is some veracity to the images, for walking by them, I thought most everyone looked like a friend of Tonya Harding.
Mr. Avedon again expresses visible pangs of social conscience in a series of photographs taken in a Louisiana mental hospital in 1963.
Here he strives for the casual, unstaged look of photojournalism, presenting pale, bony women in their hospital gowns, a costume like any other.
The patients variously curl on the floor, lie in bed, or stare benumbed into space, lacking any trace of self-regard.
The series is mired in a banal realism, and remains blind to the poetic capacities of the art snapshot medium.
But then Mr. Avedon is not an artist who seems fiercely concerned with understanding his own limitations.
The catalogue accompanying the Whitney exhibition may be the most self-loving publication ever issued by a museum.
There's a 50-page timeline devoted to key moments in Mr. Avedon's personal life; it brims with snapshots of his family, friends and own irrepressible self.
Turn to page 157, for instance, and see a picture of him in 1974 directing a photo shoot for a Bloomingdale's catalogue from a cot in his studio -- yes, valiantly advancing the cause of couture even on a day when illness confined him to bed.
Heroism knows no bounds.
