When Oregon doctors Leigh Dolin and Rick Wopat go to work next week, it won't be health care as usual for them.
Or for their patients.
After years of statewide debate and federal scrutiny, Oregon will on Feb. 1 launch a radical redesign of its federally funded Medicaid program in the nation's most serious attempt at health-care rationing.
Oregon's new health plan will extend Medicaid coverage to many working poor people who have, until now, been uninsured.
It will also phase current Medicaid recipients into cost-conscious managed-care plans.
Most radically, Oregon will limit its coverage to a priority list of 606 medical procedures, stressing prevention and basic care and trimming what the state deems unnecessary or futile, from cosmetic surgery to heroic measures for the terminally ill.
Many doctors and administrators are prepared for widespread confusion Tuesday as several hundred thousand Oregonians convert to the new system.
"It will be chaos," says Mary Lou Hennrich, administrator for CareOregon, a health-care arm of Multnomah County government.
"We have one nostril above the water."
Dr. Dolin, a Portland-based internist and president-elect of the Orgeon Medical Association, believes that "once people get the hang of it, they'll have much better care than before."
But, he adds, "We're going to have to spend some time educating the patients."
Oregon was ripe for a new health-care system.
Many of the state's 3 million residents depend on cyclical industries such as timber and agriculture -- and far too many Oregonians fell through the cracks in the health-care system.
In 1992, about 479,000 people, or 16.1%, of Oregon's population were uninsured, well above the national average of 13.9%.
Now about 120,000 of uninsured Oregonians who live at the poverty level will become newly eligible for Medicaid.
In addition, about 180,000 of the 250,000 people already enrolled in Medicaid will be embraced by the new plan.
(The remainder of Oregon's poor and uninsured will be phased in over the next five years.
Elderly and disabled people and children in foster care are scheduled to enter the plan in 1995.
An additional 300,000 of the working poor are scheduled to enter the plan in 1997 and 1998, when an employer-based coverage law kicks in.)
Despite Oregon's fiscal woes -- it expects a $1 billion budget shortfall in 1995-97 -- the state was able to fund the expansion of its Medicaid rolls and enhance services like adult dental care by imposing cigarette taxes of 10 cents a pack in recent months.
"The most exciting thing," says Jean Thorne, head of Oregon Medicaid, is that "we'll newly entitle 120,000 people who haven't had care."
Also, she expects new monthly capitation fees, where doctors receive payment per patient instead of for specific services, will offer striking improvements on the old Medicaid reimbursement rates, under which doctors often complained they lost money caring for the poor.
Oregon's insistence on managed care means a primary-care doctor will coordinate care and keep patients from falling into expensive and inefficient emergency rooms as their provider-of-last-resort.
"People now wait until they have an earache and then go to the ER," grouses Dr. Dolin.
But under the Oregon plan, he expects to deliver true preventive care at rates that cover his costs.
"The quality of care will be better, and we'll be able not to lose money every time we see one of these patients," he says.
Still, the plan's designers faced hard choices and imposed strict -- sometimes severe -- limits on what care can be funded by the public purse.
Though the plan pays for many lifesaving treatments -- liver or kidney transplants for people with cirrhosis or renal failure, for example -- it draws a line where the data don't promise a cure.
Among routine procedures no longer covered are treatment for many benign or self-limited illnesses: common colds, simple sprains and basic food poisoning.
Nonessential or controversial surgery is also out: circumcision of newborns or gastric bypass operations for the obese, both formerly covered.
"Somebody who thinks their nose is too big won't be covered," says Dr. Dolin.
More important, neither will a poor woman who seeks reconstructive breast surgery after mastectomy.
The affluent, of course, can continue to purchase such services in Oregon as elsewhere.
Most wrenching of these limits is the lack of coverage for curative treatments for people with terminal illnesses such as endstage cancer or AIDS.
Instead, the state emphasizes early diagnosis and treatment at the beginning of serious illness, medical treatments as long as they can prolong life and "comfort care" -- including pain medication and hospice services -- when the odds of cure fall below 5%.
"That's the most impossible issue to deal with," concedes Dr. Dolin.
"Doctors and insurance plans can't solve that problem.
Society needs to say everybody can't have everything they want at the end of life."
Groups like the American Cancer Society tentatively applaud the plan for its coverage of early diagnostic procedures, like mammography.
"We're rather pleased," says a spokeswoman.
Still, "Those providers and patients who want to fight to the bitter end are going to have a battle under the new system."
Dr. Wopat, a physician in the rural logging town of Lebanon, was one of the drafters of "the List" of covered procedures.
He says there is only enough money to pay for what medicine knows will work, not enough to finance costly experiments with little chance of success.
"The state shouldn't spend its resources on things not clearly shown to be effective," he says.
More typical of trade-offs required under the Oregon plan, he says, was the case of a 20-year-old woman who walked into his office this month.
She sought a routine physical and pelvic exam.
She also asked him to remove some moles from her neck -- a benign cosmetic procedure formerly covered by Medicaid.
But when she opened her mouth, the patient revealed a common ailment of the rural poor -- decaying teeth.
"Have you considered having these teeth repaired?"
Dr. Wopat asked.
"I'd love to, but Medicaid won't cover them," she said.
He informed her that after Tuesday, he won't be able to perform cosmetic mole removal.
But her dental care will be covered, he added.
"With the money we save by not removing your moles," the doctor said, "we can pay for your teeth."
