Sure, interest rates have been rising a bit recently, but yields on money funds and certificates of deposit remind many individual investors of the titles of old television shows like "Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea" and "Death Valley Days."
Meanwhile, given the jitters in the stock and bond markets, the prospect of trying for a higher return by accepting greater risk seems like a journey into the "Twilight Zone."
What's a conservative investor to do?
More and more people these days are trying to find a way out by tuning into old-fashioned fixed-rate annuities.
There's no market risk, no principal risk, and returns are higher than on CDs or money funds.
While the average one-year CD has a yield of 3.10%, the typical fixed-rate annuity is paying 5.10%, tax-deferred.
Fixed-rate annuities are insurance contracts designed as retirement plans that work like a cross between a CD and a nondeductible individual retirement account.
As with a CD, investors get a fixed rate of return, guaranteed for a set period, typically one year.
After that, the rate is reset periodically (usually every year; sometimes quarterly) to reflect changes in interest rates.
If rates have fallen, your return may also fall, although most companies guarantee the rate won't go below a floor of 3.5% to 4%.
If rates rise, the new rate you earn will also rise.
Like an IRA, the money put into a fixed-annuity account grows tax-deferred until you take it out, when you pay income taxes on the earnings, plus a 10% penalty if you're under age 59 1/2.
Unlike an IRA, however, you can shelter unlimited amounts of money in an annuity.
In fact, minimum investments commonly range from $1,000 to $5,000.
For conservative investors who are able to leave their money in place for years, annuities may make sense.
But it's crucial to know what to look for, and how to avoid bait -- and -- switch annuities that lure you in with a high rate, lock you in with steep surrender penalties, then drop the rate sharply when it's too late to get out.
All annuities are issued by insurance companies, though many are sold by brokerage firms and banks as well as insurance agents.
Single-premium annuities are intended for investors who want to make a one-time payment; flexible annuities are accounts you can add to at any time.
In general, single-premium annuities tend to pay slightly higher rates and to have higher minimums, longer guarantee periods and shorter surrender periods.
Keep in mind that annuities don't have federal-deposit insurance.
This means it's crucial to buy them from companies that have top ratings for financial soundness from the major ratings agencies: A.M. Best, Duff & Phelps, Moody's Investors Service, Standard & Poor's and Weiss Research.
Annuities also differ from CDs in another crucial way: When a CD matures, you can take the money out if you don't like the new rate.
But you can't just move your money out of an annuity.
In addition to taxes and penalties, annuities have back-end sales charges, called "surrender penalties," that are typically at 7% of your account balance in the first year and remain as high as 5% by the fifth year.
Annuity salesmen like to point out that you can take out as much as 10% of your balance each year without surrender penalties.
While this may appeal to people who are withdrawing the income for living expenses, it isn't as great a deal as it sounds.
You'll still pay income taxes on the entire withdrawal, plus a 10% penalty if you're under age 59 1/2.
These could pare down a $1,000 withdrawal to $570, assuming a combined tax rate of 33% and a 10% penalty.
It's also crucial that you watch out for another type of surrender penalty.
An increasing number of companies are tacking on an extra early-withdrawal charge, called a "market-value adjustment," or MVA.
In effect, the company retroactively credits your account with a lower rate.
This protects the insurer if interest rates spike upward and investors bail out, forcing the insurer to sell its longer-term bonds at a time when their prices are dropping.
But protection for insurers translates into principal risk for investors who take their money out early.
The main reason people try to flee early is that the rate they're getting drops.
Glenn Daily, an insurance consultant in New York, studied annuity illustrations and found that of contracts that paid the highest rates initially, two-thirds had fallen to below-average rates after the renewal period.
Companies most likely to drop their rates steeply are those that offer unusually high first-year rates, have unusually long surrender periods, or both, Mr. Daily says.
To avoid this problem, ask to see the insurer's renewal-rate history.
A salesperson who is unwilling to provide you with one or won't explain it might not be worth doing business with.
Look for a company that has a history of paying new investors the same rate as older investors and companies that have a history of fairly mirroring the shifts in interest rates.
Many annuities offer first-year "bonus" rates that add one to 1 1/2 percentage points to the base rate.
Make sure you subtract these when you anticipate what your renewal rate will be.
When buying, be aware that although annuities have no up-front sales fees, brokers and insurance agents earn commissions selling them.
Some products have commissions as low as 3%, but most annuities sold today pay commissions of 5% to 6%.
The commissions are taken from surrender charges and from the spread between what the insurance company earns when it invests your money and what it pays you, which is generally a difference of two percentage points a year.
You can buy some annuities that don't have commissions; these pass along the savings in commissions to the investor.
John Alden's Pioneer simply redirects the agent's commission back to the buyer in the form of a 4% cash bonus on the money deposited in the first four years.
It's distributed by fee-only financial planners, including those connected with Fee for Service (800-874-5662).
USAA Life's fixed annuity can be bought directly from the company (800-531-8000); the commission savings are reflected in the unusually short surrender period -- only five years -- and unusually low surrender charges.
These start at 7% and drop to 1% by year five.
People who want a large selection of good quality annuities can call Independent Advantage (800-829-2887), a Los Angeles firm that provides a list of five or so top-rated annuities available in the caller's state, and arranges the sale.
There's no charge for the service, since the company is paid a commission from whatever company the consumer buys an annuity from.
Annuity Shopper in Englishtown, N.J., (800-872-6684) provides a similar service.
Selected annuities from companies with strong credit ratings and good renewal-rate histories that offer current interest rates that aren't suspiciously high: 4%.
