At Sumitomo Marine & Fire Insurance Co., a capacity crowd of several hundred businessmen confronts the latest challenge to the old way of doing business in Japan: coping with the nation's first consumer-rights legislation.
At the podium, Sumitomo insurance expert Ippei Takata gives easy-to-understand advice on how businesses can avoid running afoul of toughened provisions on product liability.
A camera crew films Mr. Takata's presentation for broadcast to clients who pack into regional Sumitomo offices throughout Japan.
"We can sell you as many insurance policies as you like, but that just isn't economical," Mr. Takata tells the assembled businessmen.
"The best long-term policy is preventing defects."
When Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa talks about how he intends to transform the Japanese economy, he has in mind policies such as Japan's new consumer-protection rules, which are about to make it easier to sue companies for damages from defective products.
The proposed consumer-rights legislation, expected to win parliamentary approval in a few months, is part of Mr. Hosokawa's ambitious promise to change Japan's national focus from big business to the little guy.
And it symbolizes the kind of policies Mr. Hosokawa cites when he describes to the U.S. and other countries how he plans to make the Japanese economy more like that of other nations.
Businesses are already cranking up to meet the challenge.
Corporate orders for insurance coverage are surging.
At Sumitomo, volume is running more than 40% higher than from levels of a few years ago.
Competitor Mitsui Marine & Fire Insurance Co. says sales have doubled over the past five years.
Such casualty insurers are setting up "product-liability centers" to meet surging client demand.
Legal hot lines are ringing off the hook.
A new market for product-liability books and videos has cropped up.
And Japan's media are carrying a heated debate between business people and consumer advocates over the scope of the proposed legislation.
"This is making everyone more conscious of product liability and consumer rights," said Masato Nakamura, a consumer lawyer.
"If that raises product-safety standards, it's good."
Until now, Japan's relative lack of a consumer protection has been a source of tension between Tokyo and Washington.
As corporate Japan built its world-conquering export machine, its leaders worried little about the laws restricting U.S. competitors.
U.S. businesses often complain that this has amounted to an unfair advantage to Japanese companies, which pay far less for legal services.
Japan's consumers, meanwhile, have been "crying themselves to sleep," Mr. Nakamura said.
Consumer-liability cases in Japan commonly drag on for decades.
A shortage of lawyers and a cultural hesitance to sue cause out-of-court settlements that consumer groups say let manufacturers off with just a slap on the wrist.
Court proceedings are saddled with cumbersome, time-consuming regulations.
Lawyers estimate that since World War II, Japanese courts have tried only 160 product-liability cases -- fewer than what U.S. courts currently try in a single day.
With promises to change all that, Prime Minister Hosokawa ended 38 years of rule by the pro-business Liberal Democratic Party in elections last year.
And after fiercely opposing a product-liability law for decades, business leaders in this new era now realize they are no longer powerful enough to stop the changes.
"This law represents a tremendous concession on the part of business to other interest groups," said Hiroshi Ogawa, director of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry's consumer affairs department.
Some companies fear the new legislation may be the first step toward America's "litigation hell," as it is called in Japanese.
Some Japanese companies -- burned in U.S. product-liability suits -- say more lawsuits are one U.S. import Japan really doesn't need.
"I don't think there's any doubt that the number of lawsuits in Japan will increase because of this law," said Yoshikazu Miyabe, vice president at Mitsubishi Kasei Corp., a Japanese chemical concern that is giving employees an inhouse product-liability manual to read.
Such fears are probably overstated.
The proposed law is a compromise hammered out by a blue-ribbon panel commissioned by the government.
The proposal, modeled on European laws, mandates stricter manufacturer liability, whereby plaintiffs need prove only a product's defect and that it caused damage.
This is tougher than the current system, under which plaintiffs have to prove a maker knowingly marketed a defective product.
Some consumer advocates, however, say the proposal remains flawed -- and that Japan isn't likely to suddenly become a paradise for plaintiffs or ambulance-chasing lawyers.
Critics say the new rule proposes a definition of "defect" so narrow that it would represent only a marginal improvement over the existing system.
Moreover, the law doesn't improve plaintiffs' rights to uncover corporate records and information; so-called discovery rules remain much weaker in Japan than in the U.S.
