Banc One Corp.'s agreement to acquire FirsTier Financial Inc. in a stock transaction fell apart, largely as a result of a slide in Banc One's stock.
The agreement collapsed after Banc One turned down a request by FirsTier to increase its bid.
FirsTier, the No. 2 bank in Nebraska, had wanted Banc One to boost its offer to compensate for its depressed stock price.
Banc One's stock has fallen since it agreed last April to a 1-for-1 stock swap which, at the time, would have resulted in it paying a value of $712 million, based on the approximately $60 a share price of its stock.
Since then, Banc One has had a 5-for-4 stock split and a 10% stock dividend.
FirsTier had asked Banc One to adjust its offer to equal the $44.86-a-share price-adjusted for the stock split and dividend -- or total value of $535 million at which it could walk away from the agreement.
The decision to scuttle the agreement was announced after the close of trading.
Banc One closed at $32.25, down 37.5 cents, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
FirsTier closed at $45.75, down 50 cents, in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
Mike Mayo, an analyst with UBS Securities Inc., said Banc One's stock has been hurt more than most bank stocks in the past year "due to a belief that its use of derivatives is excessive and that it will not be able to grow through acquisitions at the same pace as it has in the past."
John B. McCoy, chairman of Banc One, which is based in Columbus, Ohio, said the company didn't want to increase its bid for FirsTier because "we have a policy of protecting current Banc One shareholders by not accepting dilution in an affiliation transaction."
Some analysts also said the agreement's demise suggests Banc One might have problems acquiring other banks given the stock's poor performance.
According to Mr. Mayo of UBS, Banc One's stock price has slipped 9% since Dec. 31, while comparable regional banks saw their stock prices remain essentially flat.
However, Mr. Mayo, who rates Banc One stock a "buy," said, "I don't think this sounds an alarm long term.
I expect the stock price to recover as Banc One continues to generate earnings with or without acquisitions."
The acquisition was to be Banc One's first foray into Nebraska and was part of the company's effort to bolster its holdings in the Midwest.
Banc One has $79.9 billion in assets.
One of FirsTier's largest owners is Omaha financier Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway Inc., which controls about 5.66% of common stock.
David A. Rismiller, chairman of Omaha-based FirsTier, said, "we must ensure full economic value for our shareholders."
Mr. Rismiller added that "management and the FirsTier Financial board of directors will work with Morgan Stanley & Co. to assess various strategic alternatives for enhancing shareholder value, including potential mergers and acquisitions."
Banc One's withdrawal means another bank might step in to acquire FirsTier, which has $3.1 billion in assets.
Analysts mentioned Norwest Corp. as a possible bidder, noting that it could achieve cost savings since it already has a presence in Nebraska.
Norwest, which is based in Minneapolis, had no comment.
