Peco Energy Co., formerly Philadelphia Electric Co., said it adopted a new organizational structure, along the line of shifts being made by a number of utilities to reflect changing regulatory requirements as well as competitive pressures.
Utilities generally are separating regulated and nonregulated businesses as well as power distribution and generation activities.
All five business units of Peco will report to Corbin A. McNeill Jr., president and chief operating officer.
William L. Bardeen, 55 years old, was named senior vice president and group executive of the Consumer Energy Services Group, which distributes energy to 1.5 million electric and gas retail customers.
Kenneth G. Lawrence, 46, was named to succeed Mr. Bardeen as senior vice president, finance, and chief financial officer.
Mr. Lawrence has been vice president of the natural gas business since 1990 and previously headed commercial operations.
The Bulk Power Enterprises unit, which markets and sells energy to wholesale customers, will be headed by Alvin J. Weigand, 55, senior vice president and group executive.
Mr. Weigand had headed transmission and distribution services.
Dickinson M. Smith, 60, head of nuclear operations, was named senior vice president and chief nuclear officer of the Nuclear Generation Group.
John M. Madara Jr., 50, former vice president, production, will become senior vice president and group executive of the Power Generation Group, which operates the company's fossil-fired and hydroelectric generating units.
The head of the Gas Services natural gas business will be named later.
Separately, Standard & Poor's Corp. said it affirmed its ratings on about $5.4 billion of Peco Energy debt, including triple-B-plus rated senior secured debt.
S&P noted prospects for continued financial strengthening, aided by gradual debt reduction.
The ratings outlook remains negative, however, "since Peco is unlikely to reach the financial parameters appropriate for its business position for several years," S&P said.
The ratings agency said the company's business position is somewhat below average, reflecting a heavy dependence on nuclear generation, high electric rates, a large industrial sector, little sales-growth prospects.
These negatives are tempered by ample generating capacity, limited construction activity, an absence of rate pressures, and signs of a rebounding and diversification of the Philadelphia-area economy.
