Confucius is branching out.
Or maybe it's just Rhonda Lashen of Gahanna, Ohio.
With her two-year-old company, "Fortunately Yours," Ms. Lashen cooks up fortune cookies and sells them to businesses and individuals that hope a new marketing gimmick will bring fortune to their cause.
Consider Schering-Plough Corp.
The company mailed 250,000 cookies to physicians to promote an antifungal drug that is primarily used to treat athlete's foot, jock itch and body ringworms.
"Confucius say: Patients benefit twice from dual-action Lotrisone," reads the message.
A Columbus, Ohio, branch of Banc One Corp. used green, mint-flavored cookies to market its securities and trusts.
Its entry: "When is 5% better than 6%?
ASK US!"
Says Amy Prater, a Banc One senior teller: "It gets dull going to the bank every day.
We put these on the counter like lollipops, and people asked a lot of questions."
Lane Bryant clothing stores passed out cookies at store entrances, offering kind words and discounts: "We think you're sensational!
Save 20% off your entire purchase at Lane Bryant!"
Companies accounted for the bulk of Ms. Lashen's $180,000 in sales last year, but she did a little soothsaying on the side for lovers -- who apparently really like her pink, strawberry cookies.
Favorites include: "The passion in your mind is going to be matched by the passion in your body" and "Hot kisses will cover your body soon!!"
Ms. Lashen assures that "there's nothing X-rated."
Some doctors use the cookies for thank-yous.
A Columbus urologist amused colleagues with a cookie business card saying, "Ur-ine good hands."
And a nearby ophthalmologist mailed cookie boxes to 2,500 patients and referral sources at Christmas.
The fortunes read: "Confucius say: Focus on the New Year with Good Vision."
An eager job candidate used a giant chocolate-covered cookie as a follow-up at a Columbus, radio station: "Increase your fortune.
Hire Dana Nay!!"
The lucky Ms. Nay got the job.
Not so fortunate were the lot who bought Ms. Lashen's lottery cookies, which professed to contain lucky winning numbers.
No one ever won.
"It's too bad," she says.
"I would've liked that."
