A federal judge in Anderson, S.C., blasted General Motors Corp., finding "a substantial likelihood" of "perjury and the systematic destruction of documents" related to a civil case involving the auto maker's 1973-1987 full-size pickups with side-saddle gasoline tanks.
U.S. District Court Judge G. Ross Anderson Jr. also expressed irritation in a hearing last Friday that a South Carolina law firm representing GM had agreed to hire his two law clerks and paid them $2,500 "stipends" before they came to work in his court.
The result, Judge Anderson said, was that he had to exclude the clerks from the GM case and plow through thousands of pages of documents on his own.
The judge's statements, first reported by the Washington Post and the Detroit News, represent a setback for GM's efforts to quell the controversy over its now-discontinued pickups.
Plaintiffs' attorneys and safety advocates have charged repeatedly that GM executives covered up evidence that the company knew its trucks had a propensity for leaking fuel and catching fire in side-on collisions.
In 1992, an Atlanta jury awarded the family of a young man killed in a fiery crash $105 million.
GM denied earlier charges of destroying evidence and last year retained William Webster, former director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, to investigate.
Mr. Webster has filed a report, but GM hasn't made his findings public.
GM signaled it will move as early as today to ask a higher court to find the judge's statements improper and remove them from the public record.
"General Motors strongly disagrees with the unfounded statements of Judge G. Ross Anderson Jr. about the conduct of GM and its lawyers," the company said.
Stephen Morrison, a senior partner in the Columbia, S.C., firm Nelson Mullins Riley & Scarborough, said his firm had hired the two law clerks about a year before they reported for work in Judge Anderson's court.
The $2,500 payments were agreed to as part of a common package offered new associates, he said.
"We feel everything we've done is by the book, in letter and spirit," Mr. Morrison said.
Judge Anderson issued his order to explain his decision to remove himself from the case brought by Mark D. Cameron, his brother Steven W. Cameron, and Steven's wife, Laurie Cameron.
Mark and Steven were burned in a 1990 crash when their GM pickup burst into flames, according to their attorney, James E. Butler Jr.
GM moved to have Judge Anderson removed from the case after he gave a speech at a seminar in Atlanta that Mr. Butler attended.
GM argued that the judge's remarks showed prejudice against defense lawyers in automotive personal injury cases.
Judge Anderson rejected the charge, but stepped aside to avoid an appearance of bias.
