Like many business neophytes, William E. Mitchell thought he could eliminate start-up problems by buying a franchise.
He was wrong.
Mr. Mitchell, a Savannah, Ga., auto mechanic, wanted to open a specialty shop for auto-racing fans like himself.
Last summer, he spotted an enticing newspaper advertisement in which Winner's Circle Franchise Development Corp. sought franchisees for just that kind of store.
After visiting a Winner's Circle sales office in Hilton Head, S.C., Mr. Mitchell says he paid $12,500 for a franchise and opened a Savannah store in November.
"I assumed I was going to get a lot of help, which I was promised by the franchiser," he recalls.
But Winner's Circle has failed to supply -- or finance -- an adequate inventory of apparel and souvenirs, Mr. Mitchell contends.
He says that his store lost hundreds of dollars a day in sales during the crucial holiday season, mostly because it lacked goods picturing the renowned racer Dale Earnhardt.
The company denies allegations by Mr. Mitchell and several other unhappy franchisees.
Many franchisees find that their franchisers promise plenty -- but deliver little.
The result can be devastating if the franchisee is counting on the franchiser for essential services or supplies.
"Many franchisees discover once they are in the business that they are paying royalties for nothing," says W. Michael Garner, a New York franchising lawyer.
Mr. Mitchell isn't the only Winner's Circle franchisee to voice doubts.
James A. Meaney, a Columbus, Ohio, lawyer, says he wrote complaints to Ohio's attorney general last month, on behalf of Mr. Mitchell and seven other Winner's Circle franchisees.
He says the franchisees want refunds, ranging from $14,500 to $33,000, to cover their initial investments and certain other costs.
The attorney general's office says that it will study whether the state should try to get the franchisees' money back.
Mr. Meaney says four of his eight clients have opened Winner's Circle units; the others paid for franchises but haven't opened their stores because of the alleged supply problems.
According to Mr. Meaney, all eight contend that Winner's Circle has failed to keep them fully supplied from a central warehouse and to provide them with 30-day financing for their inventory.
Mr. Mitchell, for instance, says he is struggling to strike his own deals with outside suppliers, a process that has required about $20,000 more cash than he had expected to need.
"I'm hanging on by the skin of my teeth," he says.
Meanwhile, he is refusing to pay the 5% cut of sales that he owes Winner's Circle.
"If I paid the royalty, I'd be bankrupt," he adds.
Gary R. Blume, a Scottsdale, Ariz., attorney for Winner's Circle, replies: "You have here a group of successful franchisees who don't want to pay their royalties."
Ward H. Kerr, the franchiser's president, attributes their grievances to temporary start-up problems.
"There were some glitches in the beginning.
But they are all being worked out," he says.
The company is resisting refunds, however, because the franchisees have viable business opportunities, he insists.
Winner's Circle and its critics agree that the company radically changed its initial operating plans.
The original idea was that a well-stocked distribution center would spare franchisees the costs and trouble of developing their own relationships with dozens of outside suppliers.
"The distribution center was the key to the franchising program," says Rick Riffel, a former consultant to Winner's Circle who has had a disagreement with the company.
Mr. Riffel is a partner in Tennessee Connection, a specialty retailer with Lakewood, N.Y., and Erie, Pa., stores for auto-racing buffs.
Last September, Winner's Circle opened a warehouse -- also named Tennessee Connection -- in Abilene, Texas.
Winner's Circle later decided that it would be too costly to meet franchisees' full inventory needs through that warehouse, Mr. Kerr says.
The franchiser now helps franchisees to obtain supplies individually, he adds.
As for inventory financing, Mr. Kerr denies breaking any promises.
Mr. Kerr says that he formed Winner's Circle last May with investors Richard Kern, then of Scottsdale, Ariz., and Richard L. Levinger, then of Hilton Head.
Mr. Kern still owns the majority of stock but Mr. Levinger no longer is an owner, according to Mr. Kerr.
Neither Mr. Kern nor Mr. Levinger could be reached.
In franchise-offering circulars last year, Winner's Circle listed only one officer, Mr. Kerr, and gave an Erie address as its "principal place of business."
Mr. Riffel says Winner's Circle actually had only a postal box in Erie, though he says he conducted Winner's Circle franchisee training sessions at his company's store there.
Mr. Kerr says he doesn't recall listing the company's headquarters as Erie, but confirms that training occurred in Erie.
Winner's Circle actually has headquarters in Abilene, according to Mr. Kerr.
But Mr. Kerr operates from the Louisville, Ky., office of Preferred Restaurants Inc., which he says is the management company for three fast-food franchisers: Pizza Chef Corp.; Blazers Franchise Development Corp. and Salsa's Franchise Development Corp.
Franchisees and Mr. Riffel say Winner's Circle officials boasted about their involvement in the little-known Pizza Chef Gourmet Pizza, Blazers All-American Barbecue and Salsa's Gourmet Mexican Cuisine franchise formats.
"They were using numbers relating to these other franchises to establish credibility in offering a new franchise concept," says Daniel E. Van Voorhis, a Winner's Circle franchisee in Springfield, Ohio.
In hindsight, Mr. Van Voorhis and others say that they should have paid more attention to the franchiser's lack of experience at running Winner's Circle.
Not all Winner's Circle franchisees are unhappy, though.
"We've done real well," says Robert S. Esposito in Glendale, Ariz.
When Winner's Circle failed to deliver the expected levels of inventory, he says, "I got smart fast and found out where to get things."
Rodney J. Sapp, with two stores in Cincinnati and Dayton, Ohio, says, "We thought there would be one central place to get products.
That hasn't happened."
Still, "I'm a happy camper," Mr. Sapp continues, explaining that the Winner's Circle business concept "is just great."
The company says it has sold 20 franchises so far, with eight units now open.
It aims for 50 open units by year end.
Adds Mr. Kerr, "Every day, we are getting stronger and stronger."
