When Edouard Balladur took over as French prime minister last April, a top European diplomat in Paris described his mandate as the tricky one of "doing nothing while seeming to do a lot."
The comment was a deliberate exaggeration, of course, but one that is still on the mark 10 months later.
Mr. Balladur has emerged as a master of crisis management, a man whose assured but understated manner and strategy of avoiding conflict at any cost -- and it's often high -- appears to be just the tonic the French public is looking for.
Mr. Balladur has opted for a type of Band-Aid politics, fixing only what is in need of immediate repair and offering soothing assurances that hard times will soon be over.
Satirists here depict him as a national hypnotist who makes people forget their real ailments.
In a 90-minute television interview Monday night, the prime minister insisted that there would be no change in policy, despite a continuing increase in unemployment and forecasts of meager economic growth of 1.4% this year.
"I am not going to put into question something that is beginning to produce good results," he said.
But as Mr. Balladur and his aides acknowledge, a harsh reality is knocking at the door.
There are major shortcomings in the structure of the French economy that are damaging its competitive position.
At a time when Germany, Britain and some of France's other European neighbors are trying to improve their own competitiveness, Paris is lagging behind.
"The real question is how long can we keep going without making fundamental reforms?" says Francois Perigot, president of the French national employers' association.
He and other business leaders, while generally sympathetic to the Balladur government, say major issues must be addressed soon.
They include the heavy burden of social security and other obligatory levies on companies that rank among the highest in Europe; a system of national health insurance whose costs have gone awry and which takes little account of demographic trends; and the almost complete absence of private pension funds, a historical quirk that everyone agrees must be corrected.
The short-term outlook is also hazy.
While Mr. Balladur is exhorting France to pull itself out of recession by consuming more, bankers worry that France is close to disinflation.
Prices on many goods are actually falling, while real interest rates -- pegged to levels in Germany -- are cripplingly high for companies.
To be sure, Mr. Balladur has enjoyed some important successes.
He managed to coax a reluctant nation into accepting a new world-trade accord -- after threatening for months to veto it.
And taking advantage of a soaring stock market, he is selling off several large state-owned companies to the public.
But most of his efforts are on a smaller scale, aimed at putting out local fires.
His answer to most problems, be they striking Air France workers, floods in the south of the country, protesting teachers or angry farmers and fisherman, is to avoid confrontation and pull out his checkbook.
While the national budget deficit is still a manageable 4% of gross national product, his largesse will make it difficult to reduce in the near future.
Rising unemployment, currently at 12%, is the biggest national preoccupation.
But so far, Mr. Balladur's piecemeal remedies have failed to curb the increase.
Business leaders complain that they are under strong political pressure not to lay off workers, even if they need to cut costs.
And a host of small measures that were announced recently to boost employment and consumption have been greeted with skepticism.
Among those ideas, he urged the hiring of more janitors and gas-station attendants, and promoted a plan to give 5,000 francs ($852) to people who trade in their 10-year-old cars for new ones.
(One group of jobless people in Toulouse sent Mr. Balladur a check for 5,000 francs, telling him it was time "to trade in his old ideas for some new ones.")
Overall, however, France seems to applaud his management -- and in doing so is nurturing Mr. Balladur's presidential ambitions.
Raymond Barre, a former prime minister, contends that Mr. Balladur's style accords well with the nation's current psychological state.
After years of upheaval brought about by previous Socialist governments, and at a time when the French seem nervous about their future, "the prime minister doesn't trouble their tranquillity and avoids making waves," Mr. Barre says.
Mr. Balladur remains very popular, even if his approval ratings have dropped slightly in recent weeks.
If a presidential election were to be held today, rather than as scheduled in just over a year, polls show Mr. Balladur would win easily.
That is both a blessing and a curse, because Mr. Balladur's caution is based in part on the precariousness of his situation, and his lack of room to maneuver.
Economically, he took over a nation in recession with an already overstretched budget.
Politically, his position of prime minister was more akin to one of caretaker.
Mr. Balladur was supposed to pave the way for the triumphal emergence of his ally and party leader, Jacques Chirac, the mayor of Paris, in time for next year's presidential elections.
Instead, Mr. Chirac is now breathing heavily over Mr. Balladur's shoulder, frustrated and unnerved by the prime minister's popularity.
Some of the most biting criticism of the government has come from Mr. Balladur's purported friends.
To counter the criticism, Mr. Balladur is refusing to discuss the issue of the presidency this year.
But, as he reminded TV viewers recently, whoever becomes the conservative candidate for French president, "will necessarily depend on the record of this government."
