The U.S. Forest Service, taking aim at a long-standing policy that heavily subsidizes clearcutting in Alaska's ancient forests, said it intends to cancel a contract that provides huge amounts of cheap timber to Alaska Pulp Co.
The contract is one of two unusual, 50-year pacts that environmentalists and many U.S. forest managers say have promoted severe overcutting in the Tongass National Forest, a 17 million-acre sea of giant Sitka spruce and other old trees that provide habitat for bear, eagles, salmon and many other species in southeast Alaska.
The other contract, also dating from the 1950s, is held by Ketchikan Pulp Co., a unit of Louisiana-Pacific Co.
Because of the contracts' heavy subsidies, which until 1990 made a giant 500-year-old tree about the same price as a six-pack of beer, the Tongass is perenially one of the biggest money-losers in the deficit-wracked federal forest system.
On Friday, the Forest Service said Alaska Pulp, which is owned by Japanese investors, breached its contract by closing a pulp mill at Sitka in September.
The service said the contract, which originally was intended to spur development of a timber industry in Alaska and provide permanent jobs, required Alaska Pulp to keep the mill open.
However, because of a global glut in dissolvable pulp, used to make disposable diapers and toothbrush bristles, among other things, Alaska Pulp was losing money on the operation, despite the subsidies.
It has shifted much of the timber to a sawmill, where it produces lumber, for which prices are near record highs.
Alaska Pulp has 30 days from Thursday to come up with a proposal for resolving its breach of the contract.
The company said it doesn't believe the contract has been breached and said it has provided information to the Forest Service that "will resolve differences on the matter."
But environmental attorneys doubt Alaska Pulp can do that, and they hailed the Forest Service move.
"It's a great day for the Tongass, and the beginning of the end for a lunatic policy," said Tom Cassidy, an official with American Rivers, an environmental group.
"We need to return logging in the Tongass to sustainable levels."
The Forest Service's move marks a change of course for the agency, which had long resisted calls to review the Tongass contracts.
Environmentalists credited the Clinton administration, and in particular Jack Ward Thomas, a veteran wildlife biologist and spotted-owl expert who recently was named to head the agency.
Mr. Thomas presently is reviewing a big sale of Tongass timber to Ketchikan Pulp on remote Crown Prince William Island, after a Forest Service scientist involved in the sale filed a whistle-blower complaint alleging that the sale ignores scientific evidence that it will severely damage wildlife.
