In a recent market test for new wireless pocket phones, Pacific Telesis Group engineers stumbled upon something unexpected: bad manners.
The phone company, based in San Francisco, had asked employees of Varian Chromatography Systems, a maker of chemical-analysis instruments in San Francisco, to see whether the phones increased employee efficiency.
Varian found that they did -- except in meetings.
"People grew so attached and dependent on their handsets that they would take them into meetings and answer them," recalls Pat Ireland, a Varian manager.
The practice, she says, was "very distracting," and the company eventually prohibited employees from carrying the phones into meetings.
The cellular phone is no longer a toy for the rich and ostentatious, as millions of consumers now carry them, for both business and personal use.
But the ability to make and receive phone calls just about anywhere is straining the norms of polite behavior.
"People think that just because they have a new technology, there don't have to be any rules," says Judith Martin, a.k.a.
Miss Manners, the self-styled guardian of good behavior.
"But etiquette has to keep up with technology, so cellular-phone users will have to adapt."
To prod the process along, she has written a booklet: "Miss Manners' Guide to the Perfectly Proper Use of Cellular Telephones."
Clearly, guidance can't come quickly enough.
Already, the world is splitting into users and nonusers, with a hostility that threatens soon to rival that between smokers and nonsmokers.
Ask nonusers about cellular phones, and they instantly reel off a list of offenses.
They talk of cellular-phone users blithely making calls during concerts, at movies or while waiting for a partner to complete a putt during a round of golf.
They sneer at those who think nothing of whipping out a pocket phone in the middle of a social event, including dinner, to conclude some unfinished business.
And they disgustedly tell of meetings that are interrupted by the sound of a ringing phone, causing executives to simultaneously grab their jacket pockets to see if someone's trying to reach them.
Because they are such heavy users, business executives can be some of the worst offenders when it comes to "proper" cellular etiquette.
Many executives who have mastered the walking-talking combination appear to succumb to a modern corollary of Parkinson's law: Work expands to fill the communications available for it.
Consider Robert Conheim, senior counsel for the California Integrated Waste Management Board, a state agency in Sacramento, Calif.
Mr. Conheim, who describes himself as an "insufferable technofreak," has a business card with five numbers, including that of his pager, fax and car phone.
Some months ago, he recalls, he received a business call on his cellular phone in the middle of a federal seminar on waste management and "disturbed virtually everyone."
Other times, he says, his wife complains that instead of talking to her or their children, he talks business on the car phone.
"She says I'm driving her crazy," Mr. Conheim says.
Mr. Conheim believes that the "worst breach of cellular etiquette" -- and one that he often is guilty of -- is to drive and talk at the same time, especially in a stick-shift vehicle.
"You wonder how much driving is being done," he says.
"But then, here I am, the pot calling the kettle black."
Still, as cellular phones grow in popularity many users are likely to be puzzled by what's good etiquette and what's not.
For instance, is it rude to receive an urgent business call during a date?
Since cellular calls are often expensive, how do you politely cut people off after a certain point?
For that matter, whom should you give your cellular-phone number to, and do you ask them to use it only in an emergency?
Many users fall back on rules of common courtesy.
John Sullivan, a corporate account manager for Nynex Mobile Corp., a unit of Nynex Corp., uses his phone while shuttling between Philadelphia and New York on a commuter train.
"Sometimes I want to scream" at the other party, he says, "but I've got to be more polite because there are some things you just can't say in a public place."
Other times, polite behavior may yield to more practical considerations.
Kurt Hudson, a salesperson for Integrated Controls in Signal Hill, Calif., says he has learned that it's no great sin to "be really short with people," because cellular phone calls tend to be expensive.
"My boss loves to talk," he says, "but I cut him off."
Mr. Hudson also points out that attitudes toward cellular-phone calls from public places can vary, depending on where you are.
"Out here, you don't get much of a look in a restaurant if your pocket suddenly starts ringing," he explains.
"It's standard procedure."
But, he adds, "I'm from Boston and I still feel weird about it."
If technology muddied the waters of etiquette for cellular-phone users in the first place, it may also be coming to its rescue.
Merle Gilmore, a senior vice president at Motorola Inc., a Schaumburg, Ill., maker of cellular phones, seldom leaves his phone on when in a public place.
Instead, he carries a vibrating pager that discreetly indicates that someone's trying to reach him.
"If it's an important call," he says, "I excuse myself and go to a pay phone."
Cellular-phone owners can also forward incoming calls to a voice-mail message or any other number.
When in a restaurant, for instance, the call can be forwarded to the establishment itself, and the phone owner can be politely informed by the maitre d' that he or she has a call.
"Eventually, it will become a norm for people to use cellular phones," even in public places, Mr. Gilmore says.
"People will think nothing of it."
Mr. Naik is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.
