London shares climbed solidly to finish at their highs, after a bounce in world bond markets carried equities higher on the British bourse and throughout Europe following a German labor accord.
Frankfurt stocks soared 2.4%, after an industrial strike that was to have begun yesterday was averted with the promising noninflationary settlement, which could open the way for lower German interest rates.
Tokyo stocks fell Monday after arbitragers' selling wiped out strong early gains.
Many other bourses in the region rebounded from deep sell-offs last week.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.45, up 0.41, reflecting higher American and European markets and lower Asia/Pacific markets.
Consumer services stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 139.54, up 4.39, or 3.3%, with H&R Block of the U.S. posting a 5.8% gain in its local currency.
Plantations stocks trailed at 216.89, down 8.85, or 3.9%, with Consolidated Plantations of Malaysia sliding 6.5% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index advanced 27.9 points to 3305.9, near the day's peak of 3310.7, with gains across the board.
The FT 30-stock index rose 20.5 to 2584.4.
Volume was 576.1 million shares, compared with 581 million shares in the previous session.
Prices stayed in positive territory all day, and the 100-stock index was pushed above a perceived barrier of 3300 by a rally in the gilts, or government bond, market, which in turn was supported by a firm German bond market that reacted to the weekend wage settlement involving IG Metall, Germany's largest union.
Strength in the gilts market boosted equity futures in London.
And a strong start on Wall Street allowed London shares to build on the gains.
But buying was selective, as investors still harbored fears that the U.S. will increase interest rates.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index surged 48.82 to 2108.91.
The market's ringing endorsement of the metalworkers union's settlement was reflected strongly among DAX issues, many of which were propelled up between 2% and 3%; only one of the issues lost ground.
The union agreed to a 2% annual pay increase for its 3.5 million western German members, effective June 1, making the overall boost for this year smaller; combined with cuts in bonuses and benefits, the package leaves employers' labor costs flat.
This could help ailing German industrial competitiveness and won't fuel inflation, and thus could aid the German central bank in an economy-boosting reduction of short-term interest rates.
In Paris, stocks jumped 1.9%, marking a third session of gains, helped by a surging bond market and Wall Street's early strength.
And the German labor settlement eased fears in France of a strike and inflation-fueling pay demands impeding rate cuts in Germany and Europe.
In Amsterdam, stock prices rallied broadly, buoyed by surging stock markets abroad, hopes for lower interest rates and a muscular Dutch government bond market; the rally sparked short-covering, or buying to limit losses on oversold positions, as well as bargain hunting following last week's panic selling on worries about increases in global interest rates.
In Milan, stocks including those traded electronically soared 2.2%, as last week's interestrate anxiety was laid aside when news of the German wage accord helped to rekindle hopes of German monetary rate easing, which could spill over into softer policies in Italy.
In Stockholm, shares racked up a 1.6% gain, supported by the strong performance in major markets abroad and a decline in bond yields.
In Zurich, the market bounced up 1.8%, lifted by a better bond market, easier long-term interest rates, short-covering in the futures market and strong demand in cyclical industrials.
In Brussels, shares rocketed up 1.3%, led by gains of 2% to 3% in blue-chip industrial and financial issues, in reaction to lower long-term European interest rates.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which surged 360.14 points Friday, dropped 154.12 to 19811.88.
Monday's first-section volume was estimated at 340 million shares, down from 414.9 million shares Friday.
Retreating issues outnumbered advancing issues 678-366.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which climbed 19.96 points Friday, shed 14.19 to 1680.10.
The Nikkei peaked at 20279.13 in the morning, up 1.6%, and sank to the session low of 19768.68 about a half-hour before the close.
The morning rally resulted from strong buying by dealers and overseas investors on the weakening of the Japanese yen in foreign-exchange dealings.
In afternoon dealings, arbitragers unwound equity positions in the stock market ahead of the quarterly settlement of futures and options contracts on Friday.
Japanese corporations also stepped up selling to book profits ahead of the fiscal year end, March 31.
In trading late Tuesday morning, the Nikkei was up 168.42 points at 19980.30.
In Sydney, shares rallied 1.3% in a rebound from panic selling Friday that drove the main index down 1.6% when institutions lightened holdings because of worries of a U.S. market plunge that later dissipated.
In Hong Kong, stocks jumped 1.4%, extending a rebound that began in the previous session to reverse a week of losses.
The market was supported by continued strength in some blue chips, while worries about an increase in interest rates had almost been discounted.
In Singapore, prices fell after profittaking absorbed early gains because of rumors of troubles in the merchant banking sector; blue chips remained soft in cautious, thin trading.
In Kuala Lumpur, equities tumbled broadly, taking the benchmark index down 1.7%, as investors sold because of a lack of direction.
In Taipei, shares declined in active trading, as heavy profit-taking surfaced after Taiwan's central bank on Saturday raised the limit on foreign investment in stocks.
In Manila, stocks advanced 1.8% in light volume, helped by a technical rebound following the trend in other regional markets.
In Bangkok, prices continued to rise, gaining 1.3% as sentiment improved on an easing of Thai political jitters.
But in Seoul, shares fell on concerns about liquidity drainage by the South Korean central bank, and most institutional investors had a severe cash crunch because of the central bank's reserve requirement.
In Mexico City, stocks advanced 1.3%, as the U.S. market continued to recover on a modest rally in bonds, though dealings on the Mexican bourse were tentative because of next Tuesday's deadline for registration of presidential candidates for the August election.
Among corporate developments, in Paris, PSA Peugeot Citroen slumped 12 French francs, or 1.3%, to 881 francs ($150.71).
The auto maker unveiled plans to raise 3.96 billion francs ($677.4 million) through a convertible bond issue, to boost the company's capital base.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
Source: Morgan Stanley Capital Intl.
