Siemens AG, the big German electronics concern, shocked the equities market by announcing it expects profit to fall by 10% to 15% in the current fiscal year.
The disclosure came during a generally downbeat news conference in which Siemens Chairman Heinrich von Pierer said profit from the company's wide-ranging investment portfolio, which in the past has helped offset depressed operating results, could not be counted on for the fiscal year ending Sept. 30.
If the forecast is realized, it would represent the first time in seven years that Siemens' net income hasn't increased.
Reacting to the news, Siemens's shares fell 4.8% to 726 marks ($418.68), down 36.50 marks on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange.
The forecast was made despite higher sales and net income for the fiscal first quarter, results of which were announced during the news conference.
For the quarter ended Dec. 31, net rose 2.2% to 415 million marks ($239.3 million), from 406 million a year earlier.
Sales for the period were up 2.4% to 1.3 billion, while new orders were up 15% to 21.4 billion marks.
But Karl-Hermann Baumann, chief financial officer, said new orders and sales for the group are expected to stagnate for the year as a whole, while price pressures increase.
"I think people are genuinely surprised," said Ian Macleod, Paris-based European technology analyst for County NatWest Research.
NatWest had projected an 8% increase in Siemens net for the current year, he said, but quickly reduced the forecast to match Mr. Baumann's statements.
NatWest also switched its recommendation for Siemens shares from "buy" to "sell" following the news, Mr. Macleod said.
An analyst for a Frankfurt bank suggested that Siemens' surprising announcement could be an attempt to set the stage for drastic job cuts during this fiscal year.
Indeed, Mr. von Pierer announced yesterday that the company will bring its work force to fewer than 390,000 employees during the fiscal year, a net reduction of more than 15,000.
Of these job cuts, about 5,000 posts were sliced during the first quarter.
Of the 15,000, about a third will be from the money-losing computer unit, Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG, Mr. Baumann added later.
Mr. von Pierer confirmed reports that the company is naming Gerhard Schulmeyer, previously head of the U.S. operations of Swedish-Swiss engineering concern ABB Asea Brown Boveri Ltd., to try to turn Siemens Nixdorf around.
SIEMENS AG's sales for the fiscal first quarter ended Dec. 31 rose 2.4% to 17.3 billion marks ($9.89 billion) from 16.9 billion marks a year earlier.
An article Friday incorrectly stated that sales rose to 1.3 billion marks.
(WSJ Jan. 18, 1994)
