When he meets with Syrian President Hafez Assad on Sunday in Geneva, President Clinton will have a lot to talk about.
The temptation will be for him to concentrate on the Middle East peace process.
That will be Mr. Assad's preference.
But global terrorism should be high on Mr. Clinton's list.
For while there has been a relative decline in anti-American terrorism, the world-wide terrorist infrastructure, supported by states such as Syria, Libya and Iran, is alive and well.
The Clinton administration has neglected the terrorist threat, with our public officials paying only lip service to the problem.
The State Department office charged with conducting counterterrorist policy has been downgraded and gutted.
It has lost 40% of its staff -- a curious phenomenon when last year's bombing of the World Trade Center underscored the threat of Mideast terrorism.
For many of us who have been involved in the struggle against terrorism, this is ominous.
In the past, progress in the fight against terrorism depended on vigorous, visible and courageous U.S. leadership.
Without such leadership now, we will soon lose more American lives.
The meeting with Mr. Assad provides Mr. Clinton an opportunity to talk straight and tough to one of the most visible terrorist leaders -- the only one with whom we have diplomatic relations.
That would signal to Mr. Assad and the world that the U.S. is once again serious about the fight.
Syria continues to play congenial host to numerous radical terrorist groups.
More than a dozen terrorist training camps, complete with shooting ranges, obstacle courses and dummy houses for bombing practice, still operate freely in Lebanon under the protective eye of the Syrian army.
Our government knows they are there; the Syrian government knows they are there.
Yet despite repeated requests by previous American administrations, Mr. Assad does nothing.
Nor has Libya mended its ways.
In December, Col. Moammar Gadhafi hosted an international terrorist gathering attended by radical Palestinian and other outlaw groups.
Not since Joseph Stalin's last cabinet meeting has there been such a gathering of unsavory characters.
Dozens of terrorist groups still have large modern training camps throughout Libya.
Years of diplomatic efforts and flaccid economic sanctions have failed to get the Libyan leader to turn over the Pan Am Flight 103 bombing suspects.
Meanwhile, under its so-called moderate president, Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, Iran murders its opponents wherever it can hunt them down.
The government recently reconfirmed its death sentence against author Salman Rushdie.
Iran continues to support the extremist terrorist movement Hezbollah, responsible for kidnapping Americans in Lebanon, and also backs radical groups in Sudan and Algeria.
Our allies prop up and appease Iran's extremist theocracy.
Over the past five years, Germany's exports to Iran have quintupled and Japan's have more than tripled.
Two weeks ago, the French government returned to Iran two Iranian terrorists arrested for murdering a regime opponent in Switzerland, callously breaking Paris's promise to extradite the suspects to Switzerland.
In all three cases -- Syria, Libya and Iran -- strong American leadership against terrorist networks is urgently needed.
Mr. Assad probably calculates that America is so eager to involve Syria in the peace process that it will ignore his support of terrorism.
But Mr. Clinton is in a stronger negotiating position than previous U.S. presidents who have tried to wrestle with Mr. Assad.
The weakened Assad government, no longer under Soviet sponsorship, needs Western credits and economic assistance.
Mr. Clinton should insist that Syria will never enjoy normal relations with Washington until Damascus clearly and publicly renounces terrorism.
Moreover, Mr. Clinton should demand that Syria begin expelling the terrorists living in Syria and closing down terrorist training camps.
The Syrian leader may assert that Damascus hasn't directly engaged in terrorism for several years and that it has helped restrain the activities of the groups under its control.
Mr. Clinton should remind him that at least two of these Damascus-based groups have publicly acknowledged responsibility for terrorist attacks killing Israeli civilians in the past three months -- the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine -- General Command.
With respect to Libya, the U.S. should move to expand international sanctions against Tripoli.
Here, too, our objectives should be bold -- a formal renunciation of terrorism by Col. Qadhafi, the extradition of the Pan Am suspects, and the expulsion of all terrorist groups from Libya.
We must get action, not promises, from him.
Ninety-eight percent of Libya's foreign exchange comes from oil, with Germany, Italy and Spain purchasing two-thirds of it.
Now would be a good time to impose a complete oil embargo on Libya, since the market is in a glut.
Sales lost by Libya could be made up by friendly nations such as Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Venezuela.
If a complete embargo against Libya is politically unfeasible, our government should insist that the U.N. Security Council impose on Libya a system similar to that imposed on Iraq.
All proceeds from Libyan oil sales could be put into a U.N.-administered escrow account, to be used to pay families of terrorism victims and to repay Libyan debts.
Concerning Iran, we must tell our Western allies that we abhor their financial dealings with the murderous regime in Tehran.
The timing is good because Iran's economy is a shambles.
It cannot pay its debts and, without the support of West European credit agencies, it faces default.
The West holds the key to the financial relief of Iran.
That support should not be forthcoming.
These are hard messages and hard measures, but such language is the only language terrorists understand.
Our experience over the past decade makes clear that without a resolute push from top U.S. officials, counterterrorist policies will not be effective.
Mr. Bremer was U.S. ambassador-at-large for counterterrorism from 1986 to 1989.
