Roger Johnson, the head of the General Services Administration, intends to repay the federal government $1,062.55 in expenses following the first of two reviews of his travel records.
Mr. Johnson, the former chief executive of Western Digital Corp., an Irvine, Calif.-based disk-drive maker, asked for the reviews after The Wall Street Journal obtained his travel vouchers through a Freedom of Information Act request.
The vouchers showed that Mr. Johnson visited his residence in California -- where his wife was living -- during five of the nine official trips he took in his first seven months on the job.
A second probe by his agency's inspector general is continuing.
In the meantime, aides said Mr. Johnson intends to repay $589 for meals and incidental expenses for four trips that involved stays in his home.
He plans to repay another $473.55 as the result of an error that reimbursed him for one of his trips at the commercial rate rather than the lower, government-employee rate.
The review, conducted by Dennis Fischer, the agency's chief financial officer, also discovered that Mr. Johnson was underreimbursed for an air fare by $353, and will be paid by the government for that flight.
Mr. Johnson also personally paid for some of his flights back to California, including one during the recent wildfires.
Mr. Fischer concluded that Mr. Johnson's actions were "consistent with federal travel regulations," as Mr. Johnson asserted they were.
Still, Mr. Johnson said he wanted to repay the government for some of the meal and incidental expense payments he accepted while he was staying at his home in order to avoid the appearance of confusing personal with government travel.
The 59-year-old Mr. Johnson has spent a lot of his time in Washington developing plans for -- and promoting -- President Clinton's effort to make the federal government more efficient.
He also is the administration's highest-ranking Republican and its only former chief executive of a major industrial U.S. corporation.
The GSA, a 20,000-person agency, oversees the government's real estate and does much of its purchasing.
