Indonesia and an international consortium plan to sign today a 30-year pricing agreement they expect to clear the way for the construction of a $2.5 billion privately owned power plant.
A government official and the consortium said separately earlier this week that the stage is set for signing a "power-purchase agreement" on pricing and terms for Indonesia's first big private power project -- and what would be one of Asia's largest private infrastructure developments.
It has taken 18 months for the government to reach agreement with the companies forming PT Paiton Energy.
With the signing, one obstable remains, as the venture must arrange to borrow about $1.8 billion.
The consortium is made up of Mission Energy BV of the Netherlands, a unit of Mission Energy Co. of the U.S., with a 32.5% stake; General Electric Power Funding Corp. of the U.S., also with a 32.5% holding; Mitsui & Co. of Japan, with a 20% stake; and PT Batu Hitam Perkasa of Indonesia, with a 15% share.
If and when financing is lined up, the consortium will build two 660-megawatt generators at Paiton, about 56 miles east of Surabaya, Indonesia's second-largest city.
Each coal-fired generator is to provide 615 megawatts of electricity to the national grid of PLN, Indonesia's state power utility, for 30 years.
The consortium plans to put in about $650 million in equity for the project, the cost of which it estimates at about $2.5 billion.
The government has agreed to let the companies put in half of their equity in the form of subordinated loans.
This "helps us manage our total tax burden," said Robert M. Edgell, Mission's chief operating officer.
Of the $1.8 billion in debt that the Paiton project needs, the consortium expects agencies such as the U.S. Export-Import Bank and Japan Export-Import Bank to provide about $1.4 billion.
For the other $400 million, the consortium hopes to raise some from multilateral agencies and the rest from capital markets.
Plans call for a four-year construction period, with the debt amortized in the first 10 years of commercial production.
The pricing formula -- with different rates for three different periods -- is set up to reflect debt-payment needs, consortium members said.
The rate in the final stage is about 60% of the first-stage rate.
While figures weren't disclosed, industry sources said they believe that during the first seven years, Indonesia's PLN will pay about 8.5 cents a kilowatt hour.
Mr. Edgell said he's confident the agreement will attract the needed $1.8 billion and that it contains "no gaps that will require renegotiation."
He said he hopes financing will be arranged within six months and "certainly before the end of the year."
