PUBLIC HEARINGS APPEARED likely on Whitewater despite Fiske's opposition.
The probability of congressional hearings increased despite the special counsel's efforts to persuade lawmakers that the sessions could thwart his investigation.
But two GOP senators said Republicans might delay any hearings at least until Fiske finished the first phase of his inquiries.
Separately, 81 Republican House members asked the Office of Government Ethics to investigate Hillary Clinton's holdings in an investment partnership that sold short health-care stocks.
A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll found that more Americans view Whitewater as a political squabble than as evidence of misconduct by Clinton.
Support is eroding for the Clinton health plan, according to a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll.
At the same time, however, the poll reveals strong support for the basic provisions of the president's plan.
Many people don't realize that these provisions are part of the Clinton proposal.
The U.S. should expect to contribute about half the 50,000 troops that probably would be needed to monitor a peace pact in Bosnia, the Joint Chiefs chairman said.
Meanwhile, administration officials said the U.S. is considering nearly doubling its troops in Macedonia, to some 500 peacekeepers.
Clinton unveiled his proposal for streamlining the nation's unemployment system while providing increased job-search services, counseling and training for the jobless.
The plan, projected to cost more than $13 billion over five years, is targeted largely at the middle class.
Five mortars were fired at London's Heathrow Airport, and Parliament voted shortly afterward to renew Britain's antiterrorism laws.
No one was injured in the attack, which police linked to the Irish Republican Army.
An Israeli inquiry commission inspected the Hebron mosque where a Jewish settler killed Palestinians.
The panel was told that army guards let the gunman enter the mosque even though he wore a marksman's protective headset and carried a bag of ammunition.
He told an officer, "I'm doing reserve duty," as he entered the shrine.
A top Chinese dissident has written an open letter calling for the National People's Congress to discuss "individual political rights and God-given human rights" at its annual session starting today.
The dissident, Wang Dan, had been warned by police earlier this week to stop his pro-democracy activities or face harsh penalties.
Yeltsin refused to meet with Nixon in Moscow because the former U.S. president conferred with the Russian president's political opponents, former Vice President Rutskoi and Communist leader Zyuganov.
Other government officials also canceled their scheduled meetings with Nixon, who arrived Sunday.
Russia's defense minister rejected demands to withdraw troops from Estonia and Latvia by Aug. 31, declaring that no one can tell Moscow what to do.
In a sharp rebuke to Western leaders who have been insisting that Russia must adhere to the deadline, Grachev said the pace of withdrawal is "an internal affair."
Four more nations will withdraw their soldiers from Somalia, U.N. officials said, following similar pullout moves by the U.S. and nine other countries.
U.N. officials expressed concern that still more foreign troops would leave the African nation.
Weapons inspectors have experienced some difficulties in examining North Korean nuclear sites, the State Department said, and the U.S. urged Pyongyang to fulfill its commitments.
One U.S. official said problems had developed over where the international inspectors could go.
South Africa's President de Klerk balked at using force against the government of Bophuthatswana, where pro-election protesters were hurt in clashes with the black homeland's police.
Bophuthatswana's leader opposes April's vote.
The African National Congress hopes to sweep the vote and later reincorporate all 10 homelands.
Died: Lawrence Spivak, 93, moderator of NBC's "Meet the Press" from its beginning in 1947 until 1975, in Washington, of congestive heart failure.
