The Texas Public Utility Commission spoke last week, and consumers are scrambling to find the meaning.
The commission's approval of a $439 million rate increase for TU Electric was the first major rate-case decision by the current commission, which now consists entirely of Gov. Ann Richards's appointees.
Although large, the increase was half of what TU Electric had requested; the last time the utility came to the rate table -- in 1991 -- it received all of the $442 million increase it sought.
But how does the commission decide?
And who can ask it to review rates?
Here are answers to some often-asked questions about electric rates in Texas:
How do Texas' rates compare with rates in the rest of the country?
It depends on what you compare.
Texas' average December rate is lower than the national average, largely because of low rates charged by the state's rural cooperatives, and because the national rate is skewed by high costs in Boston and New York.
But customers of most of the large investor-owned utilities in Texas pay higher rates than nearly every other major city in the country.
That gap is even more pronounced when you look at average monthly bills, particularly in the summer, when usage is highest.
The average bill in August in Texas is $101, compared with a national average of $75 at investor-owned utilities.
Who pays the highest-and lowest-rates in Texas?
By nearly every measure, El Paso Electric Co. has the highest electric rates in the state.
But the area's mild climate keeps the average residential electric bill low -- only $60 during August, compared with $156 in the muggy Gulf region served by Houston Lighting & Power.
Meanwhile, the 26,000 East Texas residents who buy power from the Upshur Rural Electric Cooperative can boast the lowest residential rates.
Companies served by Southwestern Electric Power Co. in Longview have the lowest commercial rates, and businesses in East Texas served by Southwestern Electric Service Co., a unit of Texas Utilities Co., Dallas, have the lowest industrial rates.
Why the difference?
El Paso Electric, which since January 1992 has operated under Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, has suffered from an expensive investment in the Palo Verde nuclear-power plant in Arizona and a relatively small customer base, resulting in high per-customer charges.
Earlier commissions allowed the utility to include large portions of the Palo Verde investment in its rate base, as well as approving rates of return exceeding 13%.
Meanwhile, Amarillo-based Southwestern Public Service Co., whose rates are among the lowest in the state, is considered a tight-fisted utility that operates fuel-efficient, coal-burning plants, with the lowest operating costs in the country.
How does the PUC decide what rates a utility can charge?
Regulated utilities can charge rates that allow it to recover its "prudent" expenses and earn a reasonable profit based on the value of its assets.
The commission determines those expenses and profit numbers after hearings.
Consider the TU Electric case.
The company, a unit of Texas Utilities, asked the commission a year ago for permission to raise rates to bring in an additional $760 million in annual revenue, a 15.3% increase.
The company needed the rate increase largely to begin recovering the costs of its $4.3 billion investment in Unit 2 of its Comanche Peak nuclear plant.
But early in the process, the company agreed to exclude $333 million in Comanche Peak construction costs.
Commissioners also ruled that the company couldn't include $1.7 million in charitable contributions and $33 million in so-called hypothetical taxes in its expenses.
And it reduced the company's request for a 12.5% rate of return on equity to 11.35%.
What are hypothetical taxes?
Until 1992, the commission allowed a utility to estimate its federal income taxes based on its stand-alone revenue -- even if the utility was part of a holding company whose consolidated tax bill was reduced by deductions or losses incurred by unregulated subsidiaries.
These hypothetical taxes were charged to consumers, even though they were never actually paid.
Utility executives insist such charges are legitimate.
Any tax savings at the parent company should flow to the benefit of its shareholders, they say, not to ratepayers.
The commission disagreed, arguing that utilities can only charge their customers for the actual taxes paid.
The issue is expected to come up again during the next legislative session.
Who can ask the PUC to review rates?
Typically, requests will come either from the utility, which wants to raise them, or from cities, consumer groups or individual customers, who want to lower them.
In May 1992, a laid-off employee of Houston Lighting & Power filed a complaint with the commission, alleging that the Houston Industries unit earns too much.
He also sought to remove the troubled South Texas Nuclear Project from HL&P's rate base, arguing it was an imprudent investment.
The case is pending before an administrative law judge, who will recommend whether the commission should open a full-blown rate review.
Oil prices are way, way down.
Shouldn't my rates be falling?
Utilities don't burn much oil-natural gas is generally cheaper, cleaner and more readily available.
But even if they did, it would have only a modest effect on rates.
In Texas, changes in fuel costs aren't passed on to customers automatically -- a safeguard designed to protect consumers from sudden spikes in energy costs.
And because utilities purchase fuel on long-term contracts, lower energy costs might not show up in lower utility bills at all, if today's lower oil prices prove to be a temporary dip.
Do my bills pay for all those TV commercials from utilities?
Consumers pay for some, but not all, utility advertising.
Ads designed to boost a company's image or encourage people to use more electricity are specifically excluded; the rest is at the discretion of the commission.
