Morvao, Portugal -- It was here, in the hills where Spain and Portugal meet, that I resolved never to buy another traveler's check.
Having driven through a totally unmanned border station, I pulled over at an inn that doubled as a currency exchange center.
It was 11 a.m., but I was clearly the first person of the day to disturb the Zen-like calm of this remote outpost of the international banking system.
I proffered my blue hundred-note and a friendly fellow began calling his people in some other place to determine the day's rate for dollars.
I was anticipating that I would be moderately victimized on the rate, as one almost always is at airports, hotels and restaurants, but I thought I needed some escudos to get through the morning until I got to a normal bank.
Still, I never expected that the commission charged by the Banco Borges & Irmao of Porto would come to almost 12%.
Since I had already paid American Express 1% on the same original $100, I was out $13 for the privilege of having $87 in the coin of the realm.
There was a better way.
Had I but known, I would have put my head down and driven on until I saw an automated teller machine run by Multibanco.
Like ATMs in thousands of locations around Europe and Asia, not to mention North America, machines operated by local banks are linked by the CIRRUS system with my checking account at the Chemical Bank in New York.
I discovered this by noticing the CIRRUS logo posted on a Multibanco machine.
With some trepidation, I inserted the card in the slot.
On the screen, I was able to select English as the language of the transaction.
Multibanco recognized my PIN and gave me a wad of escudos.
Then it gave me back my card and I whistled "Pennies From Heaven" all the way back to the car.
When I was a boy in the age of steam, traveler's checks were the only practical way of tapping cash away from home.
Then credit cards eliminated most of the need for them, even internationally (I remember the thrill I felt when my U.S.-issued Visa card was routinely accepted in a bookstore in France in 1978).
The card companies not only offered convenience (no more signing names on dozens of blue checks, or waiting in teller's lines, or remembering to file the serial numbers of the checks in some safe place).
But the card companies gave you a very competitive rate of exchange (the wholesale rate applied to transactions of $1 million or more).
The only remaining problem was cash.
It has been possible for several years to get cash at an ATM in a foreign country with Visa or Mastercard, but the cash was considered a cash advance and typically cost the consumer as much as 1.5%, even if he paid his next bill on time, and another 1.5% each month if he didn't.
So traveler's checks at a flat 1% were cheaper (although their inferior exchange rate did compensate for this, especially if you cashed them at the Banco Borges & Irmao or a similar bucket shop).
CIRRUS and its rival PLUS are the way out of this swamp.
If you can locate a linked bank at your destination (something easier to do every day: CIRRUS claims 44 participating countries and will give specific information if you call 1-800-4-CIRRUS), then at any hour of the night or day you should be able to acquire the cash you want at decent rates of exchange.
(Chemical Bank charges an additional $3 per international withdrawal, but this is trivial on larger transactions, and the saving on exchange rates more than makes up for it.)
Some countries have still not come on line, but at this writing most of the main tourist countries of Western Europe now have some CIRRUS participation, as does Japan.
What if your bank card is stolen?
Well, no one else can use it.
And you could still get cash with Visa or Mastercard.
Or if they are stolen, then pocket your pride and go to American Express's nearest office.
The green card can be replaced on the spot.
I did it once in Barcelona, congratulating myself that there was still one good reason for paying the annual fee for a convenience of ever-diminishing utility.
