Attorney General Janet Reno is expected to appoint a former U.S. attorney in New York as the independent counsel to investigate matters surrounding President Clinton's investments in Whitewater Development Corp.
The appointment of Robert Fiske Jr., a 63-year-old Brooklyn native and partner in the New York law firm Davis, Polk & Wardwell, could come as early as today, according to a law enforcement official.
A graduate of Yale University and the University of Michigan Law School, Mr. Fiske was a U.S. attorney from 1976 to 1980.
More recently, he represented former Defense Secretary Clark Clifford and Washington lawyer Robert Altman in a criminal case involving BCCI Holdings (Luxembourg) SA.
Ms. Reno had consistently resisted calls to appoint an independent counsel, arguing that anyone she chose wouldn't be considered truly independent.
But she dropped her opposition last week, after Mr. Clinton requested the appointment.
White House aides explained that Mr. Clinton had decided the Whitewater furor was interfering with his administration's work.
-- Was money from a now-defunct Little Rock, Ark., thrift, Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan, improperly used to pay off Mr. Clinton's Arkansas gubernatorial campaign debt?
-- Did the Clintons get a sweetheart deal on their Whitewater investment?
They were equal partners with James and Susan McDougal in Whitewater, but put up much less money.
Mr. McDougal owned Madison Guaranty, and Hillary Rodham Clinton was its lawyer.
-- Because of the Clinton-McDougal relationship, did state regulators inappropriately help Madison by approving an unusual stock sale to bolster the thrift?
Career officials from the fraud section of the Justice Department's criminal division as well as the department's Office of Professional Responsibility and Office of Public Integrity had been probing matters related to Whitewater.
Those investigations would be taken over by Mr. Fiske.
He would be appointed under regulations that give him "full power and independent authority to exercise all investigative and prosecutorial functions."
He would have the power to hire attorneys, investigators and other staff from outside the civil-service ranks.
An independent counsel may be fired "only by the personal action of the attorney general and only for good cause, physical disability, mental incapacity or any other condition that substantially impairs the performance of the independent counsel's duties," according to the regulations.
