U S West Inc. has figured out a way to have its cake in Russia and eat it, too.
In an unusual financial gambit announced yesterday, the Englewood, Colo.-based telecommunications company, raised $125 million for its fast-growing Russian ventures, without substantially increasing its own risks of doing business there.
Over the past five years, U S West has emerged as one of the most-active players in East European telecommunications, but also has been financially astute, committing just $80 million of its own capital to amass more cellular-telephone franchises in the region than any other company.
In Russia, where the company is eager to grow faster but is cautious about risking too much cash, its new gambit is to put all of its fast-growing holdings into a separate, newly created company, which it calls Russian Telecommunications Development Corp.
It retained a 71% stake in the new company, and hired investment bank CS First Boston to peddle the remaining 29% to big investors around the world.
Seven Western firms -- Baring International Investment, Capital Research International, Emerging Markets Investors, GT Capital, Invesco CEAM, Montgomery Asset Management and Morgan Stanley Asset Management -- pledged a total of $40 million to buy the shares.
A U.S. government lending arm, the Overseas Private Investment Corp., offered to loan the venture $75 million and provide $10 million in debt securities convertible into equity.
U S West said the venture will raise more cash -- up to $500 million -- by borrowing more money and reinvesting all of its profits.
Of course, in the West such "private placements" of stock to institutional investors happen all the time.
But business consultants described the venture as novel for Russia.
"It sounds super," said David Pitt-Watson, a director of Braxton Associates, a consulting unit of accountants Deloitte & Touche.
"I've heard of lots of reasonably creative financing, but I've never heard of anything like that in Russia," he said.
"In a risky environment, it's a relatively low-risk proposition," observed Michael Obermayer, senior partner in charge of Eastern Europe for McKinsey & Co., an international management consulting firm that isn't involved in the venture.
To raise the money, a company spokesman said, U S West didn't take on any substantial extra risk.
Only its existing Russian assets and their future profits, which U S West has pledged to re-invest in the venture, are at risk.
U S West's books will record a gain on the transfer, which it will spread out over "a few years," the spokesman said.
U S West has invested about $50 million in Russia, but in the past few years of operation there its assets have grown in value to "a little more than $100 million," the spokesman said.
They include cellular-telephone franchises in eight Russian cities, plus a venture with Russia's long-distance phone company, Rostelecom, that connects most of the country's telephone calls to the West.
Overseas Private Investment's involvement may have been key to attracting the private investors; the U.S. government agency has said it will "consider" insuring the U S West venture against certain political risks in Russia, the U S West spokesman said.
After natural resources, telecommunications is one of the most-promising industries in Russia.
Moscow has launched a massive drive to yank the country's phone system out of its abysmal state of poor connections, overloaded exchanges and just 15.3 phone lines per 100 inhabitants -- about the level of Uruguay or Dominica.
Upgrading the system to a European average level could cost as much as $120 billion, and scores of Western companies are hustling for the work.
To start the modernization, Moscow has hatched a bold plan to raise and spend $40 billion over ten years.
It calls the project "50x50" for the 50 long-distance telephone exchanges and 50,000 kilometers of long-distance lines envisioned -- and U S West is among three Western companies that Moscow has selected to advise on the project.
The others are Deutsche Bundespost Telekom and France Telecom.
Victor Pavlenko, president of U S West's operations in Russia and also president of the new venture, confirmed that 50x50 is one of the projects in which the venture is interested in investing.
