Microsoft will develop an original operating system for a planned Sega game machine called the Saturn, a Sega spokeswoman in Tokyo said.
Microsoft officials couldn't be reached for comment.
Operating systems control the basic functions of computers, making them easier to use and to program by providing a layer of user-friendly commands between a computer's hardware and the user.
Microsoft built its current empire largely on DOS, its hugely successful operating system for personal computers that are compatible with International Business Machines Corp. equipment.
Sega's decision to add an operating system to its game computers is the clearest sign yet that game machines and personal computers are starting to jostle over the same turf.
Adding an operating system to the Saturn may make it easier for game developers to write software for the machine.
It also might give the Saturn the ability to serve as a so-called set-top box, a piece of hardware that someday may serve as a control for such multimedia functions as interactive television.
The move also is Microsoft's first major step into the lucrative game-computer market, dominated by Sega and archrival, Nintendo Co.
While it hasn't previously entered the home game-computer market, Microsoft has aggressively pushed its Windows PC operating software as a standard not just for personal computers, but also for a variety of other hardware such as photocopiers and fax machines.
Sega declined to say whether Microsoft's operating system for the Saturn would be compatible with PC software.
By signing up Microsoft, Sega is continuing to set the pace in pushing new technologies for the game-computer market.
The company first released a CD-ROM player -- a device that plays game software from compact disks -- several years ago, a move that other game makers are only now starting to copy.
Nintendo has yet to announce plans for a CD-ROM device.
Sega also plans to introduce the first cable-TV video-game channel later this year in the U.S.
Analysts said the deal isn't likely to have much effect on Sega's introduction of the Saturn later this year.
The significant factors affecting sales, they said, will be hardware pricing and the availability of hot new games -- not whether the game computer can function as a set-top box.
The new alliance also could pose longer-term risks for Sega.
By allowing Microsoft to control its operating system, Sega may be opening the door to erosion of its proprietary game-hardware standard -- the main source of its huge profits.
"You can't keep Microsoft from going out and signing contracts with all Sega's competitors as well," said Joseph Osha, an analyst with Baring Securities (Japan) Ltd.
If that happens, the differences between different game machines, such as those from Nintendo and Sega, could vanish over time.
With them would go much of the revenue those companies currently attract.
