Tell the biotech and computer-chip guys to move over.
The folks who make potash fertilizer, plumbing maintenance products, roof shingles and bug deflectors are coming to dinner.
In a small-capitalization market long dominated by flashy, go-go technology stocks, there are signs that economically sensitive cyclical stocks are trying to grab part of the limelight.
The economy's renewed vigor is partly responsible for helping bring these mundane industrial issues more into favor with small-cap investors, analysts say.
At the same time, a growing sense that valuations in the technology sector have become frothy has focused attention on the lower-profile cyclicals, they add.
And while some professionals have warned cyclicals tend to take it on the chin when the overall stock market skids, others point out that the sector can outperform longer-term if the economy enters a stage of advanced growth.
That's particularly true of nimble, niche players in the diverse small-cap universe, they say.
"If you're in a strong economic environment with interest-rate risk," says Peter Canelo, chief market strategist for NatWest Securities, "price-earnings ratios will come under pressure, and so you'll want to be in cyclicals -- companies with rising earnings," whether large or small.
"Sure, these stocks may go down a little bit more in a market correction, but they come back stronger as the economy enters the later stages of expansion," he adds.
Among NatWest's top small-cap picks for 1994 are Giddings & Lewis Inc., a manufacturer of automated machine tools, and Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan.
Recently restructured Giddings is poised to benefit from a global economic recovery, NatWest predicts, and it thinks Potash can achieve 15% earnings growth over the next three to five years on a strong cyclical rebound in the potash fertilizer market.
A general rise in commodity futures prices since October isn't likely to abate any time soon, and those firmer prices should aid other raw-material cyclical companies in the small-cap sector, adds Mr. Canelo.
"Even assuming we get a 5%-10% correction this year, I'm convinced the bull market will continue into 1995 and that the charge will be led by a broad range of cyclical issues."
Thomas Reilly, chief investment officer of Putnam Investment Management's Basic Value Equities Group, says he likes the recent broad-based retreat in share prices because "the market had gotten a little ahead of itself on the growth stock side."
He predicts investors will start "looking to basic value small-cap stocks that have lagged" at the expense of momentum-driven technology issues.
Boston-based Putnam's small-cap value funds favor, for example, NCH Corp., a specialty chemical company that makes water-treatment products, plumbing-maintenance products and insecticides.
"NCH has tremendous financial strength and staying power -- it's got no debt and is a strong cash generator," says Bob D'Alelio, a small-cap value portfolio manager at Putnam.
"This is what I call a quality small-cap cyclical, where the risk is lower if the economy were to slow down and the reward remains if the economy improves," he says.
The stock, trading at around $63 a share on the New York Stock Exchange, is relatively cheap, having moved off its recent highs above $70 in early 1993, Mr. D'Alelio adds.
He thinks the company can lift its net income 10%, to $5 a share, for the fiscal year ending in April, up from $4.53 a year earlier.
"In a strong economy, in a year or two, you could see net at $8 a share," he says.
One indicator of improving sentiment for small cap-cyclicals is a growing raft of such issues in the initial public offering pipeline, equity analysts say.
The rate of cyclical stock issuance has more than doubled year-to-date.
"Cyclicals comprised 21% of the deals that were priced thus far this year vs. around 12% for the first quarter last year," says Linda Killian, a principal at Renaissance Capital Corp. in Greenwich, Conn.
"And they account for 28% of the issues in the hopper," or more than double last year's figure, she adds.
Ms. Killian recommends that investors be selective when considering such IPOs in the weeks ahead.
"Basically you're looking for companies that have strong market share and good fundamentals."
Renaissance Capital's only strong recommendation among the coming cyclical issues is Martin Marietta Materials, which has major stone quarries in the Southeast and Midwest.
"We see the stock as strong play on a turnaround in residential and commercial construction, as well as a bet on increased state and federal infrastructure spending."
The IPO, a spinoff of Martin Marietta Corp., the big aerospace concern, also comes at a time "when much of the Midwest's roads and bridges are in need of repair from last year's flooding," Ms. Killian adds.
Renaissance also recommended Deflecta-Shield Co., which was priced on Jan. 20 at $13 and has since climbed to around $16.50.
The company is the largest U.S. supplier of bug deflectors for light trucks.
In its most recent fiscal quarter, the company reported a 20% increase in sales to $10.8 million.
"We like the fact it has rising operating margins," Ms. Killian says.
An additional indicator of renewed interest in small-cap cyclicals comes from company insiders.
While there's nothing yet that could be described as a firm trend, there have been a handful of cases of insider buying among small-cap cyclical companies, according to CDA/Investnet, a Fort Lauderdale, Fla., company that tracks stock transactions involving a company's own executives, directors and other insiders.
Lindberg Corp., a company that heat-treats metals, saw two senior insiders snap up a combined 4,500 shares at an average $4.50 each late last year.
The stock is currently trading at around $5.25 on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
At Elcor Corp., three insiders bought a total 4,180 shares in November and December at an average $18.75 a share.
The company produces laminated fiberglass asphalt shingles, recycling equipment and it plates diesel engine parts.
The stock closed Friday at $23.125 on the Big Board.
Selling of small-company stocks continued, but volume was subdued amid a major snowstorm in an abbreviated session.
The New York Stock Exchange, the Nasdaq Stock Market and the American Stock Exchange all closed early at 2:30 p.m. EST because of the East Coast storm, but many market players bowed out earlier in deference to the frosty conditions.
The Russell 2000 Index of small-capitalization stocks finished 1.25 points, or 0.47%, lower at 262.89.
The Nasdaq Composite Index fell 2.03 points, or 0.26%, to 781.39.
Declining Nasdaq issues swamped advancers, 1,602 to 1,192.
Nasdaq National Market volume was just 171,882,500 shares in the shortened session, while total volume was 208,189,000.
In Thursday's full-length session, National Market volume stood at 284,235,400 shares, while total volume registered 339,294,000.
For the week, the Russell gained 1.22 points, or 0.47%; the Nasdaq Composite added 4.1 points, or 0.53%, and the Dow industrials climbed 23.36, or 0.60%.
In earnings news, Timberland was pounded after reporting fourth-quarter earnings of 62 cents a share, short of analysts' estimates of 66 cents.
Shares of the Hampton, N.H.-based footwear and apparel company plummeted 9 7/8, or 18.5%, to 43 1/2 on the Big Board.
Timberland, which earned 44 cents in the year-earlier period, also said its gross profit margin fell to 36.4% in the latest quarter from 38.1% a year ago.
PictureTel, a Danvers, Mass., developer of visual communications systems, fell 2 1/4 to 14 3/4 as Goldman, Sachs & Co. slashed its earnings estimate.
Analyst Mary Henry cut her fourth-quarter estimate for PictureTel to 12 cents a share from 19 cents and her 1994 estimate to 30 cents a share from $1.15.
Littlefield Adams plunged 3 to 16 3/8 on the Amex.
The San Antonio imprinter of athletic wear said it decided to rescind an agreement with Americare Health Group.
Littlefield's Medical Sales Associates subsidiary had signed a contract in March giving Americare marketing rights to certain products in exchange for 8.5 million Americare common shares.
Americare is 25%-owned by Littlefield.
The company said it has decided to tender its Americare stock to an escrow agent pending determination of the terms for its disassociation with Americare.
As a result of this decision, Littlefield said its assets for the first three quarters of 1993 will be reduced by $5.3 million, the current value of its interest in Americare.
