The annual toll of new AIDS cases has peaked in this hard-hit city, and new cases will decline over the next several years, local health officials said.
But the nationwide epidemic, while slowing from the rapacious rate of the 1980s, has yet to peak, federal officials cautioned.
City health officials here credited AIDS-prevention campaigns, targeted at the gay community beginning a decade ago, for achieving behavior changes that slowed AIDS transmission.
The epidemic's cooling is measurable only now, because the disease has a 10-year incubation period between infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and the development of AIDS.
Researchers also cite a change in statistical record-keeping.
The AIDS case definition was expanded last year, allowing doctors to diagnose HIV-infected patients with AIDS as soon as their immune cells decline to one-fifth the normal level, instead of waiting for infections to appear.
This change has accelerated the epidemic's curve by about a year and a half, resulting in an earlier peak in caseload.
About 28,000 people, or 4% of the city's population, have HIV in San Francisco, giving the deadly virus a higher prevalence here than in any other major U.S. city, the San Francisco researchers said.
AIDS has been diagnosed in 18,684 San Franciscans, about half of whom have died.
But annual new AIDS cases peaked at about 3,300 in 1992, and now will subside to around 1,200 a year by the late 1990s, researchers said.
"These figures demonstrate the benefits of comprehensive, targeted prevention efforts, which . . . altered the course of the AIDS epidemic in San Francisco," said Mitch Katz, director of the San Francisco Public Health Department's AIDS Office.
Despite the decline, the study's author, George Lemp, cautioned, "We expect the epidemic to continue well beyond the year 2000."
Moreover, he warned that continued high-risk behavior among young gay and bisexual men means that "we could see a resurgence of the epidemic at some point in the future."
At the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, where researchers have counted 339,250 AIDS cases through Sept. 30, AIDS Surveillance Chief John Ward offered a futher caveat.
San Francisco's prevention efforts succeeded, in part, because its gay community is well-organized, he said, and also because the city so far has fewer cases among hard-to-reach intravenous drug users than does New York.
"San Francisco is a good example of what can be accomplished" through prevention, Dr. Ward said, "but I don't think it's representative of the country.
Nationally, we cannot say where the peak will be."
