The staff of the Federal Trade Commission has recommended that the agency approve the merger of Columbia Healthcare Corp. and HCA-Hospital Corp. of America, according to people familiar with the FTC's review.
Although essentially endorsing the merger, the staff's recommendation raises minor concerns about the merged companies' combined market power in two southeastern markets, an individual familiar with the case said.
Before giving final authorization for the deal, the FTC is likely to require the companies to sell at least one hospital in each of these markets.
The FTC's five commissioners, who generally follow staff recommendations to approve mergers, are expected to vote within the next two weeks.
The staff's opinion in the case suggests that antitrust officials will probably smile on even the biggest mergers in the current wave of hospital consolidation.
Columbia's $5.7 billion acquisition of Nashville, Tenn.based
HCA would combine the nation's two largest for-profit hospital chains into a giant that has signaled its intention to continue buying hospitals.
Columbia is based in Louisville, Ky.
The staff recommendation also shows that antitrust hurdles may not be as big a problem as some in the industry have suggested.
The American Hospital Association and other industry groups have been pushing hard for relaxation of the antitrust laws on hospital mergers and joint ventures.
Some lawyers said the recommendation would be controversial because it appears to conflict with previous decisions to block mergers of hospital companies that were much smaller than these.
"Letting this transaction clear . . . is a relaxation of enforcement as we've understood it," said Tom Campbell, an antitrust lawyer at Gardner, Carton & Douglas in Chicago.
Other lawyers disagreed, however, about how much the decision diverged from precedent.
Spokespersons for Columbia and HCA said the company is in discussions with the FTC, but declined to elaborate other than to say the merger should be completed by Feb. 10 or shortly thereafter, as scheduled.
An FTC spokewoman said it is agency policy not to comment on mergers under review.
