Is Hi-Lo Automotive hitting on all cylinders, or are the troubles of the past year signs of misfires to come?
Based on the Houston company's stock performance during the past year, investors seem to think Hi-Lo needs an overhaul.
As earnings deteriorated and sales at stores open a year or more stumbled, the stock took a nose dive from a high exceeding $20 to a low under $10.
A number of analysts dropped coverage.
Today, Hi-Lo trades just shy of $11, or a relatively cheap 14.5 times projected 1994 earnings.
Those analysts still around, however, say Hi-Lo simply needs a tune-up.
For value hunters, they say, now is the time to jump aboard -- particularly since the company is making a name for itself not only in retailing auto parts, but in commercial auto-parts sales as well.
"This is a stock ready to bounce," says Stephen Girsky , an analyst at PaineWebber in New York.
Hi-Lo, he notes, currently trades barely above its $9.41 book value (net assets less net liabilities) in an industry that commands between 1.7 and 2.2 times book.
Mr. Girsky believes that at current levels there's little downside risk to the stock.
"Hi-Lo should easily be trading in the high-teens," he says.
Other analysts agree.
But, they caution, the bounce likely won't come until this year's second quarter, when earnings are expected to rebound from 1993's dismal showing.
"I'm taking a wait-and-see attitude.
Everything depends on whether HiLo can turn its earnings around," says Jay R. Leopold, analyst at Legg Mason Wood Walker in Baltimore, who rates the stock a "hold."
He notes, though, that if earnings come around as expected, "there's a whole lot of upside to this stock."
During 1993, earnings and same-store sales eroded as a result of price wars with competitors such as AutoZone and Pep Boys.
As the competition squeezed Hi-Lo's profit margins, a lackluster retail environment and bad weather in Houston -- Hi-Lo's primary market with half of its 150 stores -- conspired to wrack same-store sales.
From March to June, same-store sales fell between 3.9% and 5.8% on a monthly basis compared with the prior year, sending investors scrambling for the exits.
The stock lost half of its value.
Sales comparisons began recovering late in the year; however, because of the price pressures, the company had to sell higher-cost inventories at marked-down prices.
The results show in Hi-Lo's pretax profit margins: 7.3% in 1992, compared with 5.3% expected when the company reports 1993 figures later this month.
Earnings lost air faster than a ruptured radial.
Net income of $2.2 million for the third quarter was a 15% drop from a year earlier.
And Hi-Lo's per-share earnings of 54 cents for the first nine months was a significant drop from the 70 cents a share posted in 1992.
Mr. Girsky estimates that inventory devaluation will cost the company eight cents a share in earnings for 1993; analysts expect profit for the fourth quarter of 1993 and first quarter of 1994 to remain weak.
But to those confident about Hi-Lo's prospects, the future looks considerably brighter.
An improved economy is certain to pump up store sales volumes, and the addition of 20 to 25 stores a year in Dallas/Fort Worth, San Antonio, South Texas and Louisiana will boost revenue.
With cost-saving measures the company is implementing, analysts expect 1994 per-share profit to increase a healthy 17% from the 63 cents most expect when 1993 figures are released.
Moreover, now that Hi-Lo has digested its high-priced inventories, it has found ways to compete with AutoZone and others on price, namely by offering some lower-priced brands.
The company looks to improve profitability this year by spending $5 million to upgrade its distribution warehouse, which will allow employees to pick items for 15 to 20 stores at a time instead of just one store.
What should prove more important to Hi-Lo's earnings growth -- and ultimately to investors' returns -- is the company's expanding sales to commercial accounts.
Unlike most of its competitors, Hi-Lo isn't just a retail auto-parts store; with a fleet of 300 delivery trucks, the company is gaining market share as a primary parts supplier to independent repair shops.
(Pep Boys is testing this service in some parts of the country.)
Automotive Marketing, a trade publication, reported last summer that Hi-Lo has become "the key mover" in Houston, which itself has become a microcosm of the auto-parts industry, where all the major players, both retail and commercial, compete.
The publication quoted one independent wholesale distributor commenting on Hi-Lo's ability to "do everything we do, deliveries, salesmen, returns.
With 60 stores now 70 they're the only game in town."
In the past three years, commercial sales have grown as much as 25% a year, compared with virtually flat retail-sales growth.
Today, commercial sales account for about one-third of the company's annual revenue.
A sure sign of strength, notes analyst James D. Parker at Atlanta-based Robinson Humphrey, a regional brokerage house, will be increases in Hi-Lo's monthly same-store sales figures.
The company this year has budgeted for monthly samestore sales gains of about 5%; analysts say that is conservative and feasible.
Mr. Parker, like most, expects January sales to remain flat.
But, he adds, "it should pick up after that."
Tesoro Petroleum, San Antonio, leaped more than 43% on the week, gaining $2.875, on more than 12 times the stock's typical daily volume.
Late last week, a group including New York broker-dealers Loeb Partners and Loeb Arbitrage Fund said it had acquired a 5.4% stake in the company's cumulative preferred stock for investment purposes.
That same day, the company reported that unaudited net income for the fourth quarter was $16.6 million, or $1 a share, compared with a loss of $24.9 million, or $1.93 a share, a year ago.
ElectroCom Automation pulled in as the week's biggest loser, dropping nearly 29% to $6.75, on news that a postal contract the Arlington maker of document-processing systems sought went instead to a unit of International Business Machines Corp.
A day later, Merrill Lynch downgraded the stock's intermediate investment rating to "neutral" from "above average."
Pittencrieff Communications of Abilene lost $4.25, or nearly 15%, after announcing an agreement in principle to acquire from its parent, Britain-based Pittencrieff PLC, more than 6.36 million shares of Pittencrieff Communications stock currently held by the parent, which is liquidating its position.
The unit's business is mobile radio communications services.
Dallas brokerage house Rauscher Pierce Refsnes helped pump up the share price of Tetra Technologies, The Woodlands, more than 20% by raising its investment rating to "market outperformer" from "market performer."
The upgrade was based on improved profitability and increased visibility in the company's waste-treatment division, favorable trends in its natural-gas drilling, and an improving market for heavy-end brine fluids.
