Today's white-collar boom towns were yesterday's cow pastures.
Using 1990 Census data, American Demographics Inc. identified 20 of the fastest-growing, wealthiest and most educated areas of the country.
Many of them are in rural America, far from both urban centers and the suburbs that ring them.
Unlike traditional suburbs, some of these counties have their own strong economies, independent of cities.
But all 20 have attracted businesses and families looking for relief from the crime, congestion, expensive housing and poor schools endemic in cities and now encroaching on the suburbs.
Today's boom towns are not only beyond the first ring of suburbs around cities but also beyond outer suburban hubs like Princeton, N.J., and Tysons Corners, Va.
"This is the growth edge of white-collar America," says Peter Francese, the founder of American Demographics who conducted the study.
They are "the power centers of tomorrow."
The shift also reflects the restructuring of corporate America.
Businesses, to slash costs, are moving large chunks of their operations from downtown office buildings and suburban office parks to more rural areas.
Technological advances, such as computer links between manufacturing plants, suppliers and distributors, have given corporations freedom to move out of traditional business centers.
Shelby County, Ala., one of the boom counties, is a study in contrasts.
Its landscape is a bucolic mix of pine forests and covered bridges.
Brick townhouses are rising up next to rusting trailers.
A toll road soon will be needed to handle the 100,000 cars a day developers expect to travel the county's busiest artery, Route 280, by the year 2010.
The median household income, based on the 1990 Census, was $36,851, more than double the $18,272 in 1980.
That should rise even more with the expected influx of middle-income managers.
Officials of Mercedes Benz, which is building its first U.S. plant in nearby Tuscaloosa County, have been shopping for homes in Shelby, about 20 miles southwest of Birmingham.
NCR Corp. and Rust International Inc. moved to the county in the late 1980s from the metropolitan area.
AmSouth Bancorp, Alabama's largest bank, plans to move about a third of its corporate headquarters staff from the city.
Since 1980, the boom has nearly doubled the county's population to about 114,000.
In Hamilton County, Ind., a rural county north of Indianapolis, GTE Corp., Polygram Entertainment Co., Marsh Supermarkets and USA Group have built offices and distribution centers.
Williamson County, Tenn., has attracted companies with its lower taxes, uncongested roads and cheaper real estate.
Manchester Tank & Equipment Co. moved there from Los Angeles County in early 1993.
"We picked Tennessee because the cost of living and the environment are good," says Rob Reifschneider, Manchester's senior vice president.
As the jobs have moved, so have families.
United Airlines is building a maintenance facility in Indianapolis, but many moving from the old site in San Francisco have chosen Hamilton County for their homes.
The county's population rose nearly 33% between 1980 and 1990, to 108,936.
Corporate recruiters say even they have been surprised at how easy it is to draw prospective employees to Hamilton.
When GTE East built its headquarters for 23 states in the county, it found that about 70% of the 950 employees it needed were willing to relocate.
Roy A. Nicholson, chief executive at USA Group, which services and guarantees student loans, has no trouble filling even clerical jobs; many county residents don't want to commute into the city.
As companies have trimmed management ranks, many of their refugees have headed for small towns in places like Jefferson and Douglas counties in Colorado.
There, the former executives have launched their own businesses in low-rise office buildings or back bedrooms.
There's no guarantee the boom will continue in these 20 counties.
Rockingham County, N.H., has been hurt by a military-base closing.
Howard County, Md., between Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, is facing many of the problems confronting its two urban neighbors.
Planners say housing prices are climbing, hurting newcomers' chances of finding affordable homes.
And then there's the usual sprawl.
"We just can't keep building roads," says Joseph Rutter, county planning director.
"We'll end up paving the county."
But patterns point to expansion into more rural areas.
Today's boom towns are places like Fort Bend County, Texas, where the population of 260,000 is expected to keep growing as more people move out of Houston in search of better schools and cheaper housing.
Major employers, including Fluor Daniel Inc., the construction and engineering unit of Fluor Corp., and Unocal Corp., the Los Angeles-based oil company, have built regional offices in the county, and small software developers have set up shop there as well.
Likewise, a growing number of small manufacturing plants have made Delaware County, Ohio, a new pulse in the heart of the rust belt.
Some of its once-shuttered mills have been converted to auto-component plants to supply Honda's facility in the state.
One thing that hasn't changed since 1980: Fast-growing pockets of wealth and affluence are still almost entirely white; in most of these counties, more than 90% of the residents are white.
Newcomers to Jefferson County, west of Denver, are often from out-of-state urban areas.
"We see an awful lot of migration from the East and West coasts," says Jack Williamson, a strategic planner in the county.
They can get much more for their money.
If they had a $300,000 house in an upscale suburb, "they can buy a house here with acres and deer in the front yard," Mr. Williamson says.
"People see it as an opportunity to improve their standard of living," says Bill Seavey, founder of the Greener Pastures Institute in Pahrump, Nev., which helps families nationwide move to rural areas.
About 75% of his clients are parents who want to get their children out of cities.
"A lot of baby boomers want out of the urban scene at whatever sacrifice," he says.
Julie Fogle, now of Hamilton County, worried about what her three children were getting exposed to in the Indianapolis public schools.
"Drugs and sex seemed to be the only thoughts they had," says the 38-year-old loan officer.
After moving to the Hamilton town of Fishers, her children got more involved in school and even joined the student council.
And while city school budgets are squeezed, Hamilton County's schools are expanding.
Its Westfield school district has built a "smart campus" with the help of GTE East, a unit of GTE.
For Shelby residents Jess and Kay Rawls, even Birmingham's suburbs didn't feel safe enough.
They have moved several times in recent years, always to newer and more remote areas.
When the family lived in the Vestavia suburb, Mr. Rawls, a 47-year-old produce broker, took his daughter out of public schools and enrolled her in a Christian academy because of growing concerns about drugs and alcohol in the school.
"The problems of Birmingham are moving further and further out," he says.
Bud Cason, 56, knew it was time to move out of downtown Birmingham when he caught armed thieves stealing car batteries in his cookie factory's parking lot.
In 1992, Birmingham had more murders than Newark, N.J., a similar-sized city, and some larger cities, such as Miami, according to the most recent FBI Uniform Crime Report.
"People were afraid to drive up to our plant," says Mr. Cason.
"I wanted an area where people weren't afraid.
I couldn't find that in Birmingham."
In 1986, he sold the facility and left the cookie business.
In 1993, he opened a new Bud's Best Cookies plant in a wooded office park in burgeoning Shelby County.
He compares it to moving to heaven from hell.
"This is an ideal spot," he says.
