A group of liberal Democrats who favor a government-run national health-insurance system proposed financing their plan with a payroll tax on employers and a new 2.1% levy on individuals' taxable income.
The group, led by Rep. James McDermott of Washington and Sen. Paul Wellstone of Minnesota, submitted a bill last year that would set up a national health-insurance system similar to Canada's.
Yesterday, they unveiled a new proposal to pay for it: a payroll tax of 8.4% for large employers -- those with more than 75 full-time employees earning wages averaging more than $24,000 a year -- and a tax of 4% for small employers.
In addition, they proposed the 2.1% assessment on individuals' taxable income; an increase in the tax on cigarettes to $2 a pack from 24 cents; and a jump in the excise tax on ammunition and handguns to 50% from 11% and 10%, respectively.
The new taxes would replace the private insurance premiums that businesses and individuals now pay.
The money would be collected by the federal government and allocated to states to pay for a comprehensive array of health benefits for all citizens -- including preventive services, hospitalization, mental-health and substance-abuse treatment, and nursing-home care.
Private health-insurance policies would be virtually eliminated.
While the so-called single-payer system is given little chance of winning congressional approval, its roughly 100 advocates represent an important voting bloc.
They expect to play a big role in negotiations on health-overhaul legislation.
A number of the group's previous financing proposals -- including higher income-tax rates on corporations and wealthy individuals, and certain savings in the Medicare program -- were adopted by Congress last summer as part of its deficit-reduction package.
The Clinton health bill would continue to insure people mostly through private insurance policies.
The president would pay for such coverage by requiring all employers to help pay their workers' insurance premiums.
He would limit how much employers and individuals would have to pay, though.
