The Defense Department has canceled plans to conduct a controversial AIDS vaccine trial.
After months of wrangling among several federal agencies opposed to the trial of a vaccine made by MicroGeneSys Inc., Meriden, Conn., the Pentagon said it will spend the $20 million earmarked for the trial on vaccine therapies and research.
That means it will reopen the process and seek proposals from companies and universities on how to spend the money.
The trial of the MicroGeneSys vaccine, which is designed to slow the progression of AIDS in people already infected with the AIDS virus, has been criticized by both the National Institutes of Health and by the Food and Drug Administration as narrow and commercially motivated.
The company hired former Sen. Russell Long of Louisiana to lobby Congress for the vaccine trial.
Amid criticism from AIDS researchers, Congress ordered the trial as part of Pentagon-funding legislation.
Last August, efforts to include other vaccines in the trial failed.
On Jan. 4, the new director of the NIH, Harold Varmus, and FDA Commissioner David Kessler again urged Congress in a letter to spend the $20 million "to answer basic questions about the immune response."
Edward D. Martin, acting Assistant Defense Secretary, subsequently notified congressional committees in a letter that the trial wouldn't proceed.
Mr. Martin added that the Pentagon believes in the "potential" of the MicroGeneSys vaccine, but would spend the money toward general research, and will seek participation from the two agencies.
MicroGeneSys Chairman Franklin Volvovitz told the Associated Press that it was premature to say whether his company would participate in the next round of vaccine research.
On Jan. 14, the company was dealt a blow when the Wyeth-Ayerst unit of American Home Products Corp. indicated it would cease providing funding for the vaccine.
Dr. Volvovitz, who earlier declined comment on the withdrawal by American Home, couldn't be reached late Friday.
However, MicroGeneSys director Harvey Sadow told the AP that the company would survive the loss.
A spokesman for Chiron Corp., a biotechnology company based in Emeryville, Calif., which also is working on a vaccine, said, "This is the solution that everyone in the scientific community had always believed in."
"It's been 14 months that people have been haggling over this," added vaccine developer Jack Obijeski of Genentech Inc., in South San Francisco, Calif.
"Let's design the best possible trial, using the best possible vaccine candidates."
