Strong/Corneliuson Capital Management Inc. said it is holding "ongoing discussions" with the Securities and Exchange Commission about its movement of securities among some of its funds.
In response to a Friday article in this newspaper disclosing the SEC inquiry, the Milwaukee money-management firm issued a memo to "all associates" saying that the firm is "cooperating with the SEC in an investigation relating to cross trades and disclosures between 1987 and early 1990."
Strong had refused to comment prior to the article.
Cross trading is the transferring of stocks or bonds among various funds within the same company.
One area of SEC scrutiny is understood to be whether some junk bonds may have been moved out of institutional funds and into mutual funds when the firm's performance was sagging in 1989-90.
The company's memo said: "There has never been any allegation that trades were used to favor one account over another -- nor is there any basis for such an allegation."
Among other things, the SEC is believed to be looking at Strong Total Return Fund, an income and capital-appreciation mutual fund.
The company's memo didn't mention Strong Total Return.
The firm's telephone operators read the memo to clients who inquired about the article.
The company is headed by veteran mutual-fund manager Richard Strong.
It currently manages $10 billion, including $7.8 billion in mutual funds.
"The investigation is looking at whether the cross trades were conducted in accordance with an SEC rule that sets forth a number of conditions for cross trades, and whether the firm's disclosures accurately describe its trading policies," the memo said.
"This is information about something that happened four to six years ago and doesn't relate at all to Strong funds today," a company spokeswoman said.
She said there was no unusual redemption activity Friday.
The Strong funds had a rough 1989 and 1990, largely because of investments in junk bonds and takeover stocks.
In 1991, Mr. Strong hired several top managers and started to turn the firm around.
"The Strong/Corneliuson of today is a vastly different firm than the one in the late 1980s," the memo said.
"Our portfolio managers and analysts have grown from seven to 28. . . .
While we didn't have even one lawyer on staff in 1990, we have a legal and compliance team today of nine individuals, including four lawyers, enforcing a conservative compliance policy."
"We wish that we could provide more information about this matter, but we can't, given that it's the subject of ongoing discussions with the SEC," Strong's memo said.
"We believe that it will be satisfactorily resolved."
