Pull up your chair -- or couch -- penny pinchers and spendthrifts: Your money therapist is listening.
When Dianne and Bob Smith were first married, they shared a checking account.
But the weekly balancing of the checkbooks transformed their home into a minefield.
Finally, the Annapolis, Md., couple turned to Olivia Mellan, a Washington-based money therapist.
Today, the Smiths say their money troubles have been solved by the talking cure.
Around the country, a growing number of therapists are treating people who suffer from "money neurosis," or financial dysfunction.
People are increasingly aware of how money -- or lack of it -- can affect their lives, says the psychologist Joyce Brothers.
The demand for help in overcoming money problems "certainly keeps our offices full," says Robert R. Butterworth, a Los Angeles-based clinical psychologist.
Money problems often have emotional causes, says David Krueger, a Houston psychiatrist who treats some financial disorders: "Money, along with food and sex, are the most common places where emotional issues hitchhike."
And like food, you can't simply go cold turkey on money.
Money also takes on symbolic meanings.
Some people, for example, think of it as being dirty, while for others it symbolizes freedom, security or power.
Ms. Mellan traced the Smiths' money tensions to Ms. Smith's father, who used to make her apply for her allowance by painstakingly accounting for how she would spend it.
So a simple inquiry from her husband turned into an emotionally charged debate about control and independence.
The solution?
Separate checking accounts.
Now Ms. Smith simply writes a check to her husband for her part of the bills.
Money "may not be the primary cause of problems, but when you start talking to people about conflict in relationships it's really up in the top three," says Dr. Butterworth.
All kinds of people, from all kinds of backgrounds, seek money therapy.
Christopher Mogil, a Boston-based counselor, primarily treats people with inherited wealth.
One client "had inherited $100 million and was, interestingly enough, shamed about money," says Mr. Mogil.
"People who don't have enough money or have too much feel the same things . . . .
If you have a huge amount, you feel you have too many choices.
If you have no money, you have no choices.
Both feel paralyzed," he says.
At Arlene Matthews's practice in New York City, a young woman just starting out and a retirement-age man who has made and lost several fortunes are both doing time on the couch.
Ms. Matthews's practice often attracts patients who work with money as a profession.
"They're wonderful at making money for other people, but they can't manage their own," the psychotherapist says.
Today, many people feel a loss of control over their money, suggests Tahira K. Hira, professor of personal finance and consumer behavior.
Modern culture, says Dr. Hira, of Iowa State University, encourages overspending and irresponsiblity.
"Handling money demands more control because of the enticing products around us," she says.
The problems people have with money change with the times, says Ms. Matthews.
"It's a purge-binge thing . . . ." she says.
"The overwhelming message being passed around in the '80s was buy, buy, buy.
You can catch up later because the boom times are here to stay.
Now in the '90s, it's save, save . . . .
The group thinking influences the way people with money anxieties think about money."
Ms. Mellan has targeted seven types of patients who have problems with money: hoarders; spenders; money monks, who think that money is evil and corrupt; money worriers; money amassers, who want to collect a lot of it; risk takers; and risk avoiders, who want financial safety and security above all else.
In her coming book "Money Harmony," she prescribes cures for various personality types.
For instance, "Kevin was a money amasser."
He worked long hours, and spent most evenings and weekends at the computer, monitoring his stock investments.
On vacation, he flaunted his wealth, but he couldn't relax enough to enjoy it.
One day his wife decided to leave him.
"Stupefied, he asked: `How can you think about a divorce after all I've given you?'
She answered bitterly, `All you think about is your money -- how to make it grow, how to flaunt it to impress others.
I feel like a showpiece, not like someone you are sharing your life with.'"
After the shock of his divorce, Kevin ended up at a money therapy workshop run by Ms. Mellan.
Sometimes a therapist will have patients pretend to engage in a dialogue with money personified.
It might go something like this: "Money, you are dirty, get away from me."
Such an exercise can reveal how the patient really feels about money; or it can uncover even deeper roots: low self-esteem, depression or the need to have control.
Some people, says Annette Lieberman, a psychotherapist in New York City, actually refuse to touch money and buy everything with credit cards.
As part of their therapy, Ms. Lieberman tells them to pay for everything with cash and keep a diary of what they buy.
"The point is to make people more conscious of money attitudes," says Ms. Lieberman.
"If people could become more aware, they could make an informed financial decision that isn't tinged with emotional overlay."
Of course, certain professionals think money therapy is a lot of hooey.
"I am a psychologist, but I also happen to be a Jesuit priest with a vow of poverty," says Daniel O'Connell, chairman of the psychology department at Georgetown University.
"As you can see, no one ever needs to counsel me about money."
