The Texas foreclosure picture is still a long way from healthy.
The total number of foreclosures has dropped by more than 56% since 1989, the largest such decline of any state.
And from 1992 to 1993, Texas foreclosures dropped by a healthy 15%.
But the improvement says more about how bad things were than it does about how good things are.
In fact, a truer picture can be gleaned by looking at the actual rate of foreclosure -- the number of foreclosures per 1,000 properties.
In Texas, nine out of every 1,000 properties were foreclosed in 1993, according to TRW REDI Property Data in Riverside, Calif.
Two Texas counties -- Dallas and Tarrant, with rates of 11 and 12, respectively, were above the state average.
Recession-wracked southern California has a higher rate -- but not much higher.
Southern California posted a foreclosure rate of 11 properties per 1,000 last year, compared with seven properties per 1,000 in 1992.
So what do the numbers mean?
Researchers say that although the number of foreclosures in Texas continues to drop, the state is far from a healthy rate of three or four foreclosures per 1,000.
"Anything below five is indicative of a more healthy market," says Nima Nattagh, market analyst with TRW REDI.
Moreover, Mr. Nattagh says, until Texas' foreclosure rate reaches a healthier level, residential and commercial prices will continue to suffer.
"Foreclosures tend to drive down the price of comparable properties that are selling under normal conditions," Mr. Nattagh says.
And the future?
More of the same.
Analysts say foreclosure rates probably will drop another 10% to 20% in the next couple of years.
But the glut of troubled property still looms over the market, and it's going to take a long time for foreclosure rates to reach the healthy levels of the early 1980s, if they ever do.
The number of foreclosures in Texas counties: -- in several states and Texas counties: months; figures include both residential and commercial foreclosures reported in major metropolitan counties.
