After toiling for decades in the glassed-in computer rooms of corporate America, buttoned-down Electronic Data Systems Corp. is cutting loose.
In recent months, the Dallas-based unit of General Motors Corp., once so conservative that it banned blue shirts and beards, has embarked on some distinctly un-EDS-like projects: a home-shopping business with Apple Computer Inc., a hotel-movie venture with Spectradyne Inc. and a gambling venture with Video Lottery Technologies Inc.
The hope, say the executives spearheading the new work, is that the company founded by Ross Perot can be as successful linking up to the much-discussed information superhighway as it has been running data centers and computer networks for many of the world's biggest companies.
"We are undergoing a basic strategy shift," says John R. Harris, a 20-year EDS veteran coordinating what the company is calling its "interactive multimedia" push.
William D. Rabin, a former EDS employee who now follows the company as an analyst for J.P. Morgan Securities Inc. in New York, says the company, like many of its peers, is angling for the new business out of fear that it could miss something big once the information highway finally develops.
"They're putting a lot of fingers into a lot of different pies," Mr. Rabin says.
"EDS does not want to be left out."
However, given the strong conservative bent that remains at EDS, Mr. Rabin says he's convinced the company wouldn't be cutting these deals if it didn't believe the business was going to blossom.
"I don't think this is going to be a sidelight," he says.
"If it were, they wouldn't be interested."
The new direction isn't the result of a faltering core business.
EDS remains the industry leader in computer "outsourcing," in which companies cut costs by turning over their data-processing operations to outside experts.
And that business is one of the fastest-growing and most profitable niches of the information technology game.
Earlier this week, EDS landed the largest outsourcing contract ever -- an estimated $3 billion deal to run Xerox Corp.'s computer systems for the next eight to 10 years.
Thanks primarily to the company's outsourcing work, analysts expect EDS to report record sales of about $9.5 billion this year and net income of $839.9 million, a 16% jump over the $724 million reported for 1993.
This year's expected strong showing follows a slowdown last fall, when analysts began to grumble about a shortage of new contracts and EDS executives were fretting internally about the company's inability to strike an alliance with a telecommunications-industry partner.
"EDS has been winning contracts left and right," says Susan Srupski, editor of the Integrator, an industry newsletter in Barnegat, N.J.
"They're on a roll."
Many of these new contracts have been coming out of Mr. Harris's operation, run from a wing of the company's bunker-style headquarters in a suburb north of Dallas.
Employment at the unit, called the EDS Communications Industry Group, has increased tenfold in the past four years, to about 4,000 people.
Analysts estimate the group this year will generate sales of about $500 million.
According to Mr. Harris, who earned his stripes at EDS by leading the company's push into Europe, the company is interested in every facet of the digital highway, from the telecommunications and satellite byways to handling the content that will pique people's interest.
"We would not be looking to own film libraries and we're not interested in owning the pipes in the ground," he says.
"But anywhere in between, you could see us playing."
Typical is EDS's contract with Spectradyne, the Richardson, Texas, provider of Spectravision in-room movies.
Under a deal reached by the two companies in November, EDS will help convert the company's current system -- which uses robotics at each hotel to insert tapes into video players-into a digital video server that will store information pulled off a satellite.
Once the system is in place in the hotels, EDS envisions broadening the applications to include corporate training or sales programs that could be played in hotel meeting rooms.
And, Mr. Harris notes, it's not much of a leap to go from video servers for hotel rooms to movies or educational programs at home.
However, no specific home-video plan is now in the works.
Even more to the point is a project called Interactive Transaction Partners, a venture between EDS, U S West and France Telecom that promises interactive home banking.
Under the plan, customers will be able to pay bills, withdraw money, even move money between investment funds through a home telephone or personal computer.
A separate EDS contract, with USTravel of Rockville, Md., is looking at the possibility of automated-teller-style machines from which people could buy airline tickets or a seat at a Broadway show, says Ralph Manaker, USTravel's president.
The agreement with Video Lottery, meantime, centers on on-line and video gambling.
EDS has vowed to help the company to develop future products and service enhancements.
EDS's deal with Apple promises a CDROM home-shopping service featuring 21 catalogs from manufacturers such as L.L. Bean and Tiffany & Co.
Customers can browse through the catalogs, interact by tapping into pictures and videos, then order what they want through a single phone call.
Mr. Harris concedes that EDS is all over the map with these new ventures.
"You're going to see us experiment fairly broadly," he says.
"We're all searching for the right niches.
This is a new market."
Mr. Harris says he's convinced most companies are still fairly clueless about how they will plug into the highway.
EDS's job, he says, is to give them the tools to help navigate the network and use the information they find to improve their business.
The challenge for the company, analysts say, is going to be expanding its reach without moving into areas that could force it to stumble.
And how does EDS protect itself against new competition or dwindling returns in businesses that are still largely untested?
In most cases, the risk is assumed by EDS's customers.
The computer-services concern acts largely as a subcontractor, and usually locks in guaranteed, multiyear deals to protect it from hiccups.
As to EDS's expertise in many of the new areas, Mr. Harris notes that both corporate computer work and interactive services involve lots of digital transactions, as well as extensive networking between host and client computers.
"What you're talking about is a digital world, and we know data," Mr. Harris says.
"We understand technology as well or better than anybody."
Class E, representing a share in EDS's earnings, but not equity ownership. outsourcing, networking, data-center management Anderson & Co., Computer Sciences Corp., SHL Systemhouse Inc. and Cap Gemini Sogeti SA
