The surprise defeat of political reform in Japan last week has dealt the yen another serious blow.
Still, the Japanese currency could get some support from the U.S. government's continued efforts to use it as a lever against Japanese protectionism.
The result will be that the yen for now remains caught in a tug of war, traders and analysts say.
"The economics of the situation may drive it down, but the political voices from Washington will talk it up," says Dave Rossman, vice president at Harris Trust & Savings Bank, Chicago.
The failed attempt by Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa to push political reform bills through the upper house of parliament caught many in the market by surprise, and the crosscurrents began to swirl in currency markets.
In trading Friday, traders initially took the Japanese currency higher.
But as the session wore on, they changed their minds, and the dollar reversed its losses against the yen.
In late New York trading, the dollar was at 111.60 yen, up from 111.06 yen a week earlier and 111.40 yen Thursday.
The dollar was at 1.7540 marks, up from 1.7495 a week ago and 1.7380 marks Thursday.
About midday Monday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 112.13 yen and at 1.7526 marks.
Defeat of political reform makes it highly unlikely that Japan's coalition government will be able to iron out any time soon a compromise on a stimulus package or budget for the coming fiscal year beginning April 1, analysts believe.
The Diet's current session ends Jan. 29.
"This may not be a permanent defeat, but it certainly delays the whole process of moving toward fiscal stimulus and the general sense is that this is the way out" of recession, says Kevin Logan, chief economist with Swiss Bank Corp.
Moreover, the defeat of the reform package will weigh heavily upon Japan's Nikkei stock index, further sapping the currency's strength, says Mr. Rossman.
Meanwhile, the Japanese economy continues to struggle.
For example, the Bank of Japan last week said it saw no reason to believe weak loan demand would improve.
That is the kind of talk that only exacerbates tension over the growing trade deficit between the U.S. and Japan, which widened more than 15% to $5.36 billion in December.
The unlikelihood of a stimulus to fix the troubled economy means that Japan will continue to be part of trade speeches by Clinton administration officials, currency and political analysts say.
A stronger yen would damp the flow of Japanese exports to the U.S. by making them more expensive.
However, there is less demand for U.S. products as Japan's economy continues to limp along.
Thus, it is expected that the U.S. will further pressure Japan to solve its trade problems with the U.S. by pushing up the yen.
Indeed, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen met with Japanese Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii and Mr. Hosokawa Sunday.
"Bentsen has been pretty critical of the trade situation," says Randall Posejpal, vice president of foreign exchange at Saul Stone & Co. in Chicago.
He was referring to the continuing "framework" talks between the two countries that reached an impasse because of U.S. demands that trade restrictions be loosened and more imports allowed into Japan.
"Usually with these meetings, everyone expects more than what comes out of them," Mr. Posejpal says.
Still, more tough talk from Mr. Bentsen was expected to put a buffer underneath the yen, traders and analysts think, keeping it from falling too far even though there aren't any domestic supports for the yen.
Mr. Bentsen received no specific promises Sunday but said Mr. Hosokawa told him that ". . . we want to bring this to a successful conclusion."
