Nguyen Trung Truc's first business venture in Vietnam almost wiped him out.
A $300,000 shipment of pharmaceutical products that he financed was imported and sold, but his customer, a state-owned corporation, refused to repay him.
Worse, company officials spread rumors that he was working for the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency.
Legal action seemed futile, given the unreliability of the local courts.
In desperation, Mr. Truc, a Vietnamese-born Australian, persuaded his politically connected sister to use her contacts in Hanoi to put pressure on the company.
After weeks of sleepless nights, the payment finally was made.
Mr. Truc even ended up making a $10,000 profit on the deal, which took place in 1990.
Under the banner of the Hong Kong-based Peregrine merchant banking group, he has gone on to become one of the most successful businessmen in Vietnam.
"I was still a little bit green then," he says, "but I learned."
As an ethnic Vietnamese born in the Mekong Delta province of My Tho, 42-year-old Mr. Truc is hardly a typical foreign investor.
After all, he speaks Vietnamese and has the advantage of being able to call on friends and family for help.
His parents, poor farmers long retired, and most of his 10 brothers and sisters still live in the country.
But in many ways his experience reflects what any investor faces when entering Vietnam, which is trying to create a market economy while the Communist Party retains political control.
Mr. Truc went to Australia on a scholarship in 1972, when he was 20, to study economics.
He had returned to visit Vietnam only once before launching his business here.
His interest wasn't in being a trader or middleman for multinational corporations.
He and his wife, Deidre Low, 32 years old, a Malaysian accountant, set out to build what they hoped would become a diversified business empire.
Since 1991, they have taken on a partner, the Peregrine group, persuaded by the group's deep pockets and its connections to an Asia-wide network.
With Peregrine, they formed Peregrine Capital Vietnam Ltd., or PCV, owned 40% by Mr. Truc and his wife and 60% by the Peregrine group.
With Mr. Truc as the managing director, PCV is pursuing ventures in marketing and distribution, manufacturing, financial services and property.
PCV and its partners have acquired the agency for a number of international brand names, among them Mercedes-Benz cars, Ciba-Geigy and Bayer pharmaceuticals and Kenwood consumer-electronic equipment.
The concern is also awaiting government approval for a joint venture with Ciba-Geigy of Switzerland to build a plant and manufacture its pharmaceuticals.
As the local market develops for other items PCV is distributing, it hopes to enter similar production arrangements.
Through Vietnamese business associates and his family, Mr. Truc effectively controls Dai Nam Bank, whose capital he has increased to $2.5 million from $500,000.
PCV intends to use the bank to obtain a seat on Vietnam's first stock exchange, expected to open in rudimentary form this year, and set up brokerage, merchant-banking and related operations.
In real estate, PCV says it has been crimped temporarily by a shortage of experienced staff.
So it is poised to buy stakes in five projects, a mix of apartments and office buildings, some nearing completion, others in the planning stages, in Ho Chi Minh City.
"I've had the opportunity of very cheap entry into these fields," says Mr. Truc.
"My vision is to create a Vietnamese version" of a British trading house, such as Jardine Matheson.
With offices in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, PCV and partners employ directly about 70 staff, 10 of them expatriates, including seven overseas Vietnamese.
More overseas Vietnamese are being recruited to fill what Mr. Truc calls the gap between him and local managers.
Dai Nam Bank, with four branches, is staffed by 150 locals.
While declining to provide details, Mr. Truc says PCV made a profit in 1993, its second year of operation.
In contrast with some other overseas Vietnamese, the soft-spoken Mr. Truc has kept a low profile for the past four years, trying to avoid political pitfalls and convince the authorities that he is a serious, long-term investor.
For instance, Mr. Truc and Ms. Low started running tours to Vietnam from Southeast Asia in 1991.
But when it became apparent that many of the visitors were more interested in carousing in hostess clubs than sightseeing, they closed the service.
One thing that contradicts his efforts to blend in is his penchant for vintage cars.
He owns a fleet of 15, ranging from a 1902 Citroen to a 1962 MG sports car.
"It's my weakness," he says, though he often resorts to a motorbike in the evening to beat traffic congestion.
Although Mr. Truc is reluctant to discuss his relationship with Vietnamese leaders, it is obvious that he has friends in high places.
For a start, PCV occupies a colonial-style building in the grounds of the former presidential palace in Ho Chi Minh City.
The palace is administered by the prime minister's department, an associated company of which owns part of the local sales arm for Mercedes-Benz.
The prime minister's department is also the partner in a proposed apartment building on a corner of the palace grounds that Mr. Truc is negotiating on behalf of Malaysian businessman Datuk Tan Chin Nam.
(Datuk Tan owns the 30% of Dai Nam not held by Mr. Truc and Ms. Low.)
If the 120-apartment complex is approved, PCV may buy into it.
"I rarely accept purely advisory work," says Mr. Truc.
"I advise the people we would like to be our partners and hope we can make a project work and take maybe a 20% share or more in it."
Mr. Truc has solidified his relationship with the government by participating in working groups to make recommendations about a stock exchange and write the rules for build-operate-transfer investments the country is seeking.
As for the future, he says PCV wants to start a Vietnam fund, probably late this year, for about $50 million initially.
It would invest in PCV's projects as well as others involving foreign partners.
