Earthquake-related dispatches from Senior.Net, a computer network for older adults, seeking information and offering comfort in the hours just after the disaster:
From FranO: As many of you know our two children live in Southern Californa . . .
We are both grateful that they are well, and who cares about the TV's, china and crystal anyway.
A funny thing did happen though.
Susie's friend in England called her early this morning when she heard about the disaster and was able to get through.
Susie knowing she could not reach us asked her friend in England to call us, so we are reassured via London, England.
Strange but wonderful.
From Flip 2603: Ginny . . .
Des, the Cat and I are in fine shape, just minus a lot of stemware and crystal . . . oh, boy, we're just having a long, long aftershock.
Must be in the neighborhood of 5.
I'll run out in the garden if you don't mind.
From Flip 2603: This last aftershock . . . sounded like a locomotive coming up the street.
I chickened out and ran out into the garden, but tonight I'll be able to sleep thru them I'm sure.
From GERRIW: Someone who obviously had called the wrong number left a message on my machine at 7:45 a.m. PST, saying she was Kim's mother and she is alright.
If anyone knows Kim's mother, please see that Kim gets the message.
From ConnieAct: Please take it easy for the next day or two.
We learned in the Loma Prieta that the shock causes a depression after a day or two when the shock wears off.
I was weepy for a day or two.
So be good to yourselves.
From AliceB8703: We've just about accounted for all of the SeniorNet members. think there are 4/5 we've had no contact with.
KeyWiz had damage and lost aquarium . . .
Polly's house damaged & 'puters, tv's damaged.
Larry has badly cut foot that required 20 stitches.
They do not have water or power . . .
Keep thinkin' about us.
From AliceB8703: It's about 4 am Tuesday and can't sleep.
Still have not heard directly from Kim, Roger & Baby Joshua. phones are a nightmare here.
Keep posting we need to know you're out there.
From BudRob: Bill you and Linda are invited to bring Guido and come camp out here for as long as you need! . . .
(This is a serious invitation: What does Guido eat?)
From GordonM678: Prayers and thoughts with all the folks in California and the 49r's too!!
