In its first major interactive software investment, MCA Inc. said it acquired a stake in closely held Interplay Productions Inc., a 10-year-old maker of CD-ROM and video games based in Irvine, Calif.
The companies didn't disclose terms, but MCA called its acquisition "a significant minority stake," meaning between 20% and 30%, with an option to acquire nearly 50%.
Interplay's estimated 1993 revenue is about $60 million, and MCA's investment is thought to be about $60 million.
The rest of the company is held by insiders.
MCA last month formed Universal Interactive Studios, which will publish interactive software for computers and game machines.
Executive Vice President Skip Paul, who heads the unit, said Interplay will be MCA's "major vehicle" for developing such software.
"We're going to put our resources into it and grow it big," he said.
Interplay President Brian Fargo, 31 years old, who dropped out of junior college to found the company, said that in the current interactive-crazed climate, he's listened to a steady stream of investment bankers urge him to take the company public.
Some similar companies have been raising money that values them at 3-to-5 times sales.
"Going public seems to be some people's crowning jewel in life, but it's not mine.
I wanted somebody to come to the party with more than just money."
MCA, he said, will provide not only distribution clout and access to MCA-owned entertainment properties and talent, but expertise in commercial storytelling.
"In order for our medium to become bigger, we need to learn about set design, character development, plot, camera movement," he said.
Interplay, which is best known for its "Battle Chess" series, had a recent top-selling game for the Super Nintendo platform, "Clay Fighter."
It also owns all interactive rights to the original "Star Trek" television series.
It also helps other developers "bundle" their software with hardware manufacturers.
While some companies with movie and television studios like Time Warner Inc., Sony Corp. and Paramount Communications Inc. have started large in-house software divisions and acquired stakes in many outside software companies, MCA thus far has limited its spending to a 15% stake in 3DO Co., a much-touted company formed to support a new standard for interactive multimedia systems.
The interactive game machine that supports 3DO-licensed software is manufactured by MCA's parent, Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.
Interplay has been a developer for 3DO and Mr. Fargo said he expects that role to increase.
Some have speculated that Electronic Arts Inc.'s agreement this week to acquire Broderbund Software Inc. in a $400 million stock swap will cause Broderbund to increase its support for 3DO.
3DO's stock price has fallen back from previous highs amid fears its machine isn't selling quickly enough.
