New York City, in a move that could help boost the sagging fortunes of the East Coast trash industry, said it is considering shipping as much as 5,000 tons of trash daily out of state beginning in 1997.
The 20-year disposal contract for which the city said it would seek proposals could be valued at more than $1 billion.
Large-scale export of residential waste from New York could help Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani politically.
It also could help reduce the glut of disposal capacity that stretches from New Hamsphire to Virginia, which is a financial strain on some municipalities and trash-handling companies.
Likely bidders for the New York trash work include WMX Technolgies Inc. and Browning-Ferris Industries Inc., smaller regional trash concerns and perhaps Bergen County, N.J., which owns a large and little-used trash-transfer station minutes from downtown Manhattan.
Overbuilding of dumps and incinerators in the region has led to fierce price cutting as companies and communities compete for trash volumes that are lower than expected because of recycling and the recent recession.
Despite that glut, New York is one of the few cities in the country that has a shortage of disposal capacity within its borders and hasn't found a home elsewhere for its trash.
A spokeswoman for the city's Sanitation Department said a request for proposals would be issued next month, covering out-of-area disposal of 3,000 to 5,000 tons a day of residential trash for 20 years.
The city generates about 13,000 tons a day of residential trash, and sends nearly all of it by barge to the Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island.
Local politics pushes the trash out, however.
Staten Islanders haven't been happy about being host to all that trash, and the big dump has helped fuel a movement to secede from the city.
What's more, voters on Staten Island favored Mr. Giuliani in his narrow victory in the recent mayoral election.
Another political consideration: Some residents around a proposed 3,000 ton-a-day Brooklyn Navy Yard trash incinerator are strongly opposed to that project; that area, too, voted for Mr. Giuliani.
Logistics are at work, too.
A waterfront transfer station in the Bronx, which sends 1,700 tons a day to Fresh Kills, could need to be closed soon for renovation.
And as the dump grows taller, it must be sloped like a mountain, which makes accommodating the full 13,000 tons daily increasingly difficult.
Sanitation Commissioner Emily Lloyd wouldn't elaborate on the announcement that her department would seek proposals for trash export.
Though disposal prices in the East are relatively cheap -- Bergen County recently got a 32% price cut, to $42.75 a ton, to send its trash to a Virginia dump -- export still would be hard on New York because it dumps for next to nothing at Fresh Kills.
At $40 a ton, 5,000 tons six days a week would cost $62.4 million.
Waste companies haven't usually committed to 20-year contracts, but the disposal glut and tough competition have changed that.
"We're able to do 20 years," said Philip Angell, a Browning-Ferris official who said his company "will absolutely compete for those volumes."
Browning-Ferris, based in Houston, has dump space available near Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, in Ohio and at incinerators in the East also.
WMX Technologies, based in Oak Brook, Ill., also has capacity at two big dumps near Philadelphia and at East Coast incinerators.
Officials there said the company is interested in the New York volume but wouldn't elaborate.
