Sunscreens are effective in preventing sunburn, but may not provide protection against potentially deadly melanoma skin cancer, a study involving laboratory mice shows.
In the study, published in today's issue of the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, researchers at the University of Texas said that despite sunscreens mice exposed to ultraviolet rays developed melanoma tumors, the most serious form of skin cancer.
"This is an important result," said Dr. Robert Lew, a biostatistician at Brigham & Women's Hospital in Boston.
Even though a study on mice is inconclusive regarding the effect on humans, "it suggests that people at high risk, those that have light complexion or a family history of melanoma, should think twice about how long they are exposed to the sun, even if they have sunscreen on."
Most experts agree that sunscreens play a significant role in protecting people from non-melanoma skin cancers.
But the latest study sends out a strong public health message about the dangers of melanoma, Dr. Lew said.
"It's easy for even me to deceive myself into thinking that I can overdo" the amount of time spent in the sun.
In the study, researchers at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston also suggested that since sunscreens allow people to endure longer sun exposure by reducing swelling of the skin, they may accelerate the onset of melanoma by prolonging exposure to ultraviolet rays.
Melanoma usually starts as a large, irregular-shaped discoloration on the skin that doesn't ordinarily itch or hurt, and is easy to ignore.
However, unless the tumor is surgically removed at an early stage, it can spread to other organs of the body and can be fatal.
A 1992 federal study showed that the death rate for malignant melanoma is rising sharply in the U.S.: The mortality rate among men shot up 50% between 1973 and 1988 to 3.3 per 100,000 from 2.2.
For women, the mortality rate in the same period rose 21% to 1.7 from 1.4 per 100,000.
The biggest increase in mortality occurred among men age 50 and older.
Schering-Plough Corp., the leading producer of sunscreen, called the results of the study "questionable," noting that the researchers used a sunlamp instead of a solar simulator to irradiate the mice.
Schering, based in Madison, N.J., said a sun lamp produces certain ultraviolet radiation that could skew the results.
"It seems that just about every year some new scare comes up about sunscreens," a company spokesman said.
He noted that sunscreens had been endorsed by various medical groups as providing protection against various skin cancers.
Schering had estimated sales of $113.5 million from sunscreen products for the 12 months ended May 30, 1993, according to Information Resources Inc.
Skin cancer fears, perhaps linked to concern that ozone depletion has increased the amount of ultraviolet radiation reaching the earth, have helped boost sun-care products.
Despite the tentative conclusions of the study, the researchers stressed that people should use sunscreen to protect against sunburn and various skin cancers, although they say protective clothing is preferable.
In a commentary accompanying the report, Dr. Lew and a colleague, Dr. Howard Koh, a skin oncologist at Boston University, note that the regular use of sunscreen with a sun-protection factor of 15 during the first 18 years of life can cut by 78% the lifetime incidence of non-melanoma skin cancer.
Dr. Cherrie K. Donawho, an assistant immunologist at M.D. Anderson and one of the authors of the study, said the results were unexpected.
Since sunscreens are known to protect against non-melanoma skin cancers, swelling and sunburn, "I really thought they would protect" against melanoma in mice, she said.
Among humans, chronic exposure to the sun hasn't generally been linked to a higher melanoma risk, she said.
Dr. Peter Wolf, previously of M.D. Anderson and now at the University of Graz in Austria, also authored the study.
The study was conducted on laboratory mice whose ears and tails were treated with commonly used sunscreens.
Mice exposed to ultraviolet radiation from sunlamps and then injected with melanoma skin cancer cells developed more malignant tumors than unexposed mice.
