In a move to fill out its management team, Montgomery Ward & Co. named Bernard W. Andrews president and chief operating officer of its flagship retail division.
The move comes just a month after the big retailer announced the resignation of Harold Kahn, its corporate president and senior merchant.
Mr. Andrews takes over most of Mr. Kahn's former responsibilities, though his title is different.
The move comes just a month after the big retailer announced the resignation of Harold Kahn, its corporate president and senior merchant; that position remains unfilled.
Mr. Andrews, 52 years old, has worked at Montgomery Ward before and, in fact, has worked with Bernard F. Brennan, Montgomery Ward's chairman, for 20 years, first at Sears, Roebuck & Co. and later at Montgomery Ward.
Mr. Andrews left Montgomery Ward in 1990 to take the position of executive vice president at electronics retailer Circuit City Stores Inc.
His positions at Montgomery Ward are newly created.
In his new posts, Mr. Andrews faces the task of re-energizing the company's apparel sales, which didn't meet Mr. Brennan's targets last year.
More than a dozen senior-level officials have resigned from Montgomery Ward since the company was taken private in a $3.8 billion leveraged buyout in 1988.
All the turnover has given Montgomery Ward an image of instability.
Yesterday, Mr. Brennan said that isn't the case.
"Most of the people on our management team now were on our management team years ago," he said.
But Mr. Brennan added that he hoped there will be fewer changes in Montgomery Ward's executive ranks in the future.
Daniel Levy, Mr. Kahn's predecessor, left Montgomery Ward earlier in 1993.
And Mr. Kahn hadn't worked at Montgomery Ward or with Mr. Brennan before his 14-month stint as the company's No. 2 officer.
For some industry observers, the turmoil in Montgomery Ward's top ranks has clouded the company's potential for going public.
Mr. Brennan said that though a common stock offering remains a viable option for the nation's second-largest closely held retailer, it isn't one he is currently contemplating.
With a complete management team in place, Mr. Brennan said he should have more time to focus on building the company's noncore businesses.
Such ventures include Montgomery Ward's catalog business and a recent initiative to build smaller stores in smaller markets.
He also forecast that Montgomery Ward will report 1993 sales of about $6 billion.
In 1992, the company had sales of $5.8 billion.
