Amid the yo-yoing stock market, the country's most-celebrated mutual-fund managers say there are plenty of stocks that still look expensive and much that worries them.
Meanwhile, they're buying.
So far, their actions have been more on the money than their words, as the Dow Jones Industrial Average has already recovered more than a third of the ground it lost in Friday's tumble.
"Friday's action is really an insignificant little jiggle on the long-term stock chart," says Jeff Vinik, manager of the $34 billion Fidelity Magellan Fund, the country's largest mutual fund.
"It was only a 2% drop.
All the market did was give back some of January's gains."
Still he says, "I continue to believe that 1994 is going to be a difficult year for investors."
So is Mr. Vinik selling stock?
Not quite.
Both Friday and yesterday, "I've been more on the buy side than on the sell side," he says.
In recent days, he's been adding to existing positions.
He's also been venturing into financial stocks, including insurers, on the belief that their recent beating makes them good values.
John Neff, manager of the $11.1 billion Vanguard/Windsor Fund, also sounds cautious, even as he buys.
"You just don't keep moving up forever without some indigestion along the way," he says.
"At some point, you're going to get a correction, and maybe this is it."
Nonetheless, Mr. Neff used the market drop to add to his stake in bank and oil stocks.
When stock prices fall, you have to step up and buy "if you have a consistent bone in your body," he says.
Vanguard/Windsor's biggest positions include Aetna Life & Casualty, Aluminum Co. of America, Bankers Trust New York, Burlington Resources, Cigna and Citicorp.
But Mr. Neff also has more than 20% of his fund's assets in cash, the most he allows.
His biggest concern is inflation, which he says could rise to 3.5% or 4%.
"Inflation is one bogeyman I see," he says.
"But there are 10 other things that could jar people.
Expectations are so high."
Mr. Neff has lately been trimming his holdings of European cyclical stocks, which have risen sharply in anticipation of an economic recovery, and he worries that U.S. cyclicals "may be a little bit ahead of themselves."
That sentiment is echoed by James Craig, manager of the $9.4 billion Janus Fund.
Mr. Craig is avoiding European cyclical stocks and some of the more highly cyclical U.S. stocks, such as the paper companies and the steel makers.
"I do have a big position in General Motors.
I think it's a once-in-a-lifetime turnaround," he says.
"But I'm really looking at cheap growth," including Mattel, PepsiCo, Price/Costco and Wal-Mart Stores, he adds.
Mr. Craig says the key to a stock's performance is its earnings growth, and that's why he's sticking with steady growth companies, many of which have been beaten down during the past two years.
"I think the steady, predictable growth companies are the best place to be right now," he says.
Mr. Craig's search for growth led him yesterday to boost his position in two Swiss banks, Swiss Bank Corp. and Union Bank of Switzerland.
"These companies are in the middle of a big earnings surge," he says.
"They're among the cheapest banks in Europe, yet they're among the highest quality in the world."
Janus Fund has 16% of its assets in foreign stocks, 64% in U.S. stocks and a hefty 20% in cash.
Mr. Craig isn't entirely unhappy about the recent turmoil in the markets.
"I welcome the return of some volatility," he says.
"People don't like it, but it does have a benefit.
Volatility is good for mutual-fund managers on an execution basis, because it makes it easier to buy and sell things."
For manager G. Kenneth Heebner, the Federal Reserve's decision last week to make a pre-emptive strike against inflation by nudging up short-term interest rates merely affirms what he already sees: a booming economy.
Such an environment should translate into big earnings gains for cyclical companies, says Mr. Heebner, manager of CGM Capital Development Fund.
He's a big investor in firms such as Bethlehem Steel, Caterpillar, Chrysler, Deere, Ford Motor, GM and UAL, which are especially sensitive to economic ups and downs.
He sees no reason to alter his stance after Friday's drop: "I just think there's a lot of opportunity in cyclical stocks."
But like the other top managers interviewed for this article, Mr. Heebner sees plenty of stocks he doesn't like.
He believes the market's most vulnerable companies can be found in the emerging-growth sector, including high-flying restaurant and retailing stocks.
CGM Capital Development, which is closed to new investors, ranks as the fund industry's second-best performing fund during the past 10 years.
Mr. Heebner is also manager of CGM Mutual Fund, a "balanced fund," which owns a mixture of stocks and bonds and which is still open to new investors.
In CGM Mutual, "I have made a major shift from government bonds to industrial corporates" with low credit ratings, he says.
"I've bought companies where I think there will be a lot of improvement in their credit ratings based on the strength of the economy.
I don't think long-term interest rates are going to go up a lot."
But even if interest rates do rise, causing bond prices to fall, Mr. Heebner expects that upgrades in the credit ratings of his bonds will produce enough gains to offset the damage.
CGM Mutual owns high-yield junk bonds issued by Delta Air Lines, UAL and Wheeling-Pittsburgh.
John Templeton, the legendary mutual-fund manager who retired a year ago, has long been a stock-market cheerleader.
But even he is only forecasting moderate gains for stocks in the years ahead.
"We're no longer starting from a low point, so the future growth is likely to be less spectacular" than it was in the 1980s, he says.
"The chances are as good as even that sometime by the end of {the year} 2000 we will see the Dow at 6000.
I'm not sticking my neck out much to say that because in American history stocks have doubled every 11 years."
The 81-year-old Mr. Templeton, who now devotes himself to church and charitible work, says he's not making any changes in his personal portfolio following Friday's market drop.
"In all my 54 years {in the investment business}, I have never thought I could determine where bear markets started and stopped," he says.
But while Mr. Templeton declines to make short-term market predictions, he says the fundamentals of American business are good.
"The probabilities are that American stocks this year will pay the highest dividends they have ever paid and have the highest earnings they have ever had.
Finally, there aren't any signs of a business recession," he says.
"Those are three indicators of basic value -- all of which are optimistic."
