Banc One putting an acquisition on ice?
In the minds of some investors, that's a lot like General Motors halting production of cars.
The Ohio banking company has been a relentless acquirer, with six deals pending at the moment.
Then came this week's scuttling of its planned stock-swap takeover of Nebraska's FirsTier Financial.
Banc One's already faltering stock closed at 32, off 1/2 yesterday and close to a two-year low.
Now some investors are saying the company's acquisition binge may have to be shelved, at least temporarily, and the shares could slip even further.
"I think this will prove to be a watershed event for Banc One," says Robert Torray, an investment manager with $1.25 billion under management.
"Now the whole thing has unwound and its acquisitions have stalled."
In essence, the skeptics say, Banc One may not be able to sustain annual earnings growth in the low teens because its share price has fallen so low that it can't keep on using stock to make sizable acquisitions that will fatten profit.
Some analysts applauded Banc One for calling off the FirsTier deal rather than boosting the number of shares in the bid.
"We view this as a positive, since Banc One was unwilling to raise the price just to get the deal done," said Moshe Orenbuch, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein.
He expects Banc One stock to outperform the overall market.
But it has been 20 years since the bank had to walk away from a deal because it couldn't afford to increase its offer.
"Banc One has been identified with an acquisition strategy which has been the basis of its success.
That perception is now going to change," says Nancy Bush of Brown Brothers Harriman, who rates the stock "neutral."
And what about some of the Columbus, Ohio, company's pending acquisitions?
The biggest one would be the takeover of Liberty National Bancorp, another stock-swap transaction.
Malcolm Chancey, chairman of Liberty, said yesterday that the bank plans to "work diligently toward the completion of a merger."
But some big investors in Liberty say they now aren't so keen about merging with Banc One.
"Shareholders are wondering whether they wouldn't do better on their own" or if Liberty were put up for auction, says Alan Morel, an analyst with Hilliard Lyons Investment Management Group.
The Louisville, Ky., firm is one of Liberty's largest holders with about a 6% stake.
The two announced merger plans Nov. 8.
Liberty executives are "going to have to justify to shareholders any new arrangement that they make at a lower price," says Hilliard's Mr. Morel.
Liberty would bolster Banc One's presence in Kentucky and give it access to the thriving Louisville market.
Other pending deals would add more than a half-billion dollars of assets.
In addition, there is Premier Bancorp of Baton Rouge, La., with $4 billion in assets, which Banc One has an option to buy between June 1995 and June 1996.
John B. McCoy, Banc One's chairman, believes the Liberty transaction will go through.
"I don't have to worry about that," he says.
"The walkaway price with that bank is about $34.55 a share, adjusted for a recent stock split and stock dividend.
We're around $32 right now.
And we're three months away from that transaction getting approval."
Mr. McCoy recalls a time when "people said, `God, I hope they don't do a dumb deal.'"
Now, he says, it seems Banc One is under pressure to do a deal no matter what.
On Wall Street, he says "everyone's jumping on John McCoy and Banc One -- and pretty soon people are going to say this is a good buy."
But right now, the Street is skittish.
Depressing the stock are Banc One's derivatives -- heavy investment portfolio and seeming reluctance to pare costs at far-flung units.
Even some fans are torn.
Frank Barkocy of Advest, who rates Banc One a buy, says the stock "is probably just as low as it can get without it being so out-of-whack in relation to the peer group."
Yet he fears "the domino effect" of investor concerns.
"Can they still use shares as in the past to make successful acquisitions?
No they can't.
And so the stock gets weaker," he says.
When investor fears about the bank's derivatives pummeled the stock last fall, Mr. McCoy went on the road to sell the idea using such instruments as interest-rate swaps.
He won some converts but says "it takes some time to get that across to all investors."
The Federal Reserve seems unconcerned.
Says one Fed staff official of Banc One: "They take a pretty conservative approach to them.
In a worst-case scenario, if the whole derivatives book blew up, he'd lose one quarter of earnings.
The market doesn't fully understand how they're being used."
Mr. McCoy believes the company can sustain 12.5% to 13% annual earnings growth, even without the same pace of acquisitions as in the past.
"We're seeing loan growth in the Southwest, including Texas," he says.
In the fourth quarter, loans grew about 15% on an annual basis over the third quarter, fueled largely by the company's Arizona bank.
Mr. McCoy expects loans to grow more than 10% in the first quarter.
"If there was no loan demand, and we had no new products and were sitting dead in the water, I'd say maybe we ought to re-look at what we're doing," Mr. McCoy says.
"But I'm very comfortable.
I'm not worried if we don't make an acquisition for the next three years.
Now, four years -- that might be an issue."
It may take awhile for Banc One's stock to recover.
In the interim, Mr. McCoy says he might consider using cash to make acquisitions.
"We're going to look at any transaction to see if there's an appropriate way to do it.
The problem is there's a lot of goodwill" -- an accounting item arising from acquisitions -- "and we're not big on having amortization," or perennial write-offs against earnings year after year.
Dennis Shea of Morgan Stanley has a "hold" rating on Banc One.
He isn't ready to recommend the stock because he believes it'll take some time for the bank to generate enough loan growth to drive earnings.
Noting that Banc One is still working on absorbing major acquisitions in Arizona and Colorado, he says: "We don't know how long it's going to be."
Moreover, Ms. Bush of Brown Brothers would like to see Banc One "indicate to the Street that there are stronger controls on expenses."
Her view is that Banc One has been taking on one new unit after another without taking a hard enough look at overhead, employment and overlapping systems.
Until its stock recovers, she says, annual earnings will grow in the 10% to 11% range.
Meanwhile, she says, "there's not a lot of downside to the stock, and not a lot of upside.
It's going to go through a period where people sort out its future direction."
Banc One also faces this disadvantage: So many institutions own it that there are few fans still to recruit.
"This has been the No. 1 institutional favorite," says Mr. Torray.
But with acquisitions screeching to a halt and the earnings-growth rate in question, finding more and more believers will be difficult.
Add to that the overhang of a lot of hot stock in the hands of shareholders of banks that Banc One acquired, and the stock is on a wobbly foundation.
