Felix Corley's article "The Forgotten War" (editorial page, March 3) provides a very narrow view of the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
It is similar to the views of the Armenian-American lobby, which constantly portrays Armenia and Armenians of Nagorno-Karabakh as a beleaguered people under attack by Azerbaijan.
The essential fact is, the Armenian forces have effective control of one-fourth of the territory of Azerbaijan.
The United Nations estimates that there are now more than 1.1 million refugees in Azerbaijan as a result of this conflict.
The U.S. cannot directly help these refugees because the Armenian lobby got Congress to enact a ban on assistance, including humanitarian assistance to Azerbaijan.
While this U.S. law is being enforced, others have been neglected.
Stipulations contained in the fiscal 1994 Foreign Operations Appropriations bill stated that no funds shall be made available to a "government of the New Independent States of the former Soviet Union which directs any action in violation of the territorial integrity of any other New Independent State."
Mr. Corley also makes the classic mistake of believing that this war is being carried out by Karabakh Armenians alone (100,000 Armenians against seven million Azerbaijanis).
This is the same fiction put forward by Serbia.
The Karabakh Armenians, like the Bosnian Serbs, do not have the heavy weaponry, artillery and helicopters to carry out a war of aggression.
The war material all comes from Armenia itself, along with many of the military personnel.
It is no coincidence that the same person serves as defense minister of Armenia and Karabakh.
While Mr. Corley speaks of the massacre at Sumgait where "dozens" of Armenians were killed, he neglects to mention the Khojaly massacre of Feb. 25, 1992.
In one night, this town of 7,000 was overrun by Armenian forces, hundreds of civilians were killed, thousands were forcibly expelled, and the entire town destroyed.
Other towns in the Armenian-occupied territory have experienced similar fates.
Without citing any evidence, Mr. Corley confidently asserts that "mercenaries from Iran and elsewhere" are aiding the Azerbaijani war effort, while failing to discuss widely circulated reports that Armenian commanders have "received military training at secret facilities in Libya and Lebanon" (Eurasian Report, Winter 1992).
Resolving the longstanding conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan will require the best efforts of a U.S. that is committed to an evenhanded policy in our troubled region.
One-sided reports such as Mr. Corley's, however well-intended, do little to further the education of either the policy-making community or the public.
At the time of the Soviet collapse the U.S. especially made much of the principle of self-determination, as now being within the reach of the peoples that had been suppressed.
The people of Nagorno-Karabakh took those declarations at face value and voted overwhelmingly for independence.
Mr. Corley notes that the 180,000 Armenians have been able to drive back the forces of a nation of seven million people with amazing success.
This demonstrates how much that homeland and the pursuit of their ancient culture mean to the people of Karabakh.
Unfortunately, there is not yet an effective World Court to help resolve the many ethnic complexities that came with the Communist era.
We have only a U.N., which is at the mercy of any of a dozen national interests.
The situation in Karabakh is not hopeless, however.
Despite the fighting, the refugees and destruction suffered by both sides, their conflict was not and still is not driven by the fierce historical and religious hatred and complex boundary issues that have created the Bosnian mess.
In order to resolve the conflict, a determined effort is needed on the part of the superpowers, and of the U.S. especially, to get the combatants to the conference table.
The Azeri areas conquered by the Armenians can be readily restored to the Azeris if only there is assurance of peaceful intent.
America can offer her cooperation toward developing both areas to new levels of political stability and national progress.
The fact is that Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia and Nagorno-Karabakh desperately need one another's agricultural, technological and political support, both for their individual progress and to give their region the strength and independence to develop acceptable relations with Russia and the rest of the world.
Such small-region independence is needed for purposes of world peace to discourage the formation of megapower confrontations such as existed during the Soviet era.
Troy, N.Y.
