Figures showing that consumer spending was stronger than expected last month sent the prices of U.S. Treasury securities into a nosedive.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dropped nearly a point, or nearly $10 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 99 29/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, rose to 6.25% from 6.18% on Wednesday.
"Today's price action highlighted how vulnerable the market remains despite its recently good tone," said Anthony Karydakis, senior financial economist at First Chicago Capital Markets.
"The market proved to be vulnerable to just mildly uncomfortable economic numbers."
Traders reacted to news from the Commerce Department that retail sales rose 0.8% during December.
Most Wall Street economists were looking for a 0.4% gain.
On the inflation front, however, the news was not a surprise.
The Labor Department reported consumer prices rose 0.2% in December, while the so-called core rate, which excludes the volatile food and energy components, rose 0.3% last month.
The CPI data had little impact on trading.
But the retail sales data immediately prompted traders to unload securities.
"There was some hedge-fund selling after the numbers, mostly by people who had profits from the rally," said Kathleen Camilli, chief economist at Maria Fiorini Ramirez Inc.
The selling pressure continued virtually unabated throughout the session, dealers said.
And as prices moved lower, technical levels were broken, drawing in even more selling.
As trading drew to a close, the market was at its session lows.
Yesterday's sell-off halted a rally that was triggered by last week's weaker-than-forecast employment figures.
That report set off a buying flurry among investors who had been fearing that economic growth might continue to accelerate into 1994.
Those investors had been underinvested and found themselves chasing prices higher.
But by yesterday morning, bond prices were at the top end of a range that has been intact since early November.
Using the retail sales data as an excuse, investors reversed course and began selling in order to book profits.
According to Donald Fine, chief market analyst at Chase Securities Inc., the sell-off showed the market is still in a range centered on a 6 1/4% yield on the 30-year bond.
"We've been in a range for some time and until we see what the first quarter looks like we'll remain in a range," Mr. Fine said.
That doesn't mean note and bond prices are about to head back toward the lows reached during the first few days of January, analysts said.
Early last week, the 30-year bond hit a high yield of 6.42% and the five-year note yielded 5.30%.
The rally of the past week, however, took the bond yield down to 6.18% and the yield on the five-year note to 4.95%.
"I would be surprised if we retraced all the way to a 6.42% yield on the bond," said Ms. Camilli of Ramirez.
"There is still a lot of cash under the market that needs to be put to work and is slowly going to be worked into both the Treasurys and corporate bond markets."
That investment demand will in fact gradually push yields lower, Ms. Camilli said.
"All that money is chasing too few securities and that will ultimately pull long-term interest rates lower," she said.
Mr. Karydakis of First Chicago also argued that yesterday's sell-off would turn out to be only a pause for the bond market.
"I don't think this eliminated the bond's prospects of testing 6%," Mr. Karydakis said.
"But it did show the process toward higher price levels will be a painfully slow one."
The bond market will have more economic data to contend with this morning when the Federal Reserve will be releasing December industrial production and capacity figures.
Most economists believe the nation's factories, mines and utilities produced 0.4% more in December than they did in November and that the utilization rate rose to 83.2%.
Then at mid-morning, traders will be awaiting word on the mid-month consumer confidence report from the University of Michigan.
Late yesterday the Federal Reserve reported that its widely watched M2, a measure of money supply, rose $7.4 billion in the week ended Jan. 3.
That puts M2 growth rate at 1.6% compared with the fourth quarter base of 1992, which is just within the Fed's target range of 1% to 5%.
M2 includes currency, checking accounts, money market funds and certificates of deposit smaller than $100,000.
Next week will be a shortened one for the cash bond market.
The Public Securities Association has recommended that the market be closed Monday in observance of the Martin Luther King holiday.
More than $1 billion of corporate debt was sold yesterday, including offerings from Heileman Acquisition Co. and News America Holdings Inc.
Meanwhile, trading in the investment-grade sector was extemely light, with prices following Treasurys lower.
Most junk bond prices ended unchanged, with activity tailing off after a moderate amount of trading during the morning.
Heileman Acquisition, which was expected to come to market Wednesday, sold $160 million of 10-year senior subordinated notes at par to yield 9.625%.
The notes are noncallable for four years and rated single-B-3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and single-B-minus by Standard & Poor's Corp.
BT Securities Corp. was lead manager of the offering.
The notes have a three-year initial public offering call option for up to 35% of the issue.
Heileman Acquisition was established by leverage buyout specialists Hicks, Muse & Co. to acquire G. Heileman Brewing Co., the fifth-largest U.S. brewer and producer of brands such as Colt 45 and Old Style.
Proceeds from yesterday's offering will be used to finalize the transaction, which is scheduled to close on Jan. 21, according to a spokesman from Hicks, Muse & Co.
The spokesman said Heileman also plans to refinance its $250 million of outstanding debt.
Other new issues yesterday included News America Holdings' $200 million of 30-year debentures priced at par to yield 7.75%.
The bonds have a 7 3/4% coupon.
News America Holdings is a unit of News Corp. Ltd.
The notes are rated Ba1 by Moody's and triple-B-minus by S&P.
The issue was sold through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch & Co.
While most of the bonds issued yesterday came from government agencies, two investment-banking firms, J.P. Morgan & Co. and Merrill Lynch & Co., also sold securities.
J.P. Morgan issued $300 million of 15-year notes with 6 1/4% coupons priced at 99.888 to yield 6.262%.
The noncallable notes are rated Aa2 by Moody's and double-A-plus by S&P and will be sold through underwriters led by J.P. Morgan.
Merrill issued $200 million of 12-year noncallable notes with 6 1/4% coupons priced at 99.34 to yield 6.33%.
The notes, which were lead-managed by Merrill, are rated single-A-1 by Moody's and single-A-plus by S&P.
Municipal securities showed broad losses.
Selling pressure from dealers and institutional accounts caused a "pretty ugly day," in which prices generally slumped at least 1/2 to 3/4 point, said Greg Gizzi, senior vice president at Dillon, Read & Co.
"The only activity I saw was selling."
Meanwhile, new municipal supply has been plentiful this week, totaling roughly $3 billion.
With numerous new deals from which to pick and choose, Mr. Gizzi said "institutional investors are finding their value in the new deals and selling into the secondary market."
There is also "dealer selling on top of that," he said, adding that "unless Treasurys turn around, the tone will stay fairly negative."
Bear Stearns & Co. priced the $133.7 million Plano Independent School District, (Collin County) Texas, refunding issue to yield from 2.65% in 1995 to 5.10% in 2011.
Mortgage securities declined but not as sharply as comparable Treasury issues.
Near the close of trading, Government National Mortgage Association 6 1/2 s for February delivery were off 16/32 at 99 22/32.
Among other 6 1/2 s for February delivery, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Golds and Federal National Mortgage Association were both down 16/32 at 99 26/32 and 99 22/32, respectively.
