Consider Salomon Brothers Inc.
The Salomon Inc. unit paid Deryck C. Maughan, its chairman and chief executive officer, a 1993 pay package of $7 million amid record profit at the big investment bank, according to the firm's proxy statement.
But Salomon's fattest 1993 pay package went to its foreign-exchange head, people familiar with the firm said.
Hans U. Hufschmid, 38 years old, received $28 million in salary, bonus and other compensation amid record currency-trading revenue at Salomon, the people said.
Mr. Hufschmid didn't take home the entire paycheck last year.
As much as half his 1993 pay package is in the form of Salomon common stock that can't be cashed in for five years.
Still, to put it in perspective, his pay rivals the $34.2 million salary cap for an entire National Football League team next season.
Mr. Hufschmid's pay wasn't disclosed in Salomon's proxy statement; that is reserved for the firm's top five executives.
But his compensation is among the highest annual pay packages ever doled out by a publicly traded Wall Street firm.
It reflects the rise of foreign-exchange traders on Wall Street in recent years.
And it also suggests that the era of highly paid traders at Salomon didn't die with the firm's 1991 Treasury-auction scandal.
Salomon, for its part, took issue with the $28 million pay figure.
"That number is wrong -- we don't lie," said Robert Baker, a Salomon spokesman.
Mr. Hufschmid said in an interview that he "was generously compensated last year," but added that pay "is something I don't really want to talk about."
Both Messrs. Baker and Hufschmid refused to elaborate.
Such lofty paychecks can be nettlesome for Wall Street firms.
For instance, soon after Salomon paid its former bond-arbitrage trading star Lawrence Hilibrand $23 million in 1990, the profit from Mr. Hilibrand's bond-arbitrage group slipped.
Salomon's foreign-exchange trading unit this year has stumbled a bit -- as have many other investment companies -- amid rocky currency markets world-wide.
Mr. Hufschmid declined to comment on any Salomon currency losses, though he said recent months "certainly have been hectic."
He noted that Salomon's foreign-exchange group tends to trade based on fundamental factors affecting currency markets, but that "a lot of trades went against fundamentals."
Mr. Hufschmid added that his unit "tries to diversify the risk, and keep what's good."
Whatever the trading position, the laconic Mr. Hufschmid tends to keep his cool, associates said.
"When positions were against him and away from him, there was no change at all in his emotional status," said James L. Massey, an honorary Salomon Brothers managing director and Mr. Hufschmid's former boss in Europe.
The blond-haired Mr. Hufschmid -- who reminds some colleagues of an Austrian ski instructor -- has a "first-class trading mind," said Mr. Massey.
"He's very capable, very bright, very controlled."
Mr. Hufschmid has run Salomon's foreign-exchange desk since 1991; the unit has 35 professionals world-wide.
Among Mr. Hufschmid's profitable trades last year involved well-timed bets on the value of the U.S. dollar against the mark.
Specifically, Salomon sold huge amounts of dollars against the mark at 1.70 and bought back dollars at 1.60.
"We got lucky and caught the break and then caught the retracement" of the dollar, Mr. Hufschmid said.
Salomon also prospered on several European cross-currency trades, including sterling-mark, mark-peseta and mark-Swedish krona, Mr. Hufschmid added.
In its proxy data, Salomon said Mr. Maughan, 46, received a bonus of $2.6 million, 57% higher than $1.7 million a year earlier.
He also received a restricted stock award of $3.9 million, a salary of $400,000, and other payouts totaling $106,127.
In addition, Mr. Maughan holds nearly $1.6 million in options on Salomon stock as of the end of 1993, the proxy materials said.
Mr. Maughan's 1993 pay package was down from $8.4 million in 1992, when he was paid $3.4 million from a deferred-pay plan that vested through Dec. 31, 1991.
Mr. Maughan's 1992 pay also was bolstered by $283,854 for a "temporary residence and other related expenses" in connection with Mr. Maughan's relocation to New York from Japan.
His 1993 pay was lower than that received by chairmen at rivals Bear Stearns Cos., Merrill Lynch & Co. and PaineWebber Group Inc.
In future years, however, Mr. Maughan's pay may well outpace that of his Salomon associates, as well as brokerage-firm peers.
That's because a pay change proposed by Salomon in its proxy data would grant Mr. Maughan an annual "executive officer performance bonus" that could total as much as $24 million if Salomon Brothers' return on equity reaches 30% or more, and is 10% or more above that of major rivals Bankers Trust Co., Bear Stearns, Merrill, Morgan Guaranty and Morgan Stanley Group Inc., the proxy data said.
If Salomon's performance lags -- for instance, its annual return on equity is 5% and is equal to its rivals -- then Mr. Maughan will receive no performance bonus.
But Mr. Maughan is ensured an annual salary and nonperformance bonus of $1 million, the proxy statement said.
"Thus, for example, if a rising tide of industry profits raises all boats except Salomon Brothers', he is penalized; if Salomon Brothers' performance outpaces a rising tide, he will be rewarded," the proxy materials said.
Salomon earned record net income of $827 million in 1993, up 50% from the $550 million in 1992.
Since 1988, however, its stock has lagged behind an index of rival brokerage firms, including Bear, Merrill and Morgan Stanley, the proxy data said.
Salomon's stock closed Friday at $50.625, down 62.5 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Jacques C. Lazard was named executive vice president and chief financial officer of this builder of family and adult residential communities.
Mr. Lazard, 42 years old, had been vice president and controller of Maxxam Inc.
He succeeds Robert H. Daskal, 52, who resigned to pursue other business opportunities.
