Bill Clinton came to the nation's capital vowing to end the city's notorious laxity in ethical standards.
Instead, as the latest Whitewater disclosures show, his administration often has reverted to business as usual.
The latest example is Bernard Nussbaum, who resigned over the weekend as White House counsel and who was supposed to be the administration's ethical watchdog.
Although he defended his actions as proper, Mr. Nussbaum took part in a series of meetings that recall President Nixon's widely condemned meddling into the workings of independent federal agencies.
With Mr. Nussbaum present, White House aides met three times with top officials of the Treasury Department and the Resolution Trust Corp. about the agencies' investigations into a failed Arkansas thrift.
The Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan was once owned by President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton's partner in the Whitewater real-estate venture.
How could this have happened?
How did these Democrats, who came of age in the post-Watergate era and who were so critical of the ethical lapses of recent Republican administrations, get caught acting like their predecessors?
Part of the answer may be that operating in Washington is tougher these days.
Ever since Watergate, the media have gotten more aggressive about exposing -- and the public appears less willing to tolerate -- a range of perceived ethical slips.
"Mr. Nussbaum is the victim of the scandal machine in which the combined currents of law enforcement, politics and the press create a Bermuda Triangle through which only the most sophisticated legal sailors in the ways of Washington can navigate," says Robert Bennett, a seasoned criminal-defense lawyer who practices in the Washington office of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom.
-- According to participants, administration officials have been treating the Democratic Party's biggest campaign givers to regular, high-level briefings both in Washington and in warm-weather vacation spots.
Despite the president's rhetoric over the need to reform campaign financing, Mr. Clinton himself continues to raise millions of dollars for Democrats.
-- The revolving door continues to turn, despite Mr. Clinton's pledges to jam it.
Late last year, Deputy Chief of Staff Roy Neel, an architect of the administration's plans for an information superhighway, resigned to become a highly paid lobbyist for the telecommunications industry.
-- Mr. Clinton hired into the top levels of his administration many of the types of lobbyists he vilified during the campaign.
Both of his top legislative chiefs, Howard Paster and his successor Patrick Griffin, were high-priced lobbyists before coming to the White House.
(Mr. Paster is now chairman of Hill & Knowlton Inc., a public-relations and lobbying firm.)
-- A raft of outsider cronies of the president and first lady has been given special access to the White House.
Former Arkansas Rep. Beryl Anthony and former Clinton aide Betsey Wright became corporate lobbyists who got their way more than once.
Television producer Harry Thomason got a temporary White House office, and was instrumental in dismissing the White House travel staff.
-- The handling of the travel office firings was another example of ill-advised interference in law-enforcement matters.
The White House counsel's office contacted the Federal Bureau of Investigation directly to seek an investigation of allegations of wrongdoing by the travel staff and sat in on the preparation of an FBI news release about the matter -- drawing a rebuke from Attorney General Janet Reno.
While he billed himself as an outsider, Mr. Clinton arrived at the White House with sterling connections to establishment Washington and soon began hiring the city's best-known lawyers and lobbyists.
Mr. Nussbaum, a New York attorney, was one of the few who came from outside the Washington/Arkansas axis.
Some say this loyal band of advisers -- many of whom have known Mr. and Mrs. Clinton since their days as activists against the Vietnam War -- lacks the independence to alert the Clintons to the need for higher ethical standards.
Moreover, the shared assumption of those who populate the Clinton White House seems to be that because they all view themselves as "good people," the public shouldn't question their motives.
Some critics see this as a kind of baby-boomer arrogance that has made Clinton officials too quickly dismissive of ethics questions.
At the same time, Mr. Clinton and his Arkansas crew come from a much more freewheeling and forgiving environment.
The Whitewater case alone makes clear that the worlds of business and politics overlap more often and more casually back home than is the custom in buttoned-down Washington.
Mr. Clinton's highly personal style also plays a role.
The officials with the most clout are the ones who are closest to the president and his wife.
From the White House perspective, this breeds strong loyalty.
The downside is that many of the loyalists seem to have a blind spot for the public interest.
Indeed, the kind of cronyism that drew controversy to the White House under Presidents Carter and Reagan is cropping up again.
Take the case of Webster Hubbell, one of the president's closest friends who also is the third-ranking official at the Justice Department: The former Little Rock lawyer didn't think it was necessary to disclose to the White House that his own firm was probing whether he overbilled the federal government he now works for.
The White House, which is filled with Mr. Hubbell's hometown chums -- and at least two of his former law partners, including Mrs. Clinton -- believes it doesn't need to do anything more than take Mr. Hubbell's word that he is innocent, even now that the inquiry has been made public.
More broadly, Mr. Clinton hasn't poured much of his energy into fulfilling one of his key campaign pledges: to overhaul the campaign-finance system and to increase lobbying disclosure.
During the presidential election in 1992, he could hardly stop talking about "the strangle-hold" that special interests had on the government, and how he would work to loosen it.
But things haven't changed much since Mr. Clinton came to town.
While professing interest in changing the system, President Clinton and his top officials have been working to squeeze what they can out of the present one.
The Democratic National Committee maintains a vigorous schedule of briefings by Clinton and party officials around town for major money givers, according to people who have taken part in the events.
In late February, the DNC held a weekend retreat for contributors at the Boca Raton Resort & Club in Florida.
In attendance were Vice President Al Gore, Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown, House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt and Rep. Sam Gejdenson of Connecticut, a primary author of the House's campaign-finance overhaul bill.
Last April, big campaign contributors to the DNC were treated to speeches at the Madison Hotel in Washington by top Clinton officials ranging from White House Chief of Staff Thomas McLarty to national economic adviser Robert Rubin, participants say.
The night was capped when each giver had his photograph taken with Mr. Gore.
Referring to the Republicans' mirror program for major contributors, Raymond McGrath, president of the Beer Institute and a former GOP congressman, says, "It's generally the same kind of thing."
As a lobbyist now, Mr. McGrath is a member of both the Republican and Democratic big-giver groups.
"It's important to portray ourselves as bipartisan," he says.
Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, who announced on Friday that he wouldn't seek re-election, strenuously dismisses the notion that he is quitting because of disgust with Washington.
But his retirement announcement, which wasn't anticipated, has inevitably fed the impression that life inside-the-beltway has become so brutish that even its most battle-scarred veterans are getting out.
Among other issues, Mr. Mitchell -- a supporter of Mr. Clinton's legislative agenda -- has been a tireless fighter for stringent campaign-finance overhaul, only to see his bill to help end the money chase become mired in congressional gridlock.
Even the man Mr. Clinton has put in charge of controlling the damage from the investigations into the Clintons' political and business dealings in Arkansas, Deputy Chief of Staff Harold Ickes, just last year lobbied for the Puerto Rican government to save a billion-dollar tax break that Mr. Clinton had wanted to curtail.
Ironically, Mr. Ickes is now caught up in the White House's embarrassment; he is one of the six senior White House officials who have been subpoenaed to appear before a grand jury empaneled by the special counsel, Robert Fiske.
One of the others is Mr. Nussbaum, who, in a resignation letter sent to the president Saturday, defended his performance and criticized "those who do not understand, nor wish to understand the role and obligations of a lawyer."
His resignation is effective April 5.
A separate subpoena requires the White House to produce documents on any meetings, conversations or contacts between any White House staffers and officials of the Treasury or the RTC.
Nothing has surpassed the Whitewater controversy in underscoring that this White House is repeating some of history's bleakest chapters.
In the wake of last summer's apparent suicide of Mr. Nussbaum's deputy, Vincent Foster, the White House counsel was accused by the Park Police of impeding their investigation.
First, Mr. Nussbaum failed to seal Mr. Foster's office.
Then, he wouldn't permit the police investigators to look through any of Mr. Foster's papers.
He also failed to turn up a suicide note that was later found in Mr. Foster's briefcase.
The White House belatedly turned the note over to investigators.
A basic rule of political damage control in Washington is to err on the side of candor, especially where documents are concerned.
But Mr. Nussbaum violated this rule again and again, first when he advised the Clintons to assert attorney/client privilege over the Whitewater file found in Mr. Foster's office, then when he helped arrange for the Justice Department to subpoena the file to keep it away from reporters who had filed Freedom of Information Act requests.
Other missteps that sank the White House deeper into the Whitewater swamp were Mr. Nussbaum's and Mrs. Clinton's opposition to the appointment of a special counsel to investigate the matter and the three meetings with Treasury and RTC officials which presaged the White House counsel's downfall.
A major test of whether the White House intends to really press for change will be its choice to replace Mr. Nussbaum.
On NBC-TV's "Meet the Press" yesterday, Mr. Gore agreed that the choice was important and said he expected it to cause people to say, "Yeah, that's a really good pick."
White House insiders expect whoever is chosen will have integrity and independence -- and considerable experience in Washington.
