A California state-court judge dismissed theft charges against a WMX Technologies Inc. unit and eight employees, lifting a cloud that has hung over the trash hauler's municipal-collection business since July 1992, when indictments were disclosed.
The dismissals are a big victory for Oak Brook, Ill.-based WMX, formerly known as Waste Management Inc., and a setback for its rival in the trash business, Houston-based Browning-Ferris Industries Inc.
The criminal indictments stemmed from the two companies' contracts with San Jose, Calif.
For several years, WMX held the city's hauling contract and Browning-Ferris had the dump contract, forcing the nation's respective No. 1 and No. 2 waste concerns to work together.
The indictment charged WMX with stealing from the city and from Browning-Ferris by dumping trash from commercial customers at a Browning-Ferris dump while paying a low, municipal dumping fee.
Browning-Ferris complained that using the municipal fee to dump trash collected from commercial customers gave WMX an unfair market advantage.
WMX persuaded Judge David Leahy of Superior Court in Santa Clara County that its contract with the city allowed trash collected under commercial contracts to be dumped at the Browning-Ferris site.
WMX, to compensate, said it dumped like amounts of municipal trash at its own or other dumps.
Thus neither the city nor Browning-Ferris lost any money under the arrangement.
The reason for the mixing of trash was to make collection routes more efficient, WMX said.
Some municipal trash was picked up by WMX trucks very close to the Browning-Ferris dump, while other city waste was collected closer to WMX's own dump.
"We've said from the start that nothing improper took place," a WMX spokesman said.
Convictions in the case would have been a black eye for WMX's huge municipal-collection business in the U.S. Because trash from one customer is difficult to distinguish from that of another, a certain level of trust is required in most big hauling and disposal contracts.
The San Jose collection contract clearly gave WMX an additional edge with commercial customers in the area -- one that it employed -- but it was a legal edge, WMX said.
Browning-Ferris, which had lost out on the collection contract, "was truly a sore loser," WMX said in court papers seeking dismissal of the charges.
It was a Browning-Ferris complaint to the city, after the company also lost out on a commercial-collection contract to WMX, that initiated the case.
Trash from that commercial customer was dumped at the Browning-Ferris site under the city contract's fee, which was about half the market price.
More than 80 witnesses appeared before a grand jury, and San Jose police for weeks tailed WMX garbage trucks in the investigation.
A Browning-Ferris spokesman declined to comment yesterday.
