Just 10 days after starting a series of television advertisements about the recalled asthma drug Albuterol, lawyers for Jacoby & Meyers in Arizona have filed two lawsuits on behalf of seven clients against the drug's manufacturer, Copley Pharmaceutical Inc.
The Jacoby & Meyers advertisements break new ground in drumming up clients.
Legal experts say they are the first television ads that invite people to explore litigation possibilities against a specific company with a problem product.
Also, solicitations about products generally don't occur until after there are confirmed cases of injuries related to it.
The ads, which first aired in Phoenix and are showing in New York, Philadelphia and Sacramento, Calif., give a toll-free number for the firm, which sends callers "fact sheets" about Albuterol on Jacoby & Meyers letterhead.
"After contacting your doctor," the firm advises prospective clients, "contact Jacoby & Meyers for advice regarding a potential damage claim against Copley Pharmaceutical Inc."
Copley recalled Albuterol on Jan. 5.
Two other lawsuits are pending in Chicago.
The Jacoby ads have generated 471 inquiries in Phoenix and about 50 in Tucson, said partner Stephen Meyers.
The firm yesterday filed one lawsuit in Phoenix and one in Tucson on behalf of the families of seven children.
"I would guess that within several weeks we would have maybe 1,000 cases," said Mr. Meyers.
The firm has its national offices in New York.
"Things are going to happen much more quickly with respect to defective products now because we can inform the public very quickly," said Mr. Meyers.
"And they'll contact us . . . in huge numbers."
Mr. Meyers said it was important to act quickly in this case because of widespread confusion about the recall.
He also said that Copley has been doing a poor job of informing the public that it discovered potentially harmful bacteria in Albuterol, which prompted the recall.
Mr. Meyers says more than 125 clients have retained the firm to pursue possible cases.
A Copley representative said the company wouldn't comment on the litigation or the advertising.
Experts on legal advertising said they had few ethical concerns about the Jacoby & Meyers ads, so long as they don't prompt an avalanche of frivolous lawsuits.
"There are sanctions built into the civil justice system for frivolous suits," said Will Hornsby, staff counsel to American Bar Association Commission on advertising.
Mr. Hornsby said print solicitations targeted at injury victims have been increasing.
One Seattle lawyer began buying quarter-page ads in local newspapers last year after an E-coli bacteria outbreak linked to tainted, undercooked hamburgers sickened 600 adults and resulted in several deaths.
When a Chicago-area commuter train crashed last year, one Indiana lawyer took out four-by-five-inch newspaper ads entitled: "South Shore Accident Victims Know Your Rights."
The Jacoby & Meyers solicitations are unique, said Mr. Hornsby, because they appear on television.
The spots are the newest innovation in legal advertising, once considered unethical by lawyers and prohibited by state and local bar groups.
But it's taken off since a 1977 U.S. Supreme Court decision striking down such prohibitions as a violation of commercial free speech.
Indeed, Jacoby & Meyers was the first law firm to advertise on television.
While Copley's recall notice says contaminated bottles of Albuterol might cause infections in people with asthma or other respiratory ailments, Jacoby & Meyers goes a step farther, warning against the possibility of pneumonia.
In the two lawsuits yesterday, filed in state court in Tucson and Phoenix, the plaintiffs alleged their children contracted "serious illnesses and respiratory complications," including pneumonia, from using Albuterol.
Traditional law firms have long resisted legal ads, particularly on television, over concern that they demean the profession's image.
More recently, state bar groups have become concerned that television, particularly ads that solicit personal-injury victims, may turn public opinion against lawyers and claimants.
A fired General Electric Co. executive and self-proclaimed whistle-blower won a round in his wrongful dismissal action as a federal magistrate recommended denial of GE's motion to dismiss the suit.
The magistrate's recommendation paves the way for a jury trial, which GE had hoped to avoid, under the Ohio whistleblower statute in federal court in Cincinnati.
The magistrate also recommended granting GE motions to dismiss two other claims that would have allowed the defendant to introduce broader charges and seek broader redress.
The dismissal recommendation significantly "narrows the case," a GE spokeswoman said.
The trial, at which GE Chairman John F. Welch is expected to testify, is scheduled for Feb. 21.
It is expected to make public a raft of hitherto sealed charges, counter charges, depositions and documents involving price-fixing allegations that are currently under investigation by the U.S. Justice Department.
Much of the sealed material concerning the firing also offers a rare look at the inner working of GE's top management.
The suit was filed, in April 1992, by Edward Russell, who was vice president of GE Superabrasives in Worthington, Ohio, before being fired on Sept. 5, 1991, by Mr. Welch.
Mr. Russell charges that he was fired because he raised antitrust objections to his boss's meeting with GE's only major competitor in industrial diamonds.
GE, which maintains that at the meeting was to discuss "technology exchange," contends that Mr. Russell was fired for "poor performance."
Without passing any judgment on the merits of the case, magistrate judge Robert Steinberg said GE didn't present enough evidence to "prevail" in its move to get the court to dismiss Mr. Russell's suit.
The magistrate listed his findings and recommendations in a 30-page report to the judge who is scheduled to preside over the trial.
Commenting on magistrate Steinberg's action, a GE spokeswoman said that the magistrate's ruling simply means that "there are genuine disputes over the material facts" in one of Mr. Russell's charges, and "therefore, it should go to trial."
NORIEGA MOTION: Lawyers for Manuel Noriega asked for a new trial in his drug case, saying a new book indicates jurors improperly pressured a holdout, then misled the judge, according to the Associated Press.
The book, "The Case Against The General: Manuel Noriega and the Politics of American Justice" by journalist Steve Albert, "raises new and disturbing questions concerning the conduct of the jurors both during the deliberations, as well as before this court," said the motion from attorney Jon May.
The ousted Panamanian military leader was convicted in April 1992 on eight federal drug and racketeering counts.
Dan Gelber, spokesman for the U.S. attorney in Miami, said his office "would not litigate this through the media" and refused to comment.
Amal Kumar Naj contributed to this article.
