The U.S. is losing millions of dollars by subsidizing vacant units in large public housing authorities because the buildings can't legally be torn down, a report by the Department of Housing and Urban Development concludes.
The study by HUD's inspector general, results of which will be released today at hearings of a House panel investigating the federal government's problem-plagued $6 billion annual subsidy program for city public housing authorities, finds that increasing numbers of such vacant units provide a breeding ground for drug dealers.
Although in recent years HUD has paid closer attention to the management problems of the local authorities it is subsidizing -- even taking over seven of them in the process -- many of the conditions have worsened.
One of the biggest obstacles is a 1987 federal law requiring the replacement of decrepit public housing projects on a one-for-one basis, according to the report.
Congress has repeatedly cut development funds to upgrade the units, and as a result, the vacancy rate for some of the nation's largest public housing authorities -- including Philadelphia, the District of Columbia, Detroit, New Orleans and Cleveland -- is now over 20%.
Under the 1987 law, a housing authority is required to maintain vacant units until they can be replaced, or until there is enough money to provide rents for equivalent units for 15 years.
In Philadelphia, the study found that the U.S. has paid $7.9 million to maintain largely vacant units in a complex of eight buildings.
In another project in that city, the debate over what to do about two vacant high-rises containing 448 units has lasted for 18 years.
In Cleveland, the U.S. has paid $47 million in the last seven years to maintain vacant units, while the housing authority was losing $2.4 million a year that would have come from renting the units, the report said.
New Orleans, which has been unable to get funds for replacements, has persuaded HUD to relax its rules and earmark as much as $100 million to "modernize" a notoriously bad project called Desire, even though it is located on a former dump and replacement costs for the 1,837 units appear to be cheaper.
Meanwhile, New Orleans, which is losing population, has some 37,000 vacant housing units.
"There is all kinds of craziness going on with this program.
What's so frustrating is that they keep putting all this money into it," said Rep. Collin C. Peterson (D., Minn.), chairman of the housing subcommittee of House Government Operations Committee.
He says he will introduce legislation to repeal the one-for-one replacement requirement and force HUD to put more housing authorities with longterm management problems under private management.
"We invited four or five directors of troubled public housing authorities to testify at the hearing, but we couldn't get any of them because they're all being fired or replaced," Rep. Peterson added.
