When you're the richest man in the world, there's plenty to write about -- like the $6 you spent on an auto muffler pipe, the time the sun set, whether or not you ate dinner alone and what the doctor said about your left inguinal region.
The late billionaire J. Paul Getty, widely known as a great penny pincher, also happened to have been an obsessive diary keeper.
Since he was about 11 years old, Mr. Getty kept a nearly daily record "striving," he wrote, "to be an objective reporter" on his own life.
Now 29 volumes of his diaries, from 1938 until his death at the age of 83 in 1976, are up for sale.
The collection of black loose-leaf binders has been valued at $500,000 or more in a prospectus for an auction.
(A private party is now negotiating to buy the diaries.)
Many of the diaries' biggest revelations about Mr. Getty already have appeared in biographies, including Mr. Getty's apparent admiration of Adolf Hitler.
"Fuhrer makes a great, manly speech," he wrote in 1938 while in Germany.
"Crowd greets him uproariously."
But the sampling of diary pages in the prospectus provides a fascinating glimpse of Mr. Getty's day-to-day life, or at least what he chose to record.
Mr. Getty, who once put a pay phone in his London mansion for guests, writes with equal delight about spending hundreds of thousands of dollars on a painting in the morning and saving $10 in the running of his household later in the day.
He frequently seemed to enjoy comparing himself to other rich men.
"Like William Randolph Hearst, I admire splendor," he wrote.
"I like a palatial atmosphere, noble rooms, long tables, old silver, fine furniture, princely swimming pools."
"I heard a short thud.
It was a sonic boom, my first."
"Had dinner with a nice young billionaire, Ross Perot and his wife . . .
I like him."
And "At 12 a man came to back door, was told to return at 10 a.m., did so, was interviewed and escorted off the property, claimed he was my son and my name was Osborne.
Evidently hallucinations."
Finally, the world's wealthiest man pondered capitalism.
"Many say it is disappearing and I tend to agree.
Capitalists don't control anything today, not even their own businesses."
