School-choice programs that include private schools are a promising way to deliver improved education, especially for children from poor families.
Experiments such as Milwaukee's have shown some success, but systems that include any funding for private schools are rare.
Not coincidentally, in 1990 only 12% of elementary and secondary students attended private schools, with only 12% of the private enrollment in nonsectarian institutions (8% at the primary level and 14% at the secondary level).
Catholic schools were the dominant private provider, with about 70% of overall private enrollment.
The overwhelming choice of public over private education does not, of course, mean that most people view public schooling as superior.
Various studies, notably those by sociologist James Coleman and his associates, have found that students with a given level of native ability do better when they attend private institutions, especially Catholic schools in inner cities.
What sustains the dominance of public schools is that individual consumers regard the public option as free and the private one as expensive.
Catholic schools are able to thrive in spite of this obstacle because church subsidies maintain low levels of tuition.
Nonsectarian schools -- including elite places such as Andover and St. Paul's -- typically have to rely on high levels of tuition and limited amounts of financial aid and therefore can serve only a small, privileged market.
The central element of school-choice plans is the use of vouchers or tax credits to level the playing field between public and private schools.
Vouchers would increase the demand for private education and, hence, improve the average performance of graduates.
The most dramatic change would be predicted for poor families, who now typically lack access to private schools or high-quality public schools.
A substantial part of the opposition to school-choice plans comes from two groups: well-off suburbanites and public-school employees.
Suburbanites are usually at least somewhat satisfied with their local public schools and do not wish to pay higher taxes to give money to people who already use private schools.
Public-school employees do not want to lose an entrenched position that ensures a reasonable income even when their performance is bad.
For these opposition groups, a key concern is how a school-choice plan and the consequent expansion of private alternatives would affect the public schools.
Would the quality and levels of funding diminish, or would the increased competition force the public schools to do better?
Recent research by Caroline Minter-Hoxby in her doctoral dissertation at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ("Do Private Schools Provide Competition for Public Schools?") offers evidence on this issue.
The main information in her study comes from the interaction between an area's use of private schools -- especially Catholic schools -- and the quality of public education.
The information in these data is better than that provided by existing school-choice programs because in the latter case it is hard to discern long-run responses to experiments (such as the one in Milwaukee) that are relatively new and perceived as temporary.
Moreover, existing school-choice plans tend to contain serious restrictions on the options of schools and students.
The key challenge is to isolate the effect of greater availability of private schools on the performance of the public schools.
This work is a challenge because the simple relation between an area's private-school use and the quality of the public schools could, in theory, be positive or negative.
First, if an area's public schools are performing badly, then more families would be motivated to use private schools.
This response tends to generate a negative relation between public-school quality and private-school use.
Second, if an area's families are wealthier and better educated, then private-school use and public-school quality are both likely to be higher.
This interaction tends to generate a positive relation between public-school quality and private-school use.
Finally, if an increased availability of private schools provides competition that motivates the public schools to perform more efficiently, this creates a positive relationship.
It is this relation that we would like to measure if it exists.
The Minter-Hoxby study shows how cross-county differences in the costs of providing private education affect the quality of public schools.
In practice, the U.S. experience dictates a reliance on information about sectarian private schooling.
The cost differences for operating these sectarian schools come from variations across counties in the population density of Catholics or of other religious denominations that run significant numbers of private schools.
The key conclusion is that greater use of private schools, driven by differences in costs, leads to improved performance by public-school students and to greater per-pupil spending in the public schools.
These results remain true after adjusting for an array of individual and county differences, including levels of income and parental education and a person's religion and race.
One finding is that an increase of 10 percentage points in the share of a county's enrollment in private secondary schools adds 0.3 years to the highest grade completed by the average public-school student by age 24.
This increase in the share of private enrollment is also estimated to raise a public-school student's probability of receiving a high-school diploma by age 19 by 2% and to increase the wage earned by the average public-school student at age 24 by 5% (partly because the student is more likely to move to a more prosperous area and partly because the student's position in the earnings distribution improves).
Thus the presence of private alternatives means that the students who remain in the public schools achieve at higher levels.
The data also show that governments respond to greater competition from private schools by raising teachers' salaries and overall spending per student in the public schools.
An increase by 10 percentage points in the share of a county's enrollment in private secondary schools is estimated to raise the starting salary for a teacher with a B.A. by $460 in public secondary schools and to raise per-pupil spending in these schools by $340 (all measured in 1980 dollars).
Hence, at least the public-school teachers who retain their positions -- presumably the most qualified -- ought to be happy when private schools become more available.
If we combine the Minter-Hoxby evidence with previous results on the performance of private schools, then the inference is that full school-choice programs would improve student achievement whether the students shift to private schools or stay in the public system.
In other words, school choice is a good idea.
Mr. Barro, a Wall Street Journal contributing editor, is a professor of economics at Harvard.
