The Securities and Exchange Commission is concerned about hedge funds, their impact on financial markets and the agency's limited ability to monitor them, SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt said.
"We have some plans you'll be hearing about" to address these concerns, Mr. Levitt told reporters Friday after a speech to the Public Securities Association, a bond dealers' group.
Asked to be more specific, he said, "I want to know what they are doing."
Several major hedge funds have taken large losses in recent weeks, adding to market turbulence following the Federal Reserve's move to raise interest rates.
A hedge fund is a private investment partnership; many hedge funds are prone to making bold bets.
A joint SEC-Treasury-Federal Reserve study issued in the wake of the Salomon Brothers Treasury-auction bidding scandal raised the possibility of detailed federal regulation of now largely unregulated hedge funds.
But little more has been heard on the subject until recently.
On another front, the SEC chairman said his agency is "particularly concerned about derivatives and their suitability for individual investors, state and local governments and pension funds."
In a speech prepared for delivery to the gathering of bond dealers here, the SEC chief said, "We take this issue very seriously. . . .
We are currently considering sending a strong signal to this end."
Mr. Levitt told the annual convention of the PSA that the SEC is on the lookout for sales-practice abuses involving collateralized mortgage obligations.
He noted these so-called CMOs increasingly are being marketed to small investors.
"I anticipate that we will amend the customer-confirmation rule to require disclosure of the three basic items relating to a CMO transaction: the estimated yield of the CMO; the weighted average life of the CMO, and the prepayment assumptions underlying the calculated yield," Mr. Levitt said.
He also told the PSA that the explosive growth of the mutual-fund industry and innovations in derivative products require close examination.
"We will seek to work with the industry to eliminate once and for all recidivist brokers and their supervisors and to raise the standards of sales practices throughout the industry," he said.
In another area, the SEC believes that municipal-bond investors "deserve the information they need to exercise sound judgment," Mr. Levitt said.
He noted that the commission will soon review a regulatory package designed to improve disclosure in the muni market.
In addition, Mr. Levitt predicted that a rule to end "pay-to-play" practices in the municipal bond market will pass constitutional muster if tested in court.
He said the advice of the SEC's lawyers and his own feeling is that the proposed rule will withstand constitutional scrutiny.
But he acknowledged that the outcome of any court challenge "can't be predicted with certainty."
Possible court challenges aside, Mr. Levitt said the continuing public controversy over whether campaign contributions being used to buy municipal bond business has altered the market's culture and has had a salutary impact.
The Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board has proposed a rule now awaiting SEC approval to bar bond dealers from doing business with a jurisdiction within two years of making a political contribution to an official of the jurisdiction.
The SEC is expected to approve the rule before long.
The period during which the proposal is open to public comment ends March 11.
The board proposed the rule with an April 1 effective date.
Some state and local government groups and other critics of the proposal have said it raises serious constitutional questions, particularly under the First Amendment.
And officials of the board say they expect the rule to be challenged in court after the SEC approves it.
