In response to pressure from the Securities and Exchange Commission, Borden Inc. said it will reverse or reclassify more than 40% of a $642 million restructuring charge taken in 1992, and restate its 1993 and 1992 earnings.
Borden's action reflects the SEC's increased scrutiny of the many companies that have taken large restructuring charges in recent years.
Indeed, some analysts and accounting experts say Borden's case may be a warning to other companies concerning aggressive accounting methods.
"It appears to me that they must have used some very aggressive accounting with this 1992 charge," says John McMillin, an analyst at Prudential Securities Inc.
"Forty percent of the charge is being reversed, which is a high amount."
Borden, a food and chemicals company, said it reclassified or reversed $264.8 million of the $642 million charge it originally reported in 1992.
As a result, Borden's 1992 net loss narrowed by $75.2 million to $364.4 million, or $2.54 a share, while its 1993 net loss widened by $37.1 million to $630.7 million, or $4.47 a share.
The company said it will reclassify $145.5 million of the charge as 1992 operating expenses and reverse the remaining $119.3 million.
A significant portion of the reclassified amount was for marketing expenses; the reversed amount includes accruals for projects canceled after the recording of the 1992 charge and promotional accruals.
Borden, which was first contacted by the SEC in January, said its actions responded to "views expressed by the SEC staff."
The company said the restatements wouldn't have any impact on 1994 financial results and don't affect the $650 million restructuring charge taken for the fourth quarter of 1993.
Accounting experts say the SEC's activity reflects a growing concern that companies may be taking advantage of the positive effect that restructuring charges will often have on a company's stock.
While the charge may reflect severe operational problems, the announcement of a restructuring has a "cathartic effect," said Howard Schilit, president of the Center for Financial Research and Analysis in Rockville, Md.
He notes that companies struggling with poor earnings could be tempted to include operational costs in their restructuring charges, thereby easing the pressure on operating earnings.
Restructurings may help the stock price of other companies but did nothing for Borden, which has been restructuring its operations for years.
Borden's shares closed unchanged at $14.75 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday.
While Borden has denied any wrongdoing, people familiar with the company say its executives had privately fretted over its aggressive accounting procedures for years.
Some analysts have also criticized the company for the unusual methods it used to keep its debt levels low.
In February, Lawrence O. Doza, Borden's 55-year-old senior vice president and chief financial officer, elected to take early retirement after nine years at the company.
Borden is currently seeking a replacement for Mr. Doza.
A Borden spokesman said the company's position was that the expenses included in the 1992 charge were "truly incremental and related to one-time advertising and promotion programs not occurring in the normal course of business."
The SEC declined to comment.
