If artists were judged by the size of their exhibitions, Robert Morris would be up there with Michelangelo.
He is currently occupying more gallery space here than any other artist living or dead.
The retrospective exhibition of his work opening today at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum is a two-venue affair, spilling over from the Fifth Avenue headquarters to the museum's barnlike SoHo branch.
Arguably, Mr. Morris even deserves such treatment.
Along with Donald Judd and Carl Andre, he was a founder of minimalism in the 1960s.
His theoretical writings have made him only more central to the movement, whose lean, understated works are presumed to need a thick user's manual or at least an accompanying text to ensure we understand them.
"Robert Morris: The Mind/Body Problem" (up through April 17) is in keeping with this spirit of pontification.
You walk in and already you're on the intellectual defensive, wondering about that phrase, mind/body, and trying to remember the lecture on Descartes from philosophy 101.
Is it that the mind and the senses are destined to remain separate?
Forget it.
The exhibition -- organized by Thomas Krens, the museum's director, and Rosalind Krauss, a star of the academic circuit -- isn't about Cartesian philosophical traditions.
The 170 objects on view, which range from minimalist sculptures to maximalist paintings to video screens flashing with footage of Mr. Morris in the buff, often seem close to another college experience -- rebellion cultivated for its own pointless sake.
Much was sacrificed to this goal, as I was reminded in front of a piece called "Stadium," a refabrication of a 1967 sculpture in which eight massive wedges of steel are arranged like pie pieces into a circle.
In preparation for the show's opening, a museum employee with a blond ponytail was painting the sculpture gray, with the help of a roller.
I asked him why he was applying finishing touches to a work that was not his own.
He politely replied that Mr. Morris routinely entrusted the refabrication of his sculptures to others.
"We treat the work like architecture," he said.
"We paint it the way we paint the bathrooms here or anything else."
Such cavalier indifference to craft is, of course, a hallmark of minimalism, which sought to get "the hand" out of art and to put the brain in.
Or so the rhetoric went.
Lately, there's been a revival of interest in the movement.
At a time when so much contemporary art screams with charges of racism, sexism and other forms of victimization, perhaps we're nostalgic for minimalism's mute surfaces and the princely aloofness of its creators.
Still, the minimalism we're seeing isn't so minimal after all.
The Robert Ryman show at the Museum of Modern Art in the fall gave us an artist who has painted exclusively in white for decades, but who, at his best, is really a closet expressionist.
And now here's Robert Morris, who has been very clear about what he considers expendable in art.
In his 1966 essay "Notes on Sculpture," he observed: "The sensuous object, resplendent with compressed internal relations, has to be rejected."
The irony is it's precisely as a maker of "sensuous objects" that he excels.
To be sure, Mr. Morris began his career with plain and simple objects made from L-beams and I-beams, and went on to produce neodada assemblages that relate closely to the work of Jasper Johns.
But in spite of his minimalist exhortations, it wasn't until Mr. Morris disavowed his own rhetoric in the '70s that his art really flourished.
His career suggests that in removing the hand from art, artists removed too much -- if not everything that makes art interesting.
Mr. Morris's "felt pieces" look good at the Guggenheim.
The very word felt hints punningly at a switch in allegiances on his part, a conversion to an art that is felt or discovered rather than merely deduced.
I particularly liked "Untitled (Shoulder)" of 1973, in which a three-layered band of industrial felt is tacked to the wall, its sides folded down like origami.
It has a weirdly hovering presence, and looks like a cross between a Mark Rothko and a bathrobe.
A good portion of the Guggenheim show is devoted to Mr. Morris's drawings, which similarly abound with tactile effects.
A series from the '70s called "Drawing Blindfolded" was executed as described.
In spite of this old surrealist ruse and all it implies about openness to risk, the drawings succeed as traditional abstractions.
(Maybe he peeked.)
Made by smudging graphite on fiberglass paper, they're dense with black fingerprints and alternatively suggest the treads of a tire, flying bees and fluffy cumulus clouds.
More recently, Mr. Morris has turned to thoughts of nuclear holocaust and global destruction.
Yet his drawings remain entirely elegant, less a reflection of vehement politics than of 18th-century Venetian painting.
A work such as "Untitled (Firestorm)" of 1982 exploits the black magic of charcoal for airy, vaporous effects, as if a Tiepolo had been caught in a fire and emerged covered with soot.
For me, the drawings were the high point of the show, though others, I suppose, will favor the installation downtown.
There Mr. Morris has arranged nine large-scale "mirror works" to create a fun house of optical tricks.
In one untitled piece from 1975, you peer through a succession of steel frames suspended from the ceiling, only to find that the face reflected in the mirror before you belongs to somebody else in the room.
It's supposed to be deep -- a lesson in the artificiality of images -- but seeing heads inside all those cubes reminded me of nothing so much as the TV game show "Hollywood Squares."
Speaking of performers, it's worth pointing out that a photo of Mr. Morris appears on the cover of the catalog.
He's nude from head to toe, smiling smugly -- wickedly, even -- as he exposes his anatomy like John and Yoko on an album cover.
His body is encased inside a cutout of the letter I. The image is from his "I-Box" (1962), and it's meant to hark back to the Cartesian mind-body schism that's the theme of this show.
How can the body cause the mind to have sensible ideas?
The question is never answered by this exhibition, which branches in too many directions at once while offering up personality in place of profundity.
Mr. Morris may have brooded long and hard on Descartes, but the ultimate message of his work is "I think, but not enough."
