Banco Santander SA said group profit increased 12% in 1993 and said it is studying a possible bid for control of its ailing rival, Banco Espanol de Credito SA.
However, Santander Chairman Emilio Botin said the bank would go ahead with a bid only if it is sure such an acquisition would be profitable and in the interest of its shareholders.
"This is an opportunity, not an obligation," he said in an interview.
"Everything will depend on the price."
Mr. Botin's remarks, reiterated publicly over the weekend at Santander's annual shareholders' meeting, marked the opening salvo in a battle pitching Santander against other Spanish banks.
Under a salvage plan backed by Spain's central bank and due to be submitted to next month to Banesto shareholders for approval, Spanish banks are to be invited later this year to make bids for control of the troubled bank.
The Bank of Spain dismissed Banesto's former chairman, Mario Conde, and his board on Dec. 28, 1993, following the discovery of a financial shortfall now estimated at 605 billion pesetas ($4.28 billion).
Santander is widely regarded as frontrunner to take over Banesto, due to its financial and commercial success over the past few years.
But the acquisition of what was once Spain's largest and most prestigious bank would make Santander an even more powerful competitor for other Spanish banks.
Several, including Banco Bilbao Vizcaya SA, are studying rival bids.
Fresh evidence of Santander's financial success came over the weekend with news of its 1993 results.
In a year marred for Spanish banks generally by rising bad debts and narrowing margins, Santander increased net income after minority interests to 66.4 billion pesetas from 59.2 billion pesetas.
Following a 1% decline in Spain's gross national product in 1993, Santander officials said they don't expect a significant recovery this year for the Spanish economy.
However, Mr. Botin expressed confidence that Santander would have further earnings growth this year, due to its international operations and its growing investment-banking business.
In 1993, 42% of the bank's earnings came from interests outside Spain -- including its thriving commercial and investment-banking operation in Chile and its stakes in Royal Bank of Scotland and U.S.-based First Fidelity Bancorp.
By 1995, Mr. Botin said, the bank aims to increase the proportion to 50%.
Net interest income in 1993 rose 19%, to 243 billion pesetas, while income from fees and commissions rose 9.3%, to 75.5 billion pesetas.
Provisions rose 162%, to 86 billion pesetas, but that was more than offset by a 323% increase in income from securities and foreign-exchange trading on the bank's own account, to 90 billion pesetas.
The bank said it would pay a dividend for the year of 292 pesetas ($2.07) a share, up 12% from 1992.
Total assets rose 48% in 1993, to 10.4 trillion pesetas ($73.55 billion), partly reflecting the effect of three devaluations of the peseta.
The bank's capital-adequacy ratios fell to 12.5% from 12.65%, but were still well above the internationally accepted 8% minimum.
Mr. Botin said Santander is likely to begin a fund-raising exercise shortly to bolster its capital-adequacy ratios.
If confirmed, such a move would likely make Santander the first Spanish bank to seek funding from international financial markets since the crisis at Banesto, which has focused an unflattering spotlight on some aspects of Spain's business environment.
Meanwhile, Mr. Botin made clear that Santander isn't interested in Banesto at any price.
Around 1,000 of Banesto's 2,300 branches overlap with Santander's 1,350-branch network, and Banesto is unlikely to be in a position to pay a dividend before 1996.
As a result, though potentially attractive, Banesto "isn't indispensible" for Santander's future success, Mr. Botin said.
