Shades of "Star Trek."
At least once (or so it seems) in each episode of the much-recycled television series, Leonard McCoy, the crotchety physician aboard the USS Enterprise, is called upon to treat an ailing crew member.
Invariably, the good doctor produces a small, hand-held sensor, passes it over the patient's chest and promptly pronounces that Yeoman Smith has come down with (fill in the interplanetary illness of your choice).
Neat things, those sensors.
And perhaps not as far-fetched as the show's creators might have imagined.
Researchers at Georgia Institute of Technology and a company called Photonic Sensor Systems, both in Atlanta, are developing so-called microsensors, devices not much bigger than a pack of cigarettes, that may enable physicians to diagnose influenza, for instance, almost immediately.
Or allow a city to quickly learn what contaminants are in its drinking water.
Or help farmers decide within minutes whether to refertilize their fields.
All without sending off samples of blood, water or soil to a laboratory and then waiting hours or days for the results.
"The accuracy will be the same," says John G. Edwards, president of Photonic Sensor.
"But we'll be able to give you the answer on the spot -- and with something you can hold in your hand."
Sensors, of course, play a critical role in any number of industries, from agriculture to zincography (the engraving of zinc plates).
In many of those fields, laboratory support is more than adequate.
In some, however, demand is growing for devices that can measure and identify pollutants or viruses on site, with no delays and with the precision of a lab.
Being able to give patients an immediate answer as to whether they have a sexually transmitted disease could help ease the problem of patients who never return to clinics for test results.
In Atlanta, Photonic Sensor plans to address the demand by means of a Hartman interferometer, developed by Georgia Tech scientist Nile Hartman.
The device can be thought of as a cake with two layers, topped by a thin frosting.
The bottom layer supports the apparatus; the top layer is a channel through which two beams of light pass.
One beam is used as a reference; the second is aimed so that part of it comes into contact with the frosting, which alters its speed.
By making the frosting sensitive to, say, a pesticide, and then comparing the altered beam with the reference beam, local officials could tell immediately whether that pollutant was in their water supply.
Fitting the cake in a device the size of a hand-held calculator is accomplished by means of integrated optics, a technology used primarily in telecommunications.
As with electronic circuits that can be placed on a silicon chip, integrated optics allows optical devices like Mr. Hartman's to be reduced to the size of a dime.
Indeed, the "frosting" on Photonic Sensor's cake is less than one-millionth of an inch thick.
The earliest use of these microsensors will come in environmental monitoring and testing, says Mr. Edwards at Photonic Sensor.
Already, the company is working with Isco Inc., a maker of scientific and environmental instruments based in Lincoln, Neb., to develop a small, on-site device to measure pollutants in water.
"We think on-site sensors are the wave of the future," says Ralph Setter, director of engineering in Isco's environmental division.
Installing a microsensor in the field, he explains, would "tell you what pollutants are there right now, and allow you to take whatever steps you want."
Moreover, he says, the time and cost involved, anywhere from $10 to $100, in taking water samples back to a laboratory would be eliminated.
Both Photonic Sensor and Isco plan to test a device by the end of this year.
If all goes well, production could begin in the summer of 1995, with microsensors hitting the market before year end.
The cost: "probably several hundred dollars each," Mr. Edwards estimates.
Further down the road, Photonic Sensor plans to enter the medical market with so-called biosensors, hand-held devices that could be used in hospitals or doctors' offices.
Working with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, the company is currently developing sensors that, among other uses, could screen pregnant women and newborns for infection, and test for the flu.
The latter test illustrates some of the challenges in building sensors on a microscopic scale.
The CDC is providing researchers at Georgia Tech with antibodies to a flu virus.
Those antibodies are the "frosting" applied to Mr. Hartman's invention; in theory, they would bind with a flu virus, if present in a sample of mucus from a patient, and alter the speed of the light passing through the sensor.
But "gluing" those antibodies in place, says Mr. Edwards, involves something more than a bottle of Elmer's.
Among other worries, "You have to make sure the antibodies don't die," he says.
Indeed, Mr. Edwards acknowledges that his company still must clear several hurdles.
While Photonic Sensor's equipment and ideas work quite nicely in the confines of a warm and well-lighted lab on Georgia Tech's campus, "What happens when we move into the hostile world?" he wonders aloud.
"Acids, waste water, silt, freezing temperatures: There's lots of gunky things out there."
Still, he says he believes the company's gear will perform well, noting that "any other sensor has to face these problems, too."
The company has yet to set up a manufacturing operation, or to obtain the financing needed to do that.
Photonic Sensor has survived on about $150,000 in federal grants and about $150,000 of its partners' own money.
The company's new relationship with Isco, however, promises to provide a bigger financial cushion.
There are also some limitations on the technology.
For instance, a "frosting" designed to help detect a flu virus will detect only that virus, and nothing more.
"We've got to know ahead of time what we're looking for," Mr. Edwards says.
Still, researchers have already developed ways to place dozens of different frostings on top of a single device, giving these microsensors greater flexibility.
"It's still not 'Star Trek,' " says Mr. Edwards.
"But it's a first step toward doing a lot of things instantly."
