Japan said its trade surplus ballooned again in January, a development that is likely to aggravate tensions with the U.S.
The surplus widened 17%, to $6.11 billion from $5.22 billion a year earlier.
The increase, the largest since July, was the second in as many months.
Japan's trade surplus widened 15% in December.
The January data may heighten concerns that a more-balanced trade picture is a long way off.
On a bilateral basis, Japan's surplus with the U.S. grew 7% from a year earlier, to $3.13 billion.
In December, the bilateral surplus had widened 17%.
The figures don't bode well for relations with Washington, coming on the heels of the failed U.S.-Japan trade talks and U.S. charges that Japan has violated a pact to open its cellular phone markets.
Washington has said Japan may face trade sanctions.
"The pressure is going to be kept on the Japanese after this," Chris Calderwood, an economist at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities Ltd., said about the January trade data.
The figures were essentially in line with Barclays's predictions.
But more unsettling than the 17% increase in the surplus when measured in dollars, Mr. Calderwood and others said, was a 4.8% increase in the surplus when measured in yen.
Because the strong yen inflates the dollar value of trade, the yen-denominated figures can be a more accurate measure of Japan's trade flows.
Japan's surplus with other Asian nations nearly doubled from a year earlier, to $2.99 billion, continuing proof of Japan's tightening regional links.
But its surplus with the European Union dropped 36%, to $1.75 billion, in contrast to a 9.7% increase in December.
Economists attributed the shift to recession-pinched European demand.
Overall exports from Japan rose 7.5% in January, to $25.93 billion.
January's figures did contain some good news for American businesses: Imports of U.S. products rose 11% in dollar terms, their 11th consecutive monthly gain.
Japan's overall imports rose 4.8% in dollar value during January, to $19.82 billion, and 8.4% in terms of volume.
The import boom is surprising because countries tend to restrain imports during an economic downturn such as the one Japan is experiencing.
Still, analysts cautioned that it is unclear how much such gains will mollify the U.S. because a large part of the increase in imports comes from Japanese production facilities overseas.
"People are continuing to shift production to offshore bases and largely reimporting Japanese products from overseas," said Donald Kimball, senior economist at Mitsubishi Bank Ltd.
That charge is typically parried with Japanese assertions that their overseas investment boosts developing economies in the region.
