In his Feb. 8 editorial-page article, Sen. Phil Gramm claims that "the Clinton health care plan eliminates the basic elements of free choice," and suggests that unless you are one of the "privileged few who work for the government or for huge companies that employ more than 5,000 people," you will lose that choice of your own doctor or health care plan.
Had he read the articles on the Journal's page one in recent weeks, he would have discovered that it is our current health care system that is taking away people's right to choose their own doctors.
Currently, federal workers -- including senators -- are the privileged ones who receive a large menu of private plans from which they can choose each year.
Why should they be so lucky?
Under the Health Security Act, everyone will be able to choose among a range of options (HMOs, health care networks, and fee-for-service plans like Blue Cross/Blue Shield).
Federal workers -- also including senators -- will get exactly the same choices as everyone else.
In fact, until my bill to end free health care for members of Congress by the capitol physician was put into effect by House and Senate leaders in 1992, Sen. Gramm and his colleagues did enjoy privileges clearly not available to other Americans.
But not anymore.
Sen. Gramm seems to be blind to the reality of what's happening to most people today.
The Journal of Feb. 10 would have enlightened him.
"For all the emotion and rhetoric, the freedom to choose a doctor not only has been sharply diminished already, but is certain to erode further," the Journal reported, as "more employers lower costs by restricting options. . . .
From 1988 to 1993, the percentage of people enrolled by their employer in fee-for-service health plans . . . plummeted to 49% from 71%, according to research by KPMG Peat Marwick."
Sen. Gramm and his colleagues love to cite the Congressional Budget Office testimony about the projected costs of the Health Security Act, although they don't like to note Dr. Reischauer's conclusions that the bill would ultimately save the economy some $337 billion over the next nine years or that other reform proposals are likely to cost even more.
Sen. Gramm should at least be sure to note Dr. Reischauer's testimony that "the vast majority of Americans would have more in the way of choice under the president's plan than they currently have.
They will be choosing from a menu of plans that are offered by their regional alliance.
Most of us can only choose those plans that our employer puts in front of us.
Often our employer puts one plan in front of us and says this is it or nothing.
In this environment created by the president's proposal . . . my choice is not affected by where I work at all.
That is, I think, an incontrovertible fact."
Sen. Gramm also fails to mention that his own so-called "Medical Savings Accounts" will do absolutely nothing to protect the choices that most Americans are losing today.
That approach may have the rhetoric of individual choice behind it.
But it merely encourages Americans to spend their savings on bare-bones policies that cover only the most catastrophic illnesses, with deductibles as high as $5,000, further discouraging the kind of preventive care which helps keep people from getting catastrophic illnesses in the first place.
Sen. Harris Wofford (D., Pa.)
