A Food and Drug Administration investigation has found irregularities in the production of Copley Pharmaceutical Inc.'s recalled asthma drug, Albuterol.
The FDA, in an investigative report released yesterday under the Freedom of Information Act, said it found several leaks and other potential sources of contamination in a water-purification system used to make Albuterol, an inhalant solution.
The agency also said bacterial counts in Copley's internal monitoring of Albuterol production weren't accurately recorded.
The report, which had several excised portions, suggested that Copley inspectors signed off on internal water-quality documentation involved in making Albuterol before final bacterial counts were completed.
The report could add to Copley's trouble over the Albuterol recall, which has prompted lawsuits and medical concern about the quality of generic drug production.
Copley is one of the largest producers of generics, which are lower-cost versions of drugs originally marketed at higher prices by other pharmaceutical firms.
Copley President Anthony Bonelli, through a spokesman, said yesterday "We are preparing a comment to the FDA.
Copley continues to responsibly address this matter.
And all of these issues can and will be responsibly and adequately resolved."
The FDA report criticizes Copley on a number of fronts, including failing to have written procedures for microbiological monitoring and the sanitation and maintenance of the water-purification system used in the production of Albuterol.
The report also cited deficiencies in Copley's manufacturing processes.
Water-purification "system drain lines were found extended into the floor drains," it says.
The report adds that six leaks were observed in the water-purification system, including two situated after the final filter.
Such leaks represent potential sources of bacterial contamination.
In early January, Copley announced a nationwide recall of Albuterol in its 0.5% concentration due to waterborne bacterial contamination.
Since then, the company has been named in two lawsuits in Chicago alleging children developed serious illnesses after using Albuterol.
The FDA report also notes that some gauges were not calibrated correctly and that some microbiological monitoring results "were not accurate."
It also says that on three occasion a notebook in the water testing laboratory "was signed off by the analyst one day prior to when the excised plate count results would have been recorded."
In another instance, the agency's report says a "line operator responsible for cleaning the excised liquid system failed to properly drain the lines of rinsed deionized water between batches, deviating from written procedure."
Susan Cruzan, an FDA spokeswoman in Rockville, Md., said she couldn't comment on the details of the report.
"At this point, it's up to the firm to look at this, to correct all these things or tell the FDA whether or not they see them as problems that need to be corrected," she said.
The investigation was performed at Copley's Canton, Mass., facility.
