To understand Japan's latest political uproar, look into the crystal ball of the nation's powerful economic planners.
In the year 2020, the Finance Ministry sees a Japan that is all gray, a nation in which two workers must support each retiree, down from five per pensioner today.
Its solution: Increase sales levies now, despite today's recession, so that Japan can broaden its tax base.
Promising to boost levies in the middle of a recession may seem crazy to Americans, but Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa delivered a tax-reform blueprint last week that would cut income taxes now to boost the economy -- and make up the difference later by more than doubling the national consumption tax.
Mr. Hosokawa's tax-increase announcement triggered an uprising in his seven-party coalition.
Faced with the prospect of mass defections, and possibly the government's collapse, Mr. Hosokawa dropped the plan.
He hopes to find some sort of compromise today.
Even if Mr. Hosokawa manages to strike a settlement, the fight over tax policy is revealing.
In the face of strong pressure to stimulate the economy, Japan's dominant impulse is to save for its old age.
This obsession has big implications for the U.S. Tight spending already has prolonged Japan's recession, many economists argue.
It also intensifies the political confusion at home, deflecting Japan's attention from critical trade negotiations with Washington.
And Tokyo's tightwad fiscal policies are a major factor sustaining its huge trade surpluses.
The ministry's "emphasis on government savings has become counterproductive," says James Vestal, economist at Barclays de Zoete Wedd in Tokyo.
"It seems to be using its power to ensure a budget surplus," says Mr. Vestal, a program he terms "misguided."
The problems posed by an elderly populace have been eating at Japanese planners since 1970.
That's when citizens aged 65 and over first accounted for 7% of the population, considered a benchmark of an aged society.
Since then, Japan's leaders have been drilling into voters' heads the gravity of the demographic problem.
Sirens sounded in 1989, when the number of children born to the average Japanese woman in her lifetime fell to 1.57, below the pace needed to sustain the population.
The public has absorbed the lesson.
In a 1991 government survey, 86% of those polled said they were concerned about Japan's aging population.
Notably, the worry cited by most respondents was the fiscal health of the pension system -- the Finance Ministry's own pet anxiety.
With that kind of public support, few politicians dare question the ministry's reasoning.
Even the Socialists, who have long opposed the sales tax, say they agree that Japan needs higher value-added levies.
"Given the upcoming aging society, we don't think the current tax system is right," says Harumichi Hosoya, a member of the Socialists' tax-policy committee.
The demographic-disaster scenario has enabled the ministry to push its parsimonious fiscal policies.
In the 1970s and 1980s, Japan's pork-barrel politicians ran up a string of huge budget deficits.
Eventually, the ministry shamed legislators into reining in their spending.
That freed the bureaucrats to start salting away cash for the future.
From 1987 to 1992, as the U.S. government's deficit ballooned, Japan racked up large surpluses.
The dominance of this scenario explains why Mr. Hosokawa, at great political risk, backed the ministry's agenda.
"We have prepared the vision quite carefully," says one Finance Ministry budget official.
Yet, Finance Ministry officials also are concerned with the trade implications of their fiscal policy and deny they are trying to pile up budget surpluses.
That is why last week, during the current trade negotiations with Washington, top ministry leaders called in a group of U.S. reporters to argue that Japan isn't as frugal as it's cracked up to be.
The officials handed out a document containing budget-balance projections made by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
The figures show that Japan will run a deficit in its general-government budget -- combining its social-security, central and local government accounts -- in 1993, 1994 and 1995.
What's more, Japan's deficit in 1995 will exceed that of the profligate U.S. as a percentage of gross domestic product.
Japan's fiscal balance is undoubtedly worsening as tax revenue falls and the government spends more to spur the economy.
What the officials neglected to mention, however, were the OECD's estimates of Japan's so-called structural balance, a measure of what the balance would be if the economy were running at full employment.
On that basis, says the OECD, Japan will run a surplus in 1995.
Some economists consider the structural balance a better indicator of underlying fiscal health.
The distinction matters greatly to Washington, since a healthier balance sheet would mean Japan could splurge a bit more.
Frugality leads the Japanese to consume fewer goods and services than they produce -- and hence, run a trade surplus with the U.S. and other nations.
The Finance Ministry's reply to such concerns is simple: Wait a few decades -- the trade surplus will take care of itself.
Masayoshi Kanabayashi contributed to this article.
