"Operation Exodus," the Customs Service's effort to stop the illegal flow of arms around the world, has lately gotten itself, and the U.S., into a peck of trouble.
Widely heralded sting cases have fallen apart in court, and ploys by Customs agents to snare foreign businessmen as bait for future stings have resulted in two kidnapping suits now pending against the agency.
In addition, recent cases have drawn protests from the governments of Canada, Uganda and Poland, where one highly publicized sting helped put a coalition led by former Communists back in power in parliament.
Richard F. Mercier, the head of the Customs Service's Strategic Investigations Division, which oversees sting cases, says his agency's increasing use of "cooperating defendants" to set up stings comes from "the success" of earlier Exodus cases, staged by undercover Customs agents, that increased suspicions among major arms dealers.
He says the agency is reviewing some of the problems in its recent cases, but insists that "it doesn't mean our methods are inherently flawed."
But Jack Blum, a Washington lawyer who spent years looking into Customs' stings as a former Senate investigator, charges that the agency lacks control over its investigators -- many of whose exploits, he says, have been vastly oversold.
Many of its successful cases in the arms trade, Mr. Blum asserts, are against "basically low-rent types who are wandering around on the margins of it."
The most embarrassing case involves Ronald J. Hendron, a small-time California businessman who was convinced by undercover Customs agents that he could become, as he put it, "the Golden Boy" of the international arms trade.
At the suggestion of what he thought was a New York-based organized-crime group, Mr. Hendron put together a multimillion-dollar deal for an arsenal of weapons supposedly headed for Iraq, including MiG fighters, 10 trainloads of Russian weapons and hundreds of thousands of Bulgarian and Polish rifles, rockets and grenade launchers.
Shades of the Marx Brothers The resulting case was hailed in 1992 by federal prosecutors as a breakthrough that "struck at the heart" of arms proliferation in Eastern Europe.
But when the case was tried in U.S. District Court in Brooklyn, it looked more like a plot designed by the Marx Brothers.
After they scheduled the arms deal in a Frankfurt hotel suite, Customs agents were stunned to learn that German law forbade them to videotape or record the meeting.
But they went ahead anyway.
Meanwhile, unbeknownst to the agents, the translator they used at the hotel meetings ad-libbed in Polish, creating his own version of the deal, and cracked jokes that insulted the Russians.
Bulgarian agents, smelling something fishy, faded away.
So did the Russians.
Last summer, as prosecutors prepared to try five Poles they nabbed in the case, Mr. Hendron, who pleaded guilty to a conspiracy charge and agreed to be the star witness, published his memoirs in Poland, causing a sensation.
They state that he never told the Poles the arms were going to Iraq, the fact that made the deal illegal.
The prosecutors stumbled on, though, refusing to call Mr. Hendron as a witness.
In November, a jury acquitted the Poles, who had been imprisoned for 19 months.
Mr. Mercier, Customs' top investigator, refers questions about the case to the agency's New York office, where officials decline to comment.
But its repercussions were felt all the way to Warsaw.
"This case was used by the left side of the political spectrum in Poland to create anti-American feelings," says Jerzy Surdykowski, Poland's consul general in New York.
He notes that resulting anti-American demonstrations in Warsaw, staged just before elections in September, helped shift the balance in parliament.
Another much-touted 1992 Customs sting lured two Uganda officials, including Innocent Bisangwa-Mbuguje, an aide to the nation's president, into an arms deal near Orlando, Fla.
Uganda had to put a lien on its consulate in New York to make his $1 million bail in the case, which involved a supposedly illegal purchase of $18 million of TOW missiles.
But the case collapsed in court last year, after it was determined that the Ugandans thought they were pursuing a legitimate deal they had started with the State Department.
"It was a very, very painful experience for the entire government of Uganda," says Paul Reichler, a Washington attorney who represented the African nation.
The Ugandans, however, probably can't match the rage of Kenneth Walker, a Canadian businessman, who claims he had his entire life destroyed by a Customs sting involving a proposed sale of 1,000 pistols.
After he refused to go to a meeting in New York, undercover Customs agents sent him plane tickets to the Bahamas via New York, then arrested him as he was changing planes at La Guardia Airport.
Confronted with some of the same agents involved in the Hendron case, Mr. Walker says he refused their demands that he "cooperate with Team America" and set up sting operations.
The Canadian says he lost his home and his commodities brokerage business and his family wound up on welfare, as a result of being detained in New York for four months.
Now back in Canada, Mr. Walker is suing Customs for $9.5 million, charging fraud, deceit and abduction.
Canada has protested on his behalf and, for the first time in history, has summarily refused a U.S. request to extradite him.
A lower court denied a U.S. defense of sovereign immunity in Mr. Walker's civil suit, which is pending before Canada's Supreme Court.
Mr. Walker insists his role in the pistol deal was legal.
Plus, he argues, as a Canadian, he "has no obligation to U.S. foreign policy laws. . . .
You are not the policeman to the world."
Another case, involving Hossein Alikhani, a Cypriot businessman allegedly abducted by Customs in the Bahamas and flown to Florida to make sting cases, is pending in Miami.
Finally, there is the saga of Robert Wheeler, an Oakland, Calif., computer salesman.
He was enticed by Eddie Haak, a fast-talking Dutchman, into a 1990 deal to sell a supercomputer.
When told the computer was going to Bulgaria, then a prohibited destination, Mr. Wheeler says he had his lawyer call Customs immediately.
Customs agents came and arrested Mr. Wheeler.
Mr. Wheeler was later convicted by a Miami jury, after Mr. Haak testified he had told Mr. Wheeler about the Bulgarian connection earlier.
Out of desperation, Mr. Wheeler flew to Europe to plead his innocence before Mr. Haak's wife, saying that he faced a five-year jail term and was a single parent with two young daughters.
It worked.
Mr. Haak, who had agreed to help Customs set up stings after his arrest in an earlier case, wrote a letter saying he may have testified incorrectly "under pressure of the U.S. Customs," adding, "I was afraid that they Customs would not let me go out of the U.S.A."
Now Mr. Wheeler has been granted a new trial.
Mr. Mercier says that he can't comment on the Wheeler case, or on others in which some aspects are still pending.
But he says that international flaps generally come with the territory.
"A law-enforcement officer cannot be hampered by having these concerns override his sworn responsibility," he insists.
