Deflecting criticism that the Mandarin Oriental Hotel group is losing time by taking a conservative approach to China, Managing Director Robert Riley said the luxury chain is keen to enter the mainland if conditions are right.
"We have made it plain we are interested in doing hotels in China when we find opportunities fit for shareholders and customers," he said in an interview.
Mandarin Oriental's network includes a mix of 10 hotels it owns or operates in Hong Kong and Southeast Asia, and a hotel it manages in San Francisco.
Analysts have blamed the company's lackluster earnings performance on the cautious style of Hong Kong's Jardine Strategic Holdings Ltd., which owns 50% of the hotel company.
Mr. Riley termed the Mandarin Oriental group's style "a very deliberate growth strategy."
He said it is a strategy meant to ensure that every new project's "financial structure will bring long-term value, whether it be in China or Indonesia."
He added: "Our record stands for itself.
We are running business in a way that brings value to its shareholders."
The hotel company is investigating investment opportunities in Vietnam and Japan, particularly Tokyo, though it hasn't made any deals, Mr. Riley said.
The company is expected to release its 1993 earnings in March, and Mr. Riley declined to supply projections for 1994.
But he said the Hong Kong Mandarin Oriental and the Excelsior Hotel would be the group's main growth contributors because "the Hong Kong market is clearly the strongest market in Asia," he said.
The average occupancy rate at the Mandarin Oriental for the 11 months ended November 1993 was 66%, while at the Excelsior it was 88%.
Mr. Riley said he expects room rates to rise in the territory this year, though he didn't specify how much.
For 1993, the average room rate was $212.50 at the Mandarin Oriental and $83.50 at the Excelsior.
Next month, Mandarin is expected to begin managing a new resort in Koh Samui, Thailand.
It already manages the Phuket Yacht Club in that country.
The company has also secured the management contract for a hotel in Surabaya, Indonesia, due to open in the second quarter of 1995, in which it will have a 25% equity stake.
The company has secured land for a 630-room hotel in Kuala Lumpur, but Mr. Riley said it still isn't clear when the groundbreaking for the project will occur.
