"Everybody's got somebody who don't like 'em," says a TV detective.
"Every family's got a dark cloud."
Judging by this week's TV fare, some families seem to carry around their own private thunderstorm.
That's right: It's dysfunctional-families week on television.
A quiet Sunday afternoon in a sleepy Southern town.
The birds are chirping in the trees, church has just let out and it's time for a maniacal sniper to line up a mother and daughter in the cross hairs of his rifle and blow them away, ganglandstyle.
These are the opening moments of the miniseries "In the Best of Families: Marriage, Pride and Madness" (CBS, part II, Tuesday, 9-11 p.m. EST), a saga of romance gone really, really sour.
Flashing back to 1970, a flirtatious Southern belle from the right kind of family, Susie Sharp Newsom (Kelly McGillis), is about to marry the star of the basketball team, Tom Leary (Keith Carradine).
By the way they smooch in his convertible, roaring down the highway, we conclude they are deeply in love and destined for a lifetime of happiness, if they can keep their eyes on the road.
But right from the start, there are hints, forebodings, undercurrents of tension.
Tom's stern crab apple of a mother looks Susie up and down and frowns: "I'm his mother; I know what's best for him.
The simple fact is, Tom's not ready to get married."
The wedding day brings a real sign of trouble: A bridesmaid's dress is wrinkled and the high-strung Susie flips out.
"Why are you determined to ruin everything?" she screams at her own mother.
Tom's mom knocks back another drink and shakes her head.
"I've lost my son," she says.
"I curse the day I ever met that girl."
A decade of married life flies by and Tom and Susie now have two kids -- convenient pint-sized punching bags for Susie's increasingly frequent outbursts of frustration and anger.
She's not happy with their new home in New Mexico; she's not happy with their marriage.
In one excruciating scene, she shoves her screaming little boy, fully dressed, under an ice-cold shower.
As the water pounds down on him and he cries piteously, she asks, "Why do you make me do this?"
Clearly, divorce is just a few plot twists away -- right after Susie goes on a rampage and trashes their house.
Yelling "I hate you!" at the top of her lungs, she upends furniture, empties bookcases and generally makes a shambles of her life.
By this point, you feel sure you've experienced all the misery and met all the unpleasant characters that any one miniseries can throw at you.
But no -- "In the Best of Families" is just getting going.
Back home in North Carolina, Susie gets more and more bitter and launches a nasty custody battle to keep Tom away from their kids.
Then she takes up with her first cousin Fritz (Harry Hamlin).
Fritz is, well, a little odd -- which is saying something in this collection of sociopaths.
Sporting paramilitary gear, a bushy beard and a fake medical degree, he turns Susie on to "stress capsules" and the "state-of-the-art bunker" that he's just built.
"You know what's happening in the world today," Fritz mutters.
"It could blow at any time.
I want to be ready."
In one twisted scene, the bearded survivalist seduces his first cousin over the barrel of his rifle.
From here on out, things get messy.
Fritz and Susie will retreat into their own private bunker.
Tom will frantically try to get custody of the kids through all the legal channels.
Susie will snarl lines such as "I'll die before I let him take my boys."
Fritz will bring her out target shooting: "You'll be ready for combat before you know it."
And the boys will wail to their father: "Daddy, Daddy, don't make us go back."
It's only a matter of time before the bloodbath begins -- parents and relatives, Tom's and Susie's, all shot to death in their homes, one after another, a string of violent, senseless murders.
The grand finale will raise the body count to nine.
CBS says this program "rivals any Greek tragedy," and maybe it's right, if you're counting the number of corpses that litter the scene at the end.
But other than that, the sole tragedy is that this miniseries got made.
An uninteresting story packed with unhappy, unattractive characters, "In the Best of Families" gets my vote for the worst film of the season.
It's not just poorly written and poorly conceived.
It's a lurid freak show of a program, which aims to titillate viewers by plunging them headfirst into the muck, to wallow with the psychotics.
Normally one doesn't give away the conclusion, but let me spare you the viewing of this: After hours of watching these poor, innocent children crying their eyes out, we're treated to a fast-paced finale in which Tom races to get his kids back, the police close in on Fritz and Susie, the crazed pair load the children into a car packed with explosives, and boom! -- they splatter themselves and the kids all over the countryside.
That's it.
Look out for those flying hunks of flesh.
At a time when Washington is examining network TV programming more and more closely, "In the Best of Families" is exactly the kind of show that will draw the ire of Congress, not just because it's brutish and violent, but because that violence has no artistic purpose other than sensationalism.
Legislators really don't belong in the TV-critic business (there's enough competition already), but you couldn't blame them if a show like this pullad them in.
Beyond the bullet holes, the buckets of blood and the barrage of sick emotions, this miniseries racks up its casualties off-screen as well as on.
After four hours of watching "In the Best of Families," the viewer is left feeling stained, soiled -- just plain yucky.
And it makes you wonder if there isn't something dysfunctional at the CBS family that made it choose to air this program.
