It has been hard for holders of U.S. Surgical to be cheerful as the stock plunged from nearly 80 in early 1993 to the teens lately.
It's about to get even harder.
Earlier this week, U.S. Surgical announced that it had arranged to raise $200 million in a private deal, saying it would divulge the details Monday.
At first blush, that sounded like encouraging news for investors in the common stock of the ailing medical-equipment maker based in Norwalk, Conn.
But consider: The big investors wound up buying securities priced to yield a mouth-watering 9.76%, in a deal that couldn't help but undermine the price of the existing common stock.
In essence, the big guys got a crack at the tempting new securities while the little guys were left holding their common with its skislope-like chart.
The $200 million private offering was made under the Securities and Exchange Commission's Rule 144a, a relatively new provision that lets companies skirt the time-consuming registration process when selling securities privately to big, presumably "sophisticated" investors.
The rule is supposed to protect little investors from buying complex and risky investments more suited to institutions.
In this case, though, small investors might have fared better without such a "safeguard."
The private offering consisted of "dividend-enhanced" convertible preferred stock, a newfangled security that allows holders to convert their holdings into common stock after four years.
The rub is that U.S. Surgical and its underwriter, Salomon Brothers, crafted such a sweet deal to woo skeptical institutions that some of them have been selling off common and switching into the new securities priced to yield 9.76%, which Salomon calls DECS.
Moreover, the DECS will dilute common stockholders' equity in the company by 15% when the securities are converted to common in four years.
That, in part, may explain why U.S. Surgical shares tumbled 1 1/4 points Tuesday, lost 1/2 Wednesday, and slid 1/8 more yesterday to finish at 19 1/8.
"I'd rather have the new securities than the common stock, too," says Kenneth Abramowitz, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein.
"But the company needed to do this to raise money."
As for the fate of the little guy whose already battered investment is taking another knock, "that's just the way it goes," Mr. Abramowitz says.
In the end, he thinks common holders will benefit because they will hold stock in a more financially viable company.
U.S. Surgical and Salomon Brothers declined to comment on the DECS offering.
But more convertible-preferred deals like this could be on the horizon.
In fact, Wall Street traders say -- not always admiringly -- that Salomon appears to be carving out a niche for itself in the underwriting of convertible securities for struggling companies.
U.S. Surgical's offering is the latest of at least four similar deals from Salomon.
Others in the past year have included underwritings for Stone Container, Storage Technology and Carter Hawley Hale Stores.
Why would even a well-heeled investor want to invest this week in U.S. Surgical?
After all, the company has withered amid competition from Johnson & Johnson's Ethicon unit and from what some think is a stagnating market for its disposable surgical instruments.
Traders say investors were mainly growth-and-income funds that will "flip," or sell quickly, the securities.
"You could short the common stock and buy the DECS all day long," says one.
(U.S. Surgical's short position -- stock that was borrowed and then sold -- is already the 11th highest on the Big Board at nearly 12 million shares.)
Big investors were given many enticements.
The DECS pricing created a $2.20 dividend yield equaling 9.76% annually, far above the more-typical 6%.
In four years, holders face a mandatory conversion into common stock.
For holders to break even upon conversion, U.S. Surgical common stock needs to rise only 15% from when DECS holders bought it, compared with the typical 20% premium for many convertible offerings.
U.S. Surgical "needed the money and was willing to pay a high price for it," says a trader in the common stock.
Mr. Abramowitz says he believes the company is "trying to hurry to get the deal in hand" by the end of the first quarter.
But in any case, the offering doesn't do much to address the fundamental problems in U.S. Surgical's business that started the slide in the stock in the first place.
Year ended Dec. 31, 1993:
Sales: $1.04 billion
Net Loss: $138.7 million*; $2.48 a share vs.
Common shares outstanding: 56.1 million
*-Includes $137.6 million restructuring charge.
