Conde Nast Publications Inc. named as president Steven T. Florio, who is currently president and chief executive officer of the New Yorker.
While most of the 14 magazines in the Conde Nast stable are said to be quite successful, many of the senior managers are long-term veterans approaching retirement age.
Mr. Florio, 44 years old, will be succeeding Bernard H. Leser, 68, who has been associated with Conde Nast since 1959, when he founded the Australian edition of Vogue.
Another top executive, Alexander Liberman, remains editorial director of Conde Nast at age 80.
Mr. Florio will take over as president June 1, at which time Mr. Leser will become chairman of Pacific Operations for Conde Nast, a new post.
Mr. Leser will move to Syndey, Australia, and oversee expansion of the magazine group throughout the Pacific.
The company's overseas editions have mostly been European ones; two years ago, Mr. Leser arranged for a licensee in Japan to publish Conde Nast's men's magazine GQ, which has been very successful.
Conde Nast is a unit of Advance Publications Inc., the Newhouse family's private publishing empire.
S.I. "Si" Newhouse Jr., chairman of Conde Nast, said Mr. Florio "has done a brilliant job" during his nine years at the New Yorker, but didn't provide details of what he expects from him as president.
"This is a very smooth running company," Mr. Newhouse said.
"I want Steve to surprise me."
Throughout the industry, the expectation is that Mr. Florio will shake things up at Conde Nast; that may include a shuffling of publishers and a branching out into some new businesses.
Alexandra Penney, editor of Conde Nast's Self magzine, said, "This is the beginning of a new world order here.
Si Newhouse says . . . he felt it was time for the younger generation."
Magazine consultant Martin Walker said, "I think Steve Florio will make a much more aggressive president and a more vocal industry spokesman than Mr. Leser.
I think Conde Nast is the only magazine group that doesn't discount their ad rates, but the business side is getting tougher for everybody."
Mr. Florio, a stylish, hyperbolic sixfooter who has worked at Conde Nast for 15 years, says he's ecstatic about the appointment.
"To use a sports analogy, this is like running the Yankees when they really were the Yankees," he said.
An ardent fan of his portable Powerbook computer, Mr. Florio said his plans include "taking the company into cutting-edge technology.
I think this company has fabulous content and we can dominate the information highway."
Among his other priorities: helping Conde Nast magazines "that have advertising or positioning problems"; increasing the profits and presence of Conde Nast's little-known sports division, Street and Smith magazines; and adding line extensions, such as the Hallmark greeting cards he licensed based on New Yorker cartoons.
Although the editorial changes of Tina Brown are given more credit than Mr. Florio's efforts, ad pages at the New Yorker rose about 12.5% in 1993, to 2,253 pages.
Conde Nast said it will name Mr. Florio's brother, Thomas A. Florio, 38, currently the publisher of Conde Nast Traveler, to the post of publisher of the New Yorker.
He won't assume his brother's titles of president and chief executive officer.
The current publisher of the New Yorker is Lynn Heiler, whose future job hasn't been settled, the company said.
