David Obey, a pro-labor Wisconsin Democrat and protege of the legendary Rules Committee Chairman Richard Bolling, was chosen by his party caucus to be the next chairman of the House Appropriations Committee.
The 55-year-old Mr. Obey won handily over the more-senior Rep. Neal Smith of Iowa.
The 152-106 vote symbolized a generational change both in the House and the Appropriations Committee, which wields immense power over federal spending.
First elected to Congress in 1969, Mr. Obey was a young ally to Mr. Bolling, a major architect of House reforms in the 1970s.
Mr. Obey's own role in promoting tougher ethics rules cost him votes and the chairmanship of the Budget Committee in the early 1980s.
But his career has prospered as he has risen in the appropriations panel and forged a close relationship with another Bolling protege, Majority Leader Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.).
"I believe a committee is a tool of the House, not the other way around," said Mr. Obey in remarks yesterday echoing Mr. Bolling's of years ago.
The new chairman's ties to the House leadership will bring a new dimension to the appropriations panel, which is the most insular and least understood of the major House committees.
Mr. Obey will have the title of associate or acting chairman, in deference to the panel's ailing 84-year-old chairman, Rep. William Natcher of Kentucky.
But yesterday's voting was tantamount to the selection of a new chairman, and it gave Mr. Obey all the powers of that office.
Fiercely combative, Mr. Obey has a tempestuous, sometimes rude style that can be his undoing.
But he draws on a wide knowledge of domestic policy and finance built up over years on the Joint Economic Committee, which he currently heads.
His liberal credentials contrast with more moderate-to-conservative chairmen of the past who, like Mr. Natcher, were rooted in the South or border states.
Mr. Obey won by appealing to younger southern lawmakers, such as Rep. John Spratt (D., S.C.), who are less attuned than older members to the pork-barrel style of politics so identified with the appropriations panel.
