One word that was accidentally put in a Philippine tax law is costing the government badly needed pesos.
A government official estimated the lost revenue at $110 million a year, a sum that tax officers said looks high but might be right.
The error in the 1992 tax law, which only this week attracted wide notice, was made in a section on married couples' taxes intended to allow a personal deduction of 18,000 pesos ($660) per couple.
But the word "each" was somehow inserted, allowing a husband and wife each to claim that sum and doubling their relief.
The mistake came to light after the government, Congress and others started scouring for revenue sources to shrink the Philippines' chronic budget deficit.
President Fidel Ramos has set up a committee to find alternatives to an oil-price increase that was to have generated $368 million this year but that he suspended because it prompted threats of a general strike.
Congress is amenable to correcting the income-tax goof but couples now filing returns will qualify for the windfall.
Lebanon plans to rebuild its coastal railway line, which has been devastated by wars and decades of neglect.
The scenic route is flanked by the Mediterranean and mountains hugging the seacoast.
The 105-mile line links Tyre and Sidon in the south with Beirut and the northern city of Tripoli.
Modernization costs were estimated at $500 million.
The government hopes to complete the project by 1997.
INDONESIA UNMOVED BY U.S. DELAY
Indonesia reacted coolly to a U.S. decision to give the Jakarta government an additional six months to implement labor rules or lose preferential trade treatment under the Generalized System of Preferences.
It rejected U.S. linkage of trade with human and labor rights, and vowed to challenge any revocation of the trade status, but indicated the economy wouldn't be hurt without it.
The U.S. had been expected to decide the issue but allowed Indonesia the extra time to end alleged labor abuses and improve workers' rights, such as allowing labor unions.
France dissolved the government's AIDS-fighting agency and transferred its tasks to the Health Ministry.
State auditors said the agency, set up in 1989, covered some expenses with money from a fund for hemophiliacs, had to destroy 400,000 condoms found to be substandard in a distribution program, and paid two of its four chairmen bigger salaries than legally allowed.
AIDS-related deaths average 15 a day in France, which has recorded 32,000 cases, the most among European countries, since the epidemic began in 1981.
France also has 110,000 people infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
China scheduled the National People's Congress to convene March 10, the Xinhua news agency said, and the nominal parliament will be urged to support faster economic reforms.
The move indicated the ruling Communist Party has completed its plans for the annual session, which traditionally rubber-stamps proposals.
Premier Li Peng told the cabinet this year's agenda calls for building on recent successes of reforms espoused by paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Delegates will be expected to acclaim sweeping new tax, banking and currency reforms and endorse the so-called socialist market economy.
Of 5.4 million Romanians entitled to farmland seized by communists 40 years ago, only 740,000 have received deeds, the Agriculture Ministry said.
Under a 1990 law, farmers may get 25 acres each, regardless of how much land they owned prior to nationalization.
The reform program's slow pace and conduct have caused tensions and clashes.
The ministry said the effort has been hindered by a money shortage and insufficient staff to measure plots, but it also blamed local officials for abuses such as favoring friends or issuing deeds that don't specify sites.
Many state-owned farms remain intact.
Despite persistent Sino-British acrimony about constitutional reform for Hong Kong, the two governments are inching forward on other issues in the British colony's 1997 transfer to Chinese rule.
Chinese officials in the past week indicated willingness to resume formal meetings on financing $20.45 billion for Hong Kong's new airport project, for which China wants to avoid liability.
They also agreed to hold meetings next week on military aspects of the 1997 handover.
The new pragmatism may indicate sidestepping for now the battle over Hong Kong electoral rules to preserve an element of democracy.
Negotiations broke down last November, leaving Britain intent on proceeding unilaterally with the reforms and China vowing to undo them after 1997.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
When France issued a 50-franc banknote last October designed to hex counterfeiters, the central bank had a bad spell of its own.
The bill featured the writer Antoine de Saint-Exupery but placed an accent over the capital E inaccurately.
Subsequent printings got it right. . . .
Video games are "man-eating tigers" that the official People's Daily said are devouring China's children.
Terming the games violent, unhealthy and pornographic, the commentary urged banning them before they encourage a crime wave.
