U.S. sales of cars and light trucks continued to boom in January, rising 13.7% from a year earlier.
Coming in the face of higher vehicle prices and despite the disruptions of unusually cold weather and the California earthquake, the rise in car and truck sales to 1,022,543 vehicles seemed to underscore the strength of the economic recovery.
The auto industry is banking on the uptrend to continue through this year at least.
On a seasonally adjusted basis, the January results were equivalent to about 15 million vehicle sales a year, including both imports and North American-built vehicles.
That compares with a year-earlier seasonally adjusted annual sales rate of about 13.5 million.
The January rate is in line with industry forecasts for this year's sales; in 1993, U.S. vehicle sales totaled 13.9 million.
"Business," declared Ross Roberts, the Ford Motor Co. vice president in charge of its Ford marketing division, "is good."
North American-built vehicles continued to account for the rising sales totals; imported car and truck sales both declined in January.
Deliveries of new trucks -- which include the fast-growing minivan and sport-utility-vehicle segments -- surged 24% in January, while car sales rose 7.7%.
The market share held by Detroit's Big Three edged up seven-tenths of a percentage point, to 74.8%, mostly at the expense of Japanese nameplates.
Wall Street, which has been bullish on the auto stocks for some time, responded by pushing up Big Three prices in active trading.
Ford shares spurted $1.625 to close at $69.375 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
General Motors Corp. was up $1.50 to close at $63, and Chrysler Corp. gained $1.25 to close at $62.50.
One major factor in the recent sales growth has been the aggressive promotion of short-term leasing, particularly by Ford.
Separately, as expected, Ford yesterday disclosed details of its new used-car leasing program, which is to begin Feb. 15.
The program focuses on two-year-old Fords that are coming back into dealers' hands at the end of two-year leases.
Ford said it expects about 130,000 such vehicles to come back this year.
Of those, about half are likely to be leased again under the new program, Ford said.
Ford will sweeten its used-car lease deals by extending its standard new-car warranty to cover the lease period and by offering roadside assistance.
The used-car leases will carry lower interest rates than those on new-car leases, reducing potential monthly payments about $100 a month, Ford said.
GM was the big winner in January, posting a 16.6% sales gain to 345,311 cars and light trucks.
The No. 1 auto maker seized nearly a full percentage point more of market share, to 33.8%.
Like the rest of the industry, GM was particularly strong in truck sales, reporting a 44.5% increase in full-sized Chevrolet pickup-truck deliveries, a 39.4% increase in small Blazer sport-utility-vehicle sales, and a 22% total increase in truck sales.
"It will be a good, healthy market this year," predicted J. Michael Losh, the GM vice president for sales, service and marketing.
But Mr. Losh cautioned that GM's market share is likely to see-saw during the year because plant closings for model changeover are likely to disrupt the company's car sales during the second and third quarters.
Consequently, he said, GM's market share should finish 1994 about where it finished 1993, around 33%.
Ford's January sales rose 14.9% to 260,936 cars and trucks.
The No. 2 auto maker observed that its Ranger pickups, Explorer sport-utility vehicles and Villager minivans all set sales records for January and that the top-selling Taurus car posted a 25% sales increase despite tight supplies.
The new Mustang sold 11,577 units, more than twice as many as the old model sold a year earlier.
On the other hand, underscoring relative weakness in the luxury-coupe segment, sales of the Lincoln Mark VIII plunged 37% in January.
GM's competing Eldorado sold 28% fewer than a year earlier.
Mexico for sale in the U.S. Totals include all vehicle sales reported in the period except tourist-delivery sales of imported models. a year earlier.
Percentage differences based on daily sales rate rather than sales volume.
