THE BLOOM IS BACK on the rose, as weather-weary gardeners pine for spring.
Retail nursery sales are brisk, with buying starting earlier than usual.
After a harsh winter, "people are just looking to get out and get their hands in the soil," says Ric Tomasi of a Pembroke, Mass., nursery.
Sales are up 7% over last year already at Johnny's Nursery & Garden Center in Lincoln Park, Mich., with strong demand for roses to replace those hurt by bad weather.
In L.A., the earthquake spurs sales of pottery and fountains cracked by the disaster.
Gardens for children are a growth area, as are bulb sales, with Colasanti Farms of Ruthven, Ontario, posting a 25% to 30% increase.
Smaller stores shun discounts in favor of free garden seminars; Marina del Rey Garden Center in California hires only college grads with ornamental horticulture degrees.
XOTX-Tropico garden store in West Hollywood says drought-resistant plants are popular, while ponds and water gardens catch on at one Midwest nursery.
W. Atlee Burpee phone sales shoot up 25% to 30% as gardeners compensate for weather-delayed catalog deliveries.
WATCH THE VIDEO, see our ad: Western states turn to movies to tout tourism.
Arizona weighs putting ads plugging its attractions in the videotape versions of the recently released "Tombstone" and "Geronimo."
An ad and quiz in the "City Slickers" video in Britain drew thousands of inquiries for a ranch vacation, says Rocky Mountain International, which represents Wyoming, Montana, South Dakota and Idaho.
RMI also used a quiz last fall in the U.K. on Native Americans in films to promote a bus tour of Indian reservations tied to "Thunderheart," shot in South Dakota.
Oklahoma gives out tickets to a premiere of "Eight Seconds," a rodeo film.
South Dakota pins hopes on "Wyatt Earp," a Kevin Costner movie shot partly in the state and slated for release this summer.
But it holds off plans "until we know whether we end up on the cutting floor," says Susan Edwards, secretary for tourism.
Rocky Mountain states look forward to "A River Wild," a white-water-rafting film with Meryl Streep.
AT LAST: An accounting proposal bankers like.
It's on mortgages.
Banks have been irritated lately by accounting rules forcing them to post losses if their bond holdings drop in price.
But now accounting rule-makers prepare to permit banks and other mortgage originators to boost their reported mortgage-servicing profits early rather than over the life of the mortgage, if they have sold the mortgage to another concern.
"For once, FASB is making bankers happy," says Bear Stearns analyst Patricia McConnell.
David Hochstim, another Bear Stearns analyst, says the proposal could help lift stock prices of many retail mortgage bankers such as Arbor National, North American Mortgage and Countrywide Credit.
Bruce Schnelwar, Margaretten Financial CFO, says the plan "should be a positive factor" for its 1994 fourth-quarter profits.
The firm originated 60% of its mortgage portfolio in 1993.
If voted, the change could be effective late this year.
Companies that service mortgages they have purchased won't benefit from the change, analysts say.
ATHLETIC FOOTWEAR sales for 1993 rise 3.4% from 1992 to $12.1 billion.
That is a modest gain, but better than 1992's 1% gain.
Growth is fueled by the women's market, up 9%, and the 35-and-older crowd, up 10%, says market researcher NPD Group.
Hiking and walking shoes make strides.
IT'S THE END OF THE RIDE for subway automatic-teller machines in Washington.
NationsBank, Atlanta, ended a three-year test of six ATMs that also dispensed fare cards in D.C. Metro stations.
The bank blamed low transaction volume.
THERE MAY NOT BE A DOCTOR in the house, but one may be just a phone call away.
Medical Consultants of America goes national with a controversial toll-free line, Tele-Dr.
For $59, a family gets six months of unlimited medical advice.
It competes with free health info lines.
NEW FEDERAL RULES blur the future of cable-TV networks hoping to launch soon.
Despite talk of 500 channels, Booknet featuring authors, ecology-minded Planet Central TV, the Game Channel and TV Macy's all will have a long wait before going national.
For now, cable systems simply don't have the channel capacity.
Operators complain that details due out today of FCC rate restrictions will further pinch spending for upgrades that make 500 channels possible.
"This environment isn't going to change right away," says Nickolas Davatzes, head of the History Channel, set for a fall launch.
Most of the 50 or so new networks won't get out of the gate until late 1994 or 1995.
Some networks like QVC's Q2 are willing to pay operators $5 per subscriber to be carried now.
Networks typically get paid by the operator.
New rules will cause operators to look for more unregulated revenue from pay-per-view, home-shopping and pay-TV fare such as the Golf Channel and Encore's six "mood-on-demand" channels, including Westerns, mysteries and love stories.
The Adam & Eve Channel, a pay-TV network that airs adult flicks and sells lingerie, reaches two million viewers.
BRIEFS: Art imitates life at AquaSource Seafood, a New York fish store and gallery that exhibits fish-related art. . . .
Atlantic City casinos hedge bets, offering $10,000 in prizes to students for posters and essays on the age-21 requirement for gambling.
