A MAJOR EARTHQUAKE STRUCK Los Angeles, killing over two dozen people.
The quake hit before dawn, damaging up to 1,000 buildings, crumpling freeway overpasses and sparking more than 100 fires.
It caused power outages affecting as many as 1.3 million people and snarled air, rail and highway traffic.
The temblor, registering 6.6 on the Richter scale and felt as far away as Las Vegas, was the latest in a series of blows to the region's economy.
The epicenter was the San Fernando Valley and the hardest-hit town was Northridge, where 14 people died in the collapse of an apartment house.
Late yesterday, Los Angeles Mayor Riordan imposed a dusk-to-dawn curfew in the city.
President Clinton signed a federal declaration of disaster for Southern California, clearing the way for massive government relief aid.
Israel is strong enough to take a "calculated risk" for peace, even if that means returning the Golan Heights to Syria, Israel's deputy defense minister said.
But he said the Rabin government would hold a referendum on any extensive pullback from the Golan.
He stressed that the price of a settlement with Syria was full withdrawal.
Mexico's peace commissioner said he received an official communique from the rebel Zapatista National Liberation Army.
He wouldn't disclose any demands outlined in the communique, which marked the first official contact between the government and the rebels since a peasant uprising broke out Jan. 1 in southern Mexico.
Yeltsin tried to rally his divided government and vowed to forge ahead with reform.
The Russian leader accepted the resignation of his reform czar, Gaidar, who quit because of conservative resistance to his policies.
Finance Minister Fyodorov said he would stay on only if the central bank chief and deputy premier both stepped down.
A special prosecutor's report is due to be issued today on the Iran-Contra scandal, and the document reportedly will criticize ex-President Reagan and his aides.
The report by independent counsel Walsh, completed in August but sealed in court files since then, chronicles the seven-year criminal probe of arms-for-hostages deals with Iran.
Bosnian Serb leaders threatened to unleash "all-out war" against the Muslim-led government if there is no agreement at Geneva talks that start today.
Separately, U.N. Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali ordered U.N. peacekeepers to formulate concrete plans for two possible military operations that could require NATO air strikes.
Britain's Major testified that he wasn't informed about a 1988 government decision to ease restrictions on arms sales to Iraq.
The prime minister appeared before a tribunal he set up in 1992 following revelations that the U.K. government secretly approved the export to Iraq of equipment used to make weapons.
Fifteen thousand Zulus rallied outside the South African president's office in Pretoria to press their autonomy demands.
The Zulus, brandishing spears and guns, demonstrated as de Klerk met with Zulu King Zwelethini and Zulu leader Buthelezi, who want guarantees of Zulu autonomy as a condition for taking part in an April vote.
Two German neo-Nazis were jailed for assaulting a U.S. Olympic athlete who went to the aid of a black colleague after he was insulted by skinheads shouting racial epithets.
A court in the eastern German town of Suhl found the two defendants guilty of the Oct. 29 beating outside a disco in the winter sports resort of Oberhof.
U.S. Korean War POWs were taken secretly to the Soviet Union and never returned, according to a study ordered by the Pentagon.
The report concluded that 50 U.S. servicemen missing from the 1950-53 war were transferred to the Soviet Union.
Colombia's finance minister escaped assassination in Bogota when a remote-control bomb hidden in a lamppost exploded near his motorcade.
Guerrillas claimed responsibility for the attack, in which a bodyguard was injured.
Separately, rebels kidnapped two U.S. missionaries in a town southeast of the capital on Sunday.
The U.N. has ordered the release of eight supporters of Somali clan leader Aidid.
The detainees, held in connection with attacks on U.N. peacekeepers, were the last of about 750 Somali detainees ordered freed.
