What do you call a place where everything from the sewage system to the local garment factory is designed with the environment in mind?
"Eco-groovy," says Victor Schaub, this town's bearded mayor.
A typical home in Arcata might have 10 recycling bins, including ones to separate glass by color and others for different grades of paper.
There is no Burger King or Wendy's, but there is a tofu caterer and a bulk herb shop.
The town, 300 miles north of San Francisco, funds an experimental fish farm, has its own forest, flies an "earth flag" along with its U.S. and California banners, and operates a sewage-treatment system so effective that it attracts admirers from as far away as Japan.
To put it in an organic nutshell, Arcata is Ecotopia.
Don't even think about squirting herbicides on city land -- it's forbidden.
The town also hosts All Species Day, when folks can dress as a favorite life form.
And residents have to be careful about conspicuous consumption.
Don Banducci, a businessman with environmental credentials, fretted about friends coming to his new, 4,200-square-foot house.
"I was afraid they'd gag at all this space," he says, gazing at the cathedral ceiling.
Arcata's transformation began with a fight over Highway 101.
In the early 1970s, state officials tried widening the road, which runs up the California coast and through the center of Arcata, from two lanes to six.
But local activists wanted no part of it.
When the tussle was over, Arcata's city government had shifted firmly into the hands of environmentalists.
(A compromise was struck to widen the road to only four lanes in Arcata.)
At the same time, the region's traditional economy was withering.
Arcata once had more than 40 timber mills; there are now just two, neither of them large.
The decline was caused by a combination of rising environmental concerns, which led to tougher rules on how timber is harvested and processed.
Mr. Schaub, the mayor, admits that some residents are upset with how Arcata has evolved over the years.
"But, they're the minority.
We call them curmudgeons," says the lawyer who works part time on town business.
One such curmudgeon is Margaret Stafford.
After speaking out in favor of logging, her name popped up on a handwritten list of "environmental destroyers" that circulates informally.
"We let the environmentalists take over -- and they've wrecked the town," fumes Mrs. Stafford, who moved here almost four decades ago.
Critics like Mrs. Stafford blame environmentalists for the decline of timber -- once the mainstay of the local economy.
They also grumble that tough building codes and strict environmental rules make it difficult to attract industry, although many of the same curbs are common throughout the state.
What seems to bug critics even more than the town's dedication to environmentalism is the political climate that comes with it.
Arcata is not only a "nuclear-free zone" but has a formal policy of boycotting companies involved in the nuclear-weapons industry.
So the town had to make an exception to buy police-radio equipment from Motorola Co., one of the companies on the list.
People like Mike Trott complain that town meetings are just too "touchy feely," with everyone allowed to express their opinions, "no matter how bizarre."
Arcata last year refused to block a march by feminists who wanted to hike around town topless under the slogan "Free your breast and your mind will follow."
The event enraged Mr. Trott.
The latest shoving match is over open-air burning of leaves and other refuse.
Conservatives favor it, while environmentalists want it banned.
"The same people who talk about the right to bear arms have suddenly discovered the right to burn," says Mayor Schaub.
To really understand Arcata, one simply needs to do some shopping.
The Co-op, a grocery store a block away from the quaint town square, has 12 varieties of organically grown rice, milk in reusable glass bottles and a refrigerator case solely for "soy products" (one hot seller is cocoa-flavored soy milk).
A sign near the checkout assures shoppers that the salmon is from fish farms, not nearby rivers where they face extinction.
Even health care has an eco-flavor.
Besides doctors and clinics, the town boasts five hypnotherapists, two reflexologists (who use pressure points on the feet and hands to heal other parts of the body), two rebirthing experts (who help people get past the "trauma of birth" via breathing techniques) and a Sacred Bath for Women (for ritualistic bathing).
Mayor Schaub says new ideas spawned by environmentalism are helping Arcata rebuild its economy.
The town's two existing industrial parks -- filled mainly with environmentally acceptable light industries -- are nearly at capacity, he says, and they are considering opening a new one.
"We get a bad rap for being these weird liberals," he says, "but we've got the highest property values, lowest vacancy rates and the highest rate of new business creation in the county."
Even so, unemployment here runs close to 12%.
But what is really saving the town, residents agree, is Humboldt State University.
The school sits on a hill overlooking Arcata and has a reputation for its programs in natural resources -- and as a haven for counterculture students.
The students bring money to this otherwise isolated region, and many never leave.
Mr. Banducci, the man with the big, new abode, came to study in 1968, but spent more time kayaking than on his class work.
He never graduated.
However, he now runs the town's largest employer, Yakima Products Inc., makers of the ultimate in yuppie car-roof racks.
The curly-haired 45-year-old became a millionaire when he sold his stake in the company to outside investors earlier this year.
Mr. Banducci, who employs 140 people, admits he has an advantage over "dirty" industries.
"As a supply-distribution company, it's easy to look eco-groovy," he says, "because we don't have to make the plastic that covers our products, or forge the steel or alloys."
The same could be said for Kokatat Inc., a small garment factory that makes trendy clothing for water sports, including outfits for the U.S. Olympic kayaking team.
"We're using recycled fabric wherever possible," says Kit Mann, the production manager.
But if there is a monument to Arcata's eco-grooviness, it is "the marsh."
Along the edge of Humboldt Bay, just a few blocks from downtown, is a network of bogs and lakes built to naturally filter Arcata's waste water.
The area is laced with walking paths.
Next to the sewage plant (where primary treatment occurs before the waste water is released into the marsh system) is an "interpretive center," which houses maps and other displays showing how the marshes function as natural filters and wildlife habitat.
While this may sound like a New Age paradise, even the marsh isn't ecologically pure enough for some.
The Alliance for a Paving Moratorium, a group that opposes new roads, blasted the town for building a parking lot next to the center.
