The harsh U.S. winter and an economic recovery in major oil-consuming nations are helping to restore a fragile balance to the world's oil supply-demand picture.
As a result, monitors of petroleum supplies suggest, the huge surplus of stored oil that created such turmoil in oil markets in recent months is quietly fading away.
But the glut may be back by spring.
"The inventory overhang at the end of last year has been sharply reduced, and that presents a more balanced fundamentals outlook," said Robert McNally, oil-market analyst with Energy Security Analysis, a Washington-based firm that monitors supplies.
"We are probably drawing down inventories by at least one million barrels a day," said George Gaspar, an oil analyst at Robert W. Baird & Co. and publisher of the Gaspar Report on energy.
Indeed, Mr. Gaspar estimates that oil prices -- based on West Texas Intermediate, or WTI, the U.S. benchmark crude -- have already reached what he calls a "near-term bottom at $14 a barrel."
But so far the reduction in stocks, the industry term for petroleum inventories, has failed to rebut skeptics, who still think that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries continues to pump too much oil.
Oil prices, as a result, still hover near five-year lows.
At the heart of the matter is the widespread perception that the oil glut persists and that OPEC is unable to do anything about it.
Indeed, the glut could return in the second quarter, when oil demand usually slackens seasonally.
That's why many in the oil industry worry that prices, which dropped more than $5 a barrel last year, will fall further in the spring unless OPEC cuts output at least one million barrels a day.
There have been some brief price runups during the Arctic blasts that have swept the U.S. frequently this winter.
"However, without OPEC production cutbacks, the U.S. winter is unlikely to prevent another bout of oil-price weakness in the spring," Kleinwort Benson analysts said in a recent report.
Barring an OPEC production cut, they estimated that North Sea's Brent crude, which usually trails WTI pricing levels by $1 a barrel, will average $12 to $13 a barrel in the second quarter.
Yesterday, world oil prices generally rose slightly.
In thin U.S. futures trading, crude for April delivery was up a modest two cents a barrel to settle at $14.41.
Despite the low prices, most oil-industry publications tracking global supplies confirm that inventories are falling sharply.
"It may seem like a clever vanishing trick, and, indeed, the disappearing act probably won't last," said this week's issue of Petroleum Intelligence Weekly.
"But for one brief, shining moment, the 80- to 100-million-barrel stock overhang that has dogged markets since autumn looks to have nearly vanished."
Petroleum Intelligence's Global Oil Stocks & Balances estimated global commercial inventories of petroleum ended last month at 4.752 billion barrels.
That was just 32 million above the year-earlier level and "no longer excessive by historical standards," it said.
The Weekly Petroleum Argus, meanwhile, said that 1994 oil demand is expected to average 67.5 million barrels a day, or 1% more than the 1993 average.
A sister publication, Petroleum Argus Monthly, added: "If oil demand holds up and stocks continue to fall as expected, OPEC may not need to cut output in the second quarter."
