One of New York's mightiest law firms, Shea & Gould, is closing its doors, unable to make the transition to a new generation of leadership.
Shea & Gould fell victim to power struggles as its partners bickered over its future and direction.
At its peak, the firm had 350 lawyers and played a leading role in New York politics, banking, real estate and sports.
But it was never able to resolve a question that plagues businesses as their founders reach retirement age: how to pass control from autocratic patriarchs to a new generation of managers.
That problem was exacerbated by the tough economic climate for law firms.
Legal management consultants had been called in twice to overhaul Shea & Gould's financial and organizational structure.
As tensions escalated in recent weeks, many partners quietly began talks with other firms.
"It's a law firm that had two great founders without a successor," says Roderick M. Hills, managing partner of Shea & Gould's Washington, D.C., office.
"There were no personalities to carry it on."
Several big and medium-sized law firms have dissolved in recent years amid nasty power struggles over succession.
Others have collapsed after efforts to refinance debt or renegotiate lease obligations failed.
As partnerships, law firms often lack an institutional hierarchy or framework for making decisions, says law firm consultant D. Broward Craig, a former partner at the dissolved New York firm Webster & Sheffield.
But few failed firms had the clout or reputation of Shea & Gould.
Since its birth 30 years ago, Shea & Gould was dominated by its legendary founding partner, William A. Shea, a powerful behind-the-scenes broker in city and state politics who advised mayors and governors of both major parties.
After the Brooklyn Dodgers baseball team moved to Los Angeles, Mr. Shea played a major role in creating the New York Mets and their ballpark -- Shea Stadium.
Mr. Shea, who died in October 1991, and co-founder Milton S. Gould, 84 years old, built Shea & Gould into a law firm of street fighters and brokers.
Though it never established the kind of national reputation of some similarly sized firms, such as Los Angeles's O'Melveny & Myers, it was a forceful presence in New York, Albany and Washington.
Among its clients were the Big Six accounting firm Deloitte & Touche, the Toys "R" Us retail chain and many banks, including Marine Midland Bank and Apple Bank for Savings, as well as the New York Yankees and the Mets.
Revenue in 1993 was $85 million, up from $83 million the year before.
Finances weren't the problem, says law firm consultant Bradford W. Hildebrandt, who was called in twice to advise Shea & Gould and ultimately recommended that it disband.
"This was a firm that had basic and principled differences among the partners that were basically irreconcilable," he says.
The leadership crisis began in the mid-1980s, when Messrs. Shea and Gould began to cede control to younger lawyers.
In 1985, they relinquished their veto power over the firm's seven-member executive committee.
Almost immediately, Shea & Gould began to lose its way.
At the peak of the real estate market, the firm moved from smaller Madison Avenue offices into four floors of the Exxon Building in New York, a prestigious but expensive property.
Then it opened offices in Los Angles and Miami with two costly mergers with other firms that soon fell apart.
But the biggest problem was the failure of Shea & Gould's new leaders, Jerome Kern and Thomas E. Constance, to take the founders' place in partners' hearts and appease the firm's factions.
The management of the firm, moreover, was overseen by a divided seven-member committee that "didn't have good business sense or the love of its partners," says Mr. Hills.
By 1991, when Mr. Hildebrandt was first hired, the executive committee had swelled to 10 members.
"Decisions were not being made, and there was too much disagreement on policy," Mr. Hildebrandt says.
"There were too many people involved, and partners felt they weren't being consulted enough."
At Mr. Hildebrandt's urging, the executive committee was cut in half.
The firm renegotiated its $18 million-a-year lease with Mitsui & Co., which owns the Exxon Building, shaving $15 million in overhead over three years.
Compensation was overhauled to reflect performance.
Mr. Kern bowed out in 1991.
Mr. Constance took over, launching an aggressive recruiting campaign, bringing in 20 partners from other law firms.
Mr. Kern declined to comment.
Mr. Constance did not return phone calls.
But according to lawyers at the firm, the expansion only sparked new rifts.
Mr. Constance, for example, recruited both Mr. Hills, to head an international practice, and Carla Hills , the former U.S. trade representative.
Last year, Mr. Hills's Washington office lost about $1 million, a particular sore point for many lawyers, says a former partner.
By October, the firm had become bloated and was riven by discord over expansion plans, raising capital and day-to-day management issues.
No single leader was strong enough to seize control.
According to New York legal recruiter Lynn Mestel, Shea & Gould was the victim of too much democracy after too many years of dictatorship.
"They needed a Yeltsin," she says.
Instead, Mr. Hildebrandt stepped in a second time to recommend downsizing.
Some 20 partners and 15 associates subsequently departed, freeing a floor at the Exxon Building that Shea & Gould planned to relinquish in a new renegotiated lease.
But many partners had given up hope.
In the past month, five have left.
And two weeks ago, Mr. Constance began discussing moving with a group of lawyers to the New York office of Miami's Greenberg, Traurig, Hoffman, Lipoff, Rosen & Quentel.
Last week, when the 80 partners met to vote on dissolution, the majority were "resigned to the fact that the problems could not be resolved," says Mr. Hildebrandt.
Other than its lease obligations and $15 million owed to Chemical Bank, he says, Shea & Gould has no other significant debt.
Its pension fund is fully funded, and partners aren't individually liable for the firm's lease obligations.
Mr. Hildebrandt says the firm has enough assets to pay off the debt.
"This was not a law firm in financial trouble," he says.
"And because of that, it will wind up its affairs in an
A mistrial was declared in the Los Angeles murder trial of Lyle Menendez after the jury failed to reach a verdict, mirroring the resolution two weeks ago of a separate jury's deliberations in the case against Mr. Menendez's brother, Erik.
Lyle Menendez, 26 years old, was accused with Erik, 23, of shooting their wealthy parents four years ago.
The brothers testified that they had feared for their lives after years of sexual abuse by their father and that they killed their mother because she was in on their father's alleged scheme to murder them.
Lyle Menendez's jury ended in a deadlock after 136 hours of deliberations, which stretched over seven weeks and were suspended for a week because of the Los Angeles earthquake.
Erik's jury had labored for 20 days.
A guilty verdict on the most serious charge, first-degree murder, could have brought the death penalty.
Two juries were used because some evidence was presented against only one brother, though both were charged with the same crimes.
Three members of Lyle Menendez's jury and five of Erik Menendez's voted to convict them of first-degree murder, Judge Stanley Weisberg said, according to the Associated Press.
The hung juries gave the defense team a clear victory in avoiding conviction even on lesser charges such as manslaughter, but prosecutors have said they will press for quick retrials of both defendants.
The inability of the second panel to reach a decision indicated once again that difficult questions of guilt and justification can divide jurors even in cases when confessed killers shot at point-blank range.
The case stemmed from the Aug. 20, 1989, shotgun homicides of Jose Menendez and his wife, Kitty, in their Beverly Hills, Calif., home.
The senior Mr. Menendez, was chairman of the Los Angeles videocassette distributor Live Entertainment Inc., and was well known in Hollywood social and business circles.
His sons, who stood to inherit the couple's $14 million estate, were arrested a few months after the murder.
Their eventual acknowledgment that they had fired the shots made the case seem at first like an easy one for prosecutors.
But during the five-month trial, the case came to focus on Lyle's and Erik's testimony alleging harrowing instances of sexual and emotional abuse spanning many years.
They said that the mistreatment had led them to believe that their father, with their mother's tacit approval, was prepared to kill them.
The prosecution argued that the claims of abuse were lies, and that the brothers had acted out of hatred and avarice.
Amy Stevens contributed to this article.
