Women can't blame their career woes on men alone.
Companies owned or run by women can be positively antediluvian when it comes to hiring or promoting women into management positions.
Turtle Wax Inc., for instance, which is chaired by Sondra Healy, had 11.5% female managers in 1992, much lower than other companies in the EEOC category that includes soap, specialty cleaners and perfume, which had 28.9%.
The company says comparing it to other companies in this category is unfair and misleading, because the industry is "a very broad-based classification."
Tootsie Roll Inc. also has few women in management: 11 out of 88 in 1992.
When asked about this number, CEO Ellen Gordon at first expressed shock -- and worry.
Later, she ascribed Tootsie Roll's low figures to the way the company fills out EEOC forms: more conservatively than other candy companies.
She says she knows other concerns count foremen as managers, which Tootsie Roll doesn't do.
Almost all the women-run firms that scored low had been inherited -- including Tootsie Roll, Turtle Wax, Columbia Sportswear Co., Jockey International Inc. -- meaning that some of these women never had to experience the often long, hard climb to the top.
Ms. Healy, for example, began her career teaching drama in a Wilmette, Ill., school, and then became vice president of public relations at age 24.
In her early thirties, she became chairman.
Esprit de Corp., on the other hand, is brimming with women -- from top to bottom.
Besides Susie Tompkins, the company's 51-year-old co-founder, women hold four of the company's six vice-president posts.
Females comprise 69.4% of management positions, much higher than the average (37.3%) in its industry.
This women's apparel company makes no special efforts to recruit women: It doesn't have to.
Of 5,200 unsolicited applications the company received last year, 63% came from women, says Debra Sisson, vice president of human resources.
Many job applicants say they want to work at a woman-owned company, she adds.
The company has an easier time retaining women too, Ms. Sisson says, in part because there are so many female mentors.
Women assume that if they do well they will be promoted.
Ms. Tompkins, who believes men and women have different strengths, says she doesn't have a preference when it comes to hiring.
Rather, she looks for a mix of men and women, kind of like a family.
She compares running a business to running a house.
"You can't imagine a house run only by men" -- or only by women.
