Workers at two key General Motors Corp. brake plants went on strike, a move that could shut down most of GM's assembly plants within a few days if the strike isn't settled.
However, analysts predicted the strike will be settled within two to three days, before it could cripple GM's supply and assembly operations.
Negotiations are to resume this morning .
"Both sides are engaging in brinkmanship, the question is, where's the brink," said David Bradley, an analyst with J.P. Morgan Securities, Inc., who predicted a quick settlement.
GM's stock fell moderately, closing at $62.75 a share, down 12.5 cents, in composite New York Stock Exchange trading.
The strike didn't provoke a strong negative reaction on Wall Street in part because some investors saw the dispute as proof that GM is continuing to pressure its supply divisions to become more efficient.
The dispute is one of several labor conflicts at the plant level over GM's efficiency drives.
Most of the local fights have been resolved without strikes, but earlier this year workers at a Shreveport, La., pickup-assembly plant went on strike for four days.
In Dayton, about 3,000 workers represented by United Auto Workers local 696 walked out of the two brake plants yesterday morning, union officials said, after a 26-hour negotiating session failed to resolve a local dispute over "outsourcing"farming out plant work to outside suppliers.
The UAW said 500 of the 3,000 Dayton workers could lose their jobs if parts they produce are purchased from suppliers.
GM, which is saddled with labor costs that are twice those of its suppliers, argues that it needs to purchase more parts from outside vendors in order to reduce costs, but declined to discuss the specifics of the Dayton dispute.
The two plants are part of GM's Delco Chassis division.
They produce antilock brakes for most of GM's small cars, the company said, and also engine bearings for several GM power-trains as well as master cylinders and power-brake boosters for most GM cars and trucks.
Chrysler Corp. also buys some brake components from the Dayton plants for its Dodge Ram pickup.
