These are the times that try Russian souls.
The economic reformers are in political retreat.
Shock therapy is denigrated by the prime minister.
The Clinton policy of supporting Boris Yeltsin -- which will be much in evidence during the U.S. President's visit to Moscow today -- has critics in Moscow and Washington.
We've supported Mr. Yeltsin and the band of reformers since before the beginning.
It's time to step back and ask some tough questions about where Russia is going.
Does Western support for Mr. Yeltsin and the reformers involve us in a quagmire?
This is the case made by Sovietologist Peter Reddaway and others.
Their point is that radical reformers such as Yegor Gaidar are on the way down, and by maintaining links the U.S. drags itself down with them and alienates many Russians.
Mr. Gaidar and his fellow reformers have indeed made some blunders and they seem to spend much of their time feuding among themselves.
But it is not true that the reformist cause is lost, even though some of the reformers won't be present in Mr. Yeltsin's new, slimmed-down government.
The hallmark of that government won't be "faster" reform or "slower" reform, but self-contradiction.
Foreign policy may bear the West's careful attention, but at the same time Mr. Yeltsin has just appointed Yuri Baturin, a pro-Western reformer, as his security adviser.
Recently we detailed some of the measures to accelerate privatization that Mr. Yeltsin has undertaken since the election.
But the reformers suffered a defeat last week when the government decided to unify the Russian and Belarus economies.
Now there will be two centers for the emission of rubles -- Moscow and Minsk.
That's one of many recent government policies that is sure to boost inflation.
The media will tend to emphasize the bad policies because the "turning away from reform" theme is dramatic.
The West could simply stand back from this confusion and voice support for democratic institutions.
That's pristine.
But the fact is that without Western pressure, Mr. Gaidar and the rest might have been jettisoned from the government long ago.
Staying involved risks getting our hands dirty, but it also means making a difference.
The U.S. should support the entire reform camp, rather than individuals.
Russia is suffering from a crisis of authority; nobody listens to anybody else.
So hopes of sequencing a "therapy" are delusional.
On paper, we have several problems with the Gaidar approach.
Its tax policy is overly influenced by IMF-style austerity; tax rates are crushing.
But it is the only reform policy on offer.
(Russia doesn't have a Vaclav Klaus, the Czech leader who spent years inside his Iron Curtain country reading texts by classical economists.)
The reform is not fatally flawed; and as we say, the paper policy is far removed from real life.
It could be argued that extortionists have greater influence on business planning than government.
The most important thing is to keep privatization moving.
The current pain is not caused by radical reform, but by the collapse of the Communist apparatus, so dismantling the apparatus is paramount.
At that the government is succeeding.
The monetary mess constitutes a massive welfare-bribery scheme.
We don't defend it but can at least see a rationale.
The huge emissions were delivered to factories to prevent large-scale unemployment.
They deflected managers and generals from waging a rebellion against privatization.
If the West wants to throw a few billion dollars at the Russians to help win public support for reform, that's fine.
But surely there is a better way than through the IMF, with its growth-crippling conditions.
Russia now has wild capitalism.
Will it ever become orderly or will it just spin further out of control?
We start from the premise that you can't build a market economy and then drop it by legal fiat on a country.
The institutions that organize a marketplace have to emerge organically.
This takes time.
In the meantime corruption is everywhere and many unsavory people get rich.
There are signs that things are settling down.
The new constitution, while far from perfect, is the basis for a manageable political process.
Young people have absorbed Western practices with amazing speed.
Some of the big commercial banks and investment funds are run by serious financial managers.
The privatized companies are moving gradually to create their own trading networks; the good ones have an interest in instituting honest practices.
Boris Yeltsin is not a role model for policy wonks, the way Mikhail Gorbachev was.
But his instincts are to go to the polls when in trouble.
And often enough, he has sided with the reformers.
He's the only train leaving the station.
The West should be with him, trying to show the right direction.
{See related article: "REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial): ...
And at His Generals" -- WSJ Jan. 13, 1994}
