British Aerospace PLC narrowed its pretax loss to #237 million ($351 million) for 1993 -- a year in which the company refocused its attention on building military and civil aircraft.
Although analysts had expected an even smaller pretax loss of about #180 million, the results nonetheless mark a major improvement from the previous year's pretax loss of #1.2 billion.
British Aerospace shares rose sharply immediately after the announcement.
The stock reached 572 pence ($8.46) during yesterday's trading before closing at 548 pence, up from 539 pence a day earlier.
Outlook for 1994 The improvement came in a year of considerable restructuring at the company, paving the way for what is widely expected to be a return to profit in the current year.
In a statement, outgoing Chairman John Cahill emphasized those changes, which included the company's departure from the automobile, construction and corporate jet businesses.
"The past 12 months have seen real progress toward the board's goal of focusing the business of British Aerospace on its strengths in defense and aerospace," Mr. Cahill said.
Mr. Cahill will be succeeded in April by Robert Bauman, current SmithKline Beecham PLC chief executive officer.
The biggest single factor keeping the company in the red for the third straight year was a previously announced #250 million provision for restructuring the turboprop division.
In the year-earlier period, British Aerospace took a #1 billion charge for restructuring at its regional jetliner division.
The 1993 results also had two exceptional items that surprised analysts.
One was a charge of #38 million for writing off goodwill from the sale of the group's construction operations -- an accounting act that analysts said wouldn't affect the company's cash position.
The other surprise was the conspicuous absence of any exceptional benefit from the sale of the corporate jet business to Raytheon Co. while the two companies complete their agreement.
But in its desire to keep investor confidence high as the company engineers a turnaround, British Aerospace will increase its full-year dividend to 8.3 pence a share for 1993 from seven pence in 1992.
Analysts had expected the company to raise the dividend to just eight pence.
The move appeared to work.
"People have taken some encouragement from that," said Lehman Brothers International's Keith Hodgkinson.
In his statement, Mr. Cahill also cited the recently completed sale of the Rover automobiles unit for #800 million as "the best evidence of our determination to focus on businesses offering strong positions in international markets and attractive cash flow."
But the proceeds from the sale, to Bayerische Motoren Werke AG, won't show up on British Aerospace's balance sheet until the current year's figures are reported.
Also fueling investor confidence was the news that British Aerospace managed to earn a profit before taxes and exceptional items of #71 million.
That compares with a loss of #186 million on the same basis in the previous year.
