White House officials said Deputy Defense Secretary William Perry is the front-runner to succeed Les Aspin as Pentagon chief.
Separately, an administration official said Boston attorney Deval Patrick is expected to be named the Justice Department's assistant attorney general for civil rights.
The serious consideration of Mr. Perry for the defense post is driven partly by the fact that many members of the Senate and House Armed Services Committees favor him.
Mr. Perry, a military technologist and defense intellectual, has won plaudits on Capitol Hill for the clarity of his congressional testimony.
Mr. Perry has been especially precise in laying out his ideas for a kind of "tough love" activist defense-industrial policy to preserve the U.S. defense industry while encouraging it to shrink, rather than maintain its size through increased exports.
In addition, he is intimately familiar with the formidable defense budget problems the administration faces in the coming years.
Those problems, as well as continuing tensions between the administration and the military, might deter other candidates from taking the job.
The disadvantages of promoting Mr. Perry to the Pentagon's top slot are that he isn't a political player and is already a member of a national security team that critics say needs bolstering.
Moreover, President Clinton passed over Mr. Perry for the Pentagon's top job twice already, when he chose Mr. Aspin in December 1992 and when he picked retired Adm. Bobby Inman last month.
Mr. Inman withdrew his nomination last week in an unusual news conference in which he said he was put off by, among other things, the prospect of a "daily diet" of press criticism.
White House aides emphasized over the weekend that President Clinton hasn't yet made a decision on a new defense secretary.
Also, Pentagon aides said it is far from clear whether Mr. Perry wants the job.
Indeed, one White House aide said officials even were discussing the possibility of bringing back Colin Powell, who retired as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff four months ago.
However, finding a place for Mr. Powell would be difficult, even if he did agree to return to public life.
As a former senior military officer, he is barred by law from being defense secretary for 10 years.
Congress could override that provision, but the administration would face a debate first.
It isn't clear where else Mr. Powell could be fit into the national security team.
Mr. Powell was traveling over the weekend and couldn't be reached for comment.
One sign that the administration is hedging its bets is that White House counselor David Gergen discussed with Defense Secretary Aspin on Friday the possibility of formally inviting Mr. Aspin to stay on at the Pentagon for a set period of time.
But others at the White House said this was unlikely, and that the administration, trying to avoid additional trouble at the Pentagon, simply wants to keep Mr. Aspin happy until a successor is found.
Last week the administration sounded out former New Hampshire Sen. Warren Rudman, a Republican, who said he wasn't interested in the job.
Having a Republican run the Pentagon might help the president maintain bipartisan support for budget cuts and insulate him from accusations in the 1996 election that he "hollowed out" the military.
As part of the process of beginning anew the search for a defense secretary, Vice President Al Gore also asked Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn whether he was interested in the job, and again was told no.
Senior administration officials emphasized that the inquiry was more a courtesy than a job offer to the Georgia Democrat, who has led congressional opposition to deep cuts in the defense budget and to a wholesale lifting of the ban on being openly gay in the military.
Mr. Patrick, the attorney who is said to be in line for the civil-rights post, is a partner in Hill & Barlow, an old-line Boston firm, where he represented Desiree Washington, the woman whom boxer Mike Tyson was convicted of raping.
The 37-year-old Mr. Patrick also does fundraising for the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund as chairman of the group's New England committee.
A Chicago native, Mr. Patrick joined the NAACP as a staff attorney after graduating from Harvard Law School and worked on voting-rights and capital-punishment cases.
He is a friend of Lani Guinier, the former NAACP attorney whom President Clinton last year nominated to the same Justice Department post.
The president withdrew Ms. Guinier's nomination after expressing concern about law-review articles she had written on ways of increasing the political power of blacks.
Last month, District of Columbia Corporation Counsel John Payton withdrew from consideration for the civil-rights job because his expected nomination appeared to face a protracted delay.
