An upstart company will unveil a new digital-compression technology here today that it claims could allow telephone companies to send 10 channels of video over their existing wires.
Though its technology has yet to be field-tested, Digital Compression Technology says it can enable homes now receiving telephone service to receive movies and interactive games and services over the same 26-gauge twisted copper phone wire.
It claims the technology could also enable a cable-TV system to send 20 to 30 channels in the space of one channel, three times what is currently possible with traditional digital compression.
The company's chairman, David "Jim" Judelson, was president of Paramount Communications Inc., then called Gulf & Western Inc., before losing the race for the top post to current Chief Executive Officer Martin Davis in 1983.
At Gulf & Western, Mr. Judelson was a big proponent of the electric car, and since leaving has invested in various technology start-ups.
He cofounded DCT with Elliot Gruenberg, an inventor and former executive at International Business Machines Corp. who spent 30 years studying digital compression.
Mr. Judelson controls Digital Compression.
Mr. Judelson's claims, which are based on research at Stevens Institute of Technology of Hoboken, N.J., are ambitious.
He says he is currently negotiating a deal with a regional Bell telephone company, though he won't name it.
He has no major corporate investors, and thus far, has only proven the new technology's claims on a real-time simulator on a lab table at Stevens.
Skeptics say such a demonstration is not proof that DCT's technology would work on interference-sensitive telephone networks handling millions of calls each hour.
"There are wonderful things you can do putting electronic devices at each end of a wire," says Jim Chiddix, senior vice president of engineering and technology at Time Warner Inc.'s cable unit.
"Most things I have come across with claims this grandiose have a fatal flaw when it comes to practical applications in the real world."
The most sophisticated telephone technology has been developed at the research unit of the regional Bell companies, Bell Communications Research.
Known as ADSL, or asymmetric digital subscriber line, it enables delivery of four channels of VCR-quality video down copper wire.
"We're skeptical from what we know" of DCT's technology, says one Bell engineer there.
An executive of another regional telephone company, however, said it is interested in the technology and plans to test it in its own labs.
But the experience of DCT underscores how even the smallest of entrepreneurial companies are trying to find a place at the table of future communications technologies.
Mr. Judelson says he plans to license the technology in the form of a computer chip that he could bring to market in less than a year.
Technicians at DCT, which has been awarded a patent on the technology, say their approach to digital compression is radically different from traditional compression techniques.
By employing a new "transmission-based" method, which essentially reconfigures bits of data into a parallel sequence, DCT says it can send 16 bits in the space and time normally reserved for one bit of information.
Mr. Judelson likens it to sending 16 cars through a tunnel side by side, instead of single file, then realigning them at the other end.
Few outside the DCT camp have seen the simulation.
One person who did, Hermann Helgert, a professor of engineering and applied science at George Washington University, dubbed the DCT technology a breakthrough, and says he believes it "performs as stated."
