SEVERAL TRENDS have recently taken hold in the development of software that promise to make it easier and quicker to get work done on personal computers.
First, more programs are emerging that are narrowly focused on specific tasks, rather than on being everything to everybody.
Second, software companies are building into their products a degree of automation that lets users perform the most common steps rapidly, without mastering all the commands and tools normally needed to do them.
These approaches make it possible for business people without artistic skills to turn out professional-looking organization charts, office layouts, maps, flow charts and other business documents.
The result is a category of software that might be called modular business graphics, in which you build graphic documents by snapping together their components like kids do with Legos.
For a decade, computers have offered the artistically challenged the promise of real drawing ability.
But the machines haven't really delivered, because most drawing programs have been wickedly hard to use for those without good spatial reasoning.
Sure, a straight line stayed straight -- but making it the right length and thickness, and connecting it to other things using a mouse, was too often a time-consuming struggle for those who, like me, can't draw to save their lives.
And art software, like other categories, has suffered from the addition of so many features and controls, demanded by real computer artists, that figuring out how to use them has gotten harder and harder.
So it's good news that this new type of drawing program has emerged, over about a year.
There are around a half-dozen entries in the field, but the leader is Visio 2.0, by Shapeware Corp. of Seattle, and a key competitor is SnapGrafx by Micrografx Inc. of Richardson, Texas.
Visio costs around $125 at discount, and SnapGrafx around $96.
Both require computers running Microsoft's Windows software.
VISIO PRESENTS the user with side-by-side windows on the screen.
At the right is a large, blank sheet of electronic graph paper on which you create a drawing.
To its left is a slimmer "stencil" window containing Visio's key element: an array of predrawn objects, called "shapes," you use to put together a drawing.
The program comes with 20 stencils arranged around common themes.
For instance, there are stencils with all the shapes you need to create a flow chart, or an organization chart or a space and furniture plan.
Others have shapes designed to fit into road maps, or bar and pie charts, engineering diagrams and maps of the world, the U.S. and Europe.
The company sells extra sets of stencils and shapes, including collections for home design, kids, landscaping and marketing, for $79.
The program works on the "drag and drop" principle.
To construct a drawing in the right-hand window, you merely click on one of the stock shapes in the stencil window, and, holding the mouse button down, drag its image onto the electronic paper.
When you release the mouse button, the program "drops" the shape into the drawing.
There's never a need to sketch anything.
Even cooler is the fact that Visio's shapes are "intelligent."
If you stretch or rotate them, they change size and orientation without becoming distorted.
If you connect them with arrows or lines and then move one of the connected elements, the others remain linked; the lines and arrows behave like rubber bands.
And you can type all sorts of text inside them without worrying about running over the borders.
ABOUT THE ONLY real downside to Visio is that, while the program is based on these simple principles, it is packed with a lot of tools and features for modifying and arranging the shapes and thus can be confusing to novices.
In my view, Visio needs a collection of "wizards" -- Microsoft's term for automated routines that create basic documents of various types with a single mouse click.
These could later be modified by the user.
Perhaps a version with fewer complicated tools and a bunch of wizards might be developed for novices at below Visio's $125 street price, which is a bit stiff in a market where software price tags are plunging.
If Visio is too much for you, you might try SnapGrafx.
This program also works on the principle of predrawn, resizable shapes, but it doesn't rely heavily on drag-and-drop, which can require considerable dexterity with the mouse.
And it has many fewer tools and options, making for a simpler, cleaner screen.
In SnapGrafx, you mainly add shapes to your documents by clicking on the shape you want, then clicking on an area of the page called a placeholder.
The program then puts the shape where the placeholder was.
Much of the resizing of the drawings is done by moving little tab symbols -- like tabs in a word-processing document -- along the screen borders.
But be warned: SnapGrafx is far less versatile than Visio.
It offers mainly precooked shapes for creating a variety of charts, and the shapes are less "intelligent."
If you want to do office layouts or engineering diagrams or maps, it's tough in SnapGrafx.
Speaking for the artistically impaired people of the world, I'm glad these programs exist.
But even so, real artists, like the one who draws the clever illustrations for this column, won't be losing sleep.
