In your Feb. 16 article ("New Business Group Aims at Old Goal: Tort Reform"), Michael Totty reports that a new coalition of business executives and professionals in Texas is attempting a comprehensive solution to the punitive-damage problem.
This new group proposes sweeping changes, including caps to limit punitive damages.
While studies are inconclusive on whether there is a punitive-damage crisis, last month's Texas Supreme Court decision in {Transportation Insurance Co. vs. Moriel} is an important step forward in making punitive damages more rational, and in refocusing attention on helping juries make better decisions.
In Moriel, the Court separated the liability decision from the punitive-damage deliberations.
Despite reform-group fears, that change should help rationalize awards in business disputes.
First, it should prevent the jury from hearing evidence of net worth in the liability stage.
Second, it permits the jury to hear evidence that would mitigate punitive damages (such as the number of jobs to be lost if a big award is given) without influencing the liability stage.
Finally, the Texas Supreme Court appears to be moving toward an endorsement of jury instructions that would give more information about how to make punitive-damage decisions.
More detailed jury instructions would focus the jury's attention on the specific considerations that should go into the award of punitive damages.
For example, evidence of internal policies and practices of the company, such as legal or environmental audits, would be admissible in the punitive-damages stage of a case, diminishing the need for the jury to punish or "send a message" to a corporate defendant.
Improvement in the jury system should begin with improving the quality of information that gets to the jury.
Arbitrary caps on awards, such as those suggested by many reformers, will not achieve the appropriate balance between deterring wrongdoing in our society and preventing excessive punishment.
Caps on damages are motivated by "fear" of the jury system, rather than hard statistical proof of a system gone awry.
The reformers would do well not to tinker too much with the jury system that has well-served victims and wrongdoers for centuries.
Michael P. Lynn
