Canada's economy picked up momentum in the fourth quarter, led by a strong rise in capital spending and a big increase in exports to the U.S.
The country's gross domestic product increased in the period at an annual rate of 3.8%, double the pace of the previous three months, Statistics Canada, a government agency, said.
GDP is the total value of goods and services produced in a nation.
Fourth-quarter exports rose at an annual rate of more than 14%, led by increased shipments of office machines, auto parts, television and telecommunications equipment, lumber and coal.
The U.S. takes more than 80% of Canada's exports.
Business investment in the fourth quarter rose an annual rate of more than 17%.
The rise was spurred by low interest rates, strong export demand, rising corporate profits and temporary small business investment tax credits.
Economic analysts said they were encouraged that Canadians also managed to increase their spending on goods and services in the fourth quarter despite a 1993 decline in their inflation-adjusted earnings.
The spending increase, at an annual rate of 1.8%, was financed by a decline in savings and a pickup in borrowing.
This is a sign of confidence in the future, said Philip Cross, senior economic analyst at Statistics Canada.
Ruth Getter, senior vice president at Toronto Dominion Bank, said Canada's prospects for 1994 look good because of the strong performance of its main trading partner, the U.S.
She said annual Canadian GDP growth of 3 1/2% to 4% "looks quite achievable" over the next several years.
For all of 1993, GDP grew 2.4%, the strongest growth since 1989.
Bank of Montreal Chief Economist Lloyd Atkinson said the Canadian economy in the coming months may show more strength than expected because of pent-up demand for autos and housing.
But he said such demand won't be sustained for long if employment and earnings don't pick up.
Employment declined 0.3% in January, pushing up the unemployment rate to 11.4% of the civilian work force.
Mr. Atkinson said he doesn't expect much employment growth this year or much change in the unemployment rate.
Canada's mild recovery has kept a lid on price pressures.
The GDP price index, a broad measure of inflation, rose 1.3% in 1993.
Separately, Statistics Canada reported yesterday that Canada had a 1993 deficit of 25.22 billion Canadian dollars (US$18.68 billion) on the current account of its international balance of payments.
In 1992 it had a deficit of C$27.68 billion.
The current account is a financial accounting of the country's trade in goods and services.
It also includes investment income flows in and out of Canada.
