It happens often enough: An elderly woman dies after a long illness, leaving her husband of 50 years depressed but not physically ill.
Yet within a few days or weeks the husband collapses and dies.
Whatever the doctor says, his friends know why: "He died of a broken heart."
"It's an old wives' tale that a person can die of a broken heart," says Stephen M. Oppenheimer, a neurologist here at Johns Hopkins University medical school.
"But," he adds, "many old wives' tales are true."
The possibility of death from a broken heart, fright or even by a curse is raised by a theory of sudden death that Dr. Oppenheimer is pursuing.
He believes he has pinpointed a part of the brain that links the heart to thought and emotions.
If he is correct -- and he is now in the midst of human experiments to find out -- Dr. Oppenheimer believes the discovery will show how unresolved mental stress, such as might be created by the death of a loved one, can throw the heart into an irregular and fatal beat.
Of broader import, Dr. Oppenheimer hopes his research will explain why some stroke patients die, not of another brain-damaging stroke, but of a heart convulsion.
And, he hopes, the research will help identify for treatment stroke patients in danger of such a convulsion.
Dr. Oppenheimer's research focuses on a puzzling facet of sudden cardiac death, within an hour of an unexpected collapse, which strikes an estimated 250,000 Americans every year.
He pulls a 1940 medical-journal article from his files describing a typical example of sudden death, written by the doctor who attended a 60-year-old man hospitalized for pains in the arms and legs, failing vision and incontinence.
"The patient was sitting upright in bed talking to his wife when he suddenly began to breathe slowly, noisily and deeply," his doctor later wrote.
"I saw him a matter of seconds after his wife called for aid."
Oxygen and adrenalin were quickly administered.
"Within two or three minutes the patient was cyanotic blue, then ashen, and the extremities became cold.
At no time were heart sounds heard."
Most people will conclude he died of "a massive heart attack."
But today it's known that the immediate cause of death is the heart's plunge into an extremely rapid or chaotic beat, called ventricular fibrillation, leading to cardiac arrest when the heart stops pumping.
Autopsies of sudden-death victims invariably reveal some kind of underlying heart disease.
Most show that the fatal fibrillation was probably triggered by a heart attack.
But in many other victims, including many who previously had suffered strokes, the pathologist finds underlying heart disease but no sign of a heart attack or other event that could have triggered fibrillation.
Dr. Oppenheimer, a 39-year-old English expatriate, first encountered the terror of fibrillation in the first patient he examined as a medical student in London.
"The patient went into cardiac arrest right in front of me," he recalls.
Fortunately, the patient was resuscitated.
Soon after, the young doctor encountered the mystery that currently occupies him.
"I was learning electrocardiogram {ECG} analysis and I couldn't figure out what some of the tracings meant on an ECG of a patient who had suffered an acute stroke," he recalls.
"It turned out no one else knew what the tracings meant either or what caused them."
The electrocardiogram, of course, is a record of the electrical impulses the nervous system sends through the heart muscle to trigger each beat.
So, in 1988, after moving to Ontario, "I began spending time in the laboratory to see how damage in the brain can change the electrical activity of the heart," he says.
A long-running series of experiments on rats revealed that a small spot in a section of the brain called the insular cortex influenced the heartbeat.
If the insular cortex were stimulated for hours at a time, the heart muscle suffered damage reminiscent of that seen in humans who succumbed to sudden cardiac fibrillation.
Dr. Oppenheimer began to speculate that damage to the insular cortex could change the brain's control of the heart, rendering a patient with underlying heart disease more susceptible to fatal fibrillation.
He also was fascinated by the fact that the brain's insular cortex is where the autonomic nervous system, which controls such automatic functions as breathing and heartbeat, links up with the mysterious limbic nervous system, which deals with anger, fear, pleasure, sexual arousal, sadness and other emotions.
He wondered if the insular cortex could be the key to the many reports of sudden deaths occurring in people who have suffered the stress of what, for them, is an unresolvable psychological conflict, such as being unable to accept the death of a loved one.
Researchers long have known that such stress floods the heart with stimulating chemicals, but what goes on in the brain to set off this flood has been a complete mystery.
Perhaps, Dr. Oppenheimer speculated, some malfunction in the insular cortex leads to an inappropriate chemical assault on the heart, which becomes dangerous if intense or prolonged, or if the person already has underlying heart disease.
To find out if humans are anything like the rats, Dr. Oppenheimer and his colleagues turned to epilepsy patients who were undergoing brain surgery that exposed the insular cortex.
They found that stimulating the insular cortex with mild electrical pulses would change the patient's heart rate and blood pressure.
In the nearly three years since he moved to Johns Hopkins, Dr. Oppenheimer has been comparing heart functions of healthy persons with those who have suffered damage to different parts of the insular cortex.
On a typical day, a middle-aged male stroke patient lies on a table in one of the neurology department's spartan examining rooms at the Johns Hopkins Hospital's ultramodern outpatient clinic.
His head and exposed chest are dotted with small circular patches holding wires that lead to a bank of electronic instruments on a cart.
Three small screens display the jagged moving lines that represent the man's ECG, respiration rate and blood pressure.
The real experiment, however, is going on inside a computer sitting on the cart.
In the healthy person, Dr. Oppenheimer explains, the seemingly regular heart rate actually is highly variable, almost chaotic.
The computer program, developed by biomedical engineer Will Martin, monitors the ECG and blood pressure tracings for patterns.
Meaning is then extracted from the patterns by a computer "model" developed by graduate student, Gil Kedem, using the new math of chaos theory.
The computer analyses are, indeed, uncovering some of the insular cortex's secrets of the heart.
Back in the laboratory, Mr. Martin flashes upon the blue oscilloscope screen the computer-processed tracings made of a healthy volunteer's heart.
The green line sketches out a jagged, irregular mountain range.
This chaotic heart rate stems from control of the heart rapidly shifting back and forth between two branches of the nervous system, one that tends to speed up the heart and one than tends to slow it down.
Mr. Martin then calls up the tracings of a 26-year-old woman who had a brain tumor removed from the left side of the insular cortex.
The peaks and valleys are far smoother and more regular than those of the volunteer.
"She has lost energy from the parasympathetic system," which tends to keep the heart rate slow, Dr. Oppenheimer says.
The opposing sympathetic system has taken full control and is producing the regular rate.
Such an imbalance in control of the heart is fertile ground for an irregular beat to develop, he says.
Such findings are bolstering Dr. Oppenheimer's belief that the insular cortex is the key to sudden cardiac deaths, including cases of people who die of broken hearts or fright.
The insular cortex also may hold the key to another mystery of the ages, "voodoo death," when a person dies after being cursed.
"Voodoo death may be difficult to do to us with our Western skepticism," he says.
"But if you truly believe that you are going to die because someone told you so, then that becomes a tremendous, unresolvable stress."
