As industrial customers go, Tosco Corp.'s huge, 200,000-barrel-a-day Bayway Refinery in Linden, N.J., ought to be a prize catch for an electric utility: It's huge, complex and a large consumer of power, and it's not likely to go anywhere.
But last summer Tosco sent its electric supplier, Public Service Electric & Gas Co., a stiff message: Reduce rates or the company will take steps to generate its own power.
With one of its biggest customers suddenly one of its most threatening, PSE&G saw little alternative.
It quickly cobbled together a rate cut of $9 million a year, or 23%.
Things could have been worse.
For instance, New York State Electric & Gas Co. watched a unit of General Motors Corp. leave its system in July 1992 to build a facility that would meet its approximately 200-megawatt power demand.
The Binghamton, N.Y., utility lacked regulators' permission to bargain.
Such dramas are played out daily in the electric-utility industry.
As alternative power sources become more available, industrial customers are jawboning rates down.
At the same time, utilities are scrambling to offset the lost revenue with extensive cost-cutting and layoffs.
Utilities also fear that accelerating deregulation could lead to true price competition.
The dismal outlook has sent utility stocks plunging.
And the situation has been aggravated by a harsh winter.
In the past several weeks, bitter cold forced electric utilities in Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Maryland to institute rolling blackouts due to inability to meet sharply higher demand.
Frozen coal piles, combined with an inability to acquire enough natural gas, hampered efforts to add capacity.
Meanwhile at one company, General Public Utilities Corp., Parsippany, N.J., poor weather conditions prevented diesel-fuel trucks from reaching crucial, "peaking" units.
The five-month-long plunge in the Dow Jones Utility Average tells part of the story.
The average has dropped from 255.34 on Sept. 1, 1993, to 218.96 yesterday.
Jay Dobson, an electric-utilities analyst with Smith Barney Shearson Inc., has slashed his recommended list to three from 17 in little more than a year.
"There's not a compelling reason to stay in the group," says Mr. Dobson.
"Historically, people have owned utility stocks for dividend growth and as a hedge against inflation.
But there's very little, if any, dividend growth prospects right now."
And skittish investors may be in for more bad news.
Several analysts believe utilities will need to retreat from their traditionally high dividends in order to preserve cash and effectively compete for customers.
Earlier this year Centerior Energy Corp., Cleveland, halved its dividend and took a $1 billion charge.
It cited increasing competition and the unlikelihood that it would be able to raise rates to pay for deferred construction expenses.
Beset by increasing competition, which stems from the gradual deregulation of the industry since 1978, electric utilities have begun slashing staff with a relish more typical of industrial-goods makers.
New York State Electric & Gas is in the middle of a 12-month program to cut 800 positions, or 16% of its work force; Peco Energy Corp., Philadelphia, reduced its work force from 12,000 to 9,400 in the past three years; and Niagara Mohawk Power Corp., Syracuse, N.Y., is in the midst of cutting 900 positions, or 8% of its staff.
To be sure, many utilities have cut costs by refinancing piles of debt.
Peco Energy has turned over about $4.4 billion in the past four years, saving more than $190 million annually.
But even savings on interest expense can't break the grim outlook.
"Many have been refinancing their debt and cutting jobs, but those efforts have only seemed to help them hold their ground," says Barry Abramson, a utilities analyst at Prudential Securities Inc.
"It's like they're treading water."
Moreover, utilities face the threat of true price competition if federal authorities allow the creation of a nationwide power grid sought by big industrial users.
Under such a system, known as "retail wheeling," customers could purchase power from anyone on the grid.
Users expect such a system to lower rates -- and some utilities with low costs favor the approach because they see a competitive advantage.
But the industry generally is fighting hard to keep retail wheeling from becoming reality anytime soon.
They gained support from the National Energy Power Act of 1992, which prohibits interstate retail wheeling.
Some utility lawyers believe states don't have the right to declare retail wheeling within their own borders.
Moreover, measuring and pricing usage under such a system remains a murky science, critics say.
Still, some form of retail wheeling is being considered in New Mexico and Michigan.
Some utilities are wooing customers with long-term contracts, hoping to lock in big customers should retail wheeling be adopted.
"The utilities are trying to buy time," says Mr. Abramson.
Threats of retail wheeling have sent the rate-making process into a tizzy, with utilities seeking the right to bargain with customers.
But with revenue from large users dropping, residential customers can expect eventually to get squeezed.
"Our concern is that residential customers don't have the same opportunities to bargain as large users, and as those large users get better deals or flee, residential rates likely will be negatively impacted," says Robert Ceisler, executive director of the New York Citizens Utilities Board.
In the Bayway case, New Jersey regulators forced PSE&G, a unit of Public Service Enterprise Group Inc., Newark, and its shareholders to absorb the discount entirely.
However, New York regulators have allowed some utilities to pass on to other customers -- including residential users -- 80% of the cost of any discount they offer.
Despite the gloom, Venture Associates, a unit of consultants Arthur Andersen, says deregulation should lead to dynamic growth in the industry, citing similarities with deregulation of railroads, air transport, telecommunications and natural gas.
"The financial community is misjudging the opportunities that deregulation provides," says Timothy P. Gardner, a co-author of the study.
"The delivery of electricity is incredibly complex, and the utilities will have the opportunity to take advantage of their expertise as the market becomes more competitive."
Some utilities with both gas and electric operations agree.
At UtiliCorp United, Kansas City, Mo., sales have grown from $233.4 million in 1990 to more than $426 million in 1992.
"We learned quite a bit on our natural-gas side," says Richard Green, chairman and president at UtiliCorp.
"I believe the same things will -- and are -- happening on the electric side.
We can't just depend on the single product anymore."
