A senior Israeli army official said that only one of three soldiers assigned to guard the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron was at his post when a Jewish gunman went on a rampage Feb. 25.
The presence of the full guard contingent might have prevented the massacre of Palestinians worshiping at a mosque there, he added.
The testimony by Maj. Gen. Danny Yatom, head of Central Command which oversees the West Bank, came on the opening day of hearings by an official five-person Israeli commission.
The commission is charged with investigating how a Jewish settler, Baruch Goldstein, managed to enter the cave and gun down Muslims at prayer before being beaten to death by the incensed crowd.
Mr. Yatom said that lapses in security had allowed Mr. Goldstein, who lived in the nearby Jewish settlement of Kiryat Arba, to easily enter the cave with a Galil rifle and open fire on Palestinians worshiping inside.
The holy site, according to the Bible, is where Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and their wives are buried.
According to Mr. Yatom, five Palestinians were killed in gunfire outside the cave, while four were shot by soldiers during rioting in the city.
Another was killed in a nearby neighborhood.
The attack led to the breakdown of negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians over implementing their September accord granting Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank city of Jericho.
The Palestine Liberation Organization has demanded that the Israelis remove some settlements before they return to the negotiating table, and wants an international force to be present in the West Bank and Gaza.
Palestinian anger over the massacre sparked widespread rioting throughout the occupied territories and inside Israel that has so far left 33 people dead and some 450 people injured.
Palestinians have been barred from entering their jobs inside Israel since the attack took place.
During the hearing, held in the Israeli Supreme Court building in Jerusalem, army officials said that their intelligence briefings didn't account for the possibility of radical settlers trying to harm Palestinians and instead focused exclusively on assessments about the likelihood of Palestinian attacks on Jews.
The commission, headed by Meir Shamgar, chief justice of the Supreme Court, has no formal power to enforce any of its recommendations, but Israeli governments have acted on the findings of such panels in the past.
