The most-wanted man in this deep South town is a tall, dark drifter known as Jerry Jackson.
At the Winn Dixie supermarket, rumors fly that he was seen with another Jackson -- Michael -- at the singer's Neverland ranch.
Some speculate he was part of the plot to kneecap skater Nancy Kerrigan.
The police recently got a different tip.
"We heard that Jerry Jackson was at a football game with Bear Bryant," says Capt. Willard "Peewee" Hurst, referring to the famed -- albeit dead -- Alabama coach.
In fact, about the only place the elusive Mr. Jackson hasn't been spotted is here in Talladega, where he is wanted in connection with fraud allegations.
Larry Barton, the town's longtime mayor, is under federal indictment for paying Mr. Jackson more than $20,000 in town funds for treestump removal that police say never took place.
Mr. Barton is charged with laundering the money and pocketing it himself.
"It's a bunch of junk," says the feisty 53-year-old mayor.
"The only thing I know about money laundering is when my wife washes a dollar bill in my pants."
The mayor also scoffs at claims that he paid a phantom workman.
Mr. Jackson, he explains, goes from town to town with a machine that grinds stumps into sawdust.
He did his work quietly and moved on.
"Guy did a super job," the mayor says.
But townspeople suspect that the only thing working overtime is the mayor's imagination.
In a town so tightknit that hospital admissions are reported in the local paper, folks say it simply isn't possible that a stranger chewed up tree stumps for over a year without attracting notice.
"Talladega's like Peyton Place -- everybody's into everybody's business," says Casey "Gip" Studdard, a salesman at Cowboy Hubbard's Farmers Trading Post, a general store full of seeds, bags of pecans and elderly men swapping gossip.
"The man must have bought groceries," adds Robert Nabors, a retired mill worker.
"Someone would have seen him."
Or heard him at least.
Thomas Greene has been grinding stumps for years and says it isn't exactly low-profile work.
To prove his point, he starts up his stumpgrinder, an ungainly machine with whirring belts and metal teeth.
"This is nothing," he shouts over the deafening roar.
"When you've got it grinding stump, you can hear it for 10 city blocks.
It'd wake the dead."
Like others in town, Mr. Greene is eager to meet Mr. Jackson.
Mr. Greene earned just $2,600 last year grinding stumps and wonders how his mysterious competitor earned nearly 10 times that much.
"I want to see what kind of machine he's got so I can get one, too," he says.
Despite such skepticism, Mayor Barton has stuck to his story -- and then some.
He offers a vivid profile of Mr. Jackson: "6-foot-1, 195-to-215 pounds, dark hair, probably Hispanic."
He keeps several letters from Mr. Jackson on his desk.
And he drives a visitor down residential streets where he says Mr. Jackson removed many of the "ugly, unsightly stumps" left by tornadoes and other storms.
"There was a stump right there that's been dug up," he says, pointing at a shallow crater by the curb.
"And see that little indenture?
That was another."
Asked if Mr. Jackson created these specific stump holes, the mayor demurs.
"I'm assuming he got some of those.
We just gave him a section of town to work.
We don't follow our workers around."
Police, however, haven't found anyone who witnessed Mr. Jackson's work.
Nor is there an electricity bill or other proof of Mr. Jackson's stay in town.
Meanwhile, residents of Talladega -- a town of 19,000 midway between Birmingham, Ala., and Atlanta -- have launched a lighthearted manhunt of their own.
"Jerry Jackson was spotted yesterday in Memphis," Norman Culver tells co-workers at a factory cafeteria.
"He was eating lunch with Elvis at Burger King or something."
Not so, says Susan Springfield, a local schoolteacher: "He was buried in the rubble in L.A."
Others in Talladega hope that Mr. Jackson remains at large.
One popular T-shirt shows a man's head with a question mark for a face and a caption that reads: "Talladega's Jerry Jackson.
Keep 'Em Stumped."
People here also enjoy playing Perry Mason.
At the factory, Mr. Culver wonders why a man whom the mayor describes as Hispanic is named Jerry Jackson.
"It should be Bubba Gonzales, or something," he says.
Then there's the matter of Mr. Jackson's penmanship.
In recent months, the mayor has received several letters signed "Jerry Jackson" and sent from around the country.
"The last time I heard from Jerry, he was in Florida," the mayor says, offering a Christmas card with a shaky, childlike signature and, appropriately, a Jacksonville postmark.
But the town councilor who brought charges against the mayor, Howard "Rip" Williams, greets such evidence with guffaws.
Moving a pen from his right hand to his left, Mr. Williams scribbles a "Jerry Jackson" signature much like that on the mayor's letters.
"Jerry must be a real nervous writer," he says.
Police say the letters have "general delivery" as a return address, making them hard to trace.
And police, too, have joined in the fun.
A mock postcard on Capt. Hurst's bulletin board reads: "To Talladega P.D. Keep up the good work!
Best wishes and Happy New Year."
The signature is in the tremulous hand of Jerry Jackson.
Such humor is starting to get a little old for Jerry "Jamming" Jackson.
The Talladega disk jockey has had to endure nonstop ribbing since the search for his namesake began.
"People are always asking me what I did with the stumps and with my share of the money.
I don't even cut firewood."
The mayor, by contrast, seems unflustered.
Of Mr. Jackson's crude handwriting, he says: "Jerry can't write worth a flip."
And he blames the whole fuss on political foes.
"You can have a ham sandwich indicted by a grand jury," he scoffs.
The son of mill workers, Mr. Barton married at 16, went to work bagging groceries at 50 cents an hour, and rose far enough to lose a race for lieutenant governor of Alabama.
He lives in a modest house with an American flag out front and is regarded as an accessible politician.
"I go to a funeral a day," the mayor says.
The slogan of his last campaign: "Y'all call.
I'll return your call."
He has also turned foibles into vote-getters.
He once gave a key to the city to Vanessa Williams, the Miss America who then lost her title because she had posed for nude photographs.
The mayor asked for the key back.
That scored him points with conservatives.
Now, many people suspect he has a similar 11th-hour stunt up his sleeve.
Indeed, the mayor promises, "There are some surprising things that will surface in court."
Asked if they might include the elusive Mr. Jackson, the mayor just smiles.
"Anything's possible," he says.
