Mr. Hosokawa and many of his cabinet members emerged Thursday from the backrooms where deals have long been cut to make a series of public appeals.
Their speeches amounted to a call to the Japanese electorate to lobby balking legislators to revive the troubled political-reform bills before Saturday's deadline.
"Call your local Diet members.
Fax them.
If you too think that we must change Japan's political order, you must express your feelings through actions," Mr. Hosokawa pleaded at a political-reform pep rally at a downtown hotel.
The highly popular Mr. Hosokawa hinted that he would step down if the reform bills failed, a move that could unleash political chaos.
That threat seemed aimed at boosting the pressure on the opposition Liberal Democratic Party to compromise over reform.
Indeed, the Hosokawa coalition's basic strategy is to fan fears within the opposition that many LDP members might lose their seats in a snap general election if reform fails.
"This isn't necessarily a genuine reform movement," groused Koichi Kato, a senior LDP parliament member, the other day.
"This is a power struggle."
Despite his popular appeal, Mr. Hosokawa faces long odds in his fight.
The political-reform bills -- which are designed to curb corruption and rewrite the nation's electoral system -- passed the lower house of parliament in November, but failed in the upper house last week.
Mr. Hosokawa has pledged to enact the legislation during the current parliamentary session, which ends Saturday.
So far this week, Mr. Hosokawa's plan to revive reform has been to try to broker a compromise between the ruling and opposition parties.
Late Thursday night, committee-level talks aimed at such a deal broke down.
On Friday morning, Mr. Hosokawa was reportedly stepping up the pressure for a summit with LDP leader Yohei Kono.
If that fails, the coalition can submit the bills for another vote in the lower house, a showdown that could come as soon as Friday.
The coalition would then need a two-thirds majority to make the bills law.
Success would require, according to some estimates, the defection of as many as 70 LDP members, a highly unlikely prospect, most political experts say.
Still, even if the current reform package is defeated, it isn't certain -- despite the threats -- that Mr. Hosokawa would leave office immediately.
Indeed, some analysts believe that even if reform fails, Mr. Hosokawa might try to broker another compromise that would keep his government in power to deal with such other pressing issues as tax reduction and economic stimulus when the new parliamentary session opens next week.
Many politicians say that even if Mr. Hosokawa can't pass the reform bills this week, he can accomplish the next best thing -- further battering the LDP.
It was the defection of several dozen pro-reform members that ended the LDP's four-decade reign last year.
A number of pro-reform LDP members have quit the party since, and still more are considered ripe for coalition recruiting.
As many as 30 LDP members "will vote for the bills," even if party leaders forbid it, said pro-reform LDP legislator Senpachi Ohishi.
"There is a strong possibility I will join the group."
If Saturday arrives and no sort of reform package passes, Mr. Hosokawa could step down or call snap elections.
But the timing would be horrible.
Japan's economy is stuck in recession and new economic measures are on hold because of the reform tussle.
Mr. Hosokawa is scheduled to meet with President Clinton in Washington Feb. 11 to reach a trade agreement, and a failed summit could escalate bilateral tensions.
Reform opponents fear they would get blamed in any imminent election for such troubles.
Thus, even many of Mr. Hosokawa's detractors are suggesting -- even begging -- that he stay in office for awhile, at least until the budget for the next fiscal year is passed.
"He's already a lame duck," said Taro Nakayama, one of the LDP's strong opponents of the bills.
"But he can stay."
Thursday's appeal -- broadcast on television newscasts -- was only the latest example of Mr. Hosokawa's attempts to change the rules of Japan's stodgy democracy.
In the final years of the LDP reign, popular appeal seemed almost irrelevant.
The most important voter was a power broker, Shin Kanemaru, who virtually single-handedly named and dismissed prime ministers.
Since taking office in August, Mr. Hosokawa has displayed unusual public-relations savvy, and his popularity at one point soared past 70%, the highest enjoyed by a postwar Japanese leader.
He used the power of that popularity to make the difficult decision to end Japan's ban on rice imports in December.
Shortly after Mr. Hosokawa's speech, the leaders from the top parties in the coalition held a separate rush-hour rally atop a sound truck outside Shinjuku Station, a bustling commuter hub.
"I've never been to something like this," said Junichi Yamazaki, a 41-year-old tax accountant, who stopped to listen in the winter chill.
But, despite his support for the reform bills, Mr. Yamazaki remained skeptical that the new approach would help.
"I don't think it's very effective," he said, pointing to the thin crowd, as most commuters rushed by.
"We don't have a custom of having discussions with politicians."
