Grumman Corp. set up a process for Northrop Corp. and Martin Marietta Corp. to submit final bids for the company by Thursday afternoon, but Northrop criticized the new rules as essentially forcing it to "bid against itself."
Grumman said in a letter to its two suitors that it wanted "a prompt and orderly close" to the bidding, and that it planned to announce a winner Monday at 9 a.m. EST.
Grumman Chairman Renso L. Caporali advised Northrop and Martin Marietta that the period from Thursday evening through Sunday would be used to execute the final agreement and acquisition plan with the company submitting the prevailing bid.
In a scathing response to Mr. Caporali, however, Northrop Chairman Kent Kresa charged that the new Grumman procedure "continues the unlevel playing field" that Northrop contends has handicapped its bidding.
The letter pointed out that "Northrop continues to be faced with the cost of the Martin Marietta lockup fee, a $50 million expense" that was included in the acquisition agreement Martin Marietta originally signed with Grumman on March 7.
Mr. Kresa also objected to having to consider a new offer "against a purely hypothetical price increase from Martin Marietta without any notice or knowledge of whether such an increase is in fact submitted."
Northrop has offered $60 a share, or $2.04 billion, for the Bethpage, N.Y., defense-electronics company and maker of tactical aircraft.
That hostile offer came three days after the $55-a-share Martin Marietta-Grumman agreement, totaling $1.93 billion.
In Grumman's letter to Northrop and Martin Marietta, Mr. Caporali said his company wants "a single and final round of bidding, and each of you should submit your best and highest offer."
Other companies' bids would be considered, although none had been received yet, according to a Grumman spokesman.
The Grumman letter cited Northrop's earlier request for "free and open competitive bidding," using the same language to explain Grumman's latest action.
The letter quoted a Martin Marietta communication that acknowledged Grumman's responses to the rival bids are "of course, Grumman decisions alone," and requested prompt information if Grumman established bidding procedures.
A spokesman for Martin Marietta, the fast-growing Bethesda, Md., aerospace and defense electronics concern, said it was reviewing the Grumman letter.
Mr. Kresa argued in his letter that a fair process would involve inviting continued bids without Grumman's deadline, governed instead by the effect of "time and financial constraints" on both suitors.
Such an approach would avoid having to "prematurely cut off potential bidding and potentially deprive Grumman stockholders of the opportunity to receive the maximum value for their shares," the Northrop chairman wrote.
"This, of course, will occur if Northrop is not allowed the opportunity to top any increase in bid which Martin Marietta wishes to make," the Northrop letter said.
A Northrop spokesman wouldn't say if his company would participate in Grumman's new bidding round or if it might challenge the procedures by responding to any new Martin Marietta offer after the deadline passes.
The spokesman said only that "we're keeping our options open."
Before Northrop's response, which was issued after the market closed, investors yesterday reasoned that much higher offers might be submitted for Grumman.
Shares of Grumman rose $1.625, to $64.875, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The $1.375 fall yesterday in Northrop's stock, which closed at $42.75, was attributed by analysts to speculation that Northrop would emerge victorious, thus shouldering the financing burden of acquiring Grumman.
Martin Marietta shares rose 75 cents, closing at $46.
Even early in the day, though, some aerospace-industry watchers questioned whether Grumman's attempt to impose discipline might be unnecessary.
One theory is that Martin Marietta might choose not to top the current Northrop bid.
Unless Martin Marietta has new information about Grumman's value, "I would be surprised if they jumped into an all-out bidding war," said Wolfgang Demisch, an analyst for BT Securities in New York.
"I just remember that in the past, when the bidding for Vought Corp. got to levels they (Martin Marietta) thought were unsatisfactory, they decided to drop out."
After Martin Marietta and Lockheed Corp. jointly agreed to acquire the Vought missile and aircraft units of LTV Corp. in 1992 for $355 million, the two companies lost an eventual bidding war for those operations when a group comprising Loral Corp., closely held Carlyle Group and Northrop bought them for $476 million.
Still, Mr. Demisch said it was important that companies in an industry such as defense, which receives so much government support, be careful to avoid "the Paramount experience" -- reflecting the nasty and expensive battle that Viacom Inc. won over QVC Network Inc. to acquire Paramount Communications Inc.
The more "flamboyant takeover techniques are entirely inappropriate" and could spur a reaction from Congress, he said.
Under terms in the letter, bids for Grumman are to be delivered to Goldman, Sachs & Co. by 5 p.m. EST Thursday.
The proposals are to follow the terms of Martin Marietta's and Northrop's previous acquisition plans, except for price, and are to be confidential and irrevocable until 9 a.m.
Grumman directors would accept the offer presenting "the best value reasonably obtainable for shareholders," the letter said.
Martin Marietta last week pressured Grumman to reject Northrop's bid as violating an earlier "standstill" agreement with Grumman.
But Grumman decided instead to grant Northrop access to the nonpublic financial information it had been seeking.
The information now has been provided to Northrop, according to the Grumman spokesman.
