After months of negotiations to sell its book-publishing division, Hearst Corp. said it has decided to keep William Morrow & Co. and Avon Books and rebuild the companies' depleted staffs.
The reversal late Friday shocked the publishing world, because an agreement had seemed imminent for Hearst to sell the division to Putnam Berkley Group Inc., a unit of Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.'s MCA Inc.
Executives knowledgeable about the deal say that, after months of negotiating, the two companies were just too far apart in price.
Terms were never disclosed, but the deal was expected to close in the $160 million to $200 million range.
Hearst initially began exploring the sale of the book division after it was approached by several interested buyers a year ago.
It later retained investment banker Lazard Freres & Co. to evaluate offers.
But the talks narrowed to Putnam last fall.
Phyllis Grann, Putnam's chairman and chief executive officer, said "We're disappointed that the deal wasn't made, but both sides really tried."
The dissolution of merger talks leaves two medium-size publishers facing increased competition from industry heavyweights such as Paramount Communications Inc., whose Paramount Publishing just swallowed up Macmillan Inc.
Ms. Grann said she will be looking for other acquisition candidates, "if something else comes along that makes sense."
For the beleaguered staffs of Morrow and Avon, the announcement means the end of a long year in limbo, but even Hearst's top executives admit they've got a lot of work ahead.
As negotiations dragged on, Morrow especially lost many of its top authors and editors and many agents virtually stopped coming by with new books.
Among the best-selling authors who fled recently were novelist John Irving and mystery writer Patricia Cornwell.
"There is a lot of work ahead of us, and yes, we're going to have to find and hire some quality editors," said Gordon L. Jones, corporate vice president and group head of Hearst Books.
"But I walked the halls after the announcement, and people are very excited; it was like the Giants won the Super Bowl.
Agents come to where there's money, and they'll come back."
Frank A. Bennack Jr., president and chief executive officer of closely held Hearst, said the multimedia potential for the book division was a major factor in deciding to keep it.
"Both of these book companies have an illustrious heritage," said Mr. Bennack, "And we intend to build an even more illustrious reputation for them in the future."
Editors on the staff say they are immensely relieved, because the Putnam merger would have meant considerable staff cutbacks.
Said editor Ann Bramson, "This is a group of very talented people who feel we can go on now and make up for lost time."
