Face-to-face negotiations between the Mexican government and rebels finally began here yesterday with the setting of priorities for national and state issues in a process expected to drag on for some time.
The opening of the talks was tense because the guerrillas recently have broadened demands for political and land-policy reforms and have said they might not disarm even if peace is achieved.
In a brief cathedral news conference last night, the charismatic "Subcommander Marcos" of the self-styled Zapatista Army asserted that his companions "did not come to ask for pardon."
Nearby, on the altar, other masked rebel leaders listened along with Chiapas Bishop Samuel Ruiz.
One thing that has already become clear is the pivotal role Bishop Ruiz will play.
The bishop is hosting the negotiations in his cathedral here and is so trusted by the rebels that he has been chosen as the mediator in the peace talks.
His involvement is forcing the Mexican church and the country to search their souls over the "liberation theology" that Bishop Ruiz advocates.
The theology argues that the church needs to aggressively fight social problems, so as to liberate the poor from class and economic oppression.
The theology once had spread throughout Central America, but has appeared to be waning for years.
The extent of priests' involvement in the rebellion isn't clear, but the bishop's identification with the guerrillas has made him so controversial throughout Mexico that many accuse him of helping inspire the rebellion that broke out Jan. 1.
The government initially rushed to blame the rebellion on liberation theology.
Local officials accused priests and nuns of assisting rebels.
But the government has since backed off its claims.
Still, analysts say they see plenty of signs that priests at least influenced the rebels.
They point to epistles written by Subcommander Marcos, which read more like Matthew than like Marx.
Gustavo Armendaris, who served briefly as an interim governor here, says the priests "are involved.
I am sure of it."
Subcommander Marcos himself, in an interview published over the weekend in the magazine Proceso, denies being a priest or even a former seminarian.
He says he was a journalist before becoming a guerrilla.
The multilingual Subcommander Marcos says he learned his English from American adult magazines, not through the church.
He says he hasn't been in a church since he was eight years old.
While Bishop Ruiz has denied complicity with the guerrillas, he has said, "I feel responsible for having helped, or tried to help, create awareness of the situation we live in," which he says led to "these unfortunate circumstances and a price of so much bloodshed."
Bishop Ruiz has long been controversial.
Last year, the government reportedly tried to pressure the Vatican into removing him from Chiapas.
Even now, government officials monitor his news conferences and homilies.
Yet when the Mexican government needed someone to try to broker peace with the rebels, it asked Bishop Ruiz to step in.
And with the confidence of the rebels, it is Bishop Ruiz -- not the government -- who now controls media access to the negotiations.
When the 69-year-old bishop first arrived at his post 34 years ago, one anthropologist says he was considerably more conservative.
But as the bishop saw abuses against the Indians, his activism grew.
Collectively, the bishop and his priests have challenged the established order of Chiapas, where the agrarian reforms of the 1910-1920 Mexican Revolution -- designed to take land from the rich and give it to the poor -- largely bypassed the Indian descendants of the Mayan empire.
The bishop and his priests helped keep liberation theology alive throughout Mexico, too.
Before the start of the rebellion, one priest estimated that about 10% of Mexico's priests subscribed to liberation theology.
Now priests throughout Mexico say that, after Chiapas and the exposure of the misery of Indian life here, more priests may embrace the doctrine.
While a key Vatican pronouncement has warned liberation theologians against overly politicized views and Marxist interpretations of the Scriptures, the Vatican also says its warning shouldn't be interpreted as an excuse for indifference in the face of misery and injustice.
Archbishop Adolfo Suarez of Monterrey, an industrial city 150 miles from the Texas border, calls Chiapas "a cry for all the country."
And the leader of the Mexican Bishops Conference says that the church must revise its pastoral methods to attack social problems better.
Mexico's history of church-state relations has always been complicated.
In Mexico's two largest independence fights, the Catholic Church sided with the political losers, the landed elite.
Retribution was rough.
The constitution of 1917 prohibited priests from voting, discussing politics, owning property or operating Catholic schools.
Only two years ago did President Carlos Salinas reform the constitution and formally recognize the church, even though the vast majority of Mexicans are Catholic.
The liberation theologians show no signs of backing away from their "preferential option for the poor" -- a basic tenet of liberation theology -- and their crucial role in the Chiapas peace talks will let them hammer home their points.
At his cathedral recently, Bishop Ruiz used his homily to urge the wealthy to find ways to redistribute their wealth to lower the "misery and hopelessness that can produce new outbreaks of violence."
As he talked, cameras flashed and television cameras whirred.
