The comptroller of the currency allowed NationsBank Corp. to merge two branch networks in Maryland and the District of Columbia.
The ruling, based on an obscure provision in federal law, allows NationsBank to bypass prohibitions against operating a single branch network across state lines.
It also clears the way for the Charlotte, N.C.-based company to pursue an aggressive interstate consolidation strategy even before Congress removes the long-standing obstacles to interstate branching.
The comptroller's action follows a similar decision last month affecting First Fidelity Bancorp.'s operations in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.
The two rulings reflect a growing level of support for interstate branching.
An interstate banking bill that would allow branch network consolidation recently surfaced in Congress and received unanimous approval last week from a House banking subcommittee.
The House bill also seeks to eliminate obstacles to interstate acquisitions.
Similar measures pending in state legislatures, including those in Georgia, Virginia and Florida, are fueling the movement toward interstate banking as well.
"It's just a matter of time before these barriers are moved in terms of both interstate branching and interstate banking," predicted Kathryn H. Bissette, an analyst with Sterne, Agee & Leach Inc. in Atlanta.
Currently, bank-holding companies in most states must operate a separate subsidiary in each state where they have branches.
But NationsBank and others have argued that such strictures create inconveniences for customers and drive up costs for banks.
Before this ruling, for instance, a NationsBank customer opening an account in Maryland couldn't make a direct deposit into that account from a branch in Washington.
With the comptroller's backing in hand, NationsBank may now pursue additional consolidations elsewhere in its branch system, which covers nine states and the District of Columbia.
The company is looking into the possibilities, a spokesman said, though it hasn't yet determined where its next move may be.
One clear option would be to merge NationsBank's Virginia operations into its newly consolidated Washington-area operation, although it would need comptroller approval for that and other such moves.
The comptroller granted the special rights to NationsBank and First Fidelity under a federal statute that allows banks to move their headquarters as much as 30 miles away from the town or city where the bank was originally chartered -- regardless of state boundaries.
NationsBank can now move the official headquarters of American Security Bank NA from the District of Columbia to Silver Spring, Md., 6 1/2 miles from the state line.
American Security can then be merged with Maryland National Bank, based in Baltimore.
NationsBank purchased both banks last year.
The company said the consolidation is effective immediately.
