Many investors aren't even bringing plates to this week's $2.5 billion buffet of planned junk bond deals.
These investors are making the demands for higher yields and turning a fickle eye on the long list of companies that want to sell their debt.
This is in sharp contrast to most of last year when yield-hungry investors lined up to buy new offerings of junk bonds and corporations could practically dictate the yields they wanted to pay.
The junk bond market continues to be plagued by the instability caused by rising interest rates and, as a result, a number of companies are delaying their offerings in hopes that the market will settle down.
According to analysts, some corporations are thinking about raising the yields on their junk bonds offerings in order to attract enough investor interest.
The yield on the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dipped to 6.97% after hitting a 10-month high on Friday of 7.01%.
Its price, which moves in the opposite direction of the yield, rose nearly 1/2 point, or nearly $5 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 90 30/32.
One of the week's most closely watched scheduled deals, a $350 million offering of 10-year notes from Northwest Airlines Corp., was delayed yesterday.
According to analysts, the company had hoped to get an 11% coupon for the deal.
But more investors demanded a coupon of 12%, or even higher, which by late yesterday the company was not prepared to accept.
Lehman Brothers officials said Northwest may still try to launch the deal today, although market analysts and money managers were not so optimistic.
The price of the company's outstanding debt dropped sharply in reaction to the delay.
By late yesterday, the 8 5/8% coupon notes of Northwest Airlines Inc., a unit of Northwest Airlines Corp., had dropped three points, or $30 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 89.
The yield rose to 14.29% from 12.7%.
"The pricing list was way too big," said Kingman Penniman, head of high-yield research at Duff & Phelps, and the deals were coming with "price talk that didn't reflect what's happening in the secondary market," where junk bond prices have been getting hammered.
According to Duff & Phelps, by yesterday morning the prices of 239 issues that it tracked were down while only 21 issues had risen.
"We find no cause for optimism that would suggest that as much as $2.5 billion in new issuance could come in a shortened week at aggressive price levels," Duff & Phelps said in its morning commentary yesterday.
(Many of the world's bond markets will be closed Friday in observance of the Good Friday holiday.)
"We would not be surprised to see the timing of many of these prospective issues delayed," the commentary continued.
Two other deals that may be delayed or see a substantial boost in the offered yields are a $575 million offering of 10-year mortgage notes from Huntsman Corp., and a $600 million two-part offering from Thrifty Payless, a subsidiary of TPH Corp., according to Mr. Penniman.
"This is not necessarily negative," Mr. Penniman added.
But "at a time of uncertain demand we have too much supply and it behooves the market to pull it back," he said.
"It's a week for the . . . market to react to all the unpleasant and tragic events of the last week," he explained.
According to Duff & Phelps, Thrifty Payless had been seeking a yield of 10% to 10 1/4% for $200 million of nine-year senior notes and a yield of 10 3/4% to 11% for $400 million of 10-year senior subordinated notes.
Mr. Penniman said he expects the company to boost the yield to attract more demand.
Weak demand led AK Steel Holding Corp. to revise price talk on a planned $325 million offering of 10-year senior notes.
The company had been hoping to price the deal with a yield of 9 3/4% to 10%, but now it hopes to price it between 10 1/4% and 10 1/2%, said a syndicate official at lead underwriter CS First Boston Inc.
The size of the deal from Northwest, the nation's fourth-largest airline, had already been reduced by $50 million when it ran into difficulty yesterday.
But industry analysts reacted strongly to the news of the weak demand, especially in the wake of Northwest's shaky initial public offering last week.
The IPO, which offered 20 million shares, or about a 25% interest in Northwest, had been planned at an asking price of $19 to $21 a share.
But a lukewarm response from the market forced the carrier to slash its asking price to $13 a share.
(The stock closed yesterday in Nasdaq Stock Market trading at 12 5/8, down 1/8.)
Northwest was taken private in 1989 in a $3.6 billion leveraged buyout.
Now, with the lower-priced IPO and an uncertain bond offering, Northwest is expected to raise less than its initial target for 1994 of $1.2 billion.
The airline is obligated to raise at least $500 million by 1996 to comply with a restructuring agreement it made with its unions last year.
The IPO raised about half that amount and Northwest was counting on the bond offering to raise the balance.
Deferring the planned bond issue might reduce investors' willingness to take up shares in a possible second stock offering later this year, analysts said.
Those investors who were already concerned about Northwest's heavy debt load may think even less of an airline that fails to deliver on two consecutive deals.
"Neither the stock nor the debt is a very exciting offering," said David M. Klaskin, president of Oak Ridge Investments in Chicago.
"There are too many variables outside of management's control, and it's amazing how much leverage is involved."
Northwest offering documents indicated that proceeds from both the IPO and the planned bond offering would have gone to pay down bank debt and to upgrade its fleet, now one of the oldest in the industry.
Northwest has lost more than $1 billion since 1990, but the airline turned profitable in the second half of last year, posting earnings in two consecutive quarters.
Part of the turnaround was attributed to lower costs resulting from $866 million in wage and benefit concessions made by its unions.
As a result, some analysts are still bullish on the airline, and expect it to earn close to $300 million this year.
The trouble with the bond offering "doesn't really concern me," says Raymond E. Neidl, an analyst with Furman Selz.
"They don't need the money right away, and it might be better to wait until they have additional good quarters to report."
Reflecting the malaise that has been gripping the bond market, prices of U.S. Treasury securities eked out only moderate gains despite a sizeable decline in commodities prices.
The 10-year note rose less than 1/4 point to 94 21/32 to yield 6.60%, down from 6.63% on Friday.
Traders said investors remain unwilling to commit significant amounts of new cash to the bond market, even when bullish news emerges.
Without the help of institutional investors, the market will continue having a hard time rallying, players said.
Falling commodities prices are usually greeted by bond investors as a sign of waning inflationary pressures.
Bond investors fear inflation because it reduces the value of investments with a fixed rate of return.
"This is a bear market," said Tim Heaton, a bond trader at Nikko Securities Co.
"Any good news is going to be discounted and bad news is going to be magnified," he said.
Oil prices plunged in response to news over the weekend that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries had failed to agree to oil production cuts.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude oil for May delivery dropped $1.05 a barrel to $14.08.
Prices of other commodities fell as well.
Gold fell $3.10 per ounce and the Commodity Research Bureau index plunged 3.19 points to settle at 227.56.
But the declines did little to ease inflation concerns and attract buyers into the bond market.
Traders noted that most commodity prices have been on an uptrend for months.
"A one-day decline in commodity prices is not enough to set aside all those recent fears about an expanding economy and inflation," said Anthony Karydakis, senior financial economist at First Chicago Capital Markets.
Friday's March employment data is widely expected to show a solid bounceback in nonfarm payroll employment growth following the weather-depressed readings in January and February.
Economists are calling for an increase in payrolls of about 250,000.
Although the Public Securities Association had recommended that the bond market be closed Friday in observance of the Good Friday holiday, traders at a number of major firms said they have decided to have limited staff in place for trading in the cash bond market Friday.
Faced with the prospect of traders and investors being unable to respond to the key employment data until Sunday night, both the Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile had already decided to open for an abbreviated session.
Trading in the cash market is also likely to end by midday Friday.
Municipal bonds generally were 1/2 point lower at the close.
Munis were hit by selling lists that totaled well over $100 million, traders said.
Bond funds were said to be responsible for much of the unloading.
Among the decliners was the New York Triborough Bridge & Tunnel Authority's 5% of 2024 bonds.
They were about 5/8 lower at 84.62 in late trading, yielding 6.10%.
In light new-issue action, the New York City Educational Construction Fund's $138.6 million Series 1994 revenue bonds were priced by a Morgan Stanley & Co. group to yield from 3.05% in October 1994 to 6% in 2013.
Mortgage securities finished little changed, underperforming Treasury issues for the third session in a row.
"I'm just sitting here watching this, and each day it gets uglier and uglier," said a pass-through trader on a mortgage desk in New York.
Dealers "are flush" with bad positions, he said, and investors aren't around to offer an outlet.
Among 7.5% mortgage securities for April delivery, Government National Mortgage Association slipped 1/32 to 99 9/32, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Golds were unchanged at 99 25/32, and Federal National Mortgage Association was unchanged at 99 19/32.
Sarah Bowen contributed to this article.
