"When nationwide branch banking is an accomplished fact, America will have come of age financially."
That sentiment could be attributed to almost any big-bank executive these days.
In fact, it was spoken in 1935 by A.P. Giannini, the founder and architect of Bank of America.
The banking industry has waited a long time for nationwide banking.
After years of lobbying, Congress is poised to lift the costly and cumbersome barriers imposed by the 1927 McFadden Act.
Earlier this week, the House Banking Committee approved an interstate-banking measure, allowing banks to set up branches in other states -- three years after the bill is passed -- without the costly process of retaining separate banking companies.
A similar bill was approved two weeks ago by the Senate Banking Committee, and a final bill could reach the full Congress by the August recess.
Although the industry already has been consolidating in recent years, the lifting of all interstate barriers likely will escalate the pace of bank mergers and change how banks do business.
"It could open up a whole slew of acquisition activities," says Richard Zona, vice chairman of First Bank System Inc.
Competition among regional giants such as NationsBank Corp. and Banc One Corp. is likely to heat up as they invade each other's turf.
Many small and medium-sized banks probably will be swallowed up.
Meanwhile, the big money-center banks in New York will be relatively minor players as they focus on businesses such as credit-cards that aren't dependent upon branch networks.
The so-called superregionals are probably the best positioned to take advantage of the new era in banking.
NationsBank, based in Charlotte, N.C., has been expanding rapidly in its home base in the Southeast and is eager to move into the Midwest.
One possible acquisition or merger target is First Chicago Corp., the region's biggest bank.
A potential big rival is Columbus-based Banc One, which has become a giant in the Midwest and wants to move into NationsBank's turf in the Southeast.
Meanwhile, San Francisco-based BankAmerica Corp., which recently agreed to buy Chicago's Continental Bank Corp., is widely expected to expand farther east.
Other banks are likely to work out mergers with similar-sized institutions.
Providence, R.I.-based Fleet Financial Group Inc., for one, is already New England's biggest bank and is interested in expanding to the Middle Atlantic and parts of the Southeast.
It could make an attractive partner with New Jersey's First Fidelity Bancorp., whose branches stretch from Connecticut to Pennsylvania, although they both are run by two strong-willed chief executives.
None of these banks are commenting on their plans, but they clearly are considering their options.
"You have discussions and hope that someday they may materialize into something," says William Boardman, senior executive vice president at Banc One.
Ironically, the money-center banks, which were the earliest proponents of interstate banking in the 1980s, now are primarily on the sidelines.
None of them were able to cobble together regional strengths outside the Northeast.
And their credit-card business already is on a national scale and doesn't need branch networks to operate.
Many money-center banks, in fact, have been shedding operations to reduce costs.
Last year, for instance, Citicorp sold its Arizona bank to Norwest Corp., and Chase Manhattan Corp. sold its Arizona bank to First Interstate Bancorp.
Not that they won't be regional players.
Chase and Bank of New York Co., for instance, have been building up their presence in the affluent suburbs of New York and are expected to continue building in states such as Connecticut and New Jersey.
Of course, the banking industry already was moving toward consolidation, even before interstate banking seemed likely.
Faced with weak demand for bank credit and other traditional services, banks have been merging or acquiring one another to drive down costs and spread their products across a wider customer base.
The new law will only speed the process.
Besides lifting federal barriers, the bill would effectively end the restrictions that 16 or so states and regions such as the Southeast have set up to keep out banks from other areas.
"A lot of clients on both sides of the Mason-Dixon line are examining their new opportunities," says Christopher Flowers, a partner at Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Already, some states such as Virginia, Georgia, Florida and Minnesota are changing their laws to allow interstate banking.
That could attract would-be suitors for Virginia's Signet Banking Corp., Georgia's Bank South Corp., and Florida's Barnett Banks Inc.
All three have said they want to remain independent, but they may find it harder to do so.
Still, delaying as long as possible could at least give them greater flexibility in choosing a buyer.
"One could see Virginia for the first time since 1861 as a battleground," said H. Rodgin Cohen, banking attorney at Sullivan & Cromwell.
Aside from the prospects of full interstate banking, the bill would help banks run their far-flung operations more efficiently.
Under current law, banks can purchase out-of-state institutions if the target's state allows, but the buyer has to maintain separate banking companies.
That means separate boards and other excessive red tape, such as requiring each bank to file regulatory papers and reviewing each bank separately by bank regulators.
It also means consumers can't do much in the way of interstate banking except use an automatic teller machine.
Because the bill will alleviate much of that, it should help the bank's revenue, says Mr. Kovacevich of Norwest.
Customers who work or travel across state lines are more likely to use the bank if the bill passes, because banking would be much easier.
There are believed to be 60 million consumers who live in cities near state borders.
"I think the benefits are not as much on the cost side as what it can do on the revenue side of things," Mr. Kovacevich says.
"We're in 15 states with banks, and many of our customers also have operations in those states, such as Sears, Taco Bell and McDonald's.
Today, we cannot say to those customers, `Hey, fill out one form here and we'll give you one checking account number and one statement, and you can have all your stores plugged into one bank.'
That would be illegal."
Bankers add that by diversifying geographically, they will be less susceptible to regional downturns such as those in Texas or New England.
"When you're landlocked, and you stick to your knitting, you're concentrated," says Joseph May, executive vice president at Whitney Holding Corp.'s Whitney National Bank in New Orleans, and president of the Robert Morris Associates, a trade group for lenders.
"The most effective way to diversify has been through the M&A route."
