Three sporting goods salesmen from America sit in the middle of frozen Lake Mjosa, dangling red maggots in the frigid water.
Elsewhere at the Olympics, skiers and skaters are collecting their medals.
But no one is feeling luckier than these three ice fishermen.
"It's pretty incredible being out here," says Joseph Wolf.
"In Europe!
In Norway!
At the Olympics!"
"You bet," laughs Edward Stempel.
"Pretty amazing."
"Dream come true," cackles William Carrera.
Bill, Joe and Ed, who all work for Bill's Carrera-Werner Sales Co. of Greensburg, Pa., sold more fishhooks for O. Mustad & Son, a company in Gjovik, Norway, than any other sales representative in the U.S.
They hustled, they cajoled, they promoted, and they boosted their Mustad hook sales by a whopping 199%, beating their nearest competition by a catfish's whisker.
Now, Mustad is showing its appreciation by giving them the grand Olympic schmooze.
For two weeks, everything from maggot bait to reindeer fillet is on the house.
"We keep drinking beer and after-dinner drinks and they keep buying us dinners and Olympic tickets," says Bill.
"That's a lot of fishhooks."
But it's a great catch for Mustad, which now has three extremely loyal clients in its most important market.
The fish of Lake Mjosa may not be biting; after two hours, the salesmen have one little perch among them.
But they themselves are hooked.
"You know," says Bill, "I really like the way the Norwegians do business."
Doing business at these Winter Olympics, the rule has been: When in Norway, schmooze like the Norwegians.
Which means partying like Hagar the Horrible.
It means riding a horse-drawn sleigh through moonlit forests, saying "mush" on a dog sled and dropping a line through a hole in the ice.
It means being served by people dressed up like Vikings, rubbing shoulders with trolls and listening to Edvard Grieg recitals.
It means eating salmon and reindeer and salmon and moose and salmon mousse.
If Atlanta does the same thing at the 1996 Summer Olympics, everyone will be dressing up like Rhett and Scarlet and eating grits.
"I like doing business on the back of a sleigh, as long as I stay warm," says Brian Dyer, a businessman from Fredericksburg, Va., being schmoozed by a Norwegian slate producer he represents.
He's just hopped out of a sleigh that took him to a bonfire and a round of Glogg, a Norwegian hot wine drink, on a night when the temperature has sunk below zero.
"It's inspiring," he says, rubbing his cheeks, "though your face gets a little cold."
At the Olympic Restaurant just off Lillehammer's quaint main street, legendary Arctic chef Arne Brimi has been serving neo-Arctic fare to the Games' toniest guests (including Hillary Rodham Clinton).
His kitchen cooks up traditional Norwegian meals of smoked lamb, grilled sea trout with juniper berries and cloudberries with cream.
"Mr. Brimi uses meat and milk from our cows because they are fresh and healthy animals," says Mari Bjorke of the Norwegian Cattle Association, which has brought along a group of agriculture journalists to taste for themselves.
"He wants meat from calm cows, not stressed cows.
If it isn't stressed, it tastes better."
There is also plenty of calm fish.
"We're trying to do marketing for our salmon," says Jan Inge Storheill, the caterer who choreographs a kitchen staff of 239 that prepares lunch and dinner for more than 1,500 schmoozers each day at the giant tent housing the official sponsors' pavilions.
There's boiled salmon, smoked salmon, fried salmon and gravlax.
Not everyone appreciates strapping on a Nordic feedbag.
"Mom, are you sure it's just roast beef?" asks 11-year-old Brandon Smith, nervously poking his nose into a plate of mysterious meat.
Visa International, one of the Olympics' biggest sponsors, is wining (Coking, actually) Brandon and 24 other kids who won a contest drawing pictures of the Olympics in 2094.
Visa whisked them all to a cavernous country restaurant for a night of beef, boiled potatoes and folk dancing.
The food may be yucky, but Visa has the most slavishly loyal customers in town.
"Before this I didn't really care about credit cards," says Drew Domoto, 13.
"Now I'm like Visa all the way."
Some schmoozers from America and mainland Europe came prepared to tone down the Norwegian ambiance.
Over at the foot of the ski jump in the official corporate schmooze tent, the U.S. Olympic Committee, in tandem with the Atlanta Olympic organizers, are serving up Seven-Bean Chili with rattlesnake meat.
It is the specialty of John Krimsky, the USOC's deputy secretary general, who procured canned snake for the occasion.
In the swank private club of the International Olympic Committee, two sushi chefs arrive every day from Oslo with crates of fresh fish for honored guests from Nagano, Japan, home of the 1998 Winter Olympics.
The club also features selections from the menu of IOC President Juan Antonio Samaranch's favorite restaurant in Lausanne, Switzerland, lovingly replicated by local chefs.
Mr. Samaranch may be hunkered down in the Norwegian mountains but he can still pick at his beloved penne alla vodka and fettucine con funghi.
Bill, Joe and Ed are also satisfied customers.
The local newspaper ran a photo of them sitting at a hockey game with Mustad officials.
While standing around waiting for another game to start, they wound up in a live CBS man-on-the-street session.
They mentioned to their hosts how they would like to go ice fishing, and they next thing they knew, they'd gone ice fishing.
"They've assigned someone to us to make sure we get on buses, get tickets, get to dinner, go shopping in the right shops.
Why, we don't have to do a thing," marvels Bill.
"The Norwegians have a way of making you feel like you're part of a family."
Which is enough to warm a schmoozer's heart.
"We want to motivate them," says Lars Rivenes, Mustad's personnel director.
"We want to make them better Mustad people."
Packing up their fishing gear, Bill, Joe and Ed are plenty motivated.
"What's next?" they ask.
"Dinner at seven," says one of the Mustad ice-fishing hosts.
"We'll pick you up at the front door."
"We'll be ready," says Bill.
