Japan unveiled a $675 billion budget for the fiscal year starting this April, aimed at stimulating the nation's battered economy.
It is likely to be only the first of several spending packages from the government.
The budget, which still needs parliamentary approval, reveals Japan's conflicting goals of boosting its economy while keeping debt down.
There is small growth in most outlays, including defense and overseas aid.
The only major growth is in public-works spending, which is earmarked to rise to 11.1 trillion yen ($102.4 billion), a 30% increase from a year earlier if special projects are included.
"It's relatively tight," says Takashi Oshio, economist at J.P. Morgan & Co.
"Every expenditure item is restrictive compared to last year, except for public works."
The budget projects a sharp revenue shortfall, because of tax cuts designed to promote a consumer-led business recovery.
As a result, the government expects to issue 3.14 trillion yen in deficit-financing bonds next year, the first time in five years that Japan has issued deficit bonds.
And there may be more bonds coming, because the government's tax revenue projections are based on a nominal growth in Japanese gross domestic product of 3.8%.
But few private economists expect the economy to grow by even as much as 2% in the year ending in March 1995.
If the private economists are right, then "later this year, a three trillion to four trillion yen shortfall can't be ruled out," Mr. Oshio says.
That means supplemental budgets and additional bond issuances and possibly higher Japanese interest rates.
Luckily, inflation is unlikely to be a major worry, most economists say.
A supplemental budget wouldn't be a major surprise: Postwar Japan has never gone a year without one.
The budget contains some unusual financing schemes to achieve its revenue targets.
The government will, for example, accelerate a loan-redemption plan but will issue bonds to fund the local governments that have to repay their national loans faster.
The Japanese budget usually comes out in December, but it was delayed this year by debate in the Diet over political reform.
The delay means the budget won't reach parliament before March and tinkering and debates likely will delay passage until May.
That is why Japan's six trillion yen in national and local tax cuts announced earlier this week, though retroactive to Jan. 1, won't reach consumers until June or July.
The government yesterday also approved a third supplemental budget for the current fiscal year, valued at 2.18 trillion yen, including 1.5 trillion yen for public works, which should tide the government over until the next year's budget kicks in.
The supplemental budget will be introduced to parliament next week.
