Stock mutual funds pulled in a record net inflow of $14.5 billion from investors in December.
And fund executives say January's inflows may soar even higher, powered by retirement-plan and other year-end money.
January is "a great month" for fund sales, says Stephen Gibson, a managing director at Marsh & McLennan Securities Corp.'s Putnam Investments.
"This momentum should carry over into February" as investors continue to move bonuses and year-end retirement sums out of money-market funds into stock and bond funds.
The huge cash inflow into stock funds in December capped the biggest year in history for mutual-fund sales.
All told, stock funds attracted a record $128 billion in 1993, far above the prior record of $78 billion set in 1992.
For the first time assets of all mutual funds, including stock, bond and money-market funds, topped $2 trillion at the end of December.
The influence of stock funds is growing overseas.
Fully half the money going into stock funds in December went into those investing abroad, according to a New York consulting firm, Strategic Insight.
The cash-flow data come from the Investment Company Institute, a mutualfund trade group.
They measure new sales of funds, counting the effects of exchanges among funds and redemptions.
Reinvested dividends aren't included.
The torrent of money into stock funds bodes support for the stock market.
However, fund managers' reserves of cash, which can be tapped to pick up bargains in a declining stock market, are falling.
Despite the huge inflow of cash, stock funds' holdings of cash dwindled in December to 8.5% of stock-fund assets, down from 8.8% in November.
January usually brings big cash flows into mutual funds.
Many corporate retirement plans make distributions in January, and individual retirement accounts begin getting big inflows in preparation for tax season.
But fund executives said the inflows this month are heavy even by seasonal standards.
The money comes from many sources other than bank certificates of deposit, fund executives say.
"Statistics continue to indicate that CDs have . . . diminished as a major driver of flows into mutual funds," Putnam's Mr. Gibson says.
Other sources include "bonuses, rollovers, salaries" and lump-sum payments made to victims of corporate downsizing.
Each wave of layoffs is "a boon for mutual funds," Mr. Gibson says.
In January, several fund groups, including T. Rowe Price Associates Inc. and Fidelity Investments, the largest fund manager in the U.S., say they have seen record inflows into their stock and bond funds.
T. Rowe Price says flows into funds investing in foreign stocks are strong, despite turmoil in some Pacific stock markets.
But domestic-stock funds also are pulling in big sums at T. Rowe Price.
Templeton Funds, the foreign-stock fund division of Franklin Resources Inc., says that inflows in January set a new record, beating the prior hurdle set only in December.
Most foreign stock-markets handily outperformed the U.S. stock market last year, attracting big sums of money.
The popularity of international-stock funds also reflects "some concern over high valuations in the U.S. market," says Gregory Johnson, a senior vice president at Franklin.
Fidelity says it has received strong inflows into all types of stock funds in January, including conservative and aggressive domestic-stock funds as well as international funds.
Counting stock and bond funds, Fidelity expects to pull in $2.9 billion in January, an amount greater than the cash flow into the entire fund industry during any single month of 1989.
Invesco Funds Group says the flow of cash into its funds accelerated in January from December, despite the controversy surrounding its former star manager, John Kaweske.
Invesco fired Mr. Kaweske early in January for not reporting some personal stock trades.
But the biggest fund for which he was a manager, Invesco Industrial Income, has gotten an inflow of $57 million in January, raising its assets under management to more than $4 billion.
Bond-fund inflows of $114 billion during 1993 also set a record, beating the $109 billion that flowed into bond funds in 1986.
But cash flows into bond funds dropped off late in 1993, as interest rates spiked up, hurting the performance of long-term bond funds.
Moreover, investors in popular mortgage funds suffered disappointing full-year results.
Bond funds took in $5.8 billion in December, up from $4.1 billion in November, but still below the monthly levels in most of 1993.
Government-bond funds, including those investing in mortgage-backed securities, had outflows of $2.1 billion in December.
Cash flows into taxable-bond funds rose in January at several fund groups.
An outflow of investors redeeming or exchanging out of taxable-bond funds subsided after December, when rising interest rates hurt bond-fund returns.
Higher taxes and their disclosure in "paycheck shock" is driving many investors into municipal-bond funds in January, says Neal Litvack, an executive vice-president at Fidelity.
Sales of tax-exempt bond funds were up four-fold from December at Vanguard Group, and were also up sharply at Franklin, Putnam and other groups.
Investor sentiment rose in January, according to a University of Michigan investor survey, to the highest level since the survey began in January 1991.
But the survey, sponsored by Fidelity, also found that fewer investors were planning to buy stock funds in the near future.
ONE DOLLAR, ONE VOTE: Fidelity Investments has been gradually changing the way its shareholder votes get counted.
Since November, it has gotten shareholders at 20 funds to approve "dollar based" voting on proxies, in which each holder's vote is weighted by the dollar size of the holding, not the number of shares held.
Fund groups such as Fidelity often fold many individual funds into a single "trust."
The price of a single share can vary from fund to fund.
An investor putting $70 into one fund might buy a single share, while another with $70 might buy 10 shares of another fund in the same trust.
Dollar-based voting would give both investors the same say in proxy votes.
Fidelity says the change in voting will eventually apply to all its funds.
One fund with the proposal up for a vote is giant Magellan, even though there are no other funds in Magellan's trust.
FRANKLIN'S FEES: Franklin Resources is asking shareholders to approve some fee changes.
It wants to eliminate the sales charge it imposes on reinvested dividends, an unusual practice in an industry where most companies don't charge such a sales "load" on reinvested payouts.
But Franklin also wants to raise the front-end sales charge on its funds, to a maximum of 4.5% for most stock funds and 4.25% on bond funds, up from 4% on both.
And it's asking permission to levy so-called 12b-1 annual fees, which are small but recurring sales charges that compensate brokers.
The new 12b-1 fees will be smaller than those levied by many other fund groups.
But their levels will gradually rise.
