In response to your Feb. 4 page-one story "Guns and Butter: Khashoggi Is Back, Angling for a Profit From Mideast Peace":
1. I am not and never have been an "arms dealer" or "gunrunner," notwithstanding the fondness of the press, including the Journal, for describing me as such.
In the interests of my country, Saudi Arabia, I have acted as a consultant to major Western companies on defense matters.
The representatives of these firms, together with their respective governments, have always dealt on a government-to-government basis with Saudi Arabia.
Once contracts had been concluded between the governments, my companies in Saudi Arabia acted as sponsor of the particular Western company involved and assisted their personnel with visas, local accommodations and related in-country support.
I and my companies have never worked on defense matters outside of Saudi Arabia.
The intelligence services of the Western countries that are the principal suppliers to Saudi Arabia are well aware that I and my companies have assisted in defense matters only in Saudi Arabia and nowhere else.
2. Concerning Israel, I have always believed that the Israelis and Arabs would have to live together and eventually reach a comprehensive peace settlement.
I initiated open, public meetings with Israeli officials to explore with them what they were thinking and to learn what were their hopes and ambitions for the area.
These meetings were not secret.
They were undertaken by me solely in my private capacity and not as an official of my government.
I am a businessman, not a politician.
I am a Saudi citizen loyal to my king and country, and I will go to Israel only when my government allows me to do so.
3. My efforts with the Iranians were focused on attempting to open a dialogue between them and the Americans for the purpose of finding a solution to the terrible Iran/Iraq war.
We worked with the Khomeini regime.
We did not conspire against it.
We sought to gain the cooperation of the Americans to deal with Khomeini's representatives to see if a peaceful solution could be found.
4. I am pleased to see that the Israelis are on the threshold of a peace agreement for Gaza and part of the West Bank.
It is a beginning that I hope will provide the foundation for a comprehensive peace throughout the Middle East and give stability to the region.
Adnan M. Khashoggi
