Isabel Tin-Aung doesn't want to know.
Ms. Tin-Aung, an associate at Human Rights Watch in New York, would rather not know how Nancy Kerrigan and Tonya Harding do in today's women's figure skating final at the Olympic Games in Lillehammer, Norway, before watching tonight's videotaped replay on CBS-TV.
She's not alone.
Olympics viewers in the U.S. are struggling to ignore the six-hour time difference hoping there will still be some suspense when they watch the Kerrigan/Harding faceoff during primetime.
The final begins at about 7 p.m. in Norway -- and at 1 p.m. EST in the U.S.
At Ms. Tin-Aung's office, a colleague, Ivan Lupis, was on a campaign to tell everyone the news of Wednesday's short-program contest: Tonya stumbled, Nancy won.
"Anytime someone came up to me and said `Nancy' or `Tonya,' I covered my ears and ran away from them," Ms. Tin-Aung says.
Michael Mills, a reporter for Congressional Quarterly in Washington, was doomed from the start.
Wednesday afternoon, he got a computer message on the Tonya/Nancy results, which he managed to erase without reading.
Then he reiterated to a coworker that he just didn't want to know.
For most of the day, it worked.
But in the end, another colleague just couldn't resist broadcasting how America's most infamous skaters scored.
Suzanne Corcoran in Washington invited friends over on Wednesday to watch the replay.
"I was determined not to know, but people kept telling me lies like: `Nancy Kerrigan broke her leg.' or `A 4.0 is a good score if you're in grad school,'" says the developer.
"I really thought Nancy had done horribly, and then of course, I watched the performance."
At a National Association of Broadcasters meeting in Washington, an official offered to reveal the Kerrigan/Harding results.
Before he could begin, half the people in the room walked out.
At Louie's bar in Dallas, people watched the replay -- and most didn't know the outcome, says owner Louie Canelakes.
"An amazing number of people are watching figure skating," he says, adding that the contest is attracting as many viewers in the bar as a professional hockey game.
"Look at the amount of violence in skating now," he says.
