Tokyo stocks rose Tuesday, but ended far below their highs following late bouts of arbitrage selling.
London shares skidded 1.3% to the day's worst levels, pressured by weakness in the futures and bond markets.
Frankfurt prices rose, though a rally that began a day earlier stalled on worse-than-expected German economic data.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.60, up 0.15, reflecting higher Asia/Pacific markets and lower American and European markets.
Office equipment stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 135.98, up 2.15, or 1.6%, with Pitney Bowes of the U.S. posting a 2.6% gain in its local currency.
Tobacco stocks trailed at 81.10, down 1.60, or 1.9%, with B.A.TT Industries of Britain sliding 4.7% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which dropped 154.12 points Monday, rose 86.51 points to 19898.39, after peaking at 20090.71.
In trading Wednesday, the Nikkei fell 145.91 points to close the morning session at 19752.48.
Tuesday's first-section volume was estimated at 320 million shares, down from 343.3 million shares a day earlier.
Gainers easily topped losers, 565-423.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which fell 14.19 points Monday, rose 8.22 to 1616.32.
Tokyo's trading pattern was similar to the one on Monday, when prices rose sharply in the morning on buying by overseas investors and then retreated in the afternoon on selling by arbitragers ahead of Friday's quarterly settlement of futures and options contracts.
But the market managed to close in the black Tuesday because of a few new incentives, including an unconfirmed news report that the Japanese government will lift its ban on corporate stock buybacks sooner than anticipated.
The Nikkei once again met tough resistance above 20000, a level at which corporations and tokkin specified money trust funds have been selling positions to book profits ahead of the end of the fiscal year on March 31.
This has made other investors cautious.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index tumbled 41.5 points to 3264.4, just 0.1 point above the intraday low and down from the session's peak of 3316.1.
The FT 30-stock index shed 25.4 points, or almost 1%, to 2559.0.
Volume was 677.9 million shares, compared with 576.1 million shares a day earlier.
The exchange continued to be swayed by the performance in bond markets, where investors were still nervously anticipating a U.S. increase in interest rates and thus were reluctant to drive prices up.
This scenario has overshadowed solid fundamentals for British companies, which have posted financial results in line with expectations and raised dividends a bit.
Shares yesterday slipped into negative territory soon after the opening, as British industrial production figures for January were stronger than expected; the data suggested a cut in British base lending rates will be less likely, giving investors an excuse to take profits.
And a weak start on Wall Street helped accelerate London's losses in the late going.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index rose 15.13 points to 2124.04, though this represented a decline from aftermarket trading Monday, when bond markets strengthened after a surprisingly noninflationary settlement was concluded in the western German metalworking industry.
Yesterday, the market's pace was reined in by data on western Germany's 1993 fourth-quarter gross domestic product, which contracted from the previous quarter rather than staying unchanged as anticipated, and by an expected increase in the region's joblessness in February.
Though the market has rallied since last Wednesday's sharp drop in German bonds, investors are persistently jittery and more sensitive now to bad news, such as the latest economic data.
In Paris, stocks finished mixed to lower following three straight sessions of gains, as participants trolled for clues about global interest rates.
Amsterdam prices also had a mixed performance, with many easing in line with other European bourses and prices of Dutch and German bonds.
In Milan, shares rose, as buying in the telecommunications sector spread to other issues, though a late consolidation of positions limited gains.
In Madrid, prices eased, as fresh declines in the bond market led investors to lighten holdings after three sessions of strong rises.
In Stockholm, equities declined as bond yields rose, but some blue chips managed to buck the downward trend.
In Sydney, share prices rallied for a second day and finished 1.3% higher, as fears diminished about the interest-rate outlook in the U.S. and Britain after major overseas stock markets strengthened Monday.
And in Hong Kong, stocks jumped 2.3%, extending the rebound to three sessions and a 4.9% overall climb, partly from scaled-down selling by foreign investors.
Since last Friday, stocks have recovered some of the losses of the past two weeks, though turnover has been lackluster and institutional investors scarce because of concerns about the British colony's proposed electoral reforms and about China's ability to retain favorable trade status with the U.S.; the Hong Kong and Chinese economies are closely linked.
In Singapore, equities fell across the board but ended above intraday lows in slow dealings; market sentiment remained clouded by worries about higher interest rates.
But in Kuala Lumpur, following an intraday slide that threatened to extend several sessions of losses, shares rebounded to end with gains, after support emerged for blue chips.
In Taipei, shares continued skidding, and the main index lost 3.4%, with issues in all sectors pulled down partly by Taiwan trust companies' failure to attract foreign funds for stock investments.
The market jumped last Friday in anticipation of the Taiwan central bank's decision, which came Saturday, to raise the cap on direct foreign investment in the bourse.
Analysts said reality set in following the brief euphoria, though they expect a positive long-term effect.
In Manila, in the wake of a technical rally, shares fell in light trading as investors awaited first-quarter Philippine corporate results to make buying decisions.
In Seoul, stocks tumbled 1.2% as fears lingered about liquidity policies of the South Korean central bank; its tight monetary stance has narrowed institutions' buying.
But in Wellington, prices surged 1.4% in light trading on a moderate rally in the New Zealand bond market and in reaction to Wall Street's strong climb Monday.
In Mexico City, stocks sank 1.2% on some profit-taking that reversed early gains after Wall Street turned sour.
The Mexican exchange was still preoccupied by coming elections and political dealings to resolve a peasant uprising, and discouraged by disappointing fourth-quarter economic growth and corporate earnings.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
