Postmaster General Marvin Runyon is backing a 10.3% increase in postal rates, but there are signs that board members who must support the boost don't think it would be enough.
The 10.3% increase, which would apply evenly to all classes of mail, is the lower of two proposed rate increases that will be presented to the U.S. Postal Service board in the next few days.
The other plan would impose varied increases on different classes of mail, for an average increase of 13.8%, according to people with knowledge of the plans.
The board is expected to make its decision next month, generating a filing for a rate increase with the independent Postal Rate Commission.
Higher rates would likely go into effect in early 1995.
The lower increase would boost the price of mailing a typical first-class letter to 32 cents, while the larger one would lift the price to 33 cents.
The most recent rate increase took effect in February 1991, lifting the cost of mailing a first-class letter four cents, to 29 cents.
By the time any rate increase now being considered is put into effect, the inflation rate will have gained a cumulative 14% or 15% from early 1991.
Mr. Runyon, who has embarked on a much-publicized cost-cutting effort at the agency, is said to be eager to keep the average increase below the inflation number.
Neither he nor other postal officials could be reached for comment on the plans.
Late last week, for the first time, Mr. Runyon said he backs the smaller, 10.3%, increase.
At a meeting with postal employees and business mailers in Harrisburg, Pa., Mr. Runyon said, "I'm personally pushing that, but the board of governors makes the final decision," the Harrisburg Patriot reported.
Business mailers are eager to get board backing for the 10.3% boost, in part because it would likely sidestep legal wrangling that typically has followed rate hikes in which increases varied for different classes of mail.
On Wednesday, the Mailers Council, a group of the nation's biggest mailers, plans to hold a news conference to back the across-the-board rate increase.
Groups as varied as the American Bankers Association and the Greeting Card Association also are expected to join the call.
Business officials threaten that if the higher, 13.8%, average boost is supported by the board, the consensus would break down and the rate-setting process would turn into a legal mess.
But officials both inside and outside the Postal Service are beginning to doubt the agency's ability to make do with a 10.3% increase.
Rates must be high enough to keep the Postal Service solvent, an increasingly tough chore as alternative methods for delivering documents, advertising and other messages -- such as facsimile machines and telemarketing -- continue to eat into the Postal Service's core franchise.
Under the law, the governors must be able to justify why they believe any rate increase will be sufficient to cover costs.
One senior board member, who declined to be quoted, expressed skepticism that the Postal Service can make ends meet with a 10.3% boost.
And officials outside the agency say they have spoken with other board members who have expressed similar doubts.
Outside the agency, business-mailing leaders are beginning to grow discouraged with the Postal Service's finances.
"It's extremely important that the governors give serious consideration to the 10.3% across-the-board increase," said Gene Del Polito, executive director of the Advertising Mail Marketing Association.
"But with each successive accounting period, skepticism regarding the probability of management's chance of success grows."
