From his narrow, borrowed office, Predrag Medjeski is doing what he can for Bosnian national pride.
The executive director of the Olympic Committee of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Medjeski is trying to persuade a bobsled bureaucrat to give his country's bob team a starting spot at the Winter Olympics even though the squad won't have appeared in the three international meets required.
They have a good excuse: Half the team is stuck in Sarajevo, and the entire squad hasn't competed together for two years.
The bobsledders, Mr. Medjeski says, are doing "dry training" in the war-torn city, though he confesses he has no idea what that entails.
Mr. Medjeski, a six-foot, seven-inch former professional basketball player with deeply ringed eyes, is the only member of the Bosnian Olympic Committee living abroad and therefore the only one able to do much for his country's athletes.
In a job that requires him by turns to be nursemaid, lobbyist, quartermaster and fund-raiser, haggling with sports officials is a necessary part of what he describes as "saving our second-best athletes for the future of our sport."
Bosnia's finest, he says, have long since been "lost for sport.
Either they're in armies, or they have been wounded or killed."
Bosnia's Olympic hopefuls are athletes who were too young to fight.
Most were 18 or younger when they slipped out of Sarajevo last year.
In all, there are 88 of them strewn around the world, and much of Mr. Medjeski's time is devoted to arranging their care and training.
There is a basketball team in Sycamore, Ill., cross-country skiers in Norway, boxers and handball players in Turkey and lugers in the German Alps.
Most host countries cover basic expenses.
But Mr. Medjeski, who has been in his job for a little more than a year, nonetheless must scrounge up everything from "visas to sport shoes" for his charges, who are as much refugees as they are hopeful Olympians.
Because they fled without baggage, Mr. Medjeski often has to find the athletes street clothes as well as training suits.
It's a lot of effort for what must seem to many a quixotic irrelevance: the sporting fortunes of a state battling for its life.
But for the 40-year-old Mr. Medjeski, survival is exactly what his work is about, not only saving the lives of athletes but also of a set of ideals.
It galls him when others can't grasp this, and he is particularly piqued that an Olympic-related charity in Lillehammer, Norway, raising money for Sarajevo refuses to give a small percentage of its funds to his organization.
Lillehammer is the site of the Olympic Games.
"In sport, we have kept the universality of Bosnia-Herzegovina alive.
My organization's president is a Croat, the secretary-general is a Muslim, and I'm a Serb.
And we don't make any distinction among the boys and girls" on the team, says Mr. Medjeski.
"This is our base for the future, having the athletes of all ethnic groups together.
I hope sports after the war will help to rebuild broken bridges between people."
Indeed, the internationalism of the Olympics and the multiculturalism of Sarajevo are connected.
"I always loved Olympism," he recalls.
"It's what brought me to Sarajevo" before the 1984 Winter Games, for which the Belgrade native was an organizer.
He stayed on to work in the tourist business and made Sarajevo his home.
Convincing potential donors that his work is about the future of Bosnian ethnic tolerance is none too easy.
So far, the Japanese Olympic Committee has made the only sizable cash gift -- $320,000.
The German Olympic Committee has provided Mr. Medjeski with his office.
His personal expenses are being covered by the Germans, but he has no idea how they will be repaid.
He is most disturbed by the United Nations' refusal to allow any athletes to leave Sarajevo on the return flights of relief missions.
A thick log of faxes and letters to U.N. officials and various foreign ministries attests to tireless lobbying.
All he hears in response, he says, is that "sport is not a part of any U.N. resolutions concerning war in Bosnia."
Still, Mr. Medjeski thinks last-minute pressure by Olympic officials may yet do the trick and get the bobsledders out before the start of the Games next month.
If they do, he will be delighted and says, "We'll have more athletes in the Olympic village.
We belong there.
We have a place there."
