Tough new penalties are in the works for corporate polluters, and opposition by business groups is proving to be intense.
For years, environmentalists have complained that judges across the country have gone easy on corporations accused of environmental wrongdoing.
With a few major exceptions, fines in such cases have been relatively small, partly because companies have been able to show that the problems were the result of isolated employee misconduct.
Now, a bipartisan panel of the U.S. Sentencing Commission is proposing stronger measures.
The recommended changes in sentencing rules are complex, but the bottom line would be substantial new fines and a clear message to companies to overhaul their approach to complying with environmental laws.
If the commission approves the rules and Congress doesn't specifically negate them, they will go into effect automatically.
Currently, the commission is soliciting public comments.
The proposed guidelines use a byzantine rating system that starts by grouping offenses according to the seriousness of the crime and assigning them numerical rankings.
Points are then added or subtracted depending upon the existence of various aggravating or mitigating circumstances.
The recommended fines then vary according to the adjusted point totals, with the maximum punishment reserved for cases of intentional mishandling of toxic wastes in which top managers of a company are implicated.
The guidelines' main weapon is a requirement that companies maintain extensive internal programs to monitor pollution controls and compliance with environmental statutes.
In the past, companies have been able to get fines substantially reduced by showing that they maintained such programs.
But the proposed new guidelines require that companies take much greater precautions before they will be entitled to sentencing relief.
One big change: requiring that line managers be directly involved in auditing and monitoring environmental practices.
"It is not going to be enough to go to a law firm and get a 100-page document that says a lot of nice aspirational things," says Jack Coffee, a Columbia University law professor, and a member of the advisory panel.
The prospect of tougher sentences comes at a time when the Clinton administration has vowed to crack down on polluters in court.
Though the environment was once an enforcement wasteland, the number of indictments of companies and corporate officials for environmental offenses has more than tripled since 1983, according to Beveridge & Diamond, a Washington law firm specializing in environmental law.
The new administration is widely expected to increase that pace substantially.
"Environmental crimes are a particularly insidious form of criminal conduct," says Jonathan Turley, a law professor at George Washington University, who sat on the advisory panel.
At the same time, many business groups feel the sentencing proposals are overly harsh and fail to recognize that companies themselves can be victims of environmental crimes by employees.
Such crimes can be expensive, both in terms of cleanup costs and public relations.
Groups including the National Association of Manufacturers and the American Petroleum Institute, among others, have lobbied against the sentencing proposals.
And the business-oriented Washington Legal Foundation has sued the advisory panel for holding its deliberations in secret.
These groups all say they are concerned that the new fines would be counterproductive.
"It is going to be a disaster for corporations," says Victoria Toensing, a former Justice Department official in the Reagan administration who has been lobbying against the rules on behalf of a coalition of corporate interests.
"We aren't going to help the environment.
We are only going to harm corporations."
The panel's work is an outgrowth of a 1991 effort to set guidelines for sentencing corporate defendants in general.
At the time, the sentencing commission, an arm of the judiciary which seeks to promote uniform treatment of defendants convicted of comparable offenses in the federal courts, decided that environmental cases merited special attention.
It commissioned the advisory panel to study the issue, and last November the panel released its report.
A major premise of the commission's work is that past fines have been too small.
Between 1984 and 1990, for instance, the median fine obtained in criminal prosecutions was roughly $50,000, according to Mark Cohen, a Vanderbilt University economist and professor who teaches a course on environmental management.
More recently, the fines have started to increase, most notably with the $1 billion that Exxon Corp. paid in connection with settling criminal and civil claims in connection with the 1989 Prince William Sound oil spill.
Provisions of the new sentencing guidelines could rapidly increase the stakes in such cases.
The guidelines, for example, require courts to impose a fine for each count in an indictment for which a defendant is found guilty.
Under federal clean air and water statutes, prosecutors are permitted to count each day that a company is violating the law as a separate offense.
In prolonged cases, the fines could add up, with maximum fines of up to $500,000 for each count.
Another provision would set the minimum fine at no less than an amount equal to the costs of cleaning up the pollution.
While the panel didn't agree unanimously on the point, it has alarmed attorneys representing companies in such cases, who consider the idea overly punitive.
The sentencing commission has yet to act on the findings, and probably won't for months.
For one thing, the sentencing commission itself has several vacancies that the Clinton Administration must fill.
But the panel's recommendations will be hard to ignore completely.
The group's 16 members include a number of corporate general counsel and defense counsel, along with environmentalists and prosecutors.
Among those supporting the draft: Chemical Waste Management Inc., the nation's largest hazardous-waste concern.
James Banks, Chemical Waste Management's vice president, government affairs, says he didn't agree with everything in the final report.
But he suspects that tougher sentences may be inevitable because of heightened concern over the environment.
"The big question mark for me, is not whether, but when," he says.
Law Notes. . .
WHO'S NEWS: Twenty-five intellectual-property lawyers from the recently dissolved law firm Shea & Gould have joined Rogers & Wells, a 360-lawyer firm in New York.
Shea & Gould, also based in New York, closed its doors in January amid conflicts over the firm's future management.
