When Elizabeth Crow took over as editor of Mademoiselle last October, she found herself in an office that looked like a downtown disco, with a chandelier, blue walls and red velvet curtains.
Now the walls are white and the sunny, neat room looks like an office again.
It's a radical change back to a traditional look, the same shift she is making in the magazine.
The March issue, which hits newstands next week, is her first full effort as editor in chief, and it harks back to Mademoiselle's past as a mainstream magazine for young women.
Founded in 1935, Mademoiselle has long been a key property in the Conde Nast stable of glossy lifestyle magazines owned by the Newhouse family's Advance Publications Inc., along with Glamour, Vogue, Self, GQ and Gourmet.
Mademoiselle suffered an identity crisis over the last year, however, as Ms. Crow's short-lived predecessor, Gabe Doppelt, tried to remake it into a hip, cutting-edge fashion and lifestyle magazine.
The changes radically altered the look and content of the magazine, alienating readers, advertisers -- and Conde Nast Chairman S.I. Newhouse Jr.
Ms. Doppelt left her post last fall after only nine issues.
Although Mademoiselle's pages shrank only 2% in 1993, to 1,275 pages, the magazine's publisher says Ms. Doppelt's October and November issues so turned off advertisers that ad pages for the first quarter of 1994 fell 18%.
Pages are expected to be up for April.
Ms. Crow says she wants to boost ad pages at Mademoiselle, which trails Cosmopolitan and Glamour by hundreds of pages annually.
Ms. Crow has abandoned the grunge look and rebellious one the magazine boasted under Ms. Doppelt, whose first issue came out last March.
Instead of articles on lesbianism and hair dye as a possible cause of cancer, there are articles on celibacy and "Going, going, blonde."
Initial reactions to Ms. Crow's remake are largely positive, and she is beginning to draw some new advertisers.
But there are some in fashion and beauty circles who fear she may err in making the magazine too mass-market, formulaic and bland.
Ms. Crow, who is 47 years old compared with Ms. Doppelt's 33, has had to endure snotty trade magazine reports that she's too old and frumpy to know what hip women in their 20s want.
And there were rumors -- which she denies -- that Mademoiselle has lately had trouble attracting top models and photographers.
Ms. Crow says the magazine might have been more hip before, but she thinks it made a lot of young women feel insecure, whereas she wants to be reassuring.
She says she hasn't banned super-short skirts and see-through blouses in fashion spreads because she's a prude, but because young women in focus groups say these are clothes they would never wear.
To make the magazine more relevant and practical, she has increased the number of first-person features and added six monthly "Q & A" pages on topics from sex to money.
"I think the remake is brighter, more optimistic," says Elliot Lasky, vice president, marketing for Matrix Essentials Inc., a line of beauty products sold in hair salons.
Matrix is advertising in the April issue, its first time in the magazine.
"We considered advertising in Mademoiselle before, but the changes helped swing our decision," says Mr. Lasky.
"Before, it was too doom-and-gloom and didn't have as strong a focus on beauty."
Some current advertisers haven't upped their pages, but seem favorably impressed by Ms. Crow's altered focus.
"To get to their goal of two million circulation (from the current 1.1 million), they have to broaden the magazine," says Arie Kopelman, chairman of Chanel SA.
"My reaction is to wait and see how they do, but Ms. Crow does seem to have a real vision of what the book will look like and be about."
Ms. Crow's track record includes a successful relaunch of Gruner & Jahr USA Publishing's teen magazine YM, which grew in circulation from 835,000 in 1989 to 1.9 million in 1993.
And she has the support of Mr. Newhouse in her strategy to boost Mademoiselle's fortunes.
Shortly after she started, says Ms. Crow, she told Mr. Newhouse that "some people are acting like mass is a dirty word," in response to her plans to bring Mademoiselle back to a mainstream audience.
He replied, she says, "Well, it sounds good to me."
