When I got off my plane at the Oslo airport more than two weeks ago, thoroughly jet-lagged, I headed straight for the gift shop.
There I got good news and bad news.
The good news was the rich array of souvenir T-shirts with winter sports themes.
One featured Hagar the Horrible, the comic-strip Viking who I'm told is bigger in Norway than in the U.S., waving his sword and saying something in Norwegian.
Hagar at the Olympics!
Who'd have thunk it?
The bad news was that closer inspection revealed that none of the shirts contained the words "Olympics" or, even "Lillehammer 1994," to identify them as genuine mementos of the Winter Games.
No Olympic T-shirts?
I asked the clerk in disbelief.
"You should go to Lillehammer," he answered.
Go to Lillehammer I did, there to search the bazaars for T-shirts.
In that I've had quite a bit of company.
People from many nations may have come here as athletes, officials, journalists, pickpockets or plain spectators, but our true mission at this and similar events is to fill T-shirt orders for the folks back home.
Neither gold medals nor sterling prose can make up for a failure in that department.
When, you may ask, did T-shirts get to be so important?
I don't know.
I do recall a time when a T-shirt was a T-shirt, white usually, but unremarkable even when colored.
Then someone had the idea of putting pictures and words upon them, and couture has never been the same.
That person hatched an industry of world-wide significance.
Like the guy in "The Godfather," he or she can whisper to his or her cronies, "We're bigger than U.S. Steel."
There are other souvenirs to be had here besides T-shirts, of course.
There are Kristin and Hakon dolls, depicting the Games' flaxen-haired child mascots.
There are all manner of trolls, the stooped, hairy, ugly Norwegian folk critters this land would be better off ditching.
There are horned plastic Viking helmets.
There are the beautiful, multicolored native sweaters.
But the dolls and the helmets are strictly for tots, the sweaters are too expensive for mass purchase, and nobody asked me to bring back a troll.
T-shirts remain the perfect, please-everyone gift, especially because, these days, one size (extra large) fits all.
T-shirt shopping isn't as easy as it may sound because the idea is to bring home shirts that have some style and local flavor as well as commemorate an occasion.
At the 1986 Goodwill Games in Moscow, a T-shirt "must" event, the only shirts available were through the Turner Broadcasting Co. sponsors, the Soviets being unswift in matters of commerce.
Even the Turner offerings fell short, though, because their mottos were in English, and nobody wanted to come home from the U.S.S.R. with that.
Then somebody (OK, me) suggested they print up a batch in the Cyrillic alphabet.
They sent the instructions to their Atlanta base, and, soon, back came the appropriate goods.
The result was a souvenir to savor.
As a veteran of six Olympics, I can report similar problems at these affairs.
The rub usually has come from the International Olympic Committee, which in the name of profit and propriety clamps a tight grip upon the use of the Olympic name and five-ringed symbol.
In Calgary six years ago, the IOC went so far as to dispatch its briefcase brigade to thwart a "Miss Nude Olympics" contest at a topless bar.
The bar dropped the name but staged the contest anyway.
Slavish compliance with IOC licensing agreements, coupled with a lack of imagination and variety in the official stuff, has made some Olympics virtual T-shirt wastelands.
At the Winter Games in Albertville, every shirt bore the same, wimpy design of a small, stylized Olympic flame.
Barcelona and Seoul, sites of the past two Summer Games, were only a little better; their basic T-shirt design was splashier than Albertville's, but variety was nil.
The saving grace there was price: The shops in Seoul's Itaewon district, and on the Ramblas in Barcelona, were open to bargaining, and I was able to swing nice markdowns.
Calgary in the winter of 1988 was saved by a terrific, multiflag shirt that may or may not have carried the official stamp.
Los Angeles in '84 was T-shirt paradise because nobody paid the slightest attention to the IOC.
A million flowers blossomed; one of my kids still has an "Olympig Games" shirt from there depicting porkers in various athletic acts.
Norway is a law-abiding land, and so, alas, there hasn't been noticeable T-shirt bootlegging here.
Nonetheless, the official shirts are both interesting and varied, so good that they rank just behind L.A.'s overall.
The best, I think, bear the Games' venue symbols modeled on the lumpy-looking stick figure of a skier etched upon a cave wall hereabouts some 4,000 years ago.
My search has been narrowed to a particular shirt in which the lumpy guy, in gray, holds aloft the Olympic torch upon a field of black.
All that remains is the bargaining, but I'm having little luck there.
The disapproving looks I've received when I've suggested a discount for buying a dozen shirts indicate this goes against the national character.
But one merchant did offer to lop nine kroner off the per-shirt price of 129 kroner (about $17) that everyone charges, and I'm hopeful of doing better as the days of these Games dwindle down.
Time is the bargain-hunter's ally.
And if all else fails, I can always pay retail.
