Saudi Arabia agreed on a plan to restructure $9.2 billion in payments due over the next two years to five major U.S. defense contractors, the Saudi ambassador to the U.S. said.
The agreement is especially significant because it clears the way for a big Saudi purchase of commercial aircraft.
The Saudis are now expected within a few weeks to place orders for about $6 billion of civilian airliners from Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp.
While the restructuring wasn't expressly linked to the airliner purchase, "anything out of the way makes it easier to go on to the next decision," said a person familiar with both negotiations.
Prince Bandar bin Sultan said that the restructuring agreement was signed Saturday by the Saudi government, the U.S. Defense Department, and representatives of McDonnell Douglas, General Dynamics Corp., FMC Corp., Raytheon Co., and the Hughes Aircraft unit of General Motors Corp.
That agreement reworks the single largest Saudi arms purchase -- that of 72 state-of-the-art F-15 fighter jets from McDonnell Douglas for a total price of $9 billion over several years -- and refinances much of the other Saudi arms purchases planned over the next two years.
"We have an agreement, we've all signed it, and we're happy with it," Prince Bandar said in a telephone interview from Riyadh yesterday.
Instead of taking delivery of two F-15s a month starting sometime next year, as had been planned, the Saudis now will take only one.
But McDonnell Douglas won't suffer from that new schedule because the other F-15 it produces monthly will be bought by Israel, which just last week agreed to buy 20 F-15s for $2 billion.
"They'll be making two aircraft a month -- one for us, one for them," said a Saudi close to the negotiations.
If the Saudi cash position, which has been hurt by low oil prices, improves later this decade, then the country might go back to buying two F-15s a month, this person added.
The restructuring of the financing is essentially as expected.
The Saudis will cut back their total cash payments to all five companies to $1.5 billion annually over the next two years.
The remainder, about $6 billion, will be covered by loans guaranteed by the Saudi government, which also will pay interest on the loans.
But in a different approach, the loans won't be taken out by the companies.
Instead, the agreement calls for them to form a new corporation that will be the borrower.
Through this financing method, the debt won't appear either on Saudi books or on the balance sheets of the companies.
The idea behind the restructuring is to have the companies take as much in loans as needed to maintain minimum production levels required to avoid layoffs and fianncial disruption.
The purchase of commercial aircraft won't immediately increase Saudi cash outlays because those sales are expected to be financed by the U.S. Export-Import Bank.
