The battle to define Deval Patrick began even before he was officially nominated to be President Clinton's assistant attorney general for civil rights.
The day before the nomination, Clint Bolick, the conservative legal gadfly who led the successful assault on Lani Guinier, Mr. Clinton's first nominee for the job, sent news organizations a news release labeling Mr. Patrick a "stealth Guinier."
Two days later, Mr. Bolick followed with an op-ed piece in The Wall Street Journal whose headline called Mr. Patrick a "quota clone."
A Journal headline on an earlier Bolick broadside against Ms. Guinier had dubbed her a "quota queen."
But this time the administration, learning from past mistakes, moved just as swiftly to prevent the nominee from being placed in a box designed by adversaries.
Officials introduced the 37-year-old Boston lawyer to reporters prior to his first meeting with the president.
Later, they feted him with a reception attended by civil-rights activists and members of Congress.
And within an hour of his White House nomination ceremonies, they took him to Capitol Hill to meet Democratic and Republican legislators.
Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.) introduced him to lawmakers as they came off the Senate floor.
Mr. Clinton himself signaled the administration's new, more aggressive approach.
The nominee's critics "never believed in the civil-rights laws, they never believed in equal opportunity, they never lifted a finger to give anybody of a minority race a chance in this country," he said.
"If they attack his record, it means just exactly what we've all suspected all along: They don't give a riff about civil rights.
Well, those of us who care about civil rights were elected by the American people to take care of them, and that's what we intended to do."
All this has paid off for the White House.
So far, Mr. Patrick hasn't encountered substantial opposition in Congress.
"Nobody has given any indication of picking up the cudgel on this particular individual," says one GOP Senate staffer.
Of course, Mr. Patrick's nomination has been helped by the fact that, while he has participated in some important civil-rights cases, he lacks an extensive paper trail -- numerous published articles -- that opponents can cite to attack his ideas.
The administration presented him as a modern-day success story, a young jazz lover and a good cook who came from a broken home and surmounted welfare, poverty and turmoil growing up on Chicago's South Side.
He once described his childhood as "a life of want, of deeply segregated and ill-equipped schools, of gang violence and limited hope."
From there, he went to the exclusive Milton Academy in Massachusetts and then to Harvard University, where he played squash and earned an undergraduate degree in literature and a law degree.
Supporters promote Mr. Patrick as well within the mainstream of civil-rights thinking, a member of a blue-chip law firm and someone even Republicans can support.
In a June commencement address at Milton, he lamented the lack of a national consensus on civil rights.
The nation is "trapped in a pattern of neglect and retrenchment," he said, because of a "failure of will, a lack of leadership and fear . . .
Indeed, we seem to have abandoned any sense of the possibility of national community."
Mr. Bolick decries an argument Mr. Patrick made against the death penalty; the nominee had argued unsuccessfully before the Supreme Court that the death penalty is unconstitutional because it is used disproportionately against black men.
Mr. Bolick says the case indicates Mr. Patrick believes that otherwise fair procedures are racist if they produce unequal outcomes.
Equality of opportunity, not equality of results, should be the civil rights touchstone, Mr. Bolick argues.
The conservative critic also makes much of Mr. Patrick's association with the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People Legal Defense and Educational Fund; the nominee worked for that group after graduating from law school, and currently serves on its national board and New England steering committee.
Mr. Bolick contends that the organization relentlessly pushes racial quotas, busing and laws guaranteeing minority companies government work.
But few have bought the notion that the organization and Mr. Patrick are radical civil-rights outsiders.
Supporters point to the number of federal and state judges, law deans and university presidents who came from Legal Defense Fund ranks, and note that Solicitor General Drew Days worked for the group.
Indeed, this time it's civil-rights leaders and Mr. Clinton who are attempting to cast Mr. Bolick as outside the mainstream.
On public television's MacNeil-Lehrer NewsHour, Legal Defense Fund Executive Director Elaine Jones got Mr. Bolick to admit that even the late Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall probably, in Ms. Jones' words, "could not pass the Clint Bolick test."
