Pohang Iron & Steel Co. was awarded a lead share of a consortium here that will build and develop what is potentially one of the world's most lucrative cellular telephone systems.
The move by the Federation of Korean Industries settles weeks of feuding and back-room maneuvering over which company would run the consortium.
But it still leaves up in the air the question of how big a stake foreign concerns will get in the venture.
Under the plan, the steel giant, known as Posco, would control 15% of the group, while Kolon Group, a textile company and Posco's rival for the lead role, was given a 14% share.
The remaining equity reserved for Korean companies was divided among Korea Electric Power Corp., a public utility, and Korea's top four conglomerates: Daewoo Corp. and the Samsung, Hyundai and Lucky Goldstar groups.
A share of the project is also expected to be awarded to at least two foreign bidders under a plan designed to spur foreign investment.
But it still isn't clear which of the bidders -- PacTel Corp., GTE Corp., Southwestern Bell Corp., Nynex Corp., and Qualcomm Corp. -- would be asked to join.
The decision represents a victory for Posco, which was counting on the contract to spearhead its diversification drive into telecommunications.
But the process that led to the verdict -- a snarl of contentious, back-room quarrels among participants -- is seen as a setback for President Kim Young Sam's campaign to reduce the power of Korea's conglomerates, while bolstering the country's image with foreign investors.
Immediately after Posco was declared the winner, Kolon threatened to pull out of the consortium and take its three foreign partners -- Southwestern Bell, Nynex Corp., and Bell Atlantic Corp. -- with it.
Under pressure to resolve what has become a growing embarrassment for Korean industry, the federation announced the foreign participants would be chosen "by the consortium leader under the supervision of the federation."
By late Monday night, Kolon was withholding its support for the consortium in exchange for a role for Southwestern Bell, its main technology partner.
Under Posco's submission, PacTel was to be the dominant foreign participant.
"All bets are off," says a representative from one of the foreign firms.
"They're starting from ground zero."
Regardless of which foreign companies are included, U.S. commerce officials here are expected to protest what they consider a back-room deal cobbled together by the country's most powerful industrialists.
Although foreign companies have withheld formal complaints for fear of getting locked out of the lineup, that could change once the situation congeals.
U.S. trade officials have expressed dissatisfaction with the federation's decision to limit the foreign-equity level in the consortium to 20%, instead of the 33% maximum level specified under a 1992 telecommunications agreement between Seoul and Washington.
The mobile-phone network, which is estimated to have a subscriber base valued at about $6 billion by 2000, has been an irritant to both government and industry since it was first tendered in late 1992.
