The myth: The Texas garment industry is just about dead.
Within a few years, cheap imports from Mexico will deliver the knockout punch to an industry that's already reeling from low-wage foreign competition.
The reality: Don't start the eulogy just yet.
Not only is the Texas apparel sector actually bucking the national trend by adding new jobs these days, it's growing faster than any other manufacturing category in the state.
What's more, some economists argue that the North American Free Trade Agreement may wind up helping the Texas industry as much as it hurts.
Lowering tariff barriers could prove a windfall for manufacturers seeking new markets south of the border.
And a recent study by the University of Texas' LBJ School of Public Affairs contends that higher worker productivity in Texas, along with superior transportation and communications, will help keep the industry vital here.
"There are high-end niches in the apparel market that are very favorable to Texas producers," says Chandler Stolp, an associate professor at the LBJ School who worked on the study.
Of course, Nafta will hurt some people.
Smaller sewing shops along the border that compete largely on price have already lost ground to maquiladora operations in northern Mexico, and Nafta may well accelerate the exodus of lower-skill jobs, as tariffs are phased out over the next six years.
But there are also a host of garment manufacturers that plan to stay put and even expand here.
In El Paso, apparel jobs have jumped 28% since 1990, to 4,600, fueled largely by the explosive growth of big jean manufacturers.
For instance, Wrangler, a unit of VF Corp., Reading, Pa., has bought a new plant and built new warehouse and finishing facilities, roughly tripling employment to 2,100 since 1987.
Although labor costs are higher in Texas than Mexico, the company says it has little choice.
"For our particular product line, the demand is absolutely `Made in the U.S.A.,' " says Joe Maxey, division manager.
He adds that the company's research indicates Mexican consumers feel the same way; Wrangler is currently looking into ways to increase its penetration of that market.
Levi Strauss & Co., meanwhile, is working to make itself more competitive by converting to a "team manufacturing" process.
By creating flexible groups of employees trained in a number of different assembly steps -- and by giving them more responsibility -- Levi hopes to increase quality, shrink lead times, and improve inventory management.
And the impact of Nafta?
Not much, predicts Hector Venegas, a labor-market analyst for the Texas Employment Commission in El Paso.
"Nafta didn't suddenly give somebody the opportunity to move south of the border -- we had that opportunity before," he says.
"We're very much alive, thriving, even."
The same can't be said of the Dallas area, where apparel-manufacturing employment has fallen sharply over the past decade.
Still, according to the LBJ School study, the presence of the international Apparel Mart, the largest clothing-wholesale facility in the country, gives Dallas some competitive advantages.
The Mart, among other things, keeps local manufacturers much closer to cutting-edge fashion trends.
As a result, Dallas-area factories tend to focus on higher-quality market niches that place a premium on flexibility and timeliness -- a shortcoming of foreign manufacturers, which require longer lead times.
"Mexico's inability to respond quickly and to meet production schedules severely limits its competitiveness in an industry where flexibility and responsiveness to changing demands are critical," the LBJ School study says, noting that Mexico's apparel industry is "atomized," with some 17,000 factories, each with an average of eight to 10 workers.
That's one reason designer Leonard Steinberg decided against locating in Mexico when he split off from Victor Costa to start his own line of upscale ladies dresses and suits.
"In our business, when you need a button, you need it now; when a store needs a dress, it needs it yesterday," he says.
The Metroplex, with its easy airline connections all over the U.S., as well as its proximity to buyers, suited his needs much better.
What's more, Mr. Steinberg has discovered that Texas has its own cost advantages over some other garment centers.
He says his clothing, which retails for between $350 and $575, would have to be priced about 50% higher if it was manufactured in New York.
Jerell Inc., another Dallas clothing company, also plans to continue contracting with local sewing houses to manufacture its Melissa line of women's dress and Ali Miles sportswear.
"Our advantage is we can respond quickly to what's happening," he says.
Meanwhile, Jerell is licking its chops about the opportunities offered by Nafta: It recently converted its labels to English, French and Spanish to facilitate sales in Canada and Mexico.
Big Government: In case you didn't already know it, the comptroller's office reports that state government accounts for a big chunk of the Texas economy: 7.3%, to be exact.
In some markets, state spending is by far the biggest game in town.
For instance, the state accounts for 35.7% of all medical-services expenditures, and 9.7% of all building construction.
In more than half of all Texas counties, the public-school system is the biggest single employer.
