Today at 2 p.m. at the White House, President Clinton and Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa are scheduled to hold a news conference on U.S.-Japan trade disputes.
Mr. Clinton may attempt to use this news conference, as he used one last April, to browbeat a Japanese leader over Japan's alleged unfair trade practices.
Unfortunately, Mr. Clinton's trade policy appears to be increasingly dominated by both a contempt for American consumers and a disregard for accurately representing the actions of foreign nations.
An examination of last month's U.S.-Chinese conflict over textile imports sheds light on the values driving the U.S. position in its dispute with Japan.
On Jan. 17, Clinton administration trade officials proudly announced a settlement with China over alleged textile transshipments.
(The U.S. had accused China of illegally transshipping $2 billion of clothing and textile products a year into the U.S. market.)
While the U.S. portrayed the settlement as a victory for America, the deal was actually a stunning defeat for U.S. consumers -- and revealed how the Clinton administration grossly abuses trade statistics, a major sticking point in the current dispute with Japan.
U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor declared that the agreement will result in $700 million fewer textile and apparel imports from China between now and 1996 than would have been permitted under a previous agreement.
At the same time, he assured the media that the restrictions would not have a "significant or adverse" impact on U.S. consumers.
Yet, according to the arcane methods used to measure textile trade, the new agreement will result in the equivalent of more than one billion fewer bras or 475 million fewer pairs of underwear exported from China to the U.S.
The most surprising aspect of the U.S.-China agreement was the imposition of import quotas on silk clothing, which Mr. Kantor hailed as "a very important new restraint."
Silk imports have never faced high trade barriers because no silk clothing is made in the U.S.
Silk clothing may be the fastest growing segment of the American clothing business in recent years.
(China supplies 95% of the silk clothing sold in the U.S.) Silk exports from China to the U.S. have increased from $900 million in 1991 to $2.6 billion in 1993.
Under the new agreement, the rate of increase in silk clothing imports will be slashed from 100% a year to only 1%.
Since the demand for affordable silk clothing is surging, the restrictions will likely result in a spike in the price of some types of silk clothing.
Julie Hughes of Associated Merchandising Corp. observed, "People better go out and buy their silk underwear soon because once there are quotas, it will be too expensive."
For the first time in history, silk clothing has become affordable to working-class and middle-class Americans.
It has recently appeared in such mass market outlets as J.C. Penney, according to one textile trade expert.
This is a great example of a triumph of commerce bringing down a one-time symbol of elitism, if not snobbery.
But it may be short-lived.
Mr. Clinton's controls on silk imports will likely lead China to curtail exports of the lowest value silk garments first, as usually happens when import quotas are imposed.
Clinton administration policy makers feared that the sale of silk blouses was undercutting that of American-made cotton and polyester blouses.
Yet no analysis was made public actually showing that imported silk clothing is adversely impacting the price of American-made nonsilk clothing.
Instead, the new quotas are simply part of the continuing U.S. trade policy of viewing any and all clothing imports as enemies of national prosperity.
The textile agreement came at a time when the evidence the U.S. trade representative offered to prove China's guilt in the transshipment dispute is looking more and more absurd.
Mr. Kantor announced on Jan. 6 that China was guilty of illegally transshipping 625 million kilograms of shop towels through Honduras to the U.S.
He repeatedly used the 625 million figure, as it was by far the most egregious of the four examples the U.S. offered of pervasive Chinese trade cheating.
Yet, according to the U.S. Customs Service and Commerce Department, China has been penalized in the past five years for transshipping only about 626,000 kilograms of shop towels.
Diana Wildman, a spokeswoman for the U.S. trade representative, conceded on Jan. 19 that Mr. Kantor had been given the wrong number.
Perhaps Mr. Kantor's thousand-fold error -- and the nonchalant attitude of U.S. trade officials about his mistake -- reveals the Clinton administration's definition of "close enough for government work."
The absurdity of the 625 million kilogram accusation would have been clear if any of the U.S. government trade experts had checked some of the endless reports that the government issues on textile imports.
Total U.S. imports of shop towels from all nations are less than six million kilograms.
Moreover, the 625 million kilogram figure works out to roughly 19 billion shop towels.
Yet, the average U.S. consumption of shop towels is less than 400 million a year.
Thus, according to Mr. Kantor, the Chinese clandestinely shipped enough towels to satisfy U.S. consumption for almost the next half century.
This month, the Clinton administration appears obsessed with forcing Japan to agree to a compulsive affirmative action program for American exports -- with Japan promising that specific amounts of specific U.S. products will be bought in Japan.
Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman declared Wednesday, "What we will wait for, until hell freezes over, is an agreement that there will be measurements."
Yet last July, at a speech at Tokyo University, Mr. Clinton declared that the U.S. is not seeking "so-called trade by the numbers."
With such contradictions, the Japanese are naturally wary of signing any agreement that could later be distorted, thereby sowing the seeds of even greater trade conflicts.
Why should the Japanese believe that U.S. trade officials' numbers and assertions on U.S.-Japan trade are any more trustworthy than were their assertions last month on U.S.-Chinese trade?
The Clinton administration seems unlikely to curb its moral self-righteousness and protectionist demands in trade disputes with Asian nations.
But if the government cannot get its numbers straight, can we at least hope that it will avoid dragging American consumers and world trade down with its mistakes?
Mr. Bovard writes often on trade policy.
