It's hard to believe that in this culture of confession and complaint the personal essay has not received more official recognition.
Phillip Lopate has set out to remedy that injustice with a vast anthology that traces the tradition from Seneca onward.
"The Art of the Personal Essay: An Anthology From the Classical Era to the Present" (Anchor Books, 777 pages, $30) is so packed with personality and beguiling first-person prose that after reading the 70 or so pieces in the collection, I had to fight the urge to begin this review with a story from childhood.
The appealing assumption behind the personal essay, and this anthology, is that when writers speak of themselves they speak a universal language.
Seneca's plays may seem mannered and remote to modern readers, but we all can understand him when he complains about his asthma or describes the noisy distractions of living above a bath house.
Medieval Japanese poetry may require scholarly explication, but when Sei Shonagon, the 10th-century court lady, in her list of "Hateful Things," writes: "One has been foolish enough to invite a man to spend the night in an unsuitable place -- and then he starts snoring," we hear a voice that sounds strangely modern.
As Montaigne, the great-granddaddy of self-revelation, wrote, "And on the loftiest throne in the world we are still sitting only on our own rump."
Mr. Lopate follows the personal essay from its roots in antiquity -- when first-person pioneers like Plutarch wrote letters to smuggle their personalities into print -- through Montaigne and into England, where writers like Addison and Steele brought the personal essay to the newspaper long before Tom Wolfe cooked up the "new" journalism in our own age.
A large chunk of the book is devoted to America, and there is a generous selection from abroad, including a chilling account by Ivan Turgenev of the beheading of a murderer in Paris, and a long, exquisite meditation by the Japanese novelist Junichiro Tanizaki, "In Praise of Shadows," in which the writer laments the disappearance of the muted charms of Japanese culture under the harsh light of the West.
While individual essays are unfortunately undated, each author is introduced by a brief, informative passage.
Essays are grouped not only by broad categories like "The Rise of the English Essay" and "The American Scene," but, in a second table, by themes like "Ambition," "City Life" and "Food."
But despite the book's scholarly format, it is clear that Mr. Lopate, who has published two collections of his own personal essays, has followed the credo of the genre: He has chosen writers he likes.
This is a good book for restless readers, written by a restless and unsystematic bunch of writers who often change the topic midway through, quote classical authors when it suits them and quote themselves when it doesn't.
Many of these writers seem literally unable to sit still, and it's not surprising how many take travel as their subject: "On Going on a Journey" by William Hazlitt, "Street Haunting" by Virginia Woolf, "Going Out for a Walk" by Max Beerbohm (who confesses crankily: "It is a fact that not once in all my life have I gone out for a walk.
I have been taken out for walks; but that is another matter.")
This is the kind of anthology that, while perfect for the classroom (it even fulfills the multicultural criteria of modern curricula), belongs as well in a writer's workshop.
It is full of reminders of the pleasures and perils of the craft, from Carlos Fuentes's "How I Started to Write" to F. Scott Fitzgerald's dark confession of literary and emotional breakdown, "The Crack Up."
Frank O'Connor called his study of the short story "The Lonely Voice," and the same title could serve for this collection, for no matter how cheerful or garrulous the writers in this anthology may seem, the sheer solitude involved in writing is felt in every "I."
Personal essayists are like only children making the most of what is around them -- see M.F.K. Fisher on the potato chip, Charles Lamb on ears, Robert Benchley on his own face, G.K. Chesterton on a piece of chalk.
These writers have an uncanny talent for distilling their artistry into a small space, and a few pages is enough to give one a lasting taste of the brusque seductions of Hazlitt, the assertive modesty of E.B. White, the refined rage of James Baldwin.
Reading Woolf's three-page essay, "The Death of the Moth," is like swallowing all her books in a single pill.
The last 10 or so essays in the collection represent the work of contemporary writers, among them Adrienne Rich and Richard Rodriguez.
Perhaps because they are closer to us they seem easier to quarrel with as final statements in a book so filled with fine writing.
Not that there isn't much to admire here, including Mr. Lopate's own poignantly revealing "Against Joie de Vivre" and Joan Didion's "Goodbye to All That."
Anthologies help create genres.
Beyond the individual essays, Mr. Lopate has given us a genre perfectly adapted to our fractured, skeptical, confessional age.
Mr. Rosen is associate editor of the Forward.
