The Financial Accounting Standards Board is expected this week to approve a proposal to beef up disclosure requirements for holdings of derivative financial instruments.
Under a draft rule, all businesses and not-for-profit organizations would be required to disclose on financial statements the amounts, nature and terms of their derivatives.
The rule would include "options and caps," which aren't covered by an existing FASB derivatives-disclosure standard.
The FASB's existing standard requires disclosure of derivatives that are off an organization's balance sheet.
The new rule would cover on-balance-sheet derivatives in an effort to provide a more complete picture of an organization's holdings.
"A significant proportion of derivatives hasn't been required to be disclosed" before, said FASB Project Director Halsey Bullen.
The draft also would require organizations to disclose why they are holding or issuing the instruments.
This requirement is similar to derivatives-disclosure requirements that federal banking regulators released recently for comment.
Derivatives are financial instruments that organizations can use to hedge against swings in interest or exchange rates.
The growth in the use of derivatives has exploded in recent years.
Lawmakers have called on regulators to get a better handle on derivatives activities.
The FASB, the chief rule-setting body for accounting in the U.S., recently signaled it would move with unusual speed to publish a standard requiring disclosure for all derivatives instruments.
The move comes in response to pressure from Capitol Hill and such regulators as the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The FASB will discuss the rule Wednesday and is expected to vote on it this week.
If approved, the board will then issue the proposal for comment until mid-to-late June.
According to a summary the FASB agreed to at earlier meetings, the board is expected to require that organizations' disclosures show whether the fair values of off-balance-sheet financial instruments are unrecognized assets or unrecognized liabilities and report all fair-value information on derivatives together rather than in separate parts of their financial statements.
The board's draft, however, is expected to stop short of requiring organizations' management to disclose information they use to measure risk of derivatives and to assess how well they are meeting objectives for holding the instruments.
