WHITEWATER CLAIMED its first casualty and 10 officials were subpoenaed.
Clinton searched for a replacement for White House counsel Nussbaum, who agreed to resign amid criticism over his contacts with officials investigating the Clintons' Whitewater partnership.
Meanwhile, Nussbaum and nine other officials prepared to testify Thursday before a federal grand jury.
There was a growing likelihood that witnesses will be called before congressional panels, as key Democrats privately predicted that the hearings are all but inevitable.
For the White House to restore an aura of normality, a successor will have to be found quickly for Nussbaum, who leaves early next month.
A JURY CONVICTED all four defendants in the World Trade Center bombing.
The four men were convicted on Friday of conspiracy in last year's attack on New York's twin-tower complex that killed six and injured more than 1,000.
Many questions remain unanswered, including who financed and directed the attack.
The defendants face life in prison without parole when they are sentenced in May.
They also are unindicted co-conspirators in a coming terrorism case against an Egyptian cleric and 14 others.
The second trial, set to begin Sept. 19, is expected to last as long as a year and be much more political, confrontational and ultimately harder to prove.
Majority Leader Mitchell announced that he would retire from the Senate after this year.
The 60-year-old Maine Democrat said he wanted "to consider other challenges" -- potentially a Supreme Court seat or the baseball commissioner's post.
His unexpected decision on Friday stunned his colleagues.
Beijing authorities detained Zhai Weimin, a student leader from the 1989 pro-democracy movement, in a crackdown on dissent before Secretary of State Christopher's visit, scheduled to start Friday.
Meanwhile, a leading dissident, Wei Jingsheng, reportedly left Beijing a day after he was briefly detained.
A NATO jet swooped over Bosnia's besieged northern town of Maglaj after Bosnian state radio claimed Serb warplanes destroyed a bridge there.
With Serb troops barring access to the Muslim-held town, there was no way for NATO or U.N. officials to check the report.
But NATO officers raised questions about its veracity.
Israel's cabinet voted to order the nation's attorney general to file incitement charges against anyone who praises the Feb. 25 mosque massacre.
Those found guilty would face several years in prison.
But the government is hesitating to take any action on PLO demands for removal of Jewish settlements in occupied lands.
An antiabortion activist was convicted of first-degree murder Saturday for shooting Dr. David Gunn in March 1993 as he arrived at a Pensacola, Fla., clinic to perform abortions.
After the jury verdict was announced, a judge sentenced the defendant, Michael Griffin, 32, to life in prison with no chance of parole for 25 years.
Mandela pledged to do whatever he could to get all South African parties to run in the April election that will end white minority rule.
The African National Congress leader said groups that refused to register by last Friday's deadline should be allowed to change their minds.
Several pro-apartheid white groups are boycotting the election.
Masked gunmen killed 11 blacks living in a township outside the port city of Durban, police officials said.
About 20 tin and wood shacks were set on fire during the fighting in Bhambayi.
Ukrainian nuclear warheads arrived in Russia under a pact in which the Kiev government agreed to give up its nuclear weapons in exchange for fuel for its nuclear power plants.
The first train load carried 60 warheads that will be disassembled.
Foreign observers will be allowed to observe Mexico's elections for the first time, the ruling party said.
The announcement was made by Institutional Revolutionary Party's presidential candidate, Colosio, who has promised clean elections on Aug. 21.
Died: Melina Mercouri, about 70, Greek actress who starred in the 1960 film "Never on Sunday" and later served as her country's culture minister, in New York, of complications from lung cancer.
