Cadillac Fairview Inc., a real-estate concern that is closely held by a group of mainly U.S. pension funds, said it is negotiating to restructure about one billion Canadian dollars (US$748 million) of debt because of a further deterioration in the value of its property holdings.
Cadillac Fairview said it presented a restructuring plan to its bankers and shareholders that would reduce the company's debt in relation to the value of its assets.
As part of the restructuring package, details of which weren't disclosed, the Toronto company said it is considering raising new equity, selling nonstrategic assets and offering shares to the public.
Analysts said Cadillac Fairview might well have to tap public markets, or outside investors, if it wants to raise additional equity capital.
They pointed out that Cadillac Fairview ran into resistance from its existing institutional shareholders when it tapped them for additional funds in 1992.
"We're still at the very early stages" of the restructuring, a Cadillac Fairview spokesman said.
He said that the company currently is meeting all the interest payments on its debt.
However, the company is in violation of certain covenants of the loan agreement that limited its debt to at most 75% of the value of its property assets, the spokesman said.
The debt, owed to a consortium of 41 banks, stems from the purchase of Cadillac Fairview for about US$2 billion in 1987 by a group of institutions led by JMB Realty Corp. of Chicago.
The debt, which matures in 1997 and pays interest of 11.25% annually, is secured by Cadillac Fairview's ownership interest in various properties.
Cadillac Fairview, with interests in more than 44 million square feet of real estate, holds mainly a large portfolio of shopping centers in Toronto, Atlanta and other North American cities.
It also owns major office towers, including the Toronto-Dominion Centre and Vancouver's Pacific Centre.
Cadillac Fairview also has C$2.2 billion of debt, which is directly secured by its various properties, that is not affected by the proposed restructuring.
"Over the past few months, Cadillac Fairview has conducted an exhaustive review of its operations in light of the current environment for real estate in North America," said company president Graeme Eadie.
"The general decline in values that has occurred for all types of real estate and shifting capital markets requires Cadillac Fairview to explore restructuring alternatives."
Analysts have for some time flagged the Cadillac Fairview bank debt as a possible source of financial trouble for the company.
Toronto's Dominion Bond Rating Service almost a year ago dropped its rating on the debt by three notches, to triple-B, because of concern that the company could have trouble repaying the obligation.
"That was quite a severe downgrade.
That debt is what we're worried about," said Douglas Sawchuk, an analyst at Dominion Bond Rating.
