SOME EARPHONES can eliminate annoying noise.
Pilot headsets that use one noise to mute another are slimming down and simplifying for the consumer market, making life quieter for travelers, electric-lawnmower users, joggers and anyone who lives or works in a noisy place.
Airplane pilots and some factory workers have long used headsets that reduce high-frequency noise passively, with insulation, and low-frequencies actively, by emitting antinoise sound waves.
These headsets are big and bulky and cost up to $1,000.
NoiseBuster, the first consumer headset with active noise reduction, comes from Noise Cancellation Technologies, Stamford, Conn.
It has no passive insulation; high frequencies -- including speech, music and car horns -- get through.
But, via battery, it generates antinoise in the fatigue-producing low frequencies.
NoiseBuster retails for $149.
Users seem pleased.
Larry Schatz, a divorce lawyer, says NoiseBuster cut the sound of a jackhammer near his Manhattan office "to something very tolerable."
Jerry Mill, an investment analyst in Denver, says that when he flies, NoiseBuster "gets rid of that constant drone that wears you out."
Active Noise and Vibration Technologies, Phoenix, sells a competing headset for $190.
The company says its NQ100 cancels more noise and has a longer battery life than NoiseBuster.
A third company, Sennheiser Electronics, Old Lyme, Conn., claims substantially more noise reduction and battery life from its NoisGard headset, which retails for $990.
TO PARAPHRASE Talleyrand on war, schools are much too serious a matter to be entrusted only to the principal, teachers and students.
So a growing number of architects and planners are designing schools to provide space for the public -- before, after and even during the school day.
Penn High School in Mishawaka, Ind., has a public swimming pool, one end of which includes features for young children and the handicapped.
The builder, Greiner Engineering, Irving, Texas, added a daycare center for children of students, teachers and the public.
The new elementary school in Chelsea, Mass., designed by HMFH Architects, Cambridge, is meant to serve the public "24 hours a day, seven days a week, 12 months a year," says Stephen Friedlaender, one of the architects on the project.
It houses health clinics for the neighborhood and a police substation.
In New York, a new elementary school in Washington Heights was planned jointly by the school board and the Children's Aid Society.
The school has medical and dental clinics for students and their families and outdoor lighting so the playground can be used until late at night.
New York architects Gruzen Sampton arranged the gym, auditorium and lunch room so they can be used during nonschool hours without opening the whole school.
ONCE IN A WHILE, a simple product appears in this world of high-tech complexity.
DrumWic is an eight-inch piece of stainless steel, bent into a hook and lined with felt.
When draped over the rim of a steel drum or barrel, the device uses capillary attraction and gravity to drain water, nearly one quart an hour, off the lid.
When barrels are rained on, their contents can become contaminated with water sucked in by pressure changes or leaked in through rust.
Some 75 million 55-gallon steel drums are in use in the U.S.; most hold chemicals or petroleum products.
Some drum owners choose to store them indoors, at a high price.
DrumWic, which costs $2.75 a piece, is made by Lee Technology, Huntington, W.Va.
LeSac Corp., Michigan City, Ind., sells its own Drum Wick, a plain piece of felt, without metal backing, that's glued to the top and side of a barrel.
This Drum Wick costs only 15 cents, but it doesn't last as long as DrumWic and it isn't reuseable.
By far the most popular barrel protection is the plastic or rubber lid, which snaps over the steel drum lid like a Tupperware top.
But plastic lids, which cost about the same as DrumWics, are unreliable.
"The sun breaks them down and the winds shred them," says Ed Keil, environmental coordinator for E.G.&G., Inc., a Rocky Flats, Colo., company that cleans up polluted places.
Mr. Keil is using 1,200 DrumWics and has ordered 400 more.
Drum Pal, a rubber lid made by Uniroyal, stands up better than plastic, but costs $7.50 each and prevents easy viewing of the barrel label.
In the brawny world of steel drums, macho image counts for a lot.
Ron Martinkus is product manager at Basco, an industrial catalog house based in University Park, Ill.
While Basco will soon begin selling DrumWic, Mr. Martinkus remains unconvinced.
"A little piece of felt doesn't appear to have the meat behind it," he says.
