Salomon Inc.'s second-largest shareholder, the wealthy Dart family of Sarasota, Fla., made a huge bet that the stock of the New York brokerage house would fall even as its largest shareholder, Warren Buffett, was beefing up his stake.
A group led by Dart Financial Corp. sold short 3.21 million Salomon Inc. shares on March 3 and March 4 at prices ranging from $49 to $49.62, raising $158.3 million, according to Securities and Exchange Commission documents.
Short-sellers borrow shares and sell them, betting the price will be cheaper by the time the shares must be replaced.
For the Darts, owners of privately-held foam-cup maker Dart Container Corp., shortselling is an efficient way to pare their 6.6% position in Salomon without flooding the market with Salomon shares -- and without losing their votes as holders.
But, instead of falling, Salomon's share price has climbed on news that Mr. Buffett has recently sharply increased his stake.
Mr. Buffett purchased more than 5.5 million Salomon shares in purchases from Feb. 3 through March 4, SEC filings show, bringing his stake in the firm to 19.04% from 14.7%.
He bought the majority of those shares on March 4, the day after the Dart Financial Group began short-selling.
His purchases were made through a unit of his Omaha, Neb., company, Berkshire Hathaway Inc.
Both the Dart Financial Group and Salomon Brothers Inc. declined to comment.
Mr. Buffett could not be reached for comment.
So far, the market is betting with Mr. Buffett.
While Salomon shares initially slipped on the news of Dart Financial's short-selling, Salomon shares closed Friday in New York Stock Exchange trading at $52.125, up 37.5 cents.
The Dart family purchased most of its stake in Salomon, 6.4 million of its approximately 7.7 million shares, in the weeks following Salomon's disclosure in August 1991 that it had violated federal bidding regulations in Treasury bond auctions.
During the subsequent government investigation, which resulted in Salomon paying a $290 million fine, Salomon's stock dropped.
The Darts paid an average of $24.88 a share, SEC filings show.
The two savvy investor groups both have enormous access to, and knowledge of, Salomon's inner workings.
Mr. Buffett is former interim chairman and remains a member of the board.
And the Darts are one of Salomon's biggest customers, having bought a $1.4 billion stake in Brazilian loans mainly through Salomon Brothers.
Moreover, the Darts have strong ties to the firm's trading and emerging markets executives and may know more about that area because of those ties.
Many Wall Street firms and hedge funds lost millions in emerging-markets trading in February.
Salomon is known for the sharp swings in its trading profits from quarter to quarter, volatility that the company said it has taken substantial moves to address.
For the fourth quarter of 1993, Salomon posted $508 million in pretax profit from its proprietary-trading operation.
But that operation had a $173 million loss in the third quarter.
Mr. Buffett paid prices for the shares he bought in February and March of $47.98 to $50.70 each, paying a total of $272.5 million, for a paper profit so far in excess of $12 million.
Notes Guy Moszkowski, brokerage-industry analyst for Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., "Buffett's record is almost unsurpassed."
