In the private-label business, "PC" doesn't mean politically correct.
The initials stand for President's Choice, an extensive line of upscale foods that promoters say represents the future for successful supermarkets.
President's Choice, and its primary pitchman, David A. Nichol, have achieved an extraordinary marketing feat: a private label with cachet.
Private-label products whose quality equals or exceeds national-brand products -- but are less expensive -- have long been a staple of European grocers.
But in the U.S., house brands traditionally have been viewed as poor relations.
Increasingly, however, supermarkets are using private-label products -- and upscale lines of them -- as a competitive weapon.
A&P has a premium house brand called Master Choice; Safeway has Select.
Vons in California features Royal Request, while rival Ralph's Grocery has its Private Selection label.
Eight big U.S. chains in major cities -- including New York, Chicago and Los Angeles -- carry President's Choice, which was created 10 years ago by Loblaw Cos. Ltd. of Toronto.
Today, President's Choice is the leading grocery house brand in Canada.
In the U.S. it is featured in American Stores Co.'s Jewel and Star units and D'Agostino Supermarkets Inc.
From PC's inception, Mr. Nichol has been the gregarious gourmand behind the brand's marketing, spending hours in Loblaw's test kitchens and his own, developing and tasting products.
He has appeared in 30-minute infomercials on Canadian television and in a colorful free pulp magazine he edits, sometimes holding one of his French bulldogs and a glass of wine.
To celebrate PC's recent 10th anniversary, Loblaw published "The Dave Nichol Cookbook," in which each recipe calls for at least one, and often several, President's Choice products.
A one-time ball-bearings salesman -- who earned a law degree at Harvard and then consulted for McKinsey & Co. -- Mr. Nichol came to Loblaw in the early 1980s to help the then-troubled chain.
Part of his solution: President's Choice.
Rather than put Coke or Tide on sale one week to draw customers, feature your own upscale products year-round, Mr. Nichol urged.
Much of President's Choice's success is fashioned from in-your-face hype.
PC cookies aren't simply cookies; they're "decadent."
Frozen pizza becomes "the ultimate," and PC peanut butter is "too good to be true."
A world traveler, Mr. Nichol plasters exotic labels on President's Choice sauces as if they were steamer trunks, as in Memories of Ancient Damascus Tangy Pomegranate glaze.
"For years the rule of thumb was, don't make the product different from the brand leader," says Brian Sharoff, president of the Private Label Manufacturers Association.
But now retailer brands are sometimes better than the national ones -- and cheaper.
U.S. sales data compiled for The Wall Street Journal by Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service reveal that the upscale private-label idea works very well in some categories.
In cookies, President's Choice racked up impressive U.S. sales of $21.4 million for the 52 weeks ended Sept. 12, a 140% increase from a year earlier.
For the period, juice sales totaled $5.4 million and cat food, $5 million.
Although other categories had more modest sales -- ready-to-eat PC cereal, $3.5 million; popcorn, $1.3 million; and spaghetti sauce, $1.2 million -- all had at least double-digit increases.
PC has about 1,000 products, from beer to fresh meats.
But despite the huge shadow it has cast over the grocery industry, President's Choice is still a tiny contender compared with some national brands.
In one Midwestern chain, PC's Decadent Chocolate Chip Cookie only had a 1.1% dollar share of all packaged cookie sales, compared with 7.7% for Nabisco's Oreos and 5.9% for Nabisco's Chips Ahoy!, according to Information Resources.
PC gourmet popcorn came in third behind ConAgra's Orville Redenbacher and General Mills's Pop Secret, with a 16.4% dollar share for the 52 weeks.
But PC's share in canned cat food slipped 3.3% from a year earlier, its position in bottle juices fell 13.9%, it had a very small piece of the chain's cereal business and it was barely registering in spaghetti sauces.
Last month, Mr. Nichol, 53 years old, resigned from Loblaw.
He will remain a consultant, but is advising other manufacturers and retailers, including Wal-Mart, which is using PC as a model for its recent Sam's American Choice brand.
But not all retailers buy into the idea of an upscale house brand.
At Independent Grocers Alliance, which supplies 4,000 stores in six countries, it is seen as "confusing the consumer," an IGA spokesman says.
The nation's biggest supermarket chain, Cincinnati-based Kroger Co., experimented with a premium private label but dropped it.
"The advice we got was, if you want to have a strong private label, put your name on it.
Have consistent, good quality and try to match the national brands.
That's what we've done," a Kroger spokesman says, adding that its private label represents 18% of the chain's sales.
Even American Stores, PC's biggest U.S. distributor, uses the brand selectively.
While its Chicago-based Jewel chain features 200 to 250 items, American's low-price Lucky Stores on the West Coast carry only a few items.
At American's upscale Star stores, PC is popular.
"It's clearly a point of differentiation," says Edward Cook, director of controlled brands at Harris Teeter Co., a Charlotte, N.C., chain that carries President's Choice.
The chain hopes the addition of frozen entrees, pastas and marinated meats will help double PC sales this year.
But Mr. Cook says Harris Teeter dropped PC's Splendido pizza crust when it didn't sell up to expectations.
PC usually is priced below the national market leader.
At Harris Teeter, for example, three-ounce cans of President's Choice gourmet cat food cost about 25 cents, while the category's leading brand, Nestle's Fancy Feast, costs about 36 cents.
Several U.S.-based grocery suppliers also make upscale private-label products that they say rival President's Choice.
Topco Associates Inc., Skokie, Ill., developed a World Classics line, now stocked by 28 supermarket chains.
Shurfine-Central Corp., a Northlake, Ill., cooperative that serves about 20,000 grocers and convenience stores nationwide, developed an upscale line using winning recipes from state and county fairs.
Its Adults Only Macaroni and Cheese features five ribbon-winning cheeses.
"They always say they're the best," Shurfine's Art Bousel says of President's Choice.
"But we present proof that ours is the best," Mr. Bousel says, noting that pictures of ribbon-winners appear on the packages.
Madison Group Associates Inc., which has faced questions about the precise value of its growing assets, said William T. Craig, its chief executive officer and a director, is resigning from both posts.
Meanwhile, the Securities and Exchange Commission has contacted at least three people regarding their dealings with Madison Group.
One of those individuals, a former employee, said the SEC had asked about how the company valued its assets.
The person added that the SEC also appeared interested in the trading of Madison Group stock.
Neither the company nor the SEC would comment on any possible inquiry.
In Nasdaq Stock Market trading yesterday, Madison Group closed at $1, off 3.125 cents, or 3%, on volume of 75,900 shares.
The moves follow a tumultuous year for Madison Group, based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Formerly a real-estate concern known as Canaveral International, Madison Group made several media acquisitions under the direction of Mr. Craig, according to Kenneth L. Lucas, president of the company and the man named yesterday to succeed Mr. Craig as chief executive.
As a result, the company's reported assets skyrocketed.
Among other properties, Madison Group now owns four video libraries and a radio station in Amarillo, Texas.
According to a recent securities filing, the company's reported assets for the past two fiscal years -- $36.4 million in fiscal 1993, $34.4 million in fiscal 1992 -- jumped substantially from the $6.3 million reported in 1991.
Most of the gain was attributed to the media properties.
Those media asset valuations, however, were called into question in January 1993 by Madison Group's former accountant, Vaughn M. Sarkissian, who recommended that an independent specialist be hired to evaluate the video libraries, according to the securities filing.
Although the accountant later resigned, Madison Group's board retained a specialist to evaluate the libraries, the filing states.
Yesterday, Mr. Lucas declined to elaborate on the status of the video-library valuations.
Mr. Craig, who the company said is leaving "to concentrate on other business ventures," couldn't be reached for comment.
Mr. Lucas said the company is in the midst of a restructuring in which the video library -- consisting primarily of country and gospel-music performances -- is being converted into marketable packages.
