Sales of existing single-family homes slowed in February from January's boom, partly as a result of bad weather, but the pace was still healthy, according to the National Association of Realtors.
On a seasonally adjusted rate, February home resales fell 9.9% to 3,830,000 units from a revised 4,250,000 in January, continuing an anticipated decline from the record pace in December of 4,350,000.
On a year-to-year basis, the pace picked up 10.4% from 3,470,000.
"The numbers were weaker than we expected," said Brian M. Jones, an analyst at Salomon Brothers Inc.
"It's nothing to get upset about.
The weather merely deferred activity, it didn't kill it."
Nevertheless, a leading indicator of the Mortgage Banker's Association recently plunged as interest rates have continued climbing.
The association's purchase index of mortgages that will close in 30 to 60 days peaked in February at 97% above its normal level of activity, declined slightly and then fell sharply in the middle of March to 73% above normal.
Home sales lag as much as two months behind the decision to buy, thus new mortgage purchases are a more accurate indicator of housing activity.
"We're finally seeing an impact of rising rates," said David Lereah, an economist at the Mortgage Banker's Association.
"These rates may just be too high for people, and that's inhibiting activity.
I think it will probably flatten out at this level and hover."
The average rate on a conventional 30-year mortgage increased on Friday to 7.90%, down from its recent peak of 7.95% in the week, but up from 7.85% a week earlier, according to a survey by HSH Associates in Butler, N.J.
The short-term effect of rising rates is to pull buyers into the market, but in the long run, higher rates start choking off activity.
Still, at this point, new mortgage purchases are running at the levels of October and November, when home resales started booming, and continued growth in the economy means that more people will consider buying homes than before, even with higher rates.
"The question remaining is will strong economic activity offset the rates?" asked Mr. Lereah.
"And the answer, for me, is yes.
The strong economy should dominate the housing market."
Indeed, compared with a year earlier, all regions of the country showed improving sales.
The West fared the best, posting a 22% gain in activity from a year earlier.
California showed a 22% jump, on a 3.3% price slide, according to the California Association of Realtors.
The Northwest had a 9% increase, followed by the South with 8% gain and the Midwest trailing with a 4.5% increase.
Robert H. Elrod, president of the National Association of Realtors, said that the spring home buying season should boost the pace somewhat, and that the association still thinks resales could reach a record 3,940,000 units this year, a 4% increase from last year.
Others are less optimistic.
Mark Zandi, an economist at Regional Financial Associations in West Chester, Pa., expects that resales will only hit 3,850,000 in 1994, because the pent-up demand that has been driving the market will wane throughout the rest of the year.
"It's not only the high rates, but the ending of the pent-up demand," he said.
"It's going to take some of the steam out of the market."
