The jurisprudential world, according to Eugene W. Hickok and Gary L. McDowell, is divided into two camps: those (mostly but not always liberals) who subvert judicial processes toward ideological ends, and those who adhere to constitutional principles no matter how unjust the result.
Messrs. Hickok and McDowell count themselves among the guardians of the Constitution's true vision.
Nonetheless, despite attacking the very real problem of results-oriented jurisprudence, this latest foray into the world of "judicial restraint" and "original intent" proves ultimately as unsatisfying as the Hobson's choice that forms its thesis.
As reflected in the title, "Justice vs. Law: Courts and Politics in American Society" (Free Press, 253 pages, $24.95), the authors assert that these values often conflict.
And when they do, our republic's survival depends on protecting the latter no matter how great the sacrifice of the former.
Ronald Reagan made this same point when he pledged to appoint judges "who would act like judges, and not like a bunch of sociology majors."
But the Reagan revolution was incomplete, argue Messrs. Hickok and McDowell, for "rather than deciding cases on the basis of concrete principles understood as neutrally transcending the case at hand, the contemporary judge all too frequently opts for attempting to individualize justice for the case before him."
The illustration that winds its way through the book is the 1979 U.S. Supreme Court case of DeShaney vs. Winnebago County, in which a nine-year-old child who was savagely beaten by his father to the point of near-brain death sought monetary recovery from the social services agency that failed to remove him from his clearly unsafe home.
The legal theory pressed by the lad's lawyers was that the 14th Amendment's due process clause imposes an affirmative duty upon the state to protect citizens against others.
The Court ruled 6-3 against Joshua DeShaney.
But the dissenters exemplified what Messrs. Hickok and McDowell consider the apotheosis of liberal activism.
"Poor Joshua!" proclaimed Justice Harry Blackmun, assailing the majority for failing to follow a view that "comports with dictates of fundamental justice and recognizes that compassion need not be exiled from the province of judging."
But if DeShaney was the high point for judicial restraint, the court quickly reverted to activist form three years later in Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania vs. Casey.
In it, the court preserved the right to abortion, while upholding some restrictions, suggesting that adherence to original intent would be a case-by-case effort.
The decision, argue the authors, gave "political expression to the moral sentiments presumed to be held by the people."
Messrs. Hickok and McDowell correctly assail jurisprudence based on nothing more concrete than what Justice William Douglas called "penumbras, formed by emanations," which are the constitutional equivalent of exhaust fumes.
But the alternative vision they present, in which courts passively defer to legislative and executive decisions, is just as much a recipe for tyranny.
Like the liberals they criticize, advocates of judicial restraint also have a results-oriented agenda.
In their case, it is "states' rights" and unfettered majoritarianism.
They embrace original intent when it serves those ends, but ignore it whenever it invests the judiciary with power to protect individual liberties.
For instance, the 14th Amendment, explicitly guarantees not only due process and equal protection of the laws, but also the "privileges or immunities of citizens" (which encompasses such basic rights as freedom of contract and the right to work in a chosen business or profession).
But Messrs. Hickok and McDowell prefer to dwell on another section of the amendment which gives Congress enforcement powers.
Such selective intent produces some eccentric results.
The authors applaud the 1872 Slaughter-House Cases, which eviscerated the "privileges or immunities" clause and judicial protection for economic liberties, and they assail Brown vs. Board of Education, (which abolished the "separate but equal" doctrine) as an exercise of "raw political power."
While Messrs. Hickok and McDowell's prescription would go far to curb courts that create rights out of thin air, it fuels the even more pernicious form of judicial activism that reads precious rights out of the Constitution.
It thereby denies the vital role the framers assigned to the judiciary: deferential to majority will when addressed toward legitimate ends, but vigorously protective of fundamental liberties.
The dichotomy between law and justice is not nearly so great as Messrs. Hickok and McDowell would have it.
And to suggest otherwise is not only to bestow an enormous logistical advantage upon liberal activists, but to unravel the constitutional tapestry that was so carefully woven to ensure a society in which not only democracy but liberty flourishes.
Mr. Bolick is litigation director at the Institute for Justice in Washington, D.C.
