Seated at a dining-room table in a spotless retirement-home apartment, 41-year-old Debbi McConnell is gathering clues that could help transform delivery of health care in the U.S.
The interviewer asks the 83-year-old woman who lives in the apartment to rate her vision since she had a cataract removed from her left eye late last summer.
The woman, a retired schoolteacher, looks at a scale printed on a piece of cardboard with numbers from zero to 10 on it.
She slides an arrow to the number nine.
Then, asked to recall her sight before the surgery, she again points the arrow to the nine, indicating she thinks her sight now is about the same as it was before the operation.
"It's difficult to tell" whether the operation helped, she tells Ms. McConnell.
"My husband had it, and as soon as he had the patch taken off his eye he was amazed at how blue the sky was.
I never had that `aha' experience."
The interview, which covers more than 250 questions and takes nearly two hours, is part of an ambitious investigation by medical researchers at the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions into the effectiveness of cataract surgery.
When the retired schoolteacher's answers are combined and analyzed with those from dozens of other cataract patients and their doctors, the results are expected to shed new light on how doctors should treat and manage an ailment that leads to more than one million surgical procedures on elderly Americans each year.
"We're trying to figure out what works and what doesn't, and what provides the most benefit in patients with cataracts," says Earl P. Steinberg, director of medical technology and practice assessment at Hopkins and leader of a team of 25 researchers on the project.
Broadly, that's the aim of the burgeoning field of "outcomes research," as it's called.
Instead of just settling for the results of the experimental trials done when a therapy is just being developed, outcomes research looks at how a test or treatment "performs in real life, when it's used by hundreds of doctors on a broad population of patients," Dr. Steinberg says.
"Looking at the practice of medicine and the outcomes associated with it is a critical part of health care, and of the health-reform process," says Jarrett Clinton, outgoing administrator of the federal Agency for Health Care Policy and Research.
The agency, part of the Department of Health and Human Services, currently funds more than $50 million of outcomes-research projects a year through what are called patient-outcomes research teams, including the cataract team at Hopkins.
In outcomes research, researchers look beyond body counts, who lives and who dies, to the impact of care on a patient's day-to-day life.
That means tracking patients for months or even years after treatment, seeking out and giving scientific weight to their views, something medicine traditionally has been reluctant to do.
Dr. Steinberg's interest in the field dates to his training as an internist in the early 1980s at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He recalls he was struck by the fact that doctors were constantly grumbling about increasing regulation of medical decisions by government and insurers.
At the same time, he says, "I saw many instances where senior physicians were ordering tests and doing procedures that I thought provided little or no value."
These experiences convinced him that determining how to deliver cost-effective care would be as important as basic medical science to his profession.
"And I think it is crucial," he adds, "that physicians lead, rather than be led, in determining what optimal medical practice is."
Dr. Steinberg and his colleagues rely on surveys, questionnaires, huge medical claims-databases and the medical literature itself for their work.
In one project, for instance, the team reviewed 6,000 previously published cataract studies, culling out 90 that dealt with the most relevant and sophisticated techniques used in the procedure.
In a painstaking review they graded each of the 90 studies on a scale of one to 100, with 100 being the most reliable.
The average of all the studies was 43.1, indicating that many of the cataract studies are flawed and suspect, Dr. Steinberg says.
Yet, "what doctors out in the real world believe is truth is based on this literature," he says.
Nevertheless, after taking the flaws into account, the researchers added up the results of the studies and how frequently 18 different complications of cataract surgery had occurred.
Most complications were rare, but one, a clouding of the eye capsule, occurred in nearly 20% of cases.
The findings, which appear in the February issue of Archives of Ophthalmology, may help both doctors and patients considering the surgery better assess its risks and benefits.
In another study, the researchers, in collaboration with scientists at Georgetown University, found that patients who undergo a widely used laser procedure to fix cloudy eye capsules are nearly four times more likely than other patients to suffer retinal detachment, a rare but devastating complication that can cause blindness.
But the finding was flawed, because the 60,000 medical claims it was based on didn't say whether the eye with the detached retina was also the eye where the laser was used.
To clarify the issue, the researchers mounted a second study that included the extraordinary step of getting names of patients and doctors so they could get necessary data from patient medical charts.
With a promise to protect confidentiality, they recently mailed questionnaires to 2,400 doctors, asking for data on the affected eyes and whether patients had medical problems such as diabetes that could also cause retinal detachment.
The results, it's hoped, will help doctors and patients weighing the laser procedure to avoid what the initial study suggested could be 13,000 cases of retinal detachment a year.
Another of the group's accomplishments is the development of a 14-item questionnaire that may be more effective than the widely used eye chart in determining who might benefit from cataract surgery.
Instead of lines of letters that produce a diagnosis of, say, a 20/60 eyesight, the questionnaire yields a score that indicates how severely the cataract-restricted vision is affecting the person's daily life.
Had the schoolteacher interviewed by Ms. McConnell used such a tool, she might have forgone surgery.
Though cataract surgery carries only minimal risks, her responses to some of Ms. McConnell's questions indicated that she might have avoided the procedure if she had known that the chances of significant benefit were small.
Another of Ms. McConnell's subjects, however, might have wished she had had the surgery sooner.
Fond of the color pink, the woman had purchased about a year before her operation a bright pink dress and a pink hat, or so she thought.
After the surgery, "when she put them on and looked in the mirror," Ms. McConnell says, "the dress was bright yellow and the hat was bright red."
