Japan unveiled a package of market-opening initiatives in an effort to persuade the Clinton administration to call off its trade offensive, but the plan isn't likely to bring U.S. negotiators back to the table soon.
The Japanese measures are largely a repackaging of proposals Tokyo made in the so-called framework talks, which failed last month.
The initiatives promise deregulatory steps but eschew the numerical trade targets or explicit trade goals that Washington seeks.
Tokyo said it would liberalize government purchases and put together a board of "private-sector wise men" to oversee deregulation.
But the U.S. wants to make sure those promises lead to greater imports.
"We hope this will give momentum to reopen dialogue between the U.S. and Japan under the framework talks," said Hideaki Domichi, economic counselor of Japan's Embassy in Washington.
That isn't likely.
"Positive procedural changes are always welcome," said a senior administration official.
But "there is very little new here."
Washington was hampered in coming up with a formal response yesterday as U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor was in Tennessee attending his father's funeral.
Also, Tokyo provided only a Japanese-language version of its plan yesterday, leaving the U.S. Embassy in Tokyo scurrying to provide a quick translation.
Trade officials in Washington were preparing to increase the pressure on Japan.
On Thursday, the Clinton administration will release a report on trade barriers world-wide -- including a section on Japan about 50 pages long.
In particular, the U.S. is looking to boost exports to Japan in telecommunications, medical equipment and glass.
The U.S. will decide by April 30 whether to begin formal proceedings against Japan in those areas -- and threaten trade sanctions if Japan doesn't comply.
That is the deadline for a review of foreign government purchasing practices.
The U.S. realizes that the threat of trade actions has boosted the value of the yen.
That, in turn, exerts enormous pressure on Japan's economy because it increases the price of Japanese exports abroad.
U.S. officials say they see no need to ease tensions with Tokyo soon and resume negotiations, an action that could lead to a decline in the yen's value and a reduction of Washington's leverage.
It's better, U.S. officials argue, to hold tight.
Japan's market-opening package centers on insurance, medical equipment, telecommunications and autos -- areas negotiated in the framework talks.
With insurance, Japan said it would encourage more competition and cut red tape that is largely aimed at foreign companies.
Japanese officials reiterated that the trade measures aren't just a response to U.S. pressure but are part of a continuing process to open trade.
However, the insurance plan isn't expected to reach Japan's Diet until next year.
In an example of steps being taken by the private sector, Japan's Toyota Motor Corp., Mitsubishi Motors Corp. and Honda Motor Co. outlined plans to increase their purchases of foreign auto parts, following the release last week of a similar plan by Nissan Motor Corp.
However, U.S. officials said the proposed purchases fall far short of the 20% annual growth in foreign auto-parts purchases that the U.S. was seeking.
The government and private-sector measures represent Japan's principal attempt to resolve trade tensions with the U.S. since the framework talks collapsed in mid-February.
At the time, Japan refused to accept U.S. calls for ways to measure its progress in opening its market to imports, saying that setting such targets would violate free-market principles.
Since then, Japan has been under pressure from the U.S. to fashion its own market-opening program.
The new plan hews to the free market-position and doesn't enumerate specific ways in which Japan's pledges could be monitored.
The prospect of more trade friction comes amid continued political uncertainty for the government of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, which faces an aggressive opposition that has deadlocked the Japanese parliament.
Kyodo News Service reported yesterday that a prominent member of the largest party in Japan's ruling coalition suggested that Mr. Hosokawa may have to resign if he can't resolve the legislative gridlock.
Prime Minister Hosokawa telephoned President Clinton late yesterday afternoon, Washington time, to give the president a personal account of the Japanese package, which was scheduled to be announced after a cabinet meeting in Tokyo.
The two spoke for about 10 minutes.
Mr. Clinton thanked the prime minister for the preview and said he would study its details when they became available.
He also expressed sympathy for the families of the Japanese exchange student and the Japanese-American student who were victims of a recent carjacking in Los Angeles.
Some of the measures, such as those to promote imports, were part of Japan's position in the failed framework negotiations.
As part of its market-opening plan, Japan also reiterated its willingness to change its procurement system this year so it mirrors the U.S. government's own system.
Sensitive to criticism that many Japanese government contracts are decided before bidding officially opens, Japanese officials plan to solicit comments and suggestions on product specifications for at least 60 days before announcing an open procurement.
Japan also outlined other market-opening steps, with details to be filled in by June.
Among them are steps to deregulate several areas of the economy, such as housing and land transactions, and to allow foreigners to participate in panels that will recommend further deregulation.
The government also plans to add more staffers to its Fair Trade Commission, which has been widely criticized as ineffective.
Japan also pledged to complete plans for tax reform by the end of June, and said it plans to review its 10-year, 430 trillion-yen ($4.1 trillion) plan for public-works expenditures.
On the auto-parts front, Toyota said it will buy $6.45 billion of U.S.-made parts in the year ending March 31, 1997, up 45% from the $4.43 billion purchased in the year ended last March 31.
Of the total, $1.3 billion of parts will be exported from the U.S. to Japan, up 18% over the four-year period.
The rest will be used in Toyota cars assembled in the U.S.
Toyota also said it will increase exports to Japan of its U.S.-made cars to 20,000 vehicles in 1996, from 7,839 in 1993.
Toyota said its purchases of U.S.-made parts in 1995 and 1996 will rise 10% annually.
That compares with a 20% annual increase sought by the U.S.
Mitsubishi will raise procurement of U.S. parts for the cars it produces in the U.S. to between $1.4 billion and $1.63 billion in the year ending March 31, 1997, more than double the $650 million purchased in the year ending Thursday.
Honda plans to buy $4.65 billion of U.S.-made automobile parts and materials within the year ended March 31, 1996, up 45% from $3.21 billion in the year ended March 31, 1993.
Honda also plans to increase its overall imports of parts, vehicles and other products to $1.27 billion in the same year, up from $1.07 billion in the year ended March 31, 1993.
