Plump up the couch pillows, Olympics fans!
CBS will broadcast 119 1/2 hours of the Winter Games starting with the Opening Ceremonies tomorrow night.
If that isn't enough, never fear, TNT will carry 45 hours during the weekdays, while CBS is rewaxing its skis and polishing the runners of its luge.
Greg Gumbel will be the prime-time anchor, doing his first Olympics.
Mr. Gumbel has made no secret of his dislike of cold weather and unfamiliarity with winter sports, but most Americans haven't ridden a bobsled or tried a ski jump, either.
As for the cold, well, the CBS Broadcast Guide notes that February temperatures in Lillehammer have been known to drop to -10 degrees Fahrenheit, which "meant an outdoor host location for CBS Sports' primetime broadcasts was not feasible."
Lucky Greg.
For the first time at an Olympics, tiny cameras will be mounted on the helmet of the U.S. hockey team's goalie and on the luge ridden by American Duncan Kennedy.
And, for blimp lovers, there will be aerial shots, weather permitting.
Thanks to Tonya Harding and Nancy Kerrigan, the TV audience for these Olympics could well set records.
You can bet CBS anchors won't stop promoting the women's figure skating, which doesn't start until Feb. 23.
Rival networks seem to hope snowed-under Americans will be tempted away from the Olympics by warm-weather fare.
Several of Fox's regular series will have tropical locales, not to mention two weeks of "Wild Adventures in Paradise."
ABC will attempt to raise male temperatures with "Sports Illustrated Swimsuit '94."
NBC is keeping cool, but offering a host of specials from the NBA All-Star Game to "Danielle Steel's Once in a Lifetime."
Besides a torch, a king, trolls and a giant egg, the Opening Ceremonies will include one of the new-product placement coups of all time.
SnowRunner Inc., a startup company in St. Paul, Minn., markets a product called a "snow skate," a boot with a runner on the bottom that's a bit like a Rollerblade for the slopes.
During the ceremonies, 110 Norwegian military officers will use SnowRunners to descend the ski jump hill in formation, a spectacle that will be beamed to something like 2.5 billion people world-wide.
CBS 8 p.m.-11 p.m.
