Call it Ronald Reagan's revenge.
The whopping deficit he left behind, together with Bush-era caps on federal spending, has forced Bill Clinton to adopt many of his predecessors' spending cuts to pay for watered-down Democratic spending increases.
The result is a $1.5 trillion budget that, in the midst of one of the coldest winters in decades, calls for spending 40% less next fiscal year than the government is now spending to help poor people pay heating bills.
The proposed budget also whacks 25% from subsidies for urban transit systems.
It gores a program to renovate decrepit housing projects.
At the same time, Mr. Clinton seeks 80% more money for the centerpiece of his industrial policy, the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
He asks for 25% more for legal services for the poor.
And he proposes to substantially increase spending on training programs for dislocated workers.
But as Mr. Clinton noted in his introduction to the budget: "Except in emergencies, we cannot spend an additional dime on any program unless we cut it from another part of the budget."
A Democrat with ambitious plans to spend more on education, training, technology, public health and infrastructure arrives at the White House -- and finds there isn't any way he can spend more without spending less on the very programs that Democrats tried to protect from Republican presidents for 12 years.
"You have to find it elsewhere, and that `elsewhere' is the hard part," says Budget Director Leon Panetta.
"You can say it's not a `high-priority program,' but to some member of Congress or constituency, it is their high priority."
Mr. Clinton's budget concentrates on his plans to shift around the half-trillion dollars that Congress appropriates annually to cover everything from building submarines to paying Secret Service agents.
It is these outlays -- as opposed to spending on benefits such as Social Security and Medicare -- that is subject to spending caps codified by Congress in recent years.
Not counting emergencies such as the California earthquake, the spending-cap laws force the government to spend $7.7 billion less for these purposes next year, the first such decline since 1969.
"These aren't the kind of cuts where you end up spending more money," Mr. Clinton said, referring to the standard Washington practice of labeling as cuts what are merely reductions in projected increases.
"These are true cuts, where you actually spend less."
Mr. Clinton's challenge is to convince Congress -- and the public -- that this Democrat can cut while still caring.
He has framed the budget as a series of choices.
While cutting from programs for the poor, he promises to better target the remaining resources.
He wants to spend less to subsidize today's consumption -- such as aid to urban bus lines -- and more on investments for tomorrow, such as highways.
Mr. Clinton even had to cut from his own investment agenda of a year ago.
High-speed rail, once conceived as a billion-dollar program, is a shadow of its former self in the new budget.
And the cuts in spending on public housing are at odds with his campaign promises.
Last year, Mr. Clinton tried to avoid spending caps with his stimulus spending plan and a plan to raise the caps a bit.
When both those moves failed, he managed to squeeze the defense budget that Mr. Bush left behind to fund domestic spending.
Neither was an option this year; adjusted for inflation, next year's defense budget will be the smallest since 1981.
"He had two choices," says Allen Schick, a University of Maryland professor and budget expert.
"He could knock out a couple of big programs -- high visibility, big impact, $25 billion over five years.
Or he could knock out lots of tiny programs."
At first, the White House budget office leaned toward the first option, suggesting, for instance, that the president eliminate subsidies to urban transit systems and the low-income heating-assistance program.
But with an eye toward what was most likely to succeed on Capitol Hill, Mr. Clinton opted for the second.
The big winners are the departments of Justice, Commerce, Education and Transportation, which oversee many of the investment programs that are Mr. Clinton's priorities -- and his newfound enthusiasm for spending heavily to fight crime.
The biggest losers include the departments of Energy -- in part because some of its budget goes for nuclear weapons -- Agriculture and State.
"We've seen most of the proposed cuts before," Republican Senate Leader Bob Dole of Kansas said yesterday, "but congressional Democrats refused to go along when a Republican administration wielded the budget knife."
"This is not a something-for-everyone budget exercise," adds Rep. Tim Penney, a Minnesota Democrat who is among the leaders of the antispending crusade in Congress.
"It finally admits that some things are more important than others."
Some of the proposed cuts won't happen.
One early casualty: a proposed cut in highway funds that is buried on page 1018 of the appendix.
The provision would save $406 million by killing highway projects that were written into law to satisfy particular members of Congress.
Anticipating the proposal, the Federal Highway Administration alerted states not to spend on the targeted projects.
But when Senate Appropriations Chairman Robert Byrd of West Virginia and Democratic Leader George Mitchell of Maine got wind of this, they leaned on Mr. Panetta.
Even though the cutback is printed in the budget, the White House has dropped the plan and will have to find the money elsewhere.
In all, Mr. Clinton's budget proposes to increase total government outlays by 2.3% to $1.518 trillion (not counting the cost to federal taxpayers of the California earthquake) in fiscal 1995, which begins Oct. 1.
Receipts would rise 8.4% to $1.342 trillion as the economy strengthens (and not counting the cigarette-tax increase that Mr. Clinton proposes to finance his health-care initiative).
The administration projects that the federal deficit, expected to be $234.8 billion this year, will drop to $165.1 billion next year if the president's health-care package passes as proposed or to $176.1 billion if it doesn't.
Either way, Mr. Clinton boasted in his introduction to the budget, "It will be the first time deficits have declined three years running since Harry Truman occupied the Oval Office."
But unless federal health-care spending is restrained, the budget deficit will start widening again in fiscal 1997 and top $200 billion in 1999, the White House budget office said.
The administration projects that if the president's health plan is adopted, health-care spending will be contained and the deficit will amount to $181 billion in 1999.
Unlike past presidents, Mr. Clinton didn't use the budget as the launching pad for this year's agenda.
His health-care initiative was unveiled last fall; his plans for welfare reform and revamping of the Superfund hazardous-waste cleanup program will come later.
The budget does, however, reveal the choices that Mr. Clinton was forced to make and will try to get Congress to accept.
Here are some examples:
For Mr. Clinton and many of his advisers, the worst part of budgeting was deciding which antipoverty programs to cut to make room for spending on higher-priority programs.
The favored projects include the Head Start program for low-income preschoolers (up 21% in spending authority), a program that also found favor in Bush budgets; federal aid to public schools with lots of poor pupils (up 10%) and aid for the homeless (up 52%).
The big losers were federal spending to modernize public housing (down 14%), building housing for the elderly (down 87%), a program of housing grants that Mr. Clinton tried to increase last year (down 21%), and the Low Income Heating Assistance Program (LIHEAP).
"The biggest problem in all this," says Budget Director Panetta, "is the perception that by questioning these programs, we are not as committed to these people.
That is not the case."
This was clearest in the painful debate over public housing.
Housing Secretary Henry Cisneros, a former San Antonio mayor, showed up with extensive charts to argue for more money and made the political argument that the money was a major sign of concern for public-housing tenants, some of the nation's poorest people.
But the president decided, like Republicans before him, to increase spending on vouchers that help the poor rent private housing.
The White House adds that billions of dollars of unspent public-housing money are in the pipeline.
LIHEAP, which began after the energy price increases of the 1970s, is a program that has outgrown the original intentions and is sorely in need of "reinventing," administration officials say.
The program was once targeted to the cold Northeast, but the White House argues that the spending formula written into law sends money where it isn't needed; ironically, it was Southerners such as now-Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen who forced the change.
But even administration officials concede that after January's frigid temperatures in much of the country, this proposed cut faces resistance in Congress.
"A lot of good programs got pitted against one another," complains Meg Power of the National Community Action Foundation, which represents local groups that distribute LIHEAP funds.
"It was a strange choice for this administration, which is so committed to improving the lives of low-income children."
Mr. Clinton has now stated his priorities.
Congress will have its own.
The budget debate will play out in the House and Senate Appropriations committees, which have immense discretion in allocating funds.
By changing the allocation among the various subcommittees -- each of which is responsible for setting the spending levels for a particular program -- the committee leadership can turn the tables and in effect pit the president's programs against one another.
Take the House and Senate subcommittees for State, Justice and Commerce.
The president's budget would give it an 18.6% increase in spending authority, a reflection of Mr. Clinton's desire both to help cities hire thousands of new police officers and to spur development of new civilian technologies.
But his new spending depends on the panel's going along with his plan to kill dozens of small Commerce Department projects involving everything from Great Lakes zebra mussels to Columbia River hatcheries.
A subplot involves the competition between the Commerce Department and the Energy Department's older national laboratories, which are looking for a new mission now that the end of the Cold War has wound down nuclear-weapons research.
Sandia laboratory in New Mexico, for example, has turned its engineering talents toward battery research important to auto makers, but Mr. Clinton would give it only a 2% increase next year -- a fraction of the increase proposed for the administration's new darling, the Commerce's National Institute of Standards and Technology, known as NIST.
NIST's budget grew 35% in Mr. Clinton's first year, and he is asking for another 80% rise for next year, lifting it to nearly $1 billion.
NIST director Arati Prabhakar brings not only technical expertise but ties to Pentagon research agencies, which allow her agency to share the growing defense-conversion budget.
Sen. Ernest Hollings, a South Carolina Democrat who is the Commerce subcommittee chairman, is a ready partner, but the national labs are a major employer in New Mexico, home of Sen. Pete Domenici, the senior Republican on both this subcommittee and the Senate Budget Committee.
Mr. Domenici has long protected the labs.
Worried about NIST's threat to the labs, he moved last year to the ranking spot next to Mr. Hollings.
Since his campaign days, Mr. Clinton has hammered home the message that the government must invest more, raising spending that pays off in the future.
One example is his insistence that his budget office divert more money than planned to the Transportation Department to finance highways and other construction.
In a zero-sum game, the corollary of increased investment spending is that spending on consumption -- the sort of spending that makes life better today -- must be cut.
The biggest "consumption" line in the federal budget is Social Security benefits, but Mr. Clinton hasn't any interest in touching them.
But in a series of telling small decisions, he did try to reorient federal spending toward investments.
A case in point is the popular $800 million subsidy for urban transit systems, a clear example of federal spending on consumption and a program especially important to bus lines in small cities.
Mr. Clinton would slash this by 25%.
Rod Diridon, chairman of the American Public Transit Association, says nine of 10 surveyed members of his organization said they would have to "increase fares or reduce service in order to survive."
At the same time, however, Deputy Transportation Secretary Morton Downey says the administration increased proposed spending on grants to help local transit systems buy new equipment.
"The rationale was investment as opposed to consumption," he says.
As usual, there is more to this than meets the eye.
Budget officials note that appropriations for operating subsidies tend to be spent right away -- a problem because of the stringent ceilings on federal spending.
Appropriations for capital investment tend to be spent in future years -- and count against spending ceilings in those years.
But that's a problem for next year's budget.
