Long considered the poor cousins of their more established French neighbors, Italian wines can nonetheless yield a comparable return on investment, experts say.
"A high-quality Italian wine costs about one third less than a French one and can appreciate in value just as much in the aging," says Luigi Cotti, owner of Enoteca Cotti, a Milan wine shop.
Italian wine wasn't always considered such a collector's item and a high-quality French wine still is usually more expensive than a comparable Italian one.
Wine dealers say that while Americans have appreciated the investment value of a good Barbaresco for at least a decade, Europeans and even Italians themselves have caught on only recently.
While fine vintages always have been appreciated in Italy and can come with a hefty price tag, wine typically is considered a beverage, not a jewel.
In Italy, table wine can often be had for less than the price of gasoline.
"Until a few years ago, wine was not singled out as an investment in Italy.
Italians only changed their minds toward the product in the '80s," says Luisa Ronchi, owner of a Milan wine shop called Enoteca Ronchi, founded in 1865.
"The Italian wine market isn't as developed as the French, because of a lack of tradition and organization," Ms. Ronchi says.
As a result, dealers and wine-store owners often give only vague indications of prices, and no official price list exists in Italy.
"Nevertheless, we have many good wines that can appreciate in value in the future," she says.
Wines that appreciate in value most are the newer types created after World War II, dealers say, particularly in Tuscany.
For example: Ludovico Antinori's 1990 Sassicaia, which could be purchased in the 1980s for around $15 at the current exchange rate, now is valued at around $89.
Other examples are 1989 Ornellaia and Solaia, both Tuscan reds, which now cost about $32.50 and are expected to reach prices of from $59 to $71 in about five years.
Other new wines to keep an eye on include: Tignanello, Cignale, Pergole Torte, San Marco and Castello di Ama, all from the Chianti region.
They all cost around $20.50 to $26.50 currently and are expected to double in value over the next five years, experts say.
"These wines should have good value appreciation, because they are normally considered top table wines, good for restaurants or gifts," says Mr. Cotti.
Experts attribute their high quality in part to use of modern production methods.
"Sassicaia, Tignanello and Ornellaia are not every day wines because of their high quality," says Serena Sutcliffe, head of Sotheby's wine department in London, which auctions off small Italian wine collections several times a year.
Aside from the new wines, experts say other good investments are classic types from the north (Piedmont and the Veneto region) and the center (Tuscany).
This is because of "tradition, and because central and northern producers have introduced new technologies," Ms. Ronchi says.
Some of the highest prices have been fetched by Barolo and Barbaresco from Asti in Piedmont and Amarone Recioto from Verona in Veneto; while Brunello di Montalcino is a high profile wine from Tuscany.
Classic red wines are considered a better investment than white, because they have a longer period of aging, and the whites don't appreciate with age, experts say.
Barolo and Barbaresco, two classic red wines, grab the most attention from oenologists and are those best known on the international markets.
"These wines have a good market in the U.S.," affirms Faith Willinger, a Florence-based wine writer.
"They are normally sought after by collectors and specialized shops."
Mr. Cotti, the wine-shop owner, agrees: "The best investments in classic wines are in Barolo and Barbaresco; they always increase in value.
Examples of good vintages to stock up on are 1988, 1989 and 1990 Barolo, or 1985, 1988, 1989 and 1990 Barbaresco, dealers say.
In general, Italian classic wines appreciate in quality and value until they reach about 20 to 25 years, then the price as well as the quality stabilizes.
It is better to avoid Barolos or Barbarescos bottled in 1984, 1987, 1992 and 1993, experts say, as well as in 1962, 1965 and 1969.
Italy has about 100 specialty wine shops, and customers can bargain for better prices, especially when buying several bottles at once, owners explain.
Another way of acquiring fine Italian wines is by purchasing futures.
This means buying wine about a year and a half before it reaches the shop.
Such deals, brokered by wine shops that advise on vintage quality, can save an investor as much as 50%.
"But not all producers appreciate this type of sale because many of them are too conservative," Ms. Ronchi says.
This Sunday, Sotheby's will auction off 1976, 1980 and 1983 Sassicaia, 1980 Biondi Santi Brunello di Montalcino, and 1979 and 1981 Barbaresco Gaja, a classic wine.
Twelve magnums, or double-sized bottles, of 1980 Sassicaia are valued at $600 at the current exchange rate between the pound and dollar; six bottles of Barbaresco Gaja (1979) will start bidding at $375; 12 bottles of 1980 Biondi Santi Brunello di Montalcino also will start at $375.
Really old wines, meanwhile, are more fun than profitable, experts say.
Bottles dated 1900 can run for $355, while a French one of a comparable age will cost about $474.
But they won't go much higher.
In Italy, these are sometimes given for a wedding or birthday; sometimes a buyer will select a wine dating from the year his friend was born as a special gift.
