When baseball's 28 teams finally reached a revenue-sharing agreement recently, it was presented as a rare act of team owners' statesmanship -- "a unique and historic day," as interim commissioner Bud Selig put it.
But beer sales may have had far more to do with it.
During the last weeks of baseball's long effort to transfer funds from rich ball clubs to distressed ones, the chief executives of the Kansas City Royals, San Francisco Giants and Houston Astros -- revenue-sharing proponents all -- placed calls to the chairman of the St. Louis Cardinals -- a staunch opponent.
Suddenly, St. Louis broke from the group blocking revenue-sharing and offered the compromise that was finally accepted.
What happened?
Well, team owners wear more than one cap.
David Glass, the Royals' chairman, also heads Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the largest customer of the Cardinals' parent, beer marketer Anheuser-Busch Cos.
Drayton McLane Jr., the Astros' owner, is Wal-Mart's second biggest shareholder.
Peter Magowan, the Giants' owner, also is chairman of Safeway Inc., the nation's third-largest supermarket chain.
When they talk, brewery chief August A. Busch III listens.
He explained to Cardinals President Stewart Meyer, according to people familiar with events, that there was going to be a change in the club's position.
Mr. Meyer took it from there.
"Gosh, I don't deserve any credit for it," says Mr. Glass, who does admit to drawing on his longtime business and personal relationship with Mr. Busch.
"St. Louis deserves the credit for bringing in fresh proposals."
Messrs. Magowan and McLane acknowledge making calls, termed by the latter as "very friendly, very cordial, not threatening or intimidating whatsoever."
But baseball officials, while noting that other factors and other people contributed to the accord, say these were the contacts that broke the stalemate.
"Anybody who knows August Busch knows the last thing you can do is threaten him," says an insider.
"But these were friendly calls reminding him of the Cardinals' bigger interests."
And, of course, one of those interests is selling beer.
Says a longtime baseball executive: "Every club votes its own economy, and in the case of the Cardinals it's always the economy of beer at work."
