The Clinton administration, seeking to gain political favor with California officials, urged the Supreme Court to uphold the state's aggressive policy on taxing multinational corporations.
Under pressure from the White House, the Justice Department filed a "friend-of-the-court" brief late yesterday supporting California in one of the most closely watched business cases of the 1993-1994 term of the Supreme Court.
At stake are billions of dollars in tax revenue that California says it might have to refund to multinationals if the Supreme Court rules against it.
Following through on a campaign promise by Mr. Clinton to officials in the financially strapped state, the administration reversed long-standing federal opposition to the type of tax California imposes.
Throughout protracted lower-court proceedings in the case, the Justice Department had filed briefs warning that California's aggressive tax policy has angered U.S. trading partners and could cause retaliatory actions by foreign governments that would hurt U.S. companies.
As recently as the fall of 1992, the department filed a brief with the Supreme Court supporting a challenge to the California taxing method by Barclays Bank PLC.
Yesterday, however, the Justice Department told the Supreme Court that "Barclays' claim must fail."
The administration said that an analogous claim by a U.S. -- based multinational, Colgate-Palmolive Co., also should be denied.
The central issue in the case is California's policy of taxing a portion of the world-wide income of multinational companies -- including parent companies and other affiliates -- based on a formula reflecting the amount of business the firms do in California.
In contrast, the federal government and most other states treat the U.S. operations of multinationals as separate from their affiliates overseas.
In an earlier brief attacking the California tax, the Justice Department said the so-called world-wide unitary approach "has created an irritant in the commercial relations of the United States and its major trading partners."
In yesterday's brief, the Justice Department said that as of 1977, the tax year in question in the Barclays portion of the case, executive-branch officials had expressed a "preference" for treating U.S. operations separately for tax purposes.
But, it said, federal officials hadn't indicated that state use of the world-wide unitary approach would be "incompatible" with U.S. international agreements or that there necessarily ought to be uniform tax policies on the part of individual states.
