Sex didn't sell this Christmas -- at least not at many perfume counters.
Holiday sales of many mass-market women's fragrances slumped during the critical fourth quarter, when perfume marketers typically make 60% to 80% of their annual sales.
The one hit of the season, Vanilla Fields from the Coty unit of Joh.
A. Benckiser GmbH, used a decidedly wholesome pitch: Rather than images of lovers embracing, ads for the new brand featured a field of flowers and a single hummingbird.
"It's a natural positioning," says Jerry Abernathy, president of Coty.
"That's why we didn't go with a typical `girl uses fragrance, girl gets boy' approach."
Another element in Vanilla Fields' success may be its reliance on a baking ingredient, rather than a strong floral note.
Many fragrances nowadays, including Exclamation by Coty, smell more like fruits than flowers.
One exception: the 66-year-old Tabu brand, which its marketers say is typically favored by older women.
Most marketers concede that industry sales have been hurt by the economy, as shoppers trade down to smaller bottles, and fierce price competition among retail outlets keeps prices low.
Sales of women's fragrances by supermarkets, drugstores and mass merchandisers -- the outlets that account for about two-thirds of all fragrance sales -- dropped 9% during the fourth quarter, according to Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.
Traditional mass-market products, including the resilient Charlie and Gloria Vanderbilt fragrances, also face mounting competition from aging "designer fragrances," such as Red by Giorgio, made by Avon Products Inc.
Such prestige fragrances, which marketers say are supposed to be sold only in department stores, end up in mass market outlets after being resold or routed there by distributors.
U.S. and Japanese negotiators didn't make any headway in the first day of two-day trade negotiations, U.S. officials said.
The so-called framework talks have been deadlocked over U.S. insistence that Japan agree to targets for increasing imports.
Japanese officials have resisted such demands as "managed trade."
And according to U.S. officials, the political turmoil in Japan has made the Japanese negotiators more resistant to compromise.
Although the talks had originally been scheduled to last until tomorrow, U.S. officials said they now expect them to end today.
For some time, the U.S. negotiating team has figured it would need to travel to Japan next week for another round of talks.
The two sides want a trade deal in time for a summit meeting in Washington on Feb. 11 between President Clinton and Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa.
"We're going to keep pressing the Japanese government to take action to help overcome an unacceptably high trade deficit," said Commerce Secretary Ron Brown.
"We have got to take tough and aggressive action."
