The dollar fell against the yen yesterday amid escalating trade frictions between the U.S. and Japan as President Clinton reactivated one of the most feared weapons in the U.S. trade-war arsenal.
But the dollar rose against the mark on bullish U.S. economic data after an earlier stumble over the Bundesbank's decision to leave key interest rates unchanged.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 103.95 yen, off a bit from 104.10 yen late Wednesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 1.7105 marks, up from 1.7040 marks.
Sterling was trading at $1.4965, down slightly from $1.4972.
About noon Friday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 104.27 yen and at 1.7125 marks.
Mr. Clinton reauthorized, for a two-year period, the Super 301 portion of U.S. trade law that allows the U.S. to retaliate against nations deemed to engage in unfair trade practices.
The earliest possible date for U.S. action would be Oct. 21, under the terms of Mr. Clinton's executive order.
"Any negative news on U.S.-Japan trade friction is being taken by the market as a dollar-down play," said Erik De Pol, chief trader at the Royal Bank of Scotland in New York.
He added that the market has discounted recent protests by U.S. officials that any trade actions against Japan are unrelated to dollar-yen movements.
"Whenever there are trade frictions, the market sees the administration keeping pressure on the dollar" to force a lowering of Japanese trade barriers, Mr. De Pol said, adding: "The brinksmanship by Clinton keeps fears in the market, causing the dollar to show its weaker side."
"The only thing that can turn the dollar around at this point are concessions from the Japanese that the U.S. would find acceptable," Mr. De Pol said.
The dollar fell to an intraday low of 103.40 yen in the middle of North American trading on the reports that Mr. Clinton had signed the executive order.
But traders noted the dollar didn't fall as low as the 103.02-yen level that it hit Wednesday on the early reports that the Super 301 authorization was imminent.
Traders said widespread sentiment that the Bank of Japan was prepared to defend the dollar above 103 yen kept the U.S. currency well-supported.
The dollar reversed course somewhat on comments by U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor, who cautioned that "no one" should fear a trade war with Japan, and by Treasury Undersecretary for International Affairs Lawrence Summers, who said he doesn't "anticipate a cycle of escalation."
The dollar, meanwhile, clawed higher against the mark after initially being dragged down on news that the Bundesbank decided to leave key interest rates unchanged at yesterday's biweekly meeting of the central bank's policymaking council.
The Bundesbank's decision followed news Wednesday that Germany's M3 money supply -- the central bank's favorite indicator of inflationary pressures -- rose an unexpected 20.6%, causing panic selling of German bonds.
Dealers said the mark was helped briefly by the Bundesbank's announcement yesterday, which signaled that German rates are likely to remain firm in the near term.
But the dollar then leapt higher on positive U.S. data about employment and factory orders that boded well for the U.S. economic recovery, said Joseph Francomano, a trader for Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd. in New York.
