As Congress gears up to address the issue of mental health and health reform, figures as diverse as Rosalynn Carter, Betty Ford and Tipper Gore have backed the inclusion of broad mental health coverage in the package.
Tipper Gore has argued in this paper's letters column for "outpatient, community-based care."
Yet as we contemplate reforms involving mental health, we would do well to look back to an earlier "visionary" health reform project sponsored by the federal government -- this one aimed exclusively at the mentally ill.
It is the 1963 Community Mental Health Centers Act, the legislation that made it possible to deinstitutionalize hundreds of thousands of hospitalized mental patients across the country and reduce them to homelessness.
As far back as 1989, a Journal of the American Medical Association study recognized that 42% to 49% of the homeless are mentally ill.
A substantial portion of this group is schizophrenic.
The cost of deinstitutionalization to taxpayers has been, so far, some $3 billion.
By subscribing to a series of unsubstantiated claims, ambiguous forecasts and wishful assessments of the "facts," the Kennedy administration and Congress (in collusion with the mental-health bureaucracy) deluded themselves and the American people.
In a special message to Congress (Feb. 5, 1963), President Kennedy claimed that "if we apply our medical knowledge and social insights fully, all but a small portion of the mentally ill can eventually achieve a wholesome and constructive social adjustment.
It has been demonstrated that two out of three schizophrenics -- our largest category of mentally ill -- can be treated and released within six months."
In the 31 years since, "medical knowledge and social insight" have fallen woefully short of these exaggerated claims.
Obviously, visionary reforms are subject to the laws of unintended consequences and wishful thinking, and the imperfections of human nature.
But that lesson is often forgotten -- witness Mrs. Gore's hopes.
The Community Mental Health Centers Act did in 1963 what she proposes in 1994 -- it promoted outpatient community-based care for those who are seriously mentally ill.
The consequences were disastrous.
Mrs. Gore's words are upbeat abstractions, and just as unrealistic as John Kennedy's were.
When it comes to mental health, we run the risk of repeating the tragic and costly mistakes of earlier misguided reforms.
For one thing, the concepts associated with serious mental illness are ambiguous: What we mean, for example, by normal and pathological is difficult to define, and when we define these concepts they are often difficult to apply to patients.
A person diagnosed as schizophrenic in the U.S. may be given a different diagnosis in Britain or Germany.
Diagnostic ambiguity has bedeviled psychiatry from its beginning.
And for the past 50 years dozens of committees of the American Psychiatric Association have labored mightily over nomenclature -- tweaking it here and fiddling with it there -- with precious little to show for it.
The only psychiatrists who now find our thick book of nomenclature useful are academic researchers and insurance bureaucrats.
There are several reasons for this ambiguity.
The first and most important is that we don't know the specific causes of the phenomena of mental illness -- phobias, delusions, obsessions.
The best and most useful nomenclatures are based on a knowledge of causes.
A second reason for the ambiguity is that the signs and symptoms we deal with are highly variable and often unstable -- they appear and disappear for no apparent reason, and may reappear in an altered form.
Finally, ambiguity results from the fact that all illness, including mental illness, is determined partly by social and cultural values that also vary from time to time and culture to culture.
Feelings of depression are experienced by all of us at one time or another.
Are they pathological?
Yes, if they get bad enough.
But where do we draw the line?
This polymorphous quality of mental illness often makes it very difficult to know whether the improvement that occurs in the course of a patient's illness is due to the treatment we are giving or due to other factors.
It is even more difficult to prove the effectiveness of treatment to a reasonably skeptical outsider.
The therapies that have developed over the past 100 or so years -- both psychotherapy and the biological therapies -- are empirically based and, like most other medical treatment, result in varying degrees of improvement from none to considerable.
At this time in our understanding, it is impossible to formulate accurate generalizations about who can benefit from which forms of psychiatric treatments except in the broadest categories.
We can say that patients with personality disorders are not likely to benefit from chlorpromazine (an antipsychotic medication) and that some schizophrenics may benefit, but we can't say which ones and to what degree, or what dangerous side effects might develop.
Trial and error based on clinical experience is the best guide for the prescriptions of both psychotherapy and medication.
There is a general rule in medicine that says "the sicker the patient, the harder he is to cure."
At the present time mental health professionals are powerless to cure a large number of patients.
We can get rid of the hallucinations of many schizophrenics, but they remain schizophrenic -- for the most part unable to function in normal society.
We cannot reverse the brain damage and cognitive deficiencies in those elderly with senile dementias.
We cannot transform the characters of paranoid sociopathic felons who habitually kill and injure.
We cannot cure these people.
It is very difficult for Americans -- with our can-do culture -- to accept the reality of even temporary impotence in certain spheres of experience.
If we can get a man on the moon, why can't we cure schizophrenia?
Maybe because space flight is child's play compared with schizophrenia.
Or maybe if we focused as much energy and money on schizophrenia as we have on moonshots we'd have conquered that, too.
It happens too often that politicians turn to medical bureaucrats and say we'll pay anything if you'll only help us.
Like all patients and families of patients, they want desperately to believe in our omnipotence.
But until we understand the specific causes of illnesses like schizophrenia and paranoid sociopathy, psychiatrists cannot claim much more authority than any informed citizen on how to deal with them.
We are all accountable for dealing with these shared problems.
As social problems they can be "cured" but the "cures" have costs.
The better the cure, the higher the cost.
We can arrange for the homeless to be off our streets, warm and clean and treated with whatever medications we have available; teased and cajoled out of their walled-off isolation; taken care of by kindly, devoted caretakers in small, pleasantly located settings.
Then our consciences will be clear and we can feel that we are a humane and civilized society.
But clear consciences, free of social guilt, are very expensive.
How much are we willing to pay?
That is a social and political decision, not a medical one.
Schizophrenia: A disorder of the mind (and possibly the brain) characterized by chronic social withdrawal, illogical thinking and disregard for the external world.
Dr. Kramer, a practicing psychiatrist for 35 years, is a professor at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.
