Five groups led by foreign telephone concerns have said they will tender bids for controlling stakes in two phone companies operated by the Peruvian government.
The government's sale of a controlling interest in its wholly owned Empresa Nacional de Telecomunicaciones del Peru, or Entel, and its 20%-owned Compania Peruana de Telefonos, or CPT, is being viewed as a bellwether of investor interest in Peru's resurgent economy.
Although Peru's phone system is underdeveloped even by Latin American standards, analysts say that the two phone companies, which will be sold as a package, could fetch from $300 million to $500 million.
Bidding will take place Feb. 28.
One of the groups that has registered to bid is made up of Southwestern Bell Corp. of San Antonio; Korea Telecom of Seoul, South Korea; Grupo Carso, a conglomerate from Mexico City; Daewoo Telecom, also of Seoul; and Banco de Credito Overseas Ltd., a Bahamas-registered corporation that is believed to represent Peruvian investors.
Also registering is a consortium consisting of GTE Corp., Stamford, Conn.; Companhia Portuguesa Radio Marconi SA of Lisbon; and Empresa Brasileira de Telecomunicacoes of Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Another group is composed of American Telephone & Telegraph Co., New York; Godoy & Barclay SAB, a Peruvian brokerage firm; and Manuel Pablo Olaechea Alvarez Calderon, a representative of private Peruvian investors.
Also registering is a consortium including France Telecom of Paris and Societa Finanziaria Telefonica of Torino, Italy.
The fifth group includes Telefonica de Espana SA of Madrid; Cerveceria Backus & Johnston SA, Peru's largest beer maker; Banco Wiese Ltd., Peru's second-largest bank; and Grana y Montero SA, a Peruvian construction concern.
The companies had until Monday to register to bid.
Government officials hope that the sell-off will become a breakthrough deal for a country finally overcoming a long slump brought on by economic mismanagement and political turmoil.
"We think this sale will make more investors aware that there are exciting opportunities in Peru," said Jorge Melo Vega, one of the officials working on the privatization.
Last year, Peru's economy grew at a strong rate of 6.8% while inflation was tamed to 40%, from 7,000% just a few years ago.
Moreover, terrorist attacks by Maoist Shining Path guerrillas declined sharply as much of the movement's leadership was put behind bars.
Investor interest in the phone privatization has been reflected in the run-up of the stock of CPT, which is listed on the Lima stock exchange.
CPT has risen more than 30% during the past 30 days.
CPT, which provides local phone service to Lima, also has a cable television license.
Entel provides long-distance phone services for the entire country as well as local service outside of Lima.
The government plans to sell 20% of its CPT shares through the privatization and to allow the new owner to amass a controlling stake by making a 15% increase in the company's capital.
The government will sell off 35% of its Entel shares; to ensure that the purchasing group obtains operating control, Entel's bylaws probably will be amended to give special voting rights to the shares sold in the privatization.
The remaining 65% of the government's Entel stock will be put in a special trust and sold through a secondary stock offering later.
The consortium that wins the bidding will have a formidable turnaround job ahead of it.
Latin America is known for wretched phone service, but Peru holds the dubious distinction of having the lowest distribution of telephones in the region, with just 2.5 lines per 100 residents.
Peru also has six people waiting for lines for every 10 lines in service, the largest backlog on the continent.
The new owner of the phone system will be required to add one million lines in the next five years to a system that currently has only 600,000 lines.
But the winning bidder will have a monopoly on national and long-distance service until 1998.
The Peruvian government also plans to sell this year interests in a host of other companies, including a cement maker, some electric utilities and several hotels.
In all, the government hopes to earn $3 billion to $4 billion from the privatizations.
