Martin Marietta Corp. will prohibit two of its satellite divisions from sharing information under an agreement that will allow the company's acquisition of a General Dynamics Corp. unit.
The agreement with the Federal Trade Commission said Martin Marietta's expanding satellite launch-vehicle division won't share sensitive competitive data with its existing satellite development division.
A spokesman for Martin Marietta, which is based in Bethesda, Md., said the company already had "practices and procedures in place" to prevent competition-related problems from the acquisition of General Dynamics' space-systems unit.
The spokesman, who said his company was "impressed with the promptness and thoroughness" of the FTC review, also said Martin Marietta still expects to complete the acquisition next month.
Martin Marietta agreed last December to pay $208.5 million for the General Dynamics unit, which produces the medium-lift Atlas-Centaur space-launch system.
The businesses of Martin Marietta, an aerospace and defense concern, include the Titan IV heavy-launch system.
The unit of General Dynamics, which is based in Falls Church, Va., is the only U.S. supplier of an expendable launch vehicle for intermediate-weight satellites, and satellite makers must provide vehicle manufacturers "with competitively sensitive, nonpublic information about their satellites," according to an FTC statement.
"As a result of the acquisition, then, Martin Marietta's expendable launch vehicle division will gain access to such information and could share the data with its satellite division," the statement continued.
"Thus, the acquisition increases the likelihood that competition between satellite suppliers would decrease, and that advancements in satellite research, innovation and quality could be reduced."
The FTC will decide whether to make the proposed consent agreement, which would settle those allegations, final after a 60-day comment period.
Roy J. Harris Jr. in Los Angeles contributed to this article.
