Three weeks after the Northridge earthquake assaulted Southern California, another disturbing jolt has hit Ross and Janeen Swing and their Studio City home.
The couple sustained an estimated loss of $20,000 when their chimney crashed through the roof of their three-story house.
Now, after nearly 4,000 aftershocks and bouts of heavy rain, their foundation appears to be settling into the hillside.
"It's too early to tell, but that could cost another $20,000," says Mr. Swing, a vice president for Caesars World Inc.
All around the Los Angeles area, thousands of homeowners are still discovering hidden damage ranging from cracked stucco to ruptured foundations, much of which isn't covered by insurance.
(Only a quarter to a third of the region's homeowners carry earthquake insurance, and those that do face very high deductibles.)
They are also finding that what appeared to be relatively minor problems will be very expensive to repair.
The massive and widespread destruction of the Jan. 17 temblor -- now estimated at either 6.7 or 6.8 on the Richter scale -- continues to ripple through the real-estate market, rattling insurers, lenders, realtors and tens of thousands of residents, while official cost estimates are revised upward or downward almost daily.
Bank of America, which holds about $5.58 billion in first and second mortgages and manufactured-housing loans in the affected area, says some problems don't surface for weeks or even months.
Carolyn Sherwood-Call, an economist with the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, notes that the quake's disruptions include some loss of worker productivity and individual net wealth.
The economic stimulus from billions in federal aid and insurance money doesn't directly offset those factors, she adds.
Dennis Forst, a securities analyst whose Encino home sustained an estimated $15,000 in uninsured damage, agrees.
"It's not just the money," he says.
"The biggest issue for me is the time away from work, or the time at work you spend worrying about it."
Charles Rinehart, chief executive of H.F. Ahmanson Co.'s Home Savings of America unit, says the company is sifting through its 32,000 residential loans in the affected area.
Home Savings is offering customers everything from advice on dealing with insurers, to below-market loans for those who might otherwise risk default or simply walk away from their homes.
Some employers, such as Walt Disney Co., Hughes Aircraft Co. and Times Mirror Co., have tried to bridge the gap for quake-shocked employees by offering low- or no-interest loans via credit unions.
But even for those who are insured or look financially prosperous on paper, the recovery may be an uphill climb.
Home buyers and sellers have been thrown in limbo as well.
A survey by the Mortgage Bankers Association of America said about 21% of pending home escrows and refinancings in Southern California were disrupted by the earthquake.
Delinquency and default rates are also expected to be moderately higher in the area, and some economists like First Interstate Bancorp's James Padinha say San Fernando Valley real-estate prices may drop an estimated 10% in the near term.
Ron Kelly, a Northridge realtor who owns five houses in the area, can reel off an eye-popping list of damages: four chimneys, five cinderblock walls, two damaged heating systems, two cracked pools -- or about $75,000 worth of destruction.
Moreover, the delay of several clients' pending transactions has put him in a temporary liquidity crunch, especially in light of high deductible limits on his earthquake insurance.
Still, Mr. Kelly remains optimistic.
Relatively few clients have pulled out of escrow, he says, and things are bound to recover within a few years.
"I have the option of staying here, or moving to Kansas where I could freeze to death or get hit by a tornado," he adds.
"I've looked around, and I think I'll stay here."
Economists say factors tied to residential damage -- lagging home prices, less consumer confidence, changes in retail spending patterns, net loss of personal wealth -- are among the first to be reflected in regional economic data.
Local officials estimate that 15,000 houses and apartments were made uninhabitable by the quake, while tens of thousands of others sustained enough damage to force homeowners to reach into their pockets for repairs.
From a damage standpoint, the quake already qualifies as the nation's third-costliest natural disaster in recent years with an estimated $2.5 billion in insured losses, according to Property Claim Services of Rahway, N.J., a division of the American Insurance Services Group.
That amount was surpassed only by 1992's Hurricane Andrew, with $16.5 billion in insured losses, and $4.2 billion from Hurricane Hugo in 1989.
"If our estimates have to be revised again, it would be because of additional claims from hidden damage," says Jim Welsh, an adjustor with Property Claim Services.
