The U.S. Commerce Department is expected to issue a preliminary ruling today that will propose tariffs that could be significant against Fuji Photo Film Co. for illegally dumping color photographic paper in the U.S.
The ruling would be a victory for rival Eastman Kodak Co., which filed the case against Tokyo-based Fuji.
The victory, however, may be short-lived, as Fuji said it would try to speed up its plans to build a U.S. photographic-paper plant in South Carolina if it ultimately loses the case.
Paper produced there wouldn't be subject to tariffs and could ultimately trigger a price war, hurting all paper manufacturers while benefiting consumers.
Kodak declined to comment.
The Fuji case is yet another thundercloud darkening the U.S.-Japan trade landscape.
But because dumping cases work through a quasijudicial system, the administration can't orchestrate them as it would other trade actions.
In its petition, Rochester, N.Y.-based Kodak claims that Fuji currently uses profits from "monopoly-like" sales in Japan to subsidize the selling of its paper in the U.S. for prices as low as one-fourth of what Fuji charges in Japan and the Netherlands, where it also has production facilities.
Fuji currently doesn't produce paper in the U.S.
Kodak is asking for tariffs as steep as 275% to be placed on imported photographic paper and related chemicals.
People close to the case say today's amount could hit the 200% mark.
Fuji has a wide range of options available if the tariffs are levied.
Its U.S. paper plant is scheduled for completion in late 1995.
The $250 million plant is expected to add 300 new jobs and produce 1.2 billion square feet of color paper annually, flooding an already saturated paper market by more than 30%.
The plant's capacity will be twice the amount of color paper that Fuji sold in the U.S. during 1992.
"Kodak will see some short-term pricing relief, but they will be hurt in the long term," said B. Alex Henderson, an analyst with Prudential Securities Inc.
Should Fuji become a U.S. producer, it could freely set its paper prices.
But Mr. Henderson said that after the plant is up and running for several years, industry paper prices could drop by 15% to 20% -- a boon for photofinishers and consumers but a drain on photography companies including Konica Corp. and Miles Inc.'s Agfa division.
Miles is a unit of Germany's Bayer AG.
Fuji declined to discuss its pricing plans if the ruling is against it.
But a company spokesman said Fuji "would do everything to satisfy our customers until the new facility comes on line."
If substantial tariffs are levied against Fuji, paper prices could increase in the short run.
"If Fuji decided they had to raise prices based on tariffs, I'd have to look for other alternatives," says David C. Reynolds, vice president of Genovese Drug Stores Inc. in Glen Cove, N.Y.
"But it would be short term, until their plant was up and producing."
The Commerce Department must issue a final ruling in August after further investigation, at which point the International Trade Commission must decide whether Kodak was threatened or materially injured by the dumping margin.
But any tariffs ultimately levied would become effective based on price discrepancies from today on.
Fuji could therefore ward off tariffs by immediately lowering its paper prices in Japan and the Netherlands, raising prices in the U.S. or boosting its market share in the Netherlands.
Fuji and Kodak could ask for an administrative review a year after the final ruling.
But for now, Fuji must post a bond to cover the tariff margins for any paper imported -- the amount dependent on the Commerce Department's ruling today.
"If I were Fuji, I wouldn't change my prices at all," said Michael Ellmann, an analyst with Wertheim Schroder & Co.
"I'd pay any tariffs and I'd eat it to keep my market share.
The presumption is if Kodak wants to force me to build the plant and make life rough for everybody, then I will."
Bob Davis in Washington contributed to this article.
