New York -- One-person shows where a performer impersonates an artistic celebrity of yesteryear can be, like watching Court TV, a guilty pleasure.
Take Irene Worth's "Portrait of Edith Wharton" now at the Public Theater.
The small area is gotten up as an old-fashioned private library.
Two tall potted palms flank a lectern.
There is a carpet.
There are semireal bookshelves.
A high-toned mixture of comfort and culture is being evoked.
After a piped-in piano interlude, Irene Worth takes the lectern, her regal, white-haired presence swathed in the yellowish billows of a Fortuny gown, "a gift from Lillian Gish...purchased in 1924...in
Florence, Italy," according to the program.
Miss Worth is here to take us through the life and writings of the novelist (1862-1937).
After a short prologue in which she tells of asking Bernard Berenson about the formidable but lovable Wharton, the actress speaks as Wharton (the words come mainly from the autobiography "The Backward Years") or as Wharton's characters.
The format is loose and flowing, like that Fortuny; it, too, is attractive and pleasant.
Wharton was a product of the old high New York society of the mid-19th century, the flower of the colonial Dutch and Anglo-Saxon plutocracies.
Wharton's was an upholstered childhood on Fifth Avenue (Miss Worth recalls the savor of "soft-shelled crabs with a mayonnaise of celery and peach-fed Virginia hams cooked in champagne" -- eat before you go) and at Newport, where omnipresent veils protecting female skin from the deleterious sea air bespoke "an almost pagan worship of physical beauty."
But for little Edith there was always a serpent of discontent, of ironic awareness, in this thing-choked paradise: she hid in the library and wrote stories.
Her mother dismissively rejected an early effort because it contained a social mistake ("drawing rooms are always tidy"); this was prophetic of her family's lifelong attitude of embarrassment, disgrace, and silence at her literary successes.
For opera-going, canvas-collecting New York was at bottom Philistine, art-hating.
Edith tried to be a good Gilded Age girl: she wed, but her husband, an illiterate, became a violent melancholic.
And the marriage was sexually unfulfilling; not until a late and agonized affair with journalist Morton Fullerton did Wharton find the sexual raptures documented in an unpublished racy story that Worth reads.
Wharton liberated herself from the prisons of New York and marriage in two stages: first, she built the Mount in Massachusetts as a retreat and sanctuary; later, the marriage over, she moved to Paris for good, in 1913.
She had found friends -- above all, Henry James (in this reading presented too one-sidedly as merely a comic fuddy-duddy) -- to encourage her in her great task of writing about that New York of "irresponsible pleasure seekers" and the finer spirits they destroy.
On Wharton's art, as opposed to her life, Irene Worth is skimpy, confining herself to snippets from "The House of Mirth" and "Ethan Frome."
Wharton spent the World War I years in Paris doing propaganda and good works.
Miss Worth vividly evokes the times from an almost cloudless picnic barely ruffled by the news from Sarajevo to the day Paris's long-stilled church bells called joyously to each other to mark the armistice.
After the war come a few gentle glimpses of gilded old age.
Worth and Wharton make a good fit.
Wharton, both in and out of her society, both majestic and rebellious, cast a coldly appraising eye upon the splendors that surrounded her.
Irene Worth, an American artist who has enjoyed her greatest triumphs abroad, has had an incomparably rich career, co-founding the Canadian Shakespeare Festival, creating roles in T.S. Eliot's "Cocktail Party," Edward Albee's "Tiny Alice" and Samuel Beckett's "Happy Days," while winning a Tony in Neil Simon's "Lost in Yonkers."
Hers is a Whartonesque blend of noble grandeur and tough-minded risk-taking.
For 77 minutes she stands at that lectern like Wharton herself, who did her writing either at a lectern or in bed, and enacts a display of character and charm, not omitting to reveal the steel undergirding the charm.
So much for the pleasure.
Time for a deflating word about this whole genre of dressing up as famous authors.
It achieved critical mass some decades back with Emlyn Williams doing Dickens and Hal Holbrook doing Twain and was represented in New York three seasons ago by Eileen Atkins as Virginia Woolf and by Julie Harris as Isak Dinesen.
The gimmick is generally to show the author surrounded by evocative bric-a-brac at some moment of late-life crisis, reminiscing upon the highs and lows of a colorful career.
Sometimes the life plays second fiddle to a text, as with Ms. Atkins, who simply read from "A Room of Her Own."
But whether sad or comic, whether miscast (the superb Julie Harris did not really convince as a Danish aristocrat) or ideally cast (as here at the Public), the genre is meretricious.
It reduces acting to a stunt, an impersonation.
It reduces writers to celebrities.
It reduces literature to a Greatest Hits collection, like those nostalgia compilations "not sold in any store."
It gives the audience a false sense of intimacy with great writing, while in reality it is not even so demanding as listening to recorded best-sellers in the car.
And, the greater the writer, the more dishonest the experience.
What would Wharton have made of this Art Lite?
So for all my pleasure at Irene Worth, I'd have been better off, morally, reading "The House of Mirth" at home or even seeing "The Age of Innocence" on a screen.
Mr. Lyons is the theatre critic of The New Criterion.
