Sales Are Slowing . . .
SILICON VALLEY pundits have long prophesied that digital electronics would eclipse traditional consumer electronics, and they may be right -- this year.
Despite a revived economy, sales of old-line electronics like television sets and stereos are expected to slow sharply.
At its Consumer Electronics Show last weekend in Las Vegas, the Electronic Industries Association forecast that U.S. growth in color-TV sales will be less than 3% this year, down from 10% last year; growth in audio-system sales is expected to be 1.7%, down from 6.5%.
The forecast, drawn from a consensus of major manufacturers, is for consumer electronics sales in the U.S. to rise to $41.41 billion, or 4.4%, from an estimated $39.66 billion last year, which was up 6.3% from 1992.
Manufacturers expect a slowdown in part because consumers may find they have less spending money after this year's new tax bite.
Manufacturers hope their forecast will prove wrong, noting they have underestimated sales in the past.
But industry analysts say conventional consumer electronics are old news.
Television and sound products, which account for two-thirds of consumer electronics sales, are in so many homes that when money is tight, consumers will spend it elsewhere.
Popularity Soars . . .
IN CONTRAST, sales of consumer computer products -- a relatively new category in consumer electronics -- are expected to soar this year.
With PCs in fewer than a third of American homes, the Electronic Industries Association forecasts home computer sales will jump nearly 12% to $5.44 billion from $4.86 billion last year, when sales rose 7.4%.
At the Las Vegas show, some of the largest crowds swarmed around computing-section booths -- even around those with relatively mundane technology -- while many booths with more conventional consumer fare drew sparse traffic.
One attention-getter was a program for International Business Machines' ValuePoint computer that can take verbal dictation.
The speech recognition technology is still primitive, though: IBM says the machine can bog down if there is much background noise, like that at a trade show.
Crowds also flocked Compaq Computer's booth, where the company showed its hot-selling line of Presario computers introduced last summer.
With an acting ensemble performing Tarzan-and-Jane skits to the theme of "It's a Jungle out There" (referring to the PC competition), Compaq demonstrated such Presario features as built-in voice mail and internal fax ability, as well as multimedia capability to provide full-motion video and sound.
Also drawing crowds was a product called Edge 16, which lets two people in different cities play a video game on Sega Enterprises players.
The product, developed by San Francisco-based PF Magic with American Telephone & Telegraph and available this fall for under $150, uses new AT&T technology.
It lets players converse over the phone line the game computers are using.
Software vendors like Microsoft, eager for a share of consumers' discretionary dollars, were promoting children's programs, among the fastest-growing software markets.
WordPerfect showed new programs like Kap'n Karaoke, which features sing-along tunes for children, and Wallobee Jack, an interactive adventure cartoon.
Newcomers like WordPerfect see children as a big force behind consumers' shift toward spending on computers instead of TV sets.
"I call it the `tug' factor; kids want computers," says a marketing director for WordPerfect, which set up shop at the consumer show for the first time this year.
OLD-LINE CONSUMER electronics makers do have a few tricks in their bags.
Panasonic displayed a portable compact-disk player with a three-inch video screen for viewing movies and music videos.
The Video CD player, shown for the first time in the U.S., can play disks holding up to 74 minutes of pictures and sound.
But Panasonic officials showed only a crude prototype that was so unreliable it failed to show a trailer to the film "Jurassic Park" during a presentation.
Panasonic hopes to get the player to the U.S. market by 1995.
Sanyo Fisher demonstrated its new mini-CD players for cars.
The players, which are to hit the U.S. market this summer at an undisclosed price, pop into the dashboard and play 2 1/2-inch compact disks, rather than the conventional five-inch CDs.
Panasonic also displayed a standard 14-inch "flat" TV set that is less than four inches deep, instead of 14 inches deep.
The flat sets, introduced in Japan last fall for about $3,000, should be popular, retail buyers say, because they take up less space.
Panasonic expects to ship the sets to the U.S. by early next year; buyers say they should sell well for under $2,000.
The fabled 500-channel cable system may be some years off, but Thomson Consumer Electronics is offering 150 channels through space.
Its RCA Digital Satellite System, an 18-inch dish starting at $699, retrieves TV channels from satellites.
Buyers say the dish should sell well because it is so small.
Still, Dick DiCerchio, executive vice president of Price Costco, observed: "I still can't figure out how you install it."
Thomson, acknowledging it would require "handyman" skills, recommended professional installation.
DIRECTOR Steven Spielberg arrived at the show with six bodyguards to play the videogame version of his movie, "Jurassic Park," on players from Nintendo, Sega and 3DO players. . . .
Televisions finally upstaged computers during the football playoff match between the Kansas City Chiefs and Pittsburgh Steelers, as large crowds gathered at panels of TV screens to watch the Chiefs snatch a victory.
