Continental Airlines said it plans to cut flights at its Denver hub by 23%, another step in what appears to be a company-wide route restructuring.
The carrier, based in Houston, said it would reduce daily jet departures from its third-largest hub to 107 from 139 effective March 9.
At the same time, it will cut service from Denver to six cities and eliminate 300 positions.
As Continental reduces its Denver flights, it will boost service to other parts of its system, particularly the new CALite service that operates short-haul, low-fare flights primarily in the Southeast.
While the company won't provide details, people familiar with its plans say Continental will more than double its CALite operation in March.
Also, according to published reports, it will boost its departures from its Cleveland hub by 43%.
A company spokesman wouldn't comment.
All this is part of a move by Continental to remake itself from the debt-laden, unprofitable giant that landed in bankruptcy court in 1990 to a nimbler airline with flights that don't compete head-on with its big rivals.
Since emerging from Chapter 11 protection last April, Continental has scrapped its flights to Australia and New Zealand and redeployed those planes on trans-Continental flights.
Last fall, it inaugurated CALite, the first large airline to attempt a short-haul alternative.
Previously, it was the first U.S. airline to eliminate first class on international routes and concentrate on selling only business class seats.
The Denver actions are yet another step in this move to leaner operations.
Denver is unprofitable for Continental because it's the only hub where the airline competes head-on with another carrier -- UAL Corp.'s United Airlines.
In addition, Continental's costs are likely to increase in Denver after that city's Stapleton Airport closes this year and flight operations move to the new Denver International Airport, which has much higher landing costs.
While Continental's route restructuring coincides with the projected move to the new Denver airport, Continental said the higher operating costs there aren't the primary reason it is cutting flights.
The company said it will continue to reexamine its Denver operations "to determine its proper scope."
Continental will suspend service from Denver to Bozeman, Mont.; Missoula, Mont.; Ontario, Calif.; San Antonio, Tex.; Tucson, Ariz.; and Tulsa, Okla.
