What's a company to do if it confronts sexual-harassment allegations swiftly and sternly but still faces demands for money damages from the alleged victims?
One company, Kas Tex Corp. of Vernon, Calif., that claims it is in this position, has pioneered a new approach: It is suing six women who complained about harassment and is seeking a court declaration that it is blameless.
A twist in the case is that the women hadn't even filed a lawsuit.
Their lawyer had simply sent a letter to the textile company outlining the charges and demanding $282,000 in damages to settle the allegations.
Kas Tex's pre-emptive action appears to be unprecedented and is being closely watched by employment lawyers.
Kas Tex takes the position in its court filing that the company wasn't at fault for the alleged harassment and that it has strong procedures in place to deter mistreatment and to respond aggressively to any that does occur.
The company wants the court to endorse this view and block any further action by the women.
The case is particularly noteworthy because it reflects the frustration of executives who often must defend themselves in lengthy court cases even when they maintain that they have done nothing wrong.
"Usually, defendants are perfectly content to sit back and wait to be sued," says Debra L. Raskin of the New York plaintiffs law firm Vladeck, Waldman, Elias & Engelhard.
Accused companies "are no more eager to spend attorney fees than anyone else."
The controversy first lurched toward court last August, when Shelly Mandell, a Los Angeles civil-rights lawyer, wrote to Kas Tex on behalf of six women employees, five of whom still work at the company.
The women complained that a warehouse worker had harassed them over a long period of time with lewd language and gestures.
Kas Tex suspended the worker and hired the Los Angeles law firm Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher to investigate.
According to its complaint, Kas Tex "came reluctantly to the conclusion that the accused employee had indeed engaged in offensive behavior," although the "accusations contained in the original Mandell letter were grossly exaggerated and in some measure false."
The company then fired the warehouse worker, who has maintained that he is innocent of any wrongdoing.
But the women didn't drop their demands, and Kas Tex still had the allegations hanging over it.
"We were totally frustrated because we feel that we are more than innocent," says Gustav Krebs, a vice president of the company, which had a little more than $10 million in sales last year.
Mr. Krebs argues that Kas Tex has an "open door" policy and other employment guidelines meant to prevent improper conduct.
Mr. Krebs also says that Gibson Dunn's approach, while professional, was too lowkey.
"We felt it was not being pursued aggressively enough, because what the hell do you do when you think you're innocent?"
Kenneth W. Anderson, a partner at Gibson Dunn, declined to comment on Kas Tex's decision to switch counsel.
Kas Tex retained Rafael Chodos, a Santa Monica litigator, to file the complaint for so-called declaratory relief in Los Angeles Superior Court.
Ms. Mandell, the women's lawyer, insists that Mr. Chodos "is trying to circumvent the whole system."
Kas Tex, she says, is "trying to rob the women of their remedies" by avoiding the traditional course toward settlement or a trial.
Ms. Mandell, a former president of the Los Angeles chapter of the National Organization for Women and a partner in O'Donnell & Mandell, Los Angeles, says that her office has gotten calls from state and federal agencies, including the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, that are worried the action will erode regulatory safeguards against discrimination.
Mr. Chodos's counterattack even has defense lawyers scratching their heads.
"The danger that I see is that the women will be able to get this matter in front of a jury," says Nancy L. Abell, a management lawyer at Paul, Hastings, Janofsky & Walker in Los Angeles.
She says a jury might view the company's complaint as "further harassment of the individuals on the theory that they hadn't decided to initiate litigation."
Kas Tex's case is just getting started, but already there are new complications.
The fired warehouse worker has sued the women and the company for wrongful discharge and libel, among other things.
The man's Los Angeles lawyer, James Oliver Foster, says that his client has become a "sacrificial lamb."
The six women have asked Kas Tex to indemnify them in the libel case.
So far, Kas Tex has declined.
A federal judge in Philadelphia has found "no merit" to bribery allegations leveled against an attorney in the General Motors Corp. pickup case.
Andrew J. Langham, an attorney with Kirkland & Ellis in Chicago, which represents GM, was accused by the Kansas firm of Michaud, Hutton, Fisher & Anderson of offering it a bribe.
As previously reported, the Kansas firm said in a brief filed in federal court in Philadelphia that Mr. Langham offered to pay attorneys' fees if the Michaud firm would drop objections to a proposed class-action settlement involving the owners of GM pickups.
But federal court Judge William H. Yohn Jr., who approved the settlement, wrote in a supplementary ruling that the offer, recorded and transcribed by Michaud, wasn't an attempt at bribery.
Judge Yohn wrote, "the court finds no merit in these bald allegations."
Law Notes . . .
POSNER BAN UPHELD: The federal appeals court in New York upheld harsh penalties imposed on financier Victor Posner and his son, Steven Posner, for alleged securities-law violations.
In December, U.S. District Judge Milton Pollack banned the Posners from serving as officers or directors of any publicly traded company, calling the Miami Beach businessmen "recidivist violators of the federal securities laws."
The appeals court rejected arguments that the Posners hadn't received a fair trial and that the penalty exceeded the authority of Judge Pollack.
A spokeswoman for the Posners said a further appeal is likely.
