Bell Atlantic Corp.'s historic pact to acquire cable-television giant Tele-Communications Inc. collapsed late yesterday, a stunning setback for the two companies that were supposed to lead the race to enter the interactive age.
The two companies expressed virtually no hope of resuming their efforts to merge, and Bell Atlantic, the big regional telephone company, all but ruled out the notion of mounting a new acquisition approaching TCI's scale.
The abrupt scuttling may cast a cloud over the wholesale rush to wire up the nation for the fabled information highway and is likely to thrust a spate of other pending deals into uncertainty.
In prepared statements, Bell Atlantic and TCI blamed a new federal rollback in cable rates and "the unsettled regulatory climate" for derailing the multibillion-dollar pact they had touted as the ideal marriage of technological might and market savvy.
In a second statement last night, moreover, TCI called the FCC action "unwarranted, excessively severe and harmful" and announced a 50% reduction in its planned 1994 capital spending.
But people close to both companies make it clear that the deal also was scuttled because of bitter disagreement over price.
Even after the two companies unveiled firm terms of their deal in mid-October, they engaged in a protracted bout of dickering and bickering.
When the pact was unveiled, Bell Atlantic had agreed to pay $11.8 billion in stock for most of TCI's coveted cable-TV systems and as much as $20 billion for all TCI assets, including its vaunted portfolio of equity stakes in such cable channels as Cable News Network, TNT and other outlets.
But TCI Chief Executive Officer John C. Malone, who stood to reap about $1 billion for his shares, was relentless in his push for an ever higher value and sweeter terms.
Bell Atlantic's chairman, Raymond B. Smith, was all but intractable in refusing to ante up, and indeed was pushing for a lower price that he felt TCI deserved.
Their rift widened in the past four months as Bell Atlantic's stock price -- its currency in the TCI deal -- dropped sharply from a high of $67.625 the day after the deal was announced to below the $54-a-share price it had guaranteed to TCI.
At the same time, TCI's own cash-flow outlook, a crucial benchmark for setting the final price Bell Atlantic would pay, headed south.
The Federal Communications Commission set a reduction of about 10% in cable rates last year, only to return to the issue and impose an additional 7% rollback on Tuesday.
That proved to be the last straw, ending what would have been one of the largest acquisitions in U.S. corporate history, and the largest, by far, in the spate of rapid-fire transactions in the past year of courtship between telecommunications and cable companies.
"You can't underestimate the impact of this one on future deals.
It created the climate we're all working in," said Charles Dolan, founder of Cablevision Systems Corp.
Spurred in part by the Bell Atlantic-TCI deal, Mr. Dolan has been in negotiations with U S West Inc. and its partner, Time Warner Inc., about selling his cable systems.
Bell Atlantic and TCI would have made a formidable combination.
Bell Atlantic serves six mid-Atlantic states, has some 18 million phone lines and had set plans to deliver interactive services to 1.2 million homes by the end of next year and millions more beyond that.
TCI, with cable-TV systems in 49 states, reaches into one of every four cable households in the nation, and its Liberty Media Corp. spinoff owns stakes in a passel of cable channels.
Together, the two companies would have had revenue of almost $17 billion annually and cash flow of more than $6 billion.
They would have reached 40% of all U.S. homes, a headstart so daunting that the deal's unveiling immediately sparked cries of anticompetitive behavior.
Insiders said that impressive scenario finally fell apart with the FCC action -- although FCC officials counter that both parties could well expect possible rate cuts and that such a prospect can't be blamed for thwarting their highly touted deal.
On the day before the FCC rate cut, Bell Atlantic had offered a new set of terms that would reduce its original bid: It would pay stock amounting to $2,000 per cable subscriber, down 15% from the original rate, and pay about 0.6 share for each TCI share for the entire company, down from an original ratio of 0.65 share.
A source close to TCI said Mr. Malone and his negotiators agreed to those terms and hoped to put them before a board vote tomorrow.
But TCI executives figured the new rollback on Tuesday would prompt a new effort by Bell Atlantic to cut the price again -- and they were braced to resist.
TCI itself figured the new FCC-ordered rate cut would reduce its cash flow by a daunting 15% this year.
When Bell Atlantic did indeed indicate that it wanted to further trim the price, Mr. Malone balked and ended the talks, a person in the TCI camp said.
But an executive on the Bell Atlantic side of this acquisition-gone-sour placed the blame squarely in TCI's lap, and on Mr. Malone, in particular.
Mr. Malone would have received about $1 billion in Bell Atlantic stock for selling his TCI shares, and he and TCI founder Robert Magness were to be paid a 10% premium over what regular TCI shareholders would receive.
That simply wasn't enough, this Bell Atlantic ally contends.
After the FCC ordered the new 7% rate cut on Tuesday, Bell Atlantic had asked Mr. Malone to simply split the difference and take a somewhat-reduced price.
Mr. Malone refused.
"He just kept reaching and reaching," says this executive, adding that in the middle of the initial talks with Bell Atlantic before the October announcement, Mr. Malone surprised his new would-be partners by setting up TCI's acquisition of the Liberty Media spinoff, which significantly enhanced the value TCI would carry in the Bell Atlantic acquisition.
The divergent accounts are in stark contrast to the united and entirely compatible front that Messrs. Malone and Smith had presented when they announced their deal in October.
Both men took lead roles in selling their deal as good for America and as the spark that would set off an interactive revolution.
Last night neither was available to explain their breakup, instead leaving that unpleasant task to designated spokesmen and to the behind-the-scenes advisers to both camps.
Bell Atlantic President James Cullen said the two sides had "virtually all the details worked through except the final price" before the FCC move on Tuesday.
Once the rate cut was imposed, "even though we had adjusted to a hell of a lot of things in five months, this was the final adjustment that just couldn't be made."
He said Bell Atlantic is eager to pursue joint ventures with TCI.
TCI was even more blunt in blaming the FCC for the collapse.
A spokesman pointed out that while the Clinton administration had touted the information superhighway and even praised the Bell Atlantic-TCI deal, the FCC is "depriving companies of the means to build it."
He added: "Basically the issue has always been whether the highway will be deployed on an accelerated basis.
The FCC has answered `No.'"
But FCC Chairman, Reed E. Hundt, dismissed the sniping and said the rate cut "didn't in any way make the future of the cable industry more unsettled."
The two companies were concerned that, in addition to new rate cuts, the FCC is looking at other changes, including linking future price increases to productivity gains, regulating how cable systems can package channels and making major changes in good-will allowances.
But a senior Senate staffer called the companies' criticism "preposterous."
He noted that Bell Atlantic itself last year had demanded that the FCC cut cable rates by 28% -- even more than the two rate cuts the panel has already adopted.
And when the FCC first imposed the 10% cut, the staff member noted, Bell Atlantic went so far as to sue the agency, claiming it didn't come down hard enough.
Neither company will be crippled by the breakup -- but their expansion plans may be pared back.
TCI remains the nation's most powerful cable-TV company, and it is an attractive partner for a slew of would-be suitors from the telecommunications side.
Bell Atlantic remains the most aggressive of the seven Baby Bells in its plans for the interactive future, and its $5 billion-a-year cash flow gives it ready access to new capital.
"We're still very eager to be a major player in the video delivery and programming business," said Bell Atlantic's Mr. Cullen.
"But that doesn't necessarily mean finding another cable partner."
Bell Atlantic shares fell 50 cents to $52.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
TCI's Class A ended at $24.25, down 62.5 cents, on the Nasdaq Stock Market, while the Class B shares fell 75 cents to $28.75.
