After months of being badgered about "the vision thing," Louis V. Gerstner Jr., chairman of International Business Machines Corp., seems to be getting ready to speak out.
In IBM's newly released, and remarkably candid, annual report, Mr. Gerstner delivers a sobering rundown on the company's problems and devotes more than one-third of his letter to investors to the question of strategy.
Clearly haunted by his statement last summer that the "last thing IBM needs right now is a vision," Mr. Gerstner mentions the brouhaha and now says that "setting strategies is our single highest priority after making IBM profitable."
He adds: "We are hard at work -- day and night -- developing tough-minded strategies for every one of our businesses."
Anticipation is high that Mr. Gerstner could deliver a major strategy pronouncement as soon as next week, when he meets with analysts for his first major address since taking over IBM.
As employees, customers and investors wait in suspense to hear what he will say, some clues emerge in his letter to "fellow investors":
-- Whatever the strategy is, Mr. Gerstner isn't going to be overreaching.
Unlike previous heads of IBM who expressed confidence that any problems could be overcome, Mr. Gerstner sounds more like the "Little Engine That Could."
He is being careful to hedge his bets with statements such as, "Almost a year later, I think we can do it."
-- He has learned that customers want technology that's easy to use and capable of paying off in "tangible" ways.
So he is putting more emphasis on "systems integration," helping customers figure out how to solve their business problems -- even if it means buying other brands.
-- Mr. Gerstner talks about a "borderless world" where networking technologies and new wireless capabilities will let people flit among television sets, telephones and computers, in their cars, offices or classrooms just by speaking to their machines.
Above all, Mr. Gerstner says he will proceed sans arrogance -- while the old IBM "had the reputation of being arrogant.
That was probably true at some point in the past, but it's not going to happen on my watch."
