From his cell in a Geneva jail, Florio Fiorini is casting a long shadow over France's biggest bank, state-owned Credit Lyonnais.
Mr. Fiorini, an Italian financier with a notorious reputation in his own country, is best known in the U.S. for his role in the disastrous 1990 takeover of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc. by his compatriot Giancarlo Parretti.
He has been held in jail in Switzerland for more than a year, facing charges of fraudulent bankruptcy following the collapse in October 1992 of his own Swiss company, Sasea Holding SA.
Credit Lyonnais, which helped to finance the MGM takeover and now owns the film studio, became a major lender to Mr. Fiorini's Swiss company in its final months.
Ever since Sasea collapsed, with debts of five billion Swiss francs ($3.44 billion), the bank has been sparring with Swiss authorities over its precise role in the company and its failure.
That sparring has now turned into open warfare.
The Swiss magistrate charged with the case, Jean-Louis Crochet, this week publicly announced he intends to seek the indictment of the former chairman of Credit Lyonnais, Jean-Yves Haberer, and a top executive still with the bank, Francois Gille.
Alleging that Credit Lyonnais was the de facto administrator of Sasea at the time of its collapse, the judge also removed the bank's right to be a civil party to the criminal bankruptcy proceedings.
The Swiss decision came shortly after Mr. Gille, during a long and tense hearing in Geneva, called Judge Crochet "a thug" to his face.
Credit Lyonnais insists that it is a victim, not a perpetrator, of Sasea's bankruptcy, and it strenuously denies playing any hands-on management role.
The bank, in turn, has requested that the judge be excused from the case.
A spokesman says Mr. Gille has apologized for his insult.
The practical effects of such legal squabbling may be less dire than they sound.
Unless they go to Switzerland, where they are liable to be arrested, neither Mr. Haberer nor Mr. Gille faces actual indictment.
For that to happen, French authorities would have to accept the Swiss request, which lawyers say is unlikely.
The bank, too, says the ongoing saga won't have much impact on its future earnings: it has already covered all but 500 million French francs ($85.2 million) of its 4.7 billion French franc exposure to Sasea and its subsidiaries with loan-loss provisions in its 1992 account.
Nonetheless, being deprived of its civil rights in the bankruptcy case is a blow, Credit Lyonnais acknowledges, because it means the bank will no longer have access to any official documentation in the case.
The affair, moreover, brings unwelcome publicity to the bank and its new chairman, Jean Peyrelevade, who succeeded Mr. Haberer in November with the mandate to clean up its reputation as well as its finances in preparation for its eventual privatization.
The case may also have repercussions in the U.S., where Credit Lyonnais is still fighting several legal battles over MGM with financier Kirk Kerkorian.
Mr. Kerkorian's lawyers are watching the Sasea wrangles closely, and have been in touch with various parties in the Swiss case to see if they can find further ammunition for their own legal battle against Credit Lyonnais.
The latest twist to the case is above all a partial vindication of Mr. Fiorini, a portly 53-year-old described as brilliant by his friends and Machiavellian by his detractors.
By accusing the French bank of effectively running Sasea in its final days, Judge Crochet has in fact borrowed Mr. Fiorini's own defense.
Ever since he was jailed 15 months ago, the Italian has insisted that the bank, and not he, bears the responsibility for Sasea's spectacular failure.
It is a charge he has repeated frequently since being jailed, writing his side of the story in a book of memoirs and in several articles for Italian magazines.
His lawyer, Marc Bonnant, says Mr. Fiorini has always argued that he knew Sasea was overextended as early as 1991 -- more than a year before it eventually collapsed.
But Mr. Fiorini alleges that it was Credit Lyonnais that insisted he shouldn't wind up the company there and then, and provided financial support to keep Sasea going.
"There is now reason to think that Mr. Fiorini's point of view is also the point of view adopted by Swiss justice," Mr. Bonnant said in a telephone interview.
In a fury, Credit Lyonnais lawyers agree with that assessment; they complain bitterly that the judge has spent more time delving into the French bank than into Mr. Fiorini's affairs.
The 15 months spent in jail don't seem to have damped Mr. Fiorini's spirits, according to two people who have visited him recently.
According to Mr. Bonnant, however, there are no plans to release him anytime soon.
He is being held in "preventive detention"; under Swiss law, a suspect in a major and complicated case can be detained for an unlimited period until magistrates have completed work on the case.
Mr. Fiorini first achieved notoriety in Italy, where he became embroiled in the Banco Ambrosiano scandal in the early 1980s while still working as chief financial officer for the state-owned energy conglomerate, ENI.
Because of that affair, he left ENI under a cloud, but soon reemerged by acquiring Sasea, an old and virtually defunct Swiss company that was still listed on the stock market.
Credit Lyonnais first provided support to Sasea through its errant Dutch subsidiary -- the same subsidiary that financed Mr. Parretti's acquisition of MGM.
Sasea was a substantial investor in that transaction, and a recent book by Francois d'Aubert, a French member of Parliament, describes Mr. Fiorini as the brains behind the takeover.
For its part, Credit Lyonnais has said its Dutch subsidiary disobeyed explicit commands from the French head office not to finance either Mr. Parretti or Sasea in the MGM transaction.
The MGM takeover turned sour and Credit Lyonnais ended up taking over the studio.
Even so, when Sasea seemed on the ropes in the fall of 1991, some months later, Credit Lyonnais stepped in, this time with the head office's permission, bank officials say.
The French bank ended up arranging a big restructuring plan for Sasea.
It now says in officially released documents that it was deliberately deceived by Mr. Fiorini about the extent of Sasea's problems.
For example, the Swiss company's official accounts to June 1991 showed equity capital totaling 160 million Swiss francs and assets valued at 1.15 billion Swiss francs.
Several months later, that money -- if it ever existed -- had disappeared, Credit Lyonnais claims, and, in a public statement, accuses Mr. Fiorini of creating a house of cards.
The bank has also filed suit against Sasea's auditors, KPMG Peat Marwick, which signed off on the 1991 accounts.
KPMG denies any wrongdoing.
One of the many mysteries in the affair is why Credit Lyonnais continued to support Mr. Fiorini for so long, even though it had already been severely burned by Mr. Parretti, his partner.
