Circus Circus Enterprises Inc.'s management upheaval continued with the resignation of William J. Paulos, the high-profile casino executive who oversaw the opening of the Las Vegas company's new $390 million Luxor resort.
Mr. Paulos, 46 years old, said he will become chief operating officer for Crown Casino Ltd., an Australian company that holds the right to build the first casino in Melbourne.
John O'Looney, Luxor's casino manager, was named to succeed Mr. Paulos as the top operating executive at the new resort, and the corporate senior vice president's position remains unfilled.
Investors, unnerved by the departure of another of the company's key executives, pushed Circus shares down $2.25, or 5.8%, to $36.875 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Also, Circus said Kurt Sullivan, who was named general manager of the Circus Circus Las Vegas last October, was named the company's director of operations, overseeing all eight of the company's casinos.
Several analysts noted that Mr. Paulos's departure is the latest in a string of executive departures at the casino company in less than a year and underscores concern over the company's ability to manage the aggressive growth plan it has mapped out.
Last February, Glenn W. Schaeffer resigned as president, chief financial officer and a director following a clash with William G. Bennett, Circus's strong-willed chairman.
Mr. Schaeffer had been groomed to succeed Mr. Bennett, who has long stated his desire to retire.
A month later, James W. Muir resigned as chief operating officer and a director.
In recent years, other senior executives have left the company abruptly.
They include Richard P. Banis, an earlier heir apparent who left the company in 1991 as president and chief operating officer, and Melvin Larson, an executive vice president and board member who stepped aside the following year.
"If you look at the annual report from two years ago, the four senior people under Bennett are gone," said Dennis Forst, an analyst with Hancock Institutional Equity Services, Los Angeles, who pulled his "buy" recommendation on the news.
Clyde Turner, Circus's president, and Mr. Paulos characterized the departure as amicable.
Mr. Paulos said his new compensation package was "very, very generous" and said Mr. Bennett had been "incredibly cordial and wished me luck" upon hearing of his decision.
But people familiar with the situation noted that Mr. Paulos repeatedly had been passed over for a top corporate title despite having played a key role in the opening of each of the company's major casinos in recent years, including the Colorado Belle in Laughlin, Nev., and the mammoth Excalibur and Luxor resorts in Las Vegas.
Mr. Turner said the company was comfortable with its management structure and would consider filling the chief operating slot "at the appropriate time."
The post has been vacant since Mr. Muir's departure last year.
