The Wall Street Journal today begins weekly publication of its own list of bestselling hardcover books.
The Journal list is based on actual retail sales at more than 2,500 chain bookstores nationwide.
No statistical projections or wholesale consignments are included.
Because all of the stores supplying data track sales by electronic scanner, sales figures can be obtained for the week ended this past Saturday.
The Journal list will thus include the most recent data of any bestseller list; some widely known bestseller lists are based on data more than two weeks old by the time of publication.
The Wall Street Journal bestseller list reflects all sales by the four largest retail book-sellers in the country: Barnes & Noble Inc.'s 958 Barnes & Noble, B. Dalton, Doubleday, Scribner's, Bookstop and Bookstar stores; Kmart Corp.'s 1,275 Waldenbooks, Brentano's and Borders stores; Crown Books Corp.'s 240 Crown Books and Super Crown stores; and Books-a-Million Inc.'s 111 Books-a-Million and Bookland stores.
The Journal list also includes a feature not previously available on any list: The Wall Street Journal Sales Index.
This index will enable readers to compare the relative sales of titles within the categories of fiction and nonfiction/general, and between these categories.
The index will be pegged to a benchmark of 100 for the No. 1 fiction bestseller each week.
For example, on this week's list, "Without Remorse" by Tom Clancy, the 15th-leading fiction bestseller, has a sales index of 11 -- meaning it sold only 11% as many copies as the leading fiction bestseller, "Accident" by Danielle Steel.
Similarly, "Embraced by the Light" by Betty Eadie, the leading nonfiction bestseller, with an index of 75, sold 75% as many copies as the Steel book.
Guns drawn and badges flashing, about 30 U.S. Customs agents stormed into the Seventh Avenue headquarters of jeanswear giant Gitano Group Inc.
Brushing past lobby video monitors on which images of dancing, jeans-clad teens flickered, they fanned out through the executive offices and carried off dozens of cartons of financial records.
That December 1991 raid and its aftermath ultimately engulfed Gitano and its founding Dabah family in a scandal that has sent the company's fortunes -- and those of the family -- crashing.
In December, the company and three former officers -- including two Dabah sons -- pleaded guilty to felony charges that they had schemed to evade import quotas.
Haim and Isaac Dabah face possible one-year prison terms when they are sentenced next month.
The family has sold or lost to creditors all of its 43% stake in the publicly-held company it built.
Already sputtering under heavy losses and debt, Gitano was put up for sale last month.
Its directors had little choice: Gitano's biggest customer, Wal-Mart Stores Inc., said it wouldn't do business with a supplier that had violated customs laws.
Wal-Mart has since agreed to accept Gitano merchandise while sale negotiations proceed, and has signaled its willingness to work with a new owner.
But the long-term fate of Gitano is still in doubt.
The customs episode closed a squalid chapter in one of the rag trade's more colorful family sagas.
Ambition, sweat and fortuitous timing catapulted Israeli immigrant Morris Dabah and his three sons from the gritty streets of New York's garment district to perches atop one of the highest-flying apparel concerns of the 1980s.
But ineptitude and corruption toppled them just as quickly.
The customs investigation brought to light a nest of other problems ranging from company self-dealing to an almost complete lack of financial controls.
Gitano insiders still talk about the "Black Hole" -- $15 million in supposed 1991 profit that couldn't be verified during the year-end audit.
The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating whether Gitano executives inflated earnings, and a shareholder class-action suit alleges deliberate financial misstatements.
The company's stock is in the process of being delisted from the New York Stock Exchange.
Four of Gitano's five outside directors have resigned, three of them just last month.
Robert Gregory, a former VF Corp. executive who was brought in last year by directors and creditors to mop up the mess, says he is astonished by the shambles the Dabahs left behind.
"It would take five years to create proper reporting systems at Gitano to make this thing work," says Mr. Gregory, chairman and chief executive officer.
"This was a company that was completely out of control."
The Dabahs declined to be interviewed for this article.
But Kenneth J. Bialkin, an attorney with Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom who represents the Dabahs, says they were simply the victims of too much success, too fast.
"The Dabahs are the big losers here," he says.
"They'd be the first to admit that the company's growth and complexity presented them with challenges that were extremely difficult to cope with."
Others see it differently.
"These guys thought they were bulletproof" because of Gitano's link with retailing giant Wal-Mart, says Bryan Marsal, a New York management consultant who was one of dozens that Gitano enlisted in the past two years' rescue effort.
Indeed, the Dabahs maintained appearances up to the end.
Just a few months before customs agents came calling, Haim Dabah played host to 1,000 guests at his son's bar mitzvah at the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf Astoria.
There was Lester Lanin's 40-piece orchestra, a cake baked in the shape of the Wailing Wall and a troupe of lambada dancers that the family flew in from Brazil.
But the flourish that brought gasps was a glass-enclosed wind tunnel filled with $1 bills: Each child at the party was briefly escorted into the chamber to grab as many fistfuls of dollars as he or she could.
That Gitano could grow so fast, and for so long, without its dubious business practices coming to light, is a testament to the closed ranks of the Dabah clan -- and to the strength of the fashion craze for skin-tight jeans.
While Calvin Klein and Gloria Vanderbilt peddled $50 jeans to the department-store trade, the Dabahs saw opportunity in the untapped blue-collar market that designers spurned.
Gitano linked up with Wal-Mart and other budget mass-merchants, and as these stores blanketed the nation's heartland, Gitano filled their racks with low-price chic.
Haim Dabah -- at age 42 the eldest and most flamboyant of the sons -- promoted Gitano's $15 jeans with $20 million-a-year TV ad campaigns and glossy spreads in Vogue and Elle.
Gitano's sales grew by an average of 40% a year, to a peak of $827 million in 1992.
The patriarch who started it all, Morris Dabah, was born in Syria and migrated to New York's garment district in the 1970s, after having worked as a low-level government bureaucrat in Israel.
He set up shop on the fringes of Seventh Avenue as a jobber, a middle-man who buys overstocked closeout goods and resells them to bargain basements.
The elder Dabah, now 69, found support within Brooklyn's insular Sephardic Jewish community, where better-established compatriots helped him line up loans and letters of credit with Republic National Bank of New York, whose chairman is Sephardic billionaire Edmond Safra.
After they graduated from high school, his sons Haim, Isaac and Ezra joined the business, where their father tutored them in the rough-and-tumble ways of the garment district.
"A deal is always open to be renegotiated," the father has often said.
The ambitious Dabah sons found a kindred spirit in Robert Reiss, a Bronx-born sportswear buyer at Alexander's department store in New York.
In 1977, they invited Mr. Reiss to invest $20,000 to join their business, which two years later began marketing fashion jeans under the Gitano label -- a name conceived by Ezra, now 40.
The Dabahs thus joined an influx of other newly-arrived Sephardic immigrants who were well on their way to an instant fortune in designer jeans.
Among them: Sasson founder Paul Guez, and Georges Marciano and his brothers Maurice and Paul, who own Guess jeans.
It was the equivalent of a garment-industry gold rush: Jeans that cost $4 to make in the Far East might retail for more than ten times that at American malls.
In the early days, Gitano sold to a few department stores.
Soon, though, it turned to budget retailers, where the Dabahs and Mr. Reiss were well-connected.
The discount chains were clamoring for trendy apparel, and for Gitano, the prospect of huge volume was alluring.
Budget shoppers accustomed to commodity brands swore by Gitano's styles and fit.
In 1980, "we figured that we'd do about $7 million, but instead we did $45 million," recalls Mr. Reiss, who was a Gitano executive vice president but left in 1992 after falling out with the Dabahs.
Morris Dabah, Gitano's chairman and chief executive officer, stayed in the background, hunched over a calculator at his desk at Gitano's headquarters at 1411 Broadway, punching columns of figures.
His oldest son, Haim, became Gitano's president and official spokesman.
Charming, extroverted and fond of the good life, he cultivated celebrity designers like Isaac Mizrahi -- whose business he personally invested in -- while ingratiating himself to big discounters like Kmart Corp., Target Stores and Caldor Corp.
"Haim created what was like a cult, that we were all thrilled to be a part of it," says John Amodeo, a consultant who developed Gitano promotions from 1984 to 1993.
"Haim threw company parties at Palladium, MK and all the hot clubs.
Every day you couldn't wait to get to work."
Haim Dabah and Mr. Amodeo dreamed up mail-in rebates, "Gitano Girl" model contests, and other gimmicks to heighten brand recognition.
During an annual "Gitano Week," store managers vied to move the most merchandise to win Club Med vacations or color TVs.
But the company's splashy marketing and breathless growth masked big problems.
Gitano didn't have so much as a business plan.
And it never reined in its contractors, mostly foreign manufacturers who often shipped the wrong goods, sometimes weeks or months late.
In those days, Mr. Reiss recalls, "even when we made mistakes, we still made a lot of money."
But retailers noticed.
"It took Gitano 10 or 12 months to do what other brands could do in four months," says Marc Balmuth, Caldor's president.
Even though Gitano got the fashions, prices and marketing right, he says, its quality was "just on the edge."
Caldor stopped buying Gitano apparel in 1991.
By then, though, the Dabahs had taken the company public in a $37 million 1988 initial offering.
Gitano was buoyed by its largest client, Wal-Mart, which had started buying Gitano goods in the mid-1980s and which was opening more than 100 stores a year.
(At the peak in 1990, Wal-Mart bought as much as $300 million worth of Gitano goods annually, industry analysts estimate.)
As Gitano grew along with Wal-Mart, Haim Dabah shuttled almost weekly to Wal-Mart's Bentonville, Ark., headquarters.
Along with representatives from other key vendors like Rubbermaid Inc. and Procter & Gamble Co., Haim was invited to sit on Wal-Mart's advisory vendors' council.
Wal-Mart routinely undercut its competitors' prices on Gitano jeans, and advertised the fact, taunting competitors like Caldor and Venture by name in promotions.
"The comparison pricing hurt our relationship with many stores," Mr. Reiss says.
But Haim Dabah was anxious to accommodate his big client, even if it hurt his company.
Once, when Wal-Mart abruptly decided to renegotiate the price of a $4.8 million order of Gitano blouses, Gitano simply billed Wal-Mart $4 million to cover its costs, and gave up every penny of its own $800,000 profit.
"Haim wouldn't stand up to Wal-Mart," says Mr. Reiss, now the president of No Excuses Sportswear Ltd., another jeans maker.
Haim's concessions paid off during what came to be known as the "Wal-Mart Alert."
Around 1990, when Wal-Mart ordered all its vendors to attach bar-code price tags to merchandise, Gitano executives panicked.
The scanners could compare every garment against the original order, and Gitano's foreign contractors habitually made substitutions when filling orders, such as shipping out snap-front jeans instead of button-front jeans.
"We had really dug ourselves into a big hole," one Gitano manager recalls.
"We knew that it would take us years to correct the factories so that they would consistently produce what we really ordered.
It was that messed up."
Haim Dabah flew to Bentonville and bought more time by assuring Wal-Mart that Gitano was in the midst of developing its own state-of-the-art bar-coding system.
In fact, Gitano wasn't developing a system at all, two former executives say.
Gitano finally did get around to using a bar code a year later, but its system proved erratic.
By the mid-1980s, as more competing fashion brands invaded the budget chains, the Dabahs veered in a new direction.
They began piling on new apparel divisions and opening Gitano-owned factories and retail stores in a quest to become, in Haim Dabah's words, the "Liz Claiborne of the masses."
Isaac Dabah, now 36, spearheaded Gitano's purchase of factories in Mississippi, Guatemala and Jamaica in 1988.
But in a matter of months, the new factories became bottlenecked, as each of the company's 11 marketing divisions began calling them direct to book orders.
The factories ran behind, lurching from order to order in stop-and-go runs.
In the fourth quarter of 1988 the inefficiencies resulted in $11 million in lost sales, Haim Dabah later told Wall Street analysts.
At his French antique desk at headquarters, Isaac Dabah fumed at underlings.
"He spent hours on the phone calling the factories, starting and stopping production," a former associate recalls.
Instead of tying production to demand, Isaac ordered the factories to run at full capacity so Gitano could respond quickly to orders.
"At any given time in 1989, we had at least three years' worth of inventory of jeans in storage," estimates one former Gitano manager.
To get rid of the excess inventory, Haim Dabah decided to expand Gitano's small chain of 16 outlet stores.
By 1991 Gitano had opened 88 stores, many of them in bad locations.
Wall Street by now had cooled on Gitano.
In August 1990, Goldman, Sachs & Co. apparel analyst Jay Meltzer trimmed his full-year earnings estimate for Gitano to $2.50 a share from $2.90, prompting Gitano shares to tumble $4.75 to $19.875.
The following day, Haim told Women's Wear Daily: "There's absolutely nothing negative coming out of the company."
But when Gitano's 1990 results were released a few months later, net income plunged 74% to $8 million, or 54 cents a share.
The next year, Gitano posted a net loss.
During the year-end audit for 1991, Coopers & Lybrand, Gitano's accountants, found glaring discrepancies, including what became known inside the company as "the Black Hole."
More than $15 million booked as profit could not be verified, and was deducted before audited figures were released.
Coopers & Lybrand declined to be interviewed for this article.
Accounting discrepancies were commonplace at Gitano, the new chief executive Mr. Gregory says.
"One of the biggest problems I faced last year," he says, was salespeople routinely granting discounts to retailers without deducting them from original invoices.
The company "thought they had sold an item at a 32% profit margin, but with the discounts, they had given up 10% or more of that profit and didn't even know it," he says.
"It was an ingrained part of the culture."
In an amended complaint originally filed in 1991 in federal district court in Manhattan, Gitano shareholders accused management of "systematic overstatement and misstatement of the company's financial condition and future prospects."
On Feb. 4, the class action was extended to include Coopers & Lybrand as well as a number of Gitano's bank lenders as defendants.
Gitano's 1991 year-end 10K filing disclosed how the Dabahs effectively had used Gitano funds to prop up other family-owned businesses.
The 130-store Children's Place retail chain and other Dabah-owned apparel concerns were big Gitano customers, and when these firms reneged on payments for goods that Gitano shipped to them, Gitano took a $28 million writeoff in 1991 for "related party" receivables.
Mr. Bialkin, the attorney for the Dabahs, says: "The self-dealing was fully disclosed, and was subject to the oversight and review of the directors, including the outside directors."
He also notes that the Dabahs sometimes made loans to Gitano.
Triggered by the shareholder suit, the SEC launched its investigation.
According to people familiar with the situation, the SEC is looking into trading activity in Gitano stock in 1992, as well as allegations that Gitano's earnings were falsely inflated.
No current or former Gitano officials have been charged.
Gitano's customs troubles, meanwhile, were just beginning.
The company found itself in 1991 with a major shipment of women's knit tops from several of its contractors in countries with import quotas, including Malaysia and China -- but the items were marked as made in the Maldive Islands, which aren't subject to quotas.
Isaac and Haim Dabah, along with another Gitano executive, met and decided to import the blouses anyway.
Suspicious customs officials raided the company later that year.
Yet even that didn't stop Gitano, which falsified the country of origin on yet another shipment of knit tops in 1992.
The shipments together had a declared value of $2.7 million.
That kind of customs scam is in fact fairly common in the garment business; it is one of the industry's worst-kept secrets.
But Gitano was bolder than most.
Robert Van Etten, special agent in charge of the U.S. Customs office in New York, says Gitano's officers "held meetings to plan what they were going to do before they broke criminal statutes.
They knew what they were doing was wrong."
As the company's fortunes deteriorated, its relatively passive board began to rouse itself.
Two outside directors -- Laura Sloate, chairman of Wall Street firm Sloate, Weisman, Murray & Co., and Michael Goldstein, vice chairman of Toys "R" Us -- became especially voluble.
"Laura kept complaining she wanted more discipline," Mr. Reiss says.
"Haim and Isaac privately wanted to get rid of her, but they knew they couldn't."
Ms. Sloate and Mr. Goldstein declined comment.
Both have since resigned, along with Kevin Kennedy, a partner at Goldman Sachs, and Norman Matthews, a former vice chairman of Federated Department Stores Inc.
By early 1992, Gitano's directors had lost patience with Haim Dabah's excuses and their inability to get straight answers from Gitano's chief financial officer, Stanley Greenstein, who was fired later that year.
Mr. Greenstein now says the Dabahs kept him in the dark on many financial matters, and resisted when he pressed them to tighten controls.
"We didn't have a handle on our financial systems," Mr. Greenstein says.
"We lost control."
But he also concedes: "A lot of the financial problems I should have seen."
The Dabahs had used their 43% stake in Gitano to secure bank loans to family-owned businesses, including Children's Place.
In November 1992, as Gitano's shares sank to $3.50, Citibank sold a 14% stake in Gitano it was holding as collateral on a loan to the Dabahs.
Fearing that other creditors might follow suit, the Dabah family filed individual petitions for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
The company was in almost total disarray by the time creditors and outside directors brought in Mr. Gregory as the new chief executive officer last year.
The folksy, 51-year-old South Carolinian, who had once run VF Corp.'s $1 billion Lee jeans division, folded all but Gitano's core women's sportswear division and shuttered six of its seven Manhattan showrooms.
Mr. Gregory pared debt to $130 million from $247 million and for his efforts received a bonus that brought his 1993 compensation up to $5 million.
Even as Mr. Gregory attempted to pick up some of the pieces of Gitano's shattered fortunes, though, Haim Dabah remained president of the company, while his father and brother Isaac remained directors.
That arrangement finally ended just two months ago, when all three resigned days before Haim and Isaac agreed to plead guilty to defrauding the U.S. Customs Service.
Gitano agreed to pay $2 million in fines.
The guilty pleas prompted Wal-Mart to stop ordering from Gitano.
Although Wal-Mart continues to receive Gitano apparel it had previously ordered, Gitano hasn't booked any new business from Wal-Mart or anyone else this year, according to Mr. Gregory.
Last year, Wal-Mart alone bought about $175 million of Gitano merchandise, he says.
If Gitano's customs violations were indeed the deal-breaker for Wal-Mart, it raises questions why Wal-Mart continues to buy goods from Bonjour International, another jeans maker that pleaded guilty to customs fraud in 1993.
"To the best of our knowledge Bonjour has not been guilty of any wrongdoing," a Wal-Mart spokesman says.
Since bowing out of Gitano, the Dabah family has emerged from personal bankruptcy and is attempting to regroup.
Morris is retired.
While awaiting sentencing, Isaac is running Gloria Vanderbilt Apparel Inc., which Gitano bought in 1988 and then spun off last year to a company owned by a family friend.
Ezra -- the only son not to be implicated in the customs case -- is president of Children's Place.
Haim, currently unemployed, is said to be trying to start a new business -- as an apparel consultant.
A PAGE-ONE ARTICLE on Gitano Group Inc. in Friday's edition incorrectly stated that Bonjour International had pleaded guilty to customs fraud in 1993.
In an indictment, Bonjour was accused of violating customs laws, but the company hasn't entered a plea in the case, which is scheduled to go to trial in federal district court in Manhattan in October.
(WSJ Feb. 23, 1994)
GITANO GROUP Inc., the jeanswear maker, spent $20 million a year on all types of advertising and promotion.
A Feb. 18 page-one article said incorrectly that the company spent $20 million a year on TV advertising alone.
The article also mentioned the bar mitzvah of the son of Gitano's former president, Haim Dabah, at which the children played a game of "diving for dollars."
The "dollars" used in the game, according to some who attended the party, were actually play money.
