After nearly seven decades of predictable politics, ho-hum campaigning and one-party control of power, the Mexican presidential election season is about to get interesting.
The reason can be summed up in one word: Chiapas.
The uprising by ethnic Indians in the southern state of Chiapas has stirred up old problems -- stark poverty, vast disparities in wealth, political corruption -- at a critical time.
The result is a surprisingly open political season, far different from the usual resigned wait for the ruling-party candidate to be elected, as he has been every six years since the 1920s.
This time around, the traditional opposition party has all but disappeared, the leftist party has suddenly resurfaced and rumblings of dissension have appeared in the normally monolithic ruling party.
Even if the ruling-party candidate does win in August -- still the most likely outcome -- the soul searching that is occurring during this electoral season will mean a change in priorities for Mexico.
Having focused over the past five-plus years on reviving its economy, government officials say, Mexico will now concentrate on how wealth can be distributed more equitably.
Having left the political system largely untouched to maintain stability in the face of broad economic changes, the country will deal even more aggressively with the corruption that has plagued politics for decades.
"Chiapas has called on the social conscience of us all," says Luis Donaldo Colosio, the presidential candidate of the ruling PRI party.
"Now more than ever it's important that Mexico undergo a profound social change. . . .
We have to pay attention to poor regions, to social programs and to democracy."
Mr. Colosio says that, if elected, he will continue the basic economic policies that President Carlos Salinas has used to restore Mexico's international credibility, but will try to focus more on economic growth as a way to benefit all Mexicans.
He also says he would decentralize government, ending the practice of naming officials in the central government as the ruling party's gubernatorial candidates; instead, local officials would be chosen.
"What people in Chiapas and elsewhere do not accept any more are decisions made by the central government and imposed in an authoritarian way," he says.
If Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, the presidential candidate of the leftist PRD party, were to win, he would go even further in reorienting Mexico.
He calls the economic situation "very precarious" and says the country needs a "more just political and economic system."
No matter who wins, after decades during which poverty was just accepted as a fact of life in Mexico, the disparity of wealth has thrust itself into the political campaign.
Intellectuals are saying Chiapas could turn out to be a defining moment in Mexican history, a potent symbol of the vast divide between Mexico's rich and poor.
An official in the Colosio campaign adds that "it's shameful, truly shameful, that we had to wait for something like Chiapas to happen to make us aware of how bad things are."
Chiapas also ensures that political reform will become a major issue in the campaign and that -- after years of talking about ending the ruling party's stranglehold on the electoral system -- something may finally change.
That is partly because the hard-liners within the government fought a behind-the-scenes battle to try to crush the rebellion militarily but, after several tense days, lost out to others in the ruling party who advocate change.
"The risks of the hard-liners are still there, but they're more isolated," says Manuel Camacho Solis, the government's negotiator with the rebels and, by all accounts, the runner-up to Mr. Colosio in the ruling party's selection of its presidential candidate.
Analysts also say concerns about Chiapas made it much easier to push through some recent electoral reforms, which, in a marked change, were signed by all the major political parties here.
"We will have a much better climate in 1994," Mr. Camacho says.
"People, instead of having demonstrations in the streets, will start discussing politics.
There will be more pressure on the ruling party to reform itself.
And we can now go to the guerrillas and show them that we've begun to change."
In retrospect, it is no surprise that the trouble started in Chiapas.
Many of its more than three million inhabitants descend directly from the proud Mayan empire, yet they live in Mexico's most impoverished state.
Coffee prices have tumbled, wiping out the livelihoods of many.
Oil jobs have disappeared as the state oil company, Petroleos Mexicanos, has streamlined itself.
Meanwhile, cattle ranchers have pushed poor farmers off their land -- sometimes violently -- to create more grazing room.
With the state government standing solidly behind the business interests, dozens of discontented Indians have mysteriously disappeared, making Chiapas a routine stop for groups investigating human-rights abuses in Mexico.
The initial reaction among many Mexicans was to play down the significance of the uprising.
Chiapas, after all, is almost another country.
It is full of Mayan Indians, deep in the rain forest, seeming to have more in common with Guatemala than with the rapidly industrializing desert states closer to the U.S.
But the Third World conditions there contrast so sharply with the First World aspirations of so much of Mexico that they quickly began to resonate throughout the country.
Tens of thousands of people turned out in the center of Mexico City to support the rebels, and demonstrations have shut down highways leading out of the capital.
"Chiapas" is becoming the generic term for poverty-stricken areas throughout Mexico, and there are many.
Areas just outside Mexico City are flat on their backs because mining jobs are disappearing.
Corn growers are losing government subsidies that had let them make profits even if their costs were 50% above the world average -- and they know their hard, dry land won't let them compete with the U.S. grain belt.
Farmers complain that they can't afford loans because interest rates are so high, and sometimes show their displeasure by occupying banks.
Squatters cover the country, earning the nickname "parachutists" because they seem to be able to drop into any area.
The issue is likely to remain prominent for a long time, partly because the rebels have shown themselves to be surprisingly sophisticated in keeping their cause alive even though it has been weeks since there has been real fighting.
The enigmatic rebel leader known as Subcommander Marcos has managed to send occasional communiques to newspapers in Mexico City, which publish them.
He alternates between anger and a surprising sense of humor.
In a letter published Friday, he wrote, "The country wants Chiapan oil, Chiapan electric energy, Chiapan raw materials, the Chiapan work force -- in other words, Chiapan blood.
But it doesn't want the opinion of Chiapan Indians."
The letters are so passionate and carefully crafted that Octavio Paz, winner of the Nobel Prize for literature, has written that they have moved him deeply.
With Chiapas catching people's attention, the country is finally focusing on its inequities -- and they are startling.
The minimum wage, adjusted for inflation, has dropped 24% since 1988.
It's not just the poorest who have suffered, either.
One study has found that the bottom 40% of the population saw their total share of Mexico's wealth drop to 12% from 15% during the past five years.
The safety net in the program of President Salinas was an antipoverty measure called Solidarity, under which the federal government provides raw materials needed to improve basic services to communities if their members do the work.
The program has spent more than $9 billion and has refurbished more than 75,000 schools, paved thousands of miles of roads, helped bring electricity and drinking water to more than 10 million people and assisted in providing drainage services to eight million.
But Solidarity didn't provide paying jobs or any other way to climb out of poverty.
The middle class, which needs to grow if Mexico is to continue its economic turnaround, hasn't been without its problems, either.
Although there aren't any good numbers on the growth of the middle class, Nora Lustig, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington, D.C., says that inflation-adjusted wages -- which provide a good measure of how the salaried middle class has done -- have rebounded 32.3% since 1988.
But this just gets salaries back to about where they were in 1983, before Mexico's economy collapsed.
In addition, a study by the Autonomous National University of Mexico found that 60% of the people in relatively wealthy Mexico City still live in what it called unacceptable economic conditions.
Cristina Escobar, manager of Restaurant Miravalle in Mexico City, says that even though the days of wild inflation are gone, the costs of raising her two children keep rising faster than her income.
"Maybe for the rich costs have fallen," she says, "but not for us in the middle class."
The rich are the clear winners of the past few years, because they have had the money to buy real estate and stocks, which have benefited so much from the new optimism about Mexico's future.
The Mexican stock market, for instance, has increased its value by $191 billion since 1987.
Mexicans hold about three-quarters of the equity, so they have seen the value of their stock holdings rise about $143 billion.
But as of the end of 1992, the last time figures were published, less than 0.2% of Mexicans had brokerage accounts.
That means the huge increase in value found its way into the hands of a small minority, since mutual funds hold only a small percentage of stock and pension funds and other institutional investors are almost nonexistent.
Fueled by the surge on the stock market, the number of Mexican billionaires has risen to 13 last year from two in 1991, according to Forbes magazine's annual survey.
That gives Mexico more billionaires than any country other than the U.S., Japan and Germany.
The goodies going to the rich haven't ended, either.
Recent licenses to operate in the lucrative banking market have been granted to some wealthy, politically connected people, including Carlos Slim, who owns much of Telefonos de Mexico.
Televisa, a near-monopoly in television broadcasting that strongly supports the ruling party, was recently sold dozens more government television stations under a deal in which competitors couldn't bid.
The Salinas economic reforms were deliberately designed to benefit big companies and their owners, with the idea that Mexico needed huge, strong companies if it was to compete with efficient giants from the U.S. and elsewhere in the world of freer trade that President Salinas envisioned.
In the wake of Chiapas, though, Mr. Colosio says that if elected president he will focus more on small businesses and less on the country's giants.
He says he will also focus less on the national level and more on regional development.
In Chiapas, for example, Solidarity told hard-hit coffee growers that there was a niche market providing high prices for organically grown coffee, then helped them hook up with exporters, he says.
Solidarity will also emphasize a program to help small businesses find financing, so they can create jobs, he says.
In addition, he will emphasize economic growth more than the Salinas administration did, to try to benefit all Mexicans.
The economy was such a wreck when President Salinas took office in 1988 that he had to show a budget surplus to regain credibility with international investors and had to generally squeeze the economy to cut inflation.
Mr. Colosio says that a budget surplus no longer needs to be the goal above all others.
Mr. Colosio has offered to debate the other presidential candidates -- the first time any senior PRI official has agreed to any kind of debate.
He says he will also address his campaign much more to young people and to women than any candidate has done before.
If he and the party are really serious about democratic reform, then there is, of course, no longer any guarantee that the PRI candidate will win -- which is part of the reason that this election season seems likely to be so wild.
The concerns about poverty raised by Chiapas appear to have undermined the appeal of the traditional opposition party, the PAN, the most conservative of the major parties.
Its candidate, Diego Fernandez de Cevallos, recently went to one of the PAN's biggest strongholds, Ciudad Juarez, which has a PAN mayor in a state with a PAN governor -- and almost no one turned out to see him.
Events in Chiapas have, however, restored life to the faltering Mr. Cardenas, the leftist candidate who many feel would have won the 1988 election if not for suspected fraud by the PRI.
Chiapas even creates a wild card within the PRI, because President Salinas gave the populist Mr. Camacho the highly visible job of trying to mediate a solution.
Mexico has been abuzz about the possibility that Mr. Camacho will pull off a miracle in Chiapas, then either supplant Mr. Colosio as the PRI's candidate or break off and start his own party.
Mr. Camacho declines to comment.
Although Mr. Colosio still seems secure, Mexicans are asking themselves: If things are this unsettled at the start of the election year, what will things be like by the time elections roll around in August?
