Auto stocks are trading near record highs, fueled by investors' belief that the Big Three will post exceptional earnings this year.
So, is it time to sell?
Several auto analysts say no, even though the group took a hit in the stock market yesterday.
Sure, the stocks are already up 45% to 57% from January a year ago.
And certainly, some investors are getting nervous.
Yesterday General Motors fell 3/4 to 60 1/8; Chrysler slid 5/8 to 59 7/8 and Ford Motor sank 1 3/8 to 65 5/8.
Yet auto analysts are betting that the auto stocks as a group will gain at least another 20% before sputtering.
Some auto analysts even speculate that the peak is somewhere between $90 and $100 a share for all three companies.
"The perception of what these companies will earn is rising," says David Healy, S.G. Warburg's auto analyst.
"The earnings are stronger than what the Street has expected.
The market has become convinced that the recovery in car sales is real."
Demand for vehicles is strong as consumer confidence in the economy runs high.
But the sales recovery is just part of the story.
GM, Ford and Chrysler have taken big steps in the past couple of years to improve profitability in their North American operations.
The Big Three also have a big price advantage over rival Japanese models, which now cost buyers an average of $2,500 a vehicle more than Detroit's products.
For that, Detroit can thank the Clinton administration's campaign to talk up the yen and talk tough to Japan on trade.
Detroit appears poised to reap the benefits.
For starters, the Big Three seem to be retreating from the costly rebates or sales incentives that have eroded profit margins for five years.
Instead they are offering a variety of less-generous leasing packages and value-priced vehicles.
PaineWebber's auto analyst, Stephen Girsky, says that in general every one percentage point saved in marketing costs is worth as much as 70 cents in per-share earnings.
"That's a lot of leverage," he says.
Chrysler slashed its incentives to an average of $650 a vehicle in the fourth quarter, down from $1,020 a year earlier.
For the entire year, it shaved 3.5 percentage points from its marketing costs as a percentage of sales.
Analysts say those cost-cutting measures alone contributed a large chunk of Chrysler's fourth-quarter profit of $777 million, or $2.11 a share, which exceeded analysts' expectations.
Sharply reduced discounting -- resulting in higher prices -- could help Ford and GM to post fourth-quarter earnings surprises next month as well.
Auto analysts believe that Detroit is poised to make big gains in recovering market share lost to the Japanese.
The Japanese haven't been able to shift production to meet surging demand for trucks and minivans as Detroit has over the past few years.
The Japanese are further hobbled by a continuing recession at home.
"The Japanese are still in trouble," says Mr. Girsky.
For U.S. car producers, "the inventory is not out of whack with reality.
Consumer confidence is high.
There are no red flags here at all.
I wouldn't sell any auto stocks."
So when do you sell?
Joseph Phillippi, Lehman Brothers' auto analyst, says it's possible the auto makers' stock prices might hit a peak by the end of this year.
But Wertheim Schroder's John Casesa believes the time to sell won't be until a year to 18 months from now -- before earnings are expected to peak.
Says Mr. Casesa: "You buy when business is very bad but not getting any worse.
And you sell when business is very good but can't get any better."
WALL STREET is missing the boat on PaineWebber Group, says one pro who's often a bear but bullish this time.
Even though PainWebber posted record earnings along with brokerage-industry leader Merrill Lynch yesterday, PaineWebber's stock fell 5/8, to 25 3/4.
That's barely above book value, and 5.8 times reported earnings.
"Astonishing," says David Rocker of New York's Rocker Partners, who has been adding to his PaineWebber holdings.
He mocks trend-following investors "for buying cyclicals" while abandoning PaineWebber because of fears of a bear market.
"Fundamentals don't seem to matter," complains Mr. Rocker, adding: "If things get so bad that PaineWebber's low valuation is justified, what's going to happen to the rest of the market?"
