DISSIDENT FRANCHISEES seek more concessions from Pearle Vision.
An activist group got nowhere in December when it sought a new round of royalty cuts and other changes at loss-plagued Pearle Vision Inc., based in Dallas.
So the group wrote a complaint last month to the Federal Trade Commission, hoping to put pressure on the Grand Metropolitan PLC unit.
Pearle called the complaint an attempt at "extortion" and vows to keep resisting the activists.
Pearle is a trouble spot for London-based Grand Met, whose franchising operations also include Burger King Corp. and HaagenDazs Shoppe Co.
Pearle's systemwide sales declined to $610.1 million in the fiscal year ended Sept. 30, 1993, off 3.4% from the previous year -- and 12% from two years earlier.
The company has lost market share to U.S. Shoe Corp.'s Precision LensCrafters Inc. unit and others.
Now many Pearle franchisees are in financial distress, largely because of the franchiser's price-slashing programs, claims the Vision Care Franchisees Association of Chicago.
This group of Pearle franchisees says its members own 170 of the more than 400 franchised Pearle units in the U.S.
"If the market requires deep discounting, we want the franchiser to share some of the pain," says Eric H. Karp, the group's Boston attorney.
Pearle refused to negotiate with what its New York lawyer, David J. Kaufmann, calls "a rump group."
Vision Care Franchisees then wrote to the FTC, accusing Pearle of violating federal rules governing disclosures to prospective franchisees.
Pearle denies violating these rules, and the FTC declines to comment.
The company, which reduced royalties in 1992, also insists that the current terms are "fair and equitable," Mr. Kaufmann says.
Meanwhile, ailing Pearle Inc., Pearle Vision's immediate parent, claims to be recovering -- but the available evidence is confusing at best.
Grand Met -- which uses accounting principles accepted in Britain -- has said that Pearle's "operating loss before exceptional reorganization charges" narrowed to #2 million (almost $3 million) in fiscal 1993, from #33 million a year ago.
In the U.S., however, Pearle Inc. in franchising documents reported a wider loss of $91.5 million for fiscal 1993, compared with the $56.8 million loss a year earlier.
The latest figure included a pretax "total operating loss" of $72.4 million, compared with a $49.4 million operating loss a year earlier.
The U.S. balance sheet shows restructuring and store-closing costs -- included in operations -- of $33.9 million in fiscal 1993 and $11.7 million in fiscal 1992.
A Pearle spokeswoman insists that despite the U.S. accounting treatment, operations "achieved approximately break-even status."
A NEW NEWSLETTER tries to give a steak chain some extra sizzle.
Many franchisers don't even know who their franchisees' customers are.
But Ruth U. Fertel Inc., the New Orleans parent of Ruth's Chris Steak House Franchise Inc., is taking steps to reach its clientele.
The company has distributed 50,000 copies of "Steak House Gang News," a glossy 16-page newsletter.
Now the company is gathering names -- 10,000 so far -- of customers who want free copies of future issues by mail.
The intended quarterly is aimed at reinforcing customer loyalty.
A portion of franchisee royalties helps cover the costs.
The first issue covers the chain's operations in 38 cities, discusses wine vintages, and discloses some recipes used by the chain.
It even includes an expose of what it says is a bogus restaurant-rating list -- ostensibly impartial but allegedly underwritten by one of the high-rated restaurants.
Other issues will carry profiles of individual customers who eat in the chain's restaurants in 10 or more cities.
TACO BELL, whose parent pushes mediation, rejects it for a "bully."
Since May, some 28 franchisers, including Taco Bell, have joined a dispute-resolution program aimed at avoiding litigation with franchisees.
Taco Bell's parent, PepsiCo Inc., is a prominent supporter of the so-called National Franchise Mediation Program.
A lawyer at PepsiCo's Pizza Hut unit heads the steering committee of the program, which is administered by the Center for Public Resources, New York.
But even supporters say mediation has its limits.
Taco Bell has refused to use the program to negotiate with one franchisee, Darrell Dunafon.
He sued the franchiser in November in federal court in Jefferson City, Mo.
Mr. Dunafon, whose lawyer requested the mediation in January, alleges that Taco Bell is denying him expansion opportunities because he is a leader of a franchisee group critical of the franchiser.
Taco Bell, based in Irvine, Calif., denies wrongdoing.
"There is a certain kind of schoolyard bully who picks a fight, lands the first punch and then runs for a teacher to stop the fight quickly before anything else can happen," Richard A. Smith, Taco Bell's general counsel, told the Center for Public Resources.
He said the franchisee had passed up earlier opportunities to request mediation.
But that is insufficient cause for rejecting the franchisee's mediation overtures, the center says.
Officials say Taco Bell last year agreed to a two-year test of mandatory mediation for any franchisee that requests it (with minor technical exceptions).
The center says it is still trying to persuade Taco Bell to accept mediation in the case.
Taco Bell said it had accepted four other mediation requests by franchisees, and "remains firmly committed to the spirit and intent" of the program.
WHO NEEDS PROFITS?
Of eight franchisers that recently went public, five had losses in the year preceding their initial public offerings, says Frandata Corp., a research concern in Washington, D.C.
Even fast-growing Boston Chicken Inc., whose stock rocketed on the first day of trading in November, had reported a loss for 1992.
(The company reported a profit for 1993.)
BRIEFS: Increased interest in international franchising prompts Commerce Clearing House Inc. in Chicago to start a monthly newsletter on the topic. . . .
America's Favorite Chicken Co. says it signed an agreement with Taihan Sugar Industrial Co.'s Haimarrow unit to develop 115 new Popeyes Chicken & Biscuits restaurants in South Korea during the next three years.
