What if every employee in a company, not just a few executives, made decisions with the goal of improving the bottom line?
With virtually all employees focusing on the issue most crucial to success, that company likely would be unstoppable.
To target employees' full attention on the bottom line, a few companies have pioneered an approach that has made profits zoom -- Bottom Line Powered Management.
BLPM is not like the traditional techniques of open book management, profit-sharing or gain-sharing.
These techniques flirt with focusing employees' attention on the bottom line but never really clutch and embrace it.
BLPM, in contrast, commences with educating workers at the most basic level and follows through with mechanisms to ensure that employees will remain constantly aware of the impact that their work has on the bottom line.
Jack Stack, president of SRC, a closely held Springfield, Mo.-based manufacturing company, is an originator of this approach.
"When an employee joins this firm," says Mr. Stack, "we make clear that his or her job is not to turn metal or answer the phone, it is to create ROI {return on investment} and boost profits."
To keep workers focused on the bottom line, "employees here make decisions on the financials just like the CEO might, and we train them how to do that," according to Mr. Stack.
For more than a decade, SRC has had profit and sales growth of about 20% annually, and Mr. Stack credits much of this growth to its use of BLPM.
When everyone realizes his job is to boost the bottom line, new possibilities and opportunities open up.
Emma Lou Brent, president of Phelps Bank and an advocate of this approach, states: "Before we had a few employees as salespeople.
Now every employee is a salesperson. . . .
The employees are continually suggesting and implementing ideas.
The bank's employees even set their own goals.
But they often set them too high, so I have to suggest cutting them back."
For managers and line workers to be similarly focused on bottom-line issues, it's critical that all employees are first well trained in understanding the financials.
Concerns like Capital Connections, a Kansas City consulting firm, have developed clever, heavily illustrated books to do that, while Allstate Insurance uses an interactive computer program for the training.
The mere fact that employees can be trained in the financials is itself noteworthy, since some people believe the average employee cannot comprehend the complex data of finance, such as overhead and depreciation.
Refuting this is the experience at SRC, Phelps Bank, Allstate, Chesapeake Packaging in Baltimore, and many other companies.
SRC's Mr. Stack says: "Most employees are well versed in baseball or basketball statistics.
They know the top players and teams as well as their percentages.
So, why shouldn't they understand the financials?"
The initial training in the financials should be constantly reinforced.
Megavolt, a division of SRC, holds a weekly lunch -- pizza and soft drinks supplied by the firm -- at which the financial data are given to the employees.
At the end of the meeting, the meeting chairman holds a contest.
He calls out a question about the financials, and the first person to answer it correctly gets $10.
For instance, he might ask, "What was the overhead absorption rate for last week?" or "What was the labor cost?"
The employees furiously search through their notes (everyone is given a loose-leaf notebook), make some calculations and race for the prize.
While training is important, what makes BLPM so powerful is that financial and performance data are presented to employees to be used as direct, practical feedback for operations.
At SRC, for example, financial and performance data become critical to individual performance when the profit-and-loss statement is broken down for all operations -- that is, for all employee teams and work groups.
Each employee team then knows if it is on target and can make the appropriate corrections.
If sales to a particular customer are off track, that is immediately investigated.
If the team's overhead is above the projection, that is attacked.
Moreover, this information is provided weekly, letting the employees quickly pounce on any problem.
As Burgess Oliver of Northern Telecom, a Nashville-based remanufacturer of telephone equipment, stated, "We started losing $5 on a product, and when the team learned that, they cut $10 off its cost."
To ensure that financial data are actually used, the traditional cost accounting numbers are thrown out, since they are designed to be meaningful only to outside investors.
They are replaced by numbers the employees can influence.
For instance, the teams are given the amount of labor hours they expended vs. the amount projected.
Similar data are provided for scrap, overhead absorption, and so on.
Of course, if employees are to be interested in the bottom line, it helps to reward them in bottom-line financial terms.
For example, SRC uses an employee stock ownership plan and also shares profits with the employees (after the corporation hits a certain trigger-level of profits).
An hourly worker can boost his earnings 13% this way.
At Corning, they prefer to pay an employee based on the points he earns.
Points are accrued for cost improvements, quality improvements, achieving customer satisfaction and reaching corporate ROI goals.
Under this system, the average hourly worker can earn an additional 10% of base plus overtime earnings.
While all traditional gain- or profit-sharing techniques provide some bottom-line financial incentives for employees, rarely do they educate them in understanding the financials, almost ensuring that the employees will not comprehend how their efforts can improve the bottom line.
Second, the financial, cost and performance data are generally not broken down to the team level, so the team cannot see how it influences the bottom line.
Further, whatever information they are given usually arrives too late to guide the employees in their efforts to improve what they are doing.
The biggest difference between the traditional efforts and BLPM lies in the results.
In firm after firm where BLPM has been fully implemented, the bottom line has skyrocketed.
Mr. Zangwill is a professor at the Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago, and author of "Lightning Strategies for Innovation" (Lexington, 1993).
