The smaller Asian stock markets that soared in 1993 are reversing course so far this year.
After surging 59% to as much as 154% last year, stock markets in Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand have fallen 14% to 28% since the start of 1994.
After yesterday's thumping, many money managers are trying to figure out if they are in the midst of a rout, or if the shellacking is just what professional investors euphemistically call a correction.
"Most Southeast Asian markets will be cut in half from their highs, and some, like Hong Kong, could fall 70% from their highs," predicts Marc Faber, head of a Hong Kong money management and advisory firm that bears his name.
"We had too much speculation before, and people were buying indiscriminately; now suddenly they realize they may have overpaid."
Nick Carn, chief investment officer at Draycott Partners in London, is also pessimistic.
He refuses to reinvest in markets like Hong Kong and Malaysia until "a proper bear market" develops, which he contends won't be in evidence until Hong Kong falls another 13% to 19%.
"What we're seeing at the moment is a correction against a background of quite good fundamentals," he says.
"A bear market involves a change in sentiment toward China, heavy capital outflows from the colony -- which hasn't happened yet -- and the Hong Kong monetary authorities raising interest rates to protect the Hong Kong dollar's peg" to the U.S. dollar.
Battering Asia's smaller stock markets -- especially those in southeast Asiaare fears of higher U.S. interest rates, the clouds over China's economic and political environments and a cooling of last year's speculative buying spree, in which investors from Bangkok to Boston thought Asian shares were the road to riches.
In addition, Asian stock markets are getting stiff competition from a resurgent Japanese stock market for the first time in four years.
Yesterday, fears that the Federal Reserve would push U.S. interest rates higher later this week, or early next, sent Hong Kong shares tumbling 5.1%.
That brought the Hong Kong stock market's declines to 9% for the past two trading days and to 13% for the past five.
Malaysian stocks plunged 5.3% yesterday, Thai equities 3.4% and Singapore stocks 3.2%.
Most other stock markets in the region fell from 0.9% to 2.2%.
Two exceptions were India and Taiwan, which edged up a bit.
From their highs of early January, the Hong Kong stock market has plummeted 29%; Thailand 31%; Malaysia 27%; the Philippines 22%; Taiwan 19%; Indonesia and Singapore 18%.
Investors fear that higher U.S. interest rates will push up rates throughout Asia, because several countries in the region either directly or indirectly tie their monetary policies to those of the U.S.
That would lessen the appeal of local stocks and especially hurt bloated Hong Kong property shares, which make up 30% to 35% of the Hang Seng index.
Investors also worry that the huge infusions of U.S. money that helped to drive most Asian markets to record highs might dry up.
To a lesser extent, the same holds true for Japanese money.
Brokers on Monday said some foreign mutual funds were selling shares to meet expected redemptions.
For the first three quarters of 1993, Americans purchased a net $6.8 billion of shares in Asia's smaller stock markets, up from $4.3 billion in all of 1992 and up from $1 billion in 1991.
Another concern is China, whose booming economy has been the justification for much of the investment in such markets as Malaysia, Thailand and Hong Kong.
"There are fears of inflation and how the Chinese government will deal with inflation, and there's a concern of the decline of trade that goes through Hong Kong -- the classic middlemen whose volumes are falling off," says Richard Cohen, an equity salesman at Baring Securities Ltd. in Singapore.
Adding to the gloom is China's current battle over U.S. threats to withdraw China's trading privileges and its bitter dispute with Britain over wider democracy for Hong Kong.
In addition, there is "the uncertainty of what would happen in China were the present leadership to pass from the scene," says Sanjoy Chowdhury, chief economist for the Asia Pacific region at Merrill Lynch & Co. in Singapore.
Moreover, this year's stock market "losses are a reflection of the fact that many of these markets were extremely overbought at the end of last year and the start of this year; this was particularly true of Malaysia and Thailand," Mr. Chowdhury says.
"Another element is the stupidity of the whole performance game," adds Mr. Faber.
"It means that if you are a portfolio manager and you think that Hong Kong and Malaysia are overvalued, you are still forced to buy them because you fear you will be left behind your competitors."
Lately, the problem has been finding an exit.
"The big investor can't get out comfortably, so you have sell orders overhanging the market and investors not wanting to buy at the same time," says Mr. Cohen.
"You wouldn't want to buy 100,000 shares of a company when you know someone wants to sell a million of them."
Mr. Carn of Draycott Partners says "volume has been so thin, most people are locked in the burning building."
Many investors who have gotten out, like Peter Everington, a portfolio manager at Regent Financial Service Ltd. in Hong Kong, headed for the Tokyo stock market.
When the Japanese market peaked at the end of 1989, roughly 90% of the foreign investment earmarked for Asia was in Japan and the rest was elsewhere, says Mr. Cohen of Baring Securities.
"By the end of 1993, that ratio was almost reversed," he says.
"Now we are seeing that process reversed again with the flow of funds into the Japanese market."
Tokyo markets were closed Monday for a holiday.
In Tokyo Tuesday, the Nikkei 225-stock index fell 116.91 points to close the morning session at 20352.54.
Still, some experts see hope for Asia's other stock markets.
"Once you get the next increase in U.S. short-term rates out of the way, sentiment will start stabilizing," says Mr. Chowdhury of Merrill Lynch.
"I'm inclined to think we are very close to a bottom in many of these markets -- assuming that increase will come at the end of this week or next week."
But instead of relying exclusively on ever-increasing sums of cash to push stocks higher, as they did in 1993, investors will have to be more selective and pay closer attention to earnings growth and the quality of earnings, he says.
"The one lesson we've learned is that liquidity alone isn't necessarily a sufficient condition for sustained increases."
Merrill's three favorite stock markets in the region are Singapore, Indonesia and South Korea.
Robert Lloyd George, head of Lloyd George Management (Hong Kong) Ltd. also is confident.
Noting that the Hong Kong stock market has given up nearly half the gain it made from early December 1992 -- when it began its latest bull run-to its record high on Jan. 4, he says: "That's a normal technical correction in a long-term bull market."
Mr. Lloyd George also contends that while China's economic growth should slow to 9% this year from 13% last year, "there's no reason to expect a hard landing."
Even with that slower growth, he adds "we're looking for 18% corporate earnings growth in Hong Kong, which puts the market at a prospective price-earnings ratio of 13, which is pretty cheap."
Furthermore, he sees renewed Japanese growth in the second half of 1994 giving the region a boost.
As a consequence, he says that at current levels, "we are looking for buying opportunities."
European stocks fell on worries about a possible increase in U.S. interest rates ahead of a meeting today by the U.S. Federal Reserve's policy-making panel.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.20, down 0.65, reflecting lower markets in all regions.
Semiconductor stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 229.24, up 0.93, or 0.41%, with Advanced Micro Devices of the U.S. posting a 3.8% gain in its local currency.
Plantations stocks trailed at 196.15, down 15.08, or 7.1%, with United Plantations of Malaysia sliding 10% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index fell 20.1 points, to 3198, near the day's low of 3197.
The FT 30-stock index fell 14.5 points to 2528.2.
Volume was 506.3 million shares, compared with 609.4 million shares a day earlier.
Investors were influenced by bearishness on Wall Street and nervousness about the direction of U.S. interest rates, which offset encouraging British trade figures and a buoyant stock-index futures market.
Also weighing down the market were weak world bond markets and Monday's hefty slide in Hong Kong equities.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index slid 24.33 points, or 1.1%, to 2131.28.
It fell almost 1% on Friday.
Besides the U.S. interest-rate fears, investors were unsettled by election results in northern Germany that may portend a coalition of leftwing Social Democrats and environmentalists for the next federal government.
In Paris, stocks fell, cushioned by late buying, as investors jumped on Wall Street's bearish bandwagon.
In Milan, shares, including those traded electronically tumbled 1.3% in thin trading as initial interest in telecommunications stocks failed to generate a rally, and investors lightened positions ahead of next week's national elections.
In Stockholm, shares skidded 1.1% in thin trading on concern about the large number of new share issues coming to the Swedish market.
In Zurich, stocks dropped 1.4% amid jitters about U.S. and Swiss interest rates.
Robert Steiner in Hong Kong contributed to this article.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
Source: Morgan Stanley Capital Intl.
