When electric power stopped being a curiosity and became a necessity, President Franklin Roosevelt developed a program to extend electric service to previously unserved rural regions.
Similarly, the U.S. has long been committed to the widespread availability of basic telephone service at affordable rates.
As telecommunications capabilities advance, and the National Information Infrastructure (NII) develops, the concept of "universal service" must advance as well.
When advanced communications technologies become as important to modern life as the telephone, electric power and public schooling are today, we must ensure that these services are available to all.
For this reason, we must charge the FCC and the states with revising universal service objectives.
To get this process under way, I recently challenged industry to connect all of our classrooms, libraries, hospitals and clinics by the year 2000, and I have been delighted with the response of some companies.
Alan Murray's recent skepticism about the wisdom of universal service commitment is difficult to understand (The Outlook: "Gore's Data Highway: Another Entitlement," Jan. 31).
His first concern is that it would be too expensive for the country to afford.
Yet the primary danger is just the reverse -- our society cannot afford the failure to connect large segments of our nation to the information superhighway.
Just as Congress, the executive branch, the FCC and the states will share responsibility for revising universal service, they also will share responsibility for meeting those obligations in a financially responsible manner.
(The likely size of these annual obligations will be far less than the $20 billion Mr. Murray cites.)
Mr. Murray also is concerned that access to the NII is somehow not important because it can supply entertainment as well as education, employment and health information.
This is a curious complaint.
Is a high-school auditorium any less essential to a community because it is used for dances and films as well as lectures, meet-the-candidates programs and job fairs?
The same principle applies to the NII.
Finally, Mr. Murray complains that the benefits of universal service will not be targeted to the poor.
This administration is concerned about ensuring that the disadvantaged have access to the NII.
Our proposal will make it possible for the FCC and the states to provide that access, and for them to identify other appropriate beneficiaries of universal service subsidies -- including schools, hospitals and those who now have access to "lifeline" telephone service.
We must avoid creating a society of information "haves" and "have nots."
Consequently, we must encourage competition, thereby lowering prices for everyone; the lower the price, the less the need for subsidies.
