Ira Rousso makes his living renting out stiffs.
For $65 his Schoepfer Studios in midtown Manhattan will rent you a stuffed porcupine for three days.
A mounted polar bear with a hot-tempered expression goes for $400, and a brown bear for $375.
Mr. Rousso has more than 1,500 animals to rent.
His main customers are photographers, artists and retailers, but his shop is open to any "party planner" who can afford the deposit, which goes as high as $10,000 for a leaping lion.
He's also willing to sell some more common species -- stuffed chickens, for example.
Mr. Rousso bought the taxidermic zoo a year ago from a collector whose grandfather started it in 1907.
He had lost his job as a purchasing agent and wanted to run his own business.
Mr. Rousso claims it's the variety of stiffs -- from ferocious tigers and alligators to mounted fish and cute kangaroos -- that makes his collection stand out.
"If you want a bear, fine, you can find a bear, but an elephant's head, birds of prey, a lion or Siberian tiger you won't find," he says.
"If someone comes in here and asks for a rose-breasted grosbeak, they either get it from me or don't get it anywhere."
To date, he says, the business has had about $200,000 in sales.
Mr. Rousso is especially proud when one of his menagerie makes the big time.
The sharp eyed can see one of Mr. Rousso's stuffed beavers in the movie "Naked Gun 2 1/2."
Vanity Fair, he says, rented an array of cats, birds and other animals for a photo shoot with Cindy Crawford.
And, he adds, the soap opera "All My Children" uses his animals in hunting lodge scenes.
What exactly makes a good stuffed animal?
"Very clean, mounted examples" is what Holmes Easley, set decorator on Procter & Gamble Productions' "As the World Turns," looks for.
Mr. Easley, who gets props from other vendors, says he tries to avoid "dusty, ratty old animals that look very moth-eaten."
Although Mr. Rousso says he has a steady business, some demands are seasonal.
Turkeys are big in November, for example, and crows in October.
One of his hottest items around Halloween is the New York City rat.
He has three that rent for $60 each.
He says he would like to add to his rat collection but can't find enough of them -- dead, that is.
"I've seen them in the subways," he says, "but I'm not going around killing rats."
