MEXICO'S RULING PARTY NAMED Ernesto Zedillo its candidate for president.
The U.S.-educated economist and ally of President Salinas becomes the instant favorite for the August elections.
The ruling party hasn't lost a presidential election in nearly 70 years, and Zedillo will benefit from sympathy votes after last week's assassination of the party's original candidate.
But opposition parties say he can be beaten because he lacks name recognition and political presence.
Mexico's political crisis appears to be slowing economic growth, some econmists say.
They foresee slower first-quarter GDP growth than earlier predicted.
SOUTH AFRICA TOOK STEPS toward declaring a state of emergency in Natal.
The groundwork was laid in Pretoria for the move, which could include sending troops to the predominantly Zulu area, following clashes during a Zulu march Monday that killed 53 people in and around Johannesburg.
Gunmen fired yesterday on the city's African National Congress headquarters, where nine Zulu protesters were killed by security guards in the earlier clash.
Talks between de Klerk, Mandela and Zulu leader Buthelezi are set for next week.
Buthelezi said his party will "struggle to the finish" with the ANC.
Israeli and PLO negotiators met in Cairo to try to revive stalled peace talks as violent clashes erupted across the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Israeli troops killed one Palestinian and injured 50 others in protests over the killing Monday of six members of Arafat's PLO faction.
The PLO is seeking security guarantees for Palestinians at the talks.
The White House released records of Hillary Rodham Clinton's commodities trading, on which she made $98,000 in the 1970s.
It said that Mrs. Clinton's $1,000 investment was her own money, that she didn't rely solely on a Tyson executive for advice and that she was unaware of a broker's problems with regulators.
Italy's Berlusconi faces difficulties in forming a government, despite a landmark election victory by his right-wing coalition.
One partner in his coalition is threatening to bolt, and questions are being raised about whether the tycoon will be able to keep his private business interests separate from his public duties.
Bosnia's Muslim-led parliament put off until today a vote on a Muslim-Croat federation after demanding the removal of a Croat hard-liner, accused of taking part in "ethnic cleansing" of Muslims, from an assembly considering the issue.
Separately, Croats and Serbs signed a cease-fire accord to end fighting in the Krajina region.
Greece rejected a demand from the European Union that it lift a embargo and open a port to Macedonia trade.
Meanwhile, a U.S. special envoy arrived in Athens from Skopje to try to mediate the dispute.
A U.S. judge in Idaho ruled federal agencies responsible for running dams and reservoirs on Northwest rivers broke the law by pushing through an operating plan they admitted would kill millions of salmon.
The decision is a victory for environmentalists in a fight to halt the collapse of salmon populations in the region.
The administration proposed moves to streamline the overloaded system for handling applications by foreigners seeking asylum in the U.S.
The changes would include imposing a $130 fee on applicants, expediting hearings and denying asylum seekers permission to work for five months after they apply.
South Korea's president left Beijing without any assurances that China will help press North Korea to end its refusal to allow inspections of suspected nuclear arms sites.
Kim Young Sam, despite recent rhetoric that his country's patience was running out, told a news conference he would use "dialogue and persuasion" to try to end the dispute.
Guatemala signed accords with leftist rebels aimed at ending more than three decades of civil war.
The agreements, which set up a U.N.-led process to monitor human-rights abuses, will not end fighting, but a cease-fire is expected later this year.
A powerful explosion in India killed a general and 14 soldiers at an army weapons depot in Kashmir.
The government ruled out sabotage, but a person claiming to represent a Muslim separatist group telephoned a news organization to claim responsibility.
