Paper products, one of the best supermarket buys in the 1990s, are becoming more expensive.
For more than three years, consumers reaped the spoils of pricing battles throughout the paper market.
Retail prices of bathroom tissue, facial tissue, paper towels and napkins remained stubbornly low -- even in the face of a slowly improving economy.
But recent data show that the price war is finally winding down.
Though they still hover around 1990 levels, unit prices of most types of paper products have begun to increase.
Consumer-product analysts say manufacturers -- driven, in part, by a slight fourth-quarter increase in pulp prices -- have started testing the market's appetite for retail price hikes.
For example, toilet tissue prices increased 8.9% to $1.34 a unit during the 1993 fourth quarter, compared with $1.23 a unit in the 1992 period, according to Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.
What's more, Andrew Shore, an analyst with PaineWebber Inc., says Procter & Gamble Co., maker of Puffs facial tissue, Bounty paper towels and Charmin bathroom tissue, raised prices about 2% in the fourth quarter, with other manufacturers following suit.
P&G declined to comment.
Companies "will try to keep edging prices upward," Mr. Shore says.
"But they'll likely find that they won't be able to raise prices as they have in the past."
Private-label products have performed similarly to branded products, despite their lower unit prices.
Still, private label maintains a strong position in the four major tissue markets, a fact that could temper price increases.
"The threat of private label -- or more accurately, the lingering threat of private label -- continues to be important in terms of pricing," says Bruce Kirk, an analyst with S.G. Warburg.
Even with prices percolating upward, the paper-products market remains at, or near, 1990 levels.
At that time, intensified competition, a faltering economy and a weak pulp market combined to depress prices.
The prolonged retailing battle contributed to Scott Paper Co.'s recently announced restructuring that included a $381 million after-tax charge.
Analysts say the relentless price competition among paper products reflects a dearth of value-added innovations.
There have been a few, modest product developments, such as facial tissue laced with lotion and paper towels with added perforations to allow consumers to use only the amount they need.
Nonetheless, "There's no discernible market leader out front with a far better, or differentiated, product that really allows them to control the category," Mr. Kirk says.
Bathroom tissue marketers have faced the greatest price competition in the past several years partly because of KimberlyClark Corp.'s entry into the market in 1990 with a toilet-tissue extension of its popular Kleenex facial tissue brand.
While that Kleenex product isn't yet available nationwide, its sales grew 11% to $31.3 million in the fourth quarter, according to Information Resources.
"The introduction of Kleenex really triggered the tight pricing," says Thomas Shufelt, a marketing executive at GeorgiaPacific Corp., which produces Angel Soft bathroom tissue.
"But the prices have firmed up some recently, and we hope that we can get some relief."
In response to your Feb. 3 editorial "Labor Blows Right Whistle": Your misinterpretation of the facts is a disservice to your readers and to Iowa's economic development efforts.
Your comments center around Ipsco, a Canadian steel company that plans to locate a $360 million facility and initially employ 300 people along the Mississippi River in Muscatine County.
The benefits of this project far outweigh the financial incentive package proposed by state and local officials.
Your statement that the state would pay $243,000 per job is wrong, and misrepresents Iowa's development strategy.
The facts are these: Iowa is investing $3 million in upfront assistance to help Ipsco train well-paid manufacturing workers and defray start-up costs.
The remaining assistance all comes in the form of tax incentives tied to the enormous investment in machinery and equipment required to build a competitive manufacturing plant.
Indeed, investment tax credits and exemption of machinery and equipment investments from property taxes are two basic elements of every state's economic climate.
The $70 million in taxes not collected from Ipsco over the course of 20 years merely makes us competitive with other states that don't tax equipment.
-- Additional related and supplier manufacturers likely to be attracted to serve Ipsco.
The investment package that we have offered Ipsco is available to any company planning a major expansion in Iowa.
And we've had results.
Weyerhauser, Eastman Kodak, Lennox and Maytag are only a few of the many companies that have created thousands of jobs in Iowa.
Meanwhile, I've recommended exempting all new machinery and equipment from property taxation.
When the legislature approves repeal of this tax, we will no longer have to overcome this impediment to high-paying jobs in manufacturing.
Terry E. Branstad
