Quaker Oats Co. predicted that its second-half earnings per share would be "up strongly" on good volume growth in the U.S.
"We expect profit margins in the U.S. to continue improving, to 13% for the year, while our international margins will be flat," Philip A. Marineau, president and chief operating officer, told securities analysts and portfolio managers at a conference here.
Mr. Marineau said that, despite disappointing fiscal first-quarter earnings, the Chicago food processing concern is on track to "achieve our target of 7% real earnings growth for fiscal 1994."
Mr. Marineau also said cash flow continues to be strong -- in the range of $100 million.
The company's outlook for the U.S. grocery business is for "strong volume growth to continue -- producing volume gains for the year of between 5% and 6%.
In our international grocery business, volumes should be up modestly -- in the range of 3% -- as Gatorade's strong international growth is countered somewhat by soft economies in Europe," Mr. Marineau said.
Gatorade is Quaker's most important product, and company executives predicted that the sport drink's international sales this year would exceed $200 million.
"By the end of the '90s, we plan for Gatorade sales of $1 billion a year outside the U.S.," Mr. Marineau said.
The company indicated, however, that although Gatorade volumes are up more than 20% in Europe so far this year, it expects to continue underwriting the expansion on the continent "for a few more years."
Mr. Marineau cited two factors for that: "intense entrenched competition" and "very high merchandising costs."
Gatorade was introduced in Holland and Austria earlier this year.
In North America, Mr. Marineau said, Gatorade's share continues to be 85% of the sports-drink market, with year-to-date volumes up 25%.
Hot cereal volumes rose 5% in the latest 52-week period, and the company said it had made the net effective price of standard Quaker Oats more competitive with private-label brands.
In the same period, consumer purchases of instant Quaker oatmeal were up 11%.
The company's U.S. market share of the ready-to-eat cereal category is 7.8%, Mr. Marineau said.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange Friday, Quaker Oats shares closed at $63, down 25 cents.
