The U.S. has stopped sharing its criminal evidence on top Colombian drug dealers because it believes Colombia's outspoken and embattled prosecutor general intends a lenient prosecution of cartel members.
The official, Gustavo de Greiff, has angered Washington -- and his own government -- by, among other things, saying that drug legalization should be considered.
In Washington, a senior administration official said U.S. cooperation on sending evidence to Colombia is at a standstill.
The U.S. Justice Department "is increasingly reluctant to share evidence, because of concern it might be used to make deals with the drug traffickers instead of bringing them to justice and because sharing the information might jeopardize future trials in the U.S.," the official said.
The administration official puts the blame squarely on Mr. de Greiff, who in the eyes of Washington has fallen from the hero's pedestal he attained by taking on the late Pablo Escobar, then chief of the Medellin cocaine cartel.
"Quite frankly, the cooperation is threatened by the comments and actions of the prosecutor general," the official said.
For his part, Mr. de Greiff, who is negotiating the surrender of leaders of the powerful Cali cartel, said "I don't see much will to provide us with evidence. . . .
I don't have the impression the U.S. agrees with the policy of bringing to justice the gentlemen from Cali."
In recent years, the Cali cartel has been responsible for about 80% of the cocaine shipped to the U.S.
According to Mr. de Greiff, the U.S. stopped sharing evidence needed by Colombia after he said the drug war was lost in a November drug-enforcement conference in Baltimore.
Since then, he has reiterated that legalization should be considered as a way of drying up traffickers' profit, thus ending trafficking.
Mr. de Greiff, whose office is independent of President Cesar Gaviria, is also widely seen as being too ready to acquiesce to the terms demanded by the traffickers in exchange for surrender.
This perception has brought him into conflict with most other members of the Colombian government, who fear a sequel to the embarrassment that ensued after the late Mr. Escobar escaped in 1992 from a luxury prison built to his specifications.
"In essence, the dispute is between de Greiff, who wants to bring in the Cali cartel at any price, and President Gaviria, who believes that the surrender of the cartel at any price would be an international scandal for Colombia," said a Colombian statesman and an elder of the ruling Liberal party.
Mr. de Greiff, who heatedly denies that charge, says his fundamental difference with the govenrment is that the latter wants to force those surrendering to confess to major crimes as part of a sentence-reduction deal.
Mr. de Greiff counters that traffickers must be judged on the evidence, and not compelled to confess.
"If they don't confess, the government will continue to harass them," Mr. de Greiff said.
"I don't think you can do that in a country of laws."
However, he added, Colombia's evidence is weak and he needs U.S. evidence to make cases.
Another major roadblock remaining for the surrender of Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela, the Cali cartel's most important leader, is disagreement within the government on how to jail Mr. Rodriguez Orejuela and others.
"The government wants to send him to a dungeon," Mr. de Greiff said, while the drug dealers "want a normal prison regimen."
Mr. de Greiff also created a ruckus recently when he personally agreed to requests from three alleged leaders of the Cali cartel to open criminal investigations against them.
The three, who don't have warrants outstanding, took advantage of a controversial new provision in the criminal code that allows citizens who believe they are being investigated to demand that the state "clarify their legal status."
Once the state agrees to open an investigation, it has 18 months to bring charges.
However, the state forfeits its chance to bring charges in the future if it fails to do so in the 18-month period.
"From the U.S. side, people say, why share information when the drug dealers are just going to get their wrists slapped?" said a drug expert here.
Better, he said, to keep the information in case individuals can be captured outside Colombia and brought to trial in the U.S.
"What do we lose if we just hang on to the information and see if we get lucky sometime?"
At a recent news conference, which resembled a verbal boxing match, Mr. de Greiff's differences with his own government were apparent.
Speaking from the same podium, Justice Minister Andres Gonzalez called Mr. de Greiff's flirtation with legalization "improper and untoward."
Mr. Gonzalez called for Colombia to enact money-laundering legislation, which Mr. de Greiff feels is unnecessary, saying Colombia can use existing laws punishing "illicit enrichment."
While Mr. de Greiff said earlier that the Cali cartel would surrender within 30 days, it now appears that a surrender could still take some time, in part due to conflicts within the government.
In the next three months, Colombia will hold congressional and presidential elections.
President Gaviria's lame-duck administration may prefer to leave the Cali decision to its successor.
