Days before beginning a new management job at Baldwin Co., Gary M. Ryan got a jarring five-minute phone call: The company, his new boss said, was reneging on its job offer.
Just a few days earlier, the Southern California developer had promised Mr. Ryan a $100,000 housing-assistance loan.
Despite a $50,000 loss on the sale of their Denver home, Mr. Ryan and his family had been packing their bags and looking forward to a new life.
Then, Mr. Ryan says, he was fired because a high-level Baldwin official believed he was overqualified and would leave as soon as a better job surfaced.
"My life has never been the same," says the 51-year-old Mr. Ryan, who never managed to land a job with another company despite a year and a half of looking.
Now back in Denver, he makes ends meet by running a land-development business from his home.
Baldwin declines to comment.
Mr. Ryan's trauma illustrates how firings tend to happen these days: fast.
Many newly hired managers and professionals are out on the street after only months, or even weeks, on the job.
And surprising numbers of them are booted even before they get in the door.
Not long ago, employers typically gave the newly hired at least a year to prove themselves.
But in a recent American Management Association survey, nearly 22% of the employers questioned said that in the past two years they had fired a professional or manager after less than three months.
"Five years ago, companies rarely fired a manager so quickly," says David Allen, chief executive of Wilson Learning Corp. in Minneapolis.
He says that in the past three years, the management-development consulting concern has seen 75% of its clients dismiss a manager or professional in 90 days or less.
In addition, companies such as Apple Computer Inc. and American Express Co. say they are reducing probation periods for managers and professionals.
Prudential Insurance Co. of America recently cut such periods to three or six months from a year, depending on the job.
In the past, "we wouldn't even evaluate people until after their one-year anniversary," says William Therrien, Prudential's vice president for human resources.
Now, people can get warnings very quickly.
"If someone isn't making it, we tell them even if it's in the first week," he says.
Fired employees say early dismissals push companies' loyalty to their workers to new depths.
Under pressure to restructure, companies first overcame their reluctance to dismiss long-term employees -- with generous severance packages.
Now, critics say, they aren't reluctant to drop newcomers fast, and with little or no severance.
"There is a dehumanization going on within corporations," charges Cliff Palefsky, a wrongful-termination attorney in San Francisco.
Some companies say today's pressures leave them little choice.
Some Prudential units, Mr. Therrien says, are so lean that managers need the right people immediately and can't wait for a new employee who isn't likely to come up to speed quickly.
And with so many able people out of work, companies know they can find replacements quickly.
In the past five years, a record 1.4 million executives, managers and administrative professionals have lost their jobs, the Bureau of Labor Statistics calculates.
Only 782,000 such workers lost their jobs between 1981 and 1986.
"With such a tremendous pool of talented people out there, you might as well get the one who will work out best," comments Edward Wild, who heads a Los Angeles newsletter-publishing company.
Mr. Wild says that last fall he fired a new sales executive before the man arrived on the job, even though the company had installed $5,000 worth of computer equipment in his home.
One reason: The executive had purchased a flashy car with his company automobile allowance, raising concern that he wouldn't fit into the company's conservative culture and might waste money, Mr. Wild says.
Some companies act out of desperation.
Honey Hill Farms Inc., financially stressed and urgently needing to boost sales, fired Thomas Tipp as its chief executive after just one month and four days.
Even so, "we waited too long," says Robert Bledsoe, a partner at the privately held maker of soft-serve frozen-yogurt mix.
"We really should have terminated the relationship after the first week or so."
Mr. Bledsoe and Fred Di Cosala, the San Francisco company's founder and chairman, had wooed Mr. Tipp away from a general-manager post at a Boston yogurt company.
Recalls Mr. Tipp: "They offered me the world."
Says Mr. Bledsoe: "We had high expectations."
Mr. Tipp says he hit the ground running.
In his first week, he developed a plan to add 30 to 40 people to the staff and also some new product lines.
"These were plans that I thought would help turn the company around," he says.
But the owners believed that increasing sales quickly was more important.
New products would take too long to get to market, and the company couldn't afford to expand staff.
In a "counseling session," the board told Mr. Tipp his plan was "way off target," Mr. Bledsoe recalls.
"It was a nice plan, but the wrong company."
Despite the warning, Mr. Bledsoe says, Mr. Tipp continued to focus on improving operations rather than raising sales quickly.
Shortly after firing Mr. Tipp, Honey Hill Farms entered bankruptcy proceedings.
"We were very disappointed.
We realized that Tom would be excellent for a company with the right capitalization, but not for one having financial troubles," Mr. Bledsoe explains.
"Maybe we could have saved the company with the right person."
(Mr. Tipp is now a division president for TCBY Enterprises Inc. in Dallas.)
Other people are losing out early because of corporate "downsizing."
Thomas Moak was out just three weeks after he had been hired as general manager of Carrano Trucking Co. in Los Angeles.
The company was reducing staff in Southern California's recession.
Still others get sacked because they don't really have the skills they claim.
Employers say sharper competition for jobs is tempting more applicants than in the past to lie.
The Work in America Institute recently fired an accountant after just one week because she didn't know how to operate a crucial spreadsheet that she had claimed to have mastered.
"It broke my heart to fire her," says Jerome Rosow, president of the nonprofit research group in Scarsdale, N.Y.
"But we needed someone who was familiar with the program because no one else was."
But many employees are losing their jobs partly because an old taboo against firing professionals and managers is eroding.
In the past, "your reputation was on the line if your hire didn't work out.
So, you did everything you could to make them better," explains T. Quinn Spitzer, chief executive of Kepner-Tregoe Inc., a Princeton, N.J., management-consulting firm.
"Now, your reputation is on the line if you don't get rid of them fast enough."
Indeed, many think a quick chop is best for all concerned.
"When things aren't working out, both parties lose," says Gary Billings, human-resources director at Lintas Worldwide, a New York advertising giant.
"It's more humanitarian to take immediate action."
Yet many fired employees are seeking legal help.
Joseph Garrison, a New Haven, Conn., lawyer who is president of the National Employment Lawyers Association, says up to 10% of his firm's cases now involve managers and professionals fired after less than three months.
Three years ago, he adds, such cases were rare.
With the taboo against such firings fading, many companies are wielding the ax arbitrarily, fired employees contend.
Ammirati & Puris Inc. fired David C. Lehmkuhl from a $125,000-a-year job after four months because the New York advertising agency decided he stuttered too much, according to a lawsuit he filed in New York state court in Manhattan.
Two days before Thomas Sheppard was to start work at Morgan Keegan & Co., the Memphis brokerage firm "separated" him.
His grave mistake, according to a lawsuit he filed in Superior Court in San Francisco: He had turned up at the office wearing jeans and a T-shirt while on a house-hunting trip.
Both companies settled the cases out of court and decline to comment.
But formality isn't always safe, either.
C.T. Jenkins says she was dismissed after three days as a marketing vice president with a Phoenix real-estate developer last summer.
She says her boss told her -- and included in a termination report -- that she was "too somber" on the job.
Besides, her declining to have lunch with some colleagues led the company to believe she wouldn't be a team player, and the report indicated doubt that she would fit into the corporate culture.
In addition, the company had found someone it considered better-suited.
"It was stunning," says Ms. Jenkins, who had left a fast-track management job with a national banking company.
"I told them, `Gimme a break.
I was just trying to get settled.'
But they already had their minds made up.
How can a company possibly make a decision about you after just three days?"
Some companies think they can avoid lawsuits by firing people quickly, before they become entrenched.
In the American Management Association survey that found 22% of the responding employers had fired a newly hired manager or professional after less than three months, 22% of that group said they were terminating people faster to reduce the threat of wrongful-discharge suits, 13% said they wanted to avoid costly severance payments, and 28% said competitive pressures force them to find a "perfect match" when hiring someone.
The legal strategy apparently works.
Ms. Jenkins, who didn't have an employment contract, discovered she couldn't sue.
Workers in Arizona, like those in most states, are "at-will" employees -- that is, employers can fire for any reason or none at all and without warning.
But once an employee establishes tenure -- a period of time that varies but usually runs six months to a year -- companies have a harder time justifying a firing if they can't establish reasonable cause.
In states with strong employee-rights laws, companies have been tacking "employment-at-will" clauses onto insurance forms, pension agreements and other documents.
About four years ago, for instance, Fireman's Fund Insurance Co. started including an "employment-at-will" clause on its job applications.
"People are signing their rights away, and they don't even realize it," says Paul Tobias, an employment attorney in Cincinnati.
Regardless of any legal questions, rapid dismissals can be traumatic.
A newly hired California executive, who had quit his old job and was preparing to move across the country, was fired when the new company learned that his wife had cancer.
In a seemingly innocuous telephone call to his new employer, he had asked a few questions about the job and confided that his wife was terminally ill.
A few days later, the company called and reneged on its job offer; it blamed a tight budget.
Now, the executive and his family lead a precarious life.
Unable to explain the sudden departure without revealing his wife's costly illness, he is searching for work in vain.
Meanwhile, his wife's medical bills are sapping the family's savings.
After a rapid dismissal, "few people can overcome that terrible black mark left on their records," says Mr. Garrison, the New Haven attorney.
"The inference that's left is, `How could you possibly lose your job in this short amount of time without being a complete screw-off?'"
Mr. Ryan, the executive fired by Baldwin Co., says the event "probably was responsible for the end of my career."
Often not knowing whether he could cover rent, he says he started liquidating assets to pay bills.
He had to stop supporting a son in college and ask the young man's grandparents for help.
Mr. Ryan, who settled a breach-of-contract suit against Baldwin last August, says he fought a severe bout of depression that at times kept him awake all night and in bed most of the day.
And his marriage almost collapsed.
"The stress was just paralyzing.
I couldn't even move," he says.
"If it weren't for my religious faith, I don't think I would have been able to survive it."
