Cleveland -- "Standby.
This is Ives, the first movement.
Take 63."
A hush falls inside Severance Hall, the fanciful art-deco home of the Cleveland Orchestra, as the disembodied voice of Decca/London producer Paul Myers comes over the sound system.
This world-class orchestra, which outshines all competitors these days except the Vienna Philharmonic on a good night, is in the process of making its 46th recording with Christoph von Dohnanyi, its acclaimed music director.
Mr. Dohnanyi and his players are stationed on a $140,000 extension stage built by Decca to enhance the auditorium's normally dryish acoustics.
They have already recorded the second and third movements of Charles Ives's vividly pictorial Orchestral Set No. 2 (1909-15) with relative ease.
The first movement does not fare so well.
After two false starts, take 64 seemingly takes wing.
The orchestra plays this gently hypnotic elegy with characteristic precision and shimmering string sound.
"We were too loud in front of letter E," declares Mr. Dohnanyi, an aristocratic German whose passion for perfection has raised the Cleveland's high level of playing another notch.
"The flute is still forcing it.
One more take of this, ja?"
"This is take 65," intones Mr. Myers from the makeshift control room, which has been set up in the orchestra's boardroom.
One false start and two more abortive takes later, Mr. Dohnanyi taps his baton again.
Mr. Myers groans.
"From letter D, take 68."
"Almost," says Mr. Dohnanyi after the movement's completion.
Everyone in the control room groans.
"Take 69."
This time, the movement is performed to the 63-year-old maestro's satisfaction.
All the while, the clock is ticking.
In 1940, it reportedly cost $30 a minute to record the Cleveland Orchestra.
Today, it costs between $1,000 and $1,500 a minute.
Total expenses for a single disk range from $90,000 to $120,000.
Economics also help determine the order in which the pieces are recorded.
The third movement of the Ives, a hymn-laced tone poem memorializing the sinking of the Lusitania, is tackled first.
Not only is it the most difficult, requiring precise coordination between the orchestra and an eerie offstage chorus and band, but once it is completed, the chorus members can be dismissed.
"Men and Mountains" (1924), a short work for strings by another American individualist, Carl Ruggles, is scheduled last for good reason.
According to Mr. Myers, union rules dictate that the entire orchestra be paid for the first two hours of each session; in the third hour, only those players actually at the session are paid.
And only the strings will have to be paid should the session run into overtime.
Mr. Myers, who made some 40 recordings with George Szell, Mr. Dohnanyi's most revered predecessor, is seated at a long table with a score in his hands.
On his left, technical engineer Andy Groves logs and times each take on an auto locator; at his right, mixing engineer John Pellowe operates a high-tech recording console with twinkling colored lights that seems incongruous among the boardroom's patrician furnishings.
Throughout the session, the contrast between the relative calm in the hall and the ongoing drama in the control room is remarkable.
"More horns!" cues Mr. Myers.
Mr. Pellowe, who "plays" the console's sliders like a keyboard artist, is able to delicately boost or diminish the pickup of any of the 16 microphones onstage.
"Noise!" exclaims Mr. Pellowe at the slightest creak in the stage or crinkle of a score being turned in the hall.
The offending segment will have to be redone.
"Engineers have ears like cats," says Mr. Myers, whose score-reading ability rivals that of most conductors.
During the sessions, he marks the music to indicate which take works best in a particular section.
An edited master recording based on his instructions will then be sent to Mr. Dohnanyi for approval.
The music recorded today will ultimately be released on the London label along with another Ruggles piece, "Sun-Treader" (1920s), an expressionistic work of nerve-jarring intensity that occupied the orchestra in the morning session.
In the meantime, there are many examples of the Cleveland's stellar music-making available, particularly on London, with whom the orchestra now has an exclusive recording contract.
Two luminous disks of Schumann's Symphonies display the impeccably balanced sound that has become a trademark of this orchestra under Mr. Dohnanyi.
Bartok's Concerto for Orchestra receives a taut, high-intensity reading.
And to celebrate its 75th anniversary season, the Cleveland Orchestra has released a 10-disk set showcasing its music directors past and present.
(The set is available only from the orchestra; call 800-686-1141).
At $180 plus shipping, it is hardly a must.
But it does include exemplary recent performances as well as some delightful early monaural recordings previously unavailable on CD.
In making his studio recordings, Mr. Dohnanyi must be convinced that his interpretations can stand the test of time.
"For me," he observed during an interview at his Shaker Heights home, "a live recording is a kind of snapshot . . . of what you feel at the moment.
A studio recording is more like a portrait."
His vision of Ives predates his decade-long tenure in Cleveland.
"If Ives had lived in Vienna {during the heyday of Schoenberg, Berg and Webern}," said the conductor, "he would have been recognized as one of the great geniuses of that time. . . .
Ruggles is a less intellectual person, a person who got stuck more in the mode of being `serial.'
What interests me in Ruggles is the struggling."
During the next day's morning session, it is Mr. Dohnanyi who struggles to attain the artistic excellence he seeks in Smetana's "Moldau."
After take 18 is completed, the maestro is behind schedule but content.
"Today was not so efficient," he says, "but I think we made some music, finally."
Ms. Jepson is a music writer in New York.
