A new report challenges the popular belief that the U.S. can reap enormous savings in health-care costs by curtailing aggressive, high-technology treatment for dying patients.
Researchers at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School in Boston estimated that reducing life-sustaining care for the terminally ill would cut health costs by 3.3% at most -- or about $30 billion in 1993.
"That is under the most wildly optimistic, best-case scenario," said Ezekiel J. Emanuel, a cancer specialist and medical ethicist.
"That best-case scenario would be impossible to realize."
Even if it were, he added, the savings would be far less than other published projections of more than $100 billion in potential savings through elimination of futile end-of-life care.
"We must stop deluding ourselves that . . . less aggressive care at the end of life will solve the financial problems of our health-care system," said Dr. Emanuel and his wife, Linda L. Emanuel, whose report appears in today's New England Journal of Medicine.
Steven A. Schroeder, president of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, a Princeton, N.J., philanthropy, didn't dispute the economic findings of the report but said the researchers failed to consider some issues that could help to control U.S. health costs.
For instance, he said, reduced use of hospital beds and intensive-care units for the terminally ill could speed up the closing of excess hospital capacity, an important component of health expenditures.
Dr. Schroeder added that $30 billion a year in savings "could go a long way toward covering" the nation's 39 million uninsured people.
In any event, the combination of technological advances and soaring costs has drawn a spotlight in recent years to what many doctors, policy analysts and patients consider costly, fruitless efforts to prolong life for the dying.
The concern has prompted growing use, on both economic and ethical grounds, of "Do Not Resuscitate" orders on patient charts, and advanced directives, in which patients give written notice of their preferences for treatment should they become incapacitated.
In addition, many terminally ill patients now choose hospice services, where instead of aggressive medical interventions, they receive palliative care to minimize pain and discomfort.
The Emanuels advocate such approaches as good medicine.
But they said what they consider unrealistic hopes for savings are based on, among other things, faulty extrapolations of federal Medicare data, underestimates of the costs of providing less aggressive care and the difficulty doctors and patients have in determining when treatment crosses the line from potentially beneficial to futile.
The researchers based their estimates on data indicating that Americans 65 and older who died in 1988 spent $29,295 for all health-care services that year and those under 65 who died spent $34,102.
Then they reduced those figures by 27%, based on a study that showed hospice care during the last six months of life cost 27% less than conventional care.
For the 2.17 million Americans who died in 1988, including 1.49 million Medicare patients, the total potential savings from less aggressive care would have amounted to $18.1 billion, they concluded, or 3.3% of national health-care expenditures that year.
The U.S. government estimates that the nation will spend about $1 trillion for health care in 1994; 3.3% would amount to about $33 billion.
