For 32 years, Roland "Tiny" Rowland dominated Lonrho PLC, overseeing its growth into a conglomerate with interests in sugar, mining, oil, autos, publishing and hotels, to name just a few.
Along the way, his globe-trotting exploits won him widespread notoriety.
Now, his controversial reign may be near an end.
His nemesis: the man he selected a year ago to keep Lonrho's troubled global empire from crumbling under debt, German investor Dieter Bock.
With Mr. Rowland's blessing, Mr. Bock invested #135 million ($202 million) in Lonrho for an 18% stake in December 1992 and became co-managing director with Mr. Rowland.
The men agreed on a power-sharing formula, but haven't agreed on much else since.
While Mr. Rowland wants to keep the Lonrho empire intact, Mr. Bock wants to pare it to three core businesses -- mining, agriculture and hotels -- and possibly shed more than #1 billion in assets, from the Rolls-Royce dealerships in the U.K. to a beer brewery in Zambia.
In an interview, Mr. Rowland insists the company's problems are largely shortterm, the result of depressed precious-metals prices and unfavorable foreign-exchange rates.
"Lonrho is fine," he says, noting that the company sold more than #500 million in assets even before Mr. Bock arrived, and Lonrho's debt is now at 26% of equity from 70% two years ago.
Mr. Bock, 54 years old, argues that Lonrho can't remain in its current form: 700 diversified companies in 60 countries.
"Our own people, and outsiders, can't understand Lonrho," he says.
Lonrho's performance in recent years proves his point, Mr. Bock's backers say.
Mr. Rowland's habit of borrowing heavily for acquisitions -- by the end of 1991, Lonrho's debt was #1.1 billion -- led to trouble when the recession hit.
The company's pretax profit plunged 61% in the fiscal year ended Sept. 30, 1992, to #80 million from a restated #205 million.
Lonrho, which often boasted that its dividends had increased 100-fold from 1961 to 1990, slashed its 1992 dividend to 4 pence a share from 13 pence.
The company's stock, which was as high as 353 pence a share in late 1988, has plummeted with its fortunes.
The shares were trading at 72 pence each at the time Mr. Bock made his investment; since then they have doubled, closing yesterday at 149 1/2 pence, up 3 1/2, in trading on the London Stock Exchange, as the asset sales have pared debt.
The two men have had some nasty, open squabbles.
Mr. Bock has a full-time London public-relations consultant pushing his case.
Mr. Rowland, who owns a 6.2% stake in Lonrho, is said to have hired a company to investigate Mr. Bock's previous business dealings.
The clash reflects different business philosophies and personalities.
To the 77-year-old Mr. Rowland -- nicknamed Tiny because of his towering height -- bigger is better, and Lonrho's diversity a strength.
Born in India under the British raj, he adopted Africa as his home and built a minor company, the London & Rhodesia Mining & Land Co., into a major multinational.
Mr. Rowland's exploits -- from cozying up to Libyan ruler Col. Moammar Gadhafi to getting involved in peace negotiations between warring factions in Mozambique and waging a costly, losing battle for control of Harrod's department store -- won him widespread notoriety.
In contrast, Mr. Bock is a soft-spoken accountant with a law degree and a love of art, born in the former East Germany.
He made his fortune in real estate, and still is supervisory board chairman of Advanta Management AG, a western German commercial-property concern.
So far, investors commend Mr. Bock's efforts.
"The change is there for all to see," says Paul Beaufrere, a securities analyst at James Capel & Co., London.
Mr. Bock prevailed in the first round of his quest to reorganize Lonrho: getting the board to approve three outside directors, the first since 1974.
At Mr. Bock's urging, Lonrho's board last month also agreed to set a mandatory retirement age for directors.
Though they haven't decided yet on the age, Mr. Bock favors age 65.
That would force out four of Mr. Rowland's staunchest supporters on the 16-member board; Mr. Rowland, however, would be exempt.
The issue was so sensitive that one of Mr. Rowland's board supporters sarcastically proposed making retirement mandatory at 55 -- which would force Mr. Bock out shortly.
In another rebuke to Mr. Rowland, the board recently overruled one of his more controversial ventures: the bankrolling by Lonrho of a documentary about the 1988 bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
The documentary reportedly would have shown Libyans are being unfairly blamed for the tragedy, though Western intelligence agencies believe them responsible.
Mr. Rowland has had a long relationship with Libya.
In early 1992, defying international sanctions, he sold a stake in Lonrho's Metropole hotel group to Libyan investors.
Meanwhile, Mr. Bock is forging ahead with efforts to identify additional assets that can be sold.
He is said to be considering selling some of Lonrho's hotel properties, while retaining the right to manage them.
Another possible target: Lonrho's 800 or so African trading companies.
Mr. Bock says further asset sales will let Lonrho acquire other companies related to its core businesses.
"Not just any business that can be cheaply bought," he adds, complaining this had been Lonrho's policy for years.
Analysts expect Lonrho to report pretax profits for the year ended Sept. 30 at about #90 million, up 12% from the year before but still "a long way from the profit potential this company has," says Mr. Beaufrere, the analyst.
Mr. Bock says he has scrutinized Lonrho's accounts in the past year and is convinced Lonrho doesn't contain the type of hidden losses that brought down Robert Maxwell's publishing empire.
"There are no black holes," he says.
But with Lonrho's intricate web of financial dealings, the market has little else but Mr. Bock's word to go on.
Mr. Bock's supporters say they expect Mr. Rowland will opt for retirement sometime in the next 15 to 18 months.
"I expect he will get a large premium for the rest of his shares and go," says one person close to Lonrho's board.
But Mr. Rowland says that will happen "only if I have an accident and I'm incapable of taking myself to the office."
His supporters note Mr. Rowland has beat the odds before.
He and his family were interned here in World War II because his father was German.
He never graduated from college and didn't strike it rich until he was 40.
And they point out that Mr. Bock has no track record running a large, diversified corporation, while Mr. Rowland retains many allies within Lonrho.
Mr. Bock, who has an option to increase his Lonrho stake to 25%, also vows to remain.
"I will hang on for some years," he says, "long enough so that I can step down without adversely affecting the share price."
