Thomas Jefferson in 1806 sent a letter to Dr. Edward Jenner, celebrating his discovery of the smallpox vaccine: "Medicine has never before produced any single improvement of such utility," the president wrote.
"You have erased from the calendar of human afflictions one of its greatest."
Today, President Clinton seeks to provide Americans with universal health care.
But his strategy appears to stress cutting costs more than reducing the calendar of human afflictions.
The plan embraces the concept that we cannot afford all the investment in new drugs, nor can government afford to pay for all these products.
It has erected a complex regulatory scheme to enforce this ideology.
In fact, as the late Dr. Lewis Thomas of Memorial Sloan-Kettering has written, there is no important human disease "for which medicine possesses the outright capacity to prevent or cure where the cost of the technology is itself a major problem."
Advances are not an obstacle to cost control -- they are essential to the process.
The success of my company and every other biopharmaceutical firm has always rested on the fundamental principle that scientific advances are cost-effective.
Antibiotics and vaccines remain the least expensive way of treating infectious diseases.
The elimination of costly ulcer surgery and the decline in the number of deaths due to high blood pressure were made possible by the breakthrough medicines of their day.
Declining rates of hospitalization for diseases such as depression, kidney disease and cancer are the result of new drugs that vastly improved the effectiveness of intervention.
Nonetheless, treatments for many of today's most prevalent diseases are at a high-cost stage in the cycle of innovation.
A recent Boston Consulting Group study notes that the annual medical costs of only seven major uncured diseases account for about half of today's health care bill.
Current medical knowledge leaves us midstream, able to intervene with some degree of effectiveness in many illnesses, but still short of a cure for major diseases such as AIDS, Alzheimer's, various cancers, multiple sclerosis, arthritis and many genetic disorders.
For many of these diseases, a highly effective control or cure is being vigorously pursued.
As research-based drug firms begin to apply the understanding of illness that has emerged from investments in biotechnology, the cost of treating today's major diseases should plunge.
If the cycle of innovation stalls, we may be stuck with today's highest-cost, less-effective options.
While the administration asserts that innovative drugs are a major factor in runaway spending, patients who have no effective treatment face the stark reality that a decline in breakthrough-medicine investment will ration their future cures.
No politician will be defeated by the cure that doesn't come -- but the patients of tomorrow will lose just as surely.
Apparently, the White House is skeptical about investing so much in cures for certain diseases.
Criticizing the pricing of new pharmaceuticals, it wants to create a national pricing board -- a notion that is casting an investment pall over the industry.
But consider the potential advances that may be affected:
We at Schering-Plough are pursuing more effective treatments for asthma and hepatitis.
Repligen is working on a drug to cure late-stage cancers for which no alternative therapies exist.
Merck has developed compounds it hopes will stop the progression of HIV infection.
Genzyme is working on gene therapy for cystic fibrosis and Gaucher's disease.
Each of these drugs would constitute a huge medical advance, saving lives and spurring further investment.
The idea that a politically appointed pricing board should rule arbitrarily on the access and price of such innovations is appalling.
Indeed, discouraging investment in new medicines for certain indications will seriously compromise the quality of care for many illnesses.
One noteworthy example: alpha interferon.
In developing the first genetically engineered alpha interferon, Schering-Plough initially found that only a handful of cancer patients showed even a partial reduction in tumor size.
But to proceed with development of the drug, we had to commit $100 million to a recombinant interferon manufacturing facility.
We committed the funding because of our steadfast belief that interferon would prove useful in treating many diseases.
In 1986, the drug was approved in the U.S. to treat people with an advanced form of hairy cell leukemia -- a very rare cancer.
Our total market at the time of approval was fewer than 1,000 people.
Yet today, Intron A is a blockbuster product treating 16 diseases with annual sales of more than $500 million world-wide.
Its success is regarded as a defining moment in the growth of the world-wide biotechnology industry.
Intron A is precisely the kind of drug the Clinton plan discourages.
It started out as a dubious treatment for a small, largely hopeless group of patients.
Under price controls, drugs for many disease groups would be shelved regardless of their potential to eliminate human suffering.
The administration's cynical silence on the human cost of rationing important new medicines makes the moral rhetoric of health care reform ring hollow.
While the pharmaceutical industry is accused of putting profits before people, the administration's plan puts cheap drugs before future cures, cost reductions before quality, a political strategy before the imperative of sustaining medical progress.
Mr. Kogan is president and chief operating officer of Schering-Plough Corp., based in Madison, N.J.
