Whittle Communications L.P. said that three major drug-company advertisers will provide $147 million to sponsor its Medical News Network, but the company still needs about $53 million more in sponsorship commitments to launch the network nationally this fall.
Whittle declined to identify the three companies.
Medical News Network, an electronic news and information service delivered by satellite to doctor's offices, has just completed a one-year test of the service in 6,000 physicians' offices.
A number of major drug companies provided $100 million in advertising and sponsorship dollars to the test, which ended Monday.
But Ciba-Geigy Corp., Merck & Co., and Abbott Laboratories Inc., confirmed that for a number of reasons, including budget cuts and changes in company marketing plans, they will not participate in the national launch of Medical News Network.
Others that participated in the test, including Marion Merrell Dow Inc., Pfizer Inc., Johnson & Johnson and Glaxo Inc., said they were either undecided about backing the Whittle project further or still in negotiations with the company.
If Merck sticks with its decision not to support the national launch of Medical News Network, it would be a blow to Whittle's plans.
Merck, the country's largest drug company, gave the largest chunk of money for Whittle's test of the network.
Christopher Whittle, company founder and chairman, said yesterday in an interview that Whittle is "still in discussions" with Merck.
But late yesterday, a Merck spokeswoman said "We have definitely declined to participate further at this time.
Our relationship with Whittle is terminated."
Alan Greenberg, Medical News Network chairman, said in a statement that in addition to the three that have signed on for the national launch, Whittle is in the "final stages" of talks with five other potential drug company sponsors.
Negotiations are expected to be finished in a few weeks, and by the end of this month Whittle executives said they will release details about the network's national launch, including plans for a second electronic network that would reach health-industry "managed care" executives.
Medical News Network, launched in early 1993, was devised as an interactive way for major drug companies to reach their most important clients: physicians who prescribe drugs and medication.
Whittle has spent an undisclosed sum to install personal-computer-like video monitors and keyboards in physicians' offices.
Doctors can view a daily medical news program, order drug samples, request information from companies by fax or mail, and view accredited continuing medicaleducation programs and news specials.
Failure to attract enough drug-company sponsors for the national launch would deal a potentially crippling blow to Medical News Network, and add to Whittle's woes in general.
Whittle's Special Report Network for doctors' waiting rooms is operating at a loss and is considered "problematic," according to one Whittle executive, even though it has hired new sales people and opened new sales offices in Chicago and Los Angeles in recent months.
And Whittle's for-profit Edison school project, while impressing public-school groups and hiring new staff, was unable to attract big corporate partners and has been scaled back.
Whittle's advertiser-supported Channel One in-school news broadcast continues to generate controversy, though Whittle said advertising demand on the system remains strong.
