The New York Stock Exchange announced three new listings including two initial public offerings.
The National Association of Securities Dealers announced four new listings including three initial offerings.
The American Stock Exchange announced four new listings.
The Big Board began trading the following initial offerings: G.T. Global Developing Markets Fund Inc., San Francisco, a closed-end fund, under GTD; and JP Realty Inc., Salt Lake City, a real estate investment trust, JPR.
The Big Board also began trading Osmonics Inc., Minnetonka, Minn., a maker of technology equipment, OSM, which previously traded on the Nasdaq system.
The Nasdaq national market began trading the following initial offerings: Fidelity Federal Savings Bank of Florida, West Palm Beach, Fla., a chartered savings bank, FFFL; Crescent Airways Corp., Lawrenceville, Ga., a provider of helicopter contract services and air charter services, CRAR and warrents under CRARW; and Westerfed Financial Corp., Missoula, Mont., a chartered savings bank, WSTR.
The Nasdaq also began trading Nobility Homes Inc., Ocala, Fla., a housing producer, which previously traded on the Nasdaq Small Cap Market.
The Amex began trading Colonial Data Technologies Corp., New Milford, Conn., a supplier of caller identification displays, CDT.
The company previously traded on the Emerging Company Marketplace.
The Amex also listed Series A common stock of Franklin Real Estate Income Fund, under FIN, Franklin Advantage Real Estate Income Fund, FAD, and Franklin Select Real Estate Income Fund, FSN.
Each fund is a real estate investment trust.
The Amex listed a second offering of PaineWebber Group Inc. warrants on the Amex Hong Kong 30 Index; and AMEX's Emerging Company Marketplace began trading Pyrocap International Corp., Springfield, Va., a chemical manufacturer, PYR.EC, Class A warrants under PYR.WS.A.EC, Class B warrants under PYR.WS.B.EC; and Class C warrants, PYR.WS.C.EC.
The company previously traded over-the-counter.
The Chicago Board Options Exchange said it will begin trading options on the Nasdaq-100 Index on Jan. 28.
The CBOE also began trading options on the American Depository Receipts of Shanghai Petrochemical Company Ltd.
