Can stock market investors learn to love a liberal Democrat?
As President Clinton begins his second year in office, the Dow Jones Industrial Average continues to hit one record after another.
Indeed, the index closed above the 3900 level Friday for the first time ever.
And that strong performance comes on the heels of 19.5% gain during Mr. Clinton's first year in the White House.
At the same time, the bond market underwent a phenomenal rally last year, providing a solid foundation for the stock market's gains.
Some analysts figure the vigorous, young president deserves kudos from investors.
"You can't help but give Clinton some of the credit for the financial markets' performance," says Andrew G. Schwartz, political analyst at County NatWest/Washington Analysis in Washington.
"He was in large part responsible for the mood of the markets."
But others argue that it isn't that simple.
While Mr. Clinton's policies have been more benevolent than at first expected, these critics say the results to date are due more to lucky timing than to any Clinton administration initiatives.
"Clearly Clinton was positioned very well with the economy improving at the end of President Bush's term," says Ryan Krueger, political analyst at Nomura Research Institute.
"And so far, he hasn't done anything to harm the economy."
To his fans, Mr. Clinton has done a masterful job of winning the hearts and wallets of Wall Street.
They credit him with laying the foundation in his first year for a continued improvement in the economy and a further rise in stock prices.
Joseph Battipaglia, chief investment strategist at Gruntal & Co., argues that Mr. Clinton has matured as president, recognizing the need to compromise on his major policy initiatives.
Even Mr. Clinton's much-maligned tax increases will have only a limited impact on the overall economy because they target higher-income individuals, Mr. Battipaglia contends.
And, he adds, the budget enacted last year will likely show better-than-expected results in deficit reduction.
"A lot of positive things will show up as a result of his first year," Mr. Battipaglia says.
"The U.S. economy will continue to expand at an above-average rate compared with the last few years and the U.S. export position will improve."
Mr. Battipaglia says he wouldn't be surprised to see a 10% to 13% gain in stock prices this year, aided by stable interest rates.
Individual investors are likely to continue pouring money into the market, he says, adding that these investors' holdings of stocks are still far below record levels relative to their total assets.
Thomas D. Gallagher, political analyst at Shearson Lehman in Washington, is less enthusiastic.
He gives President Clinton credit for helping spark the bond market rally by focusing on deficit reduction.
But he is quick to point out that the low inflation environment that greeted the Clinton administration and that has continued through its first year also played a key role.
"Credible deficit reduction along with disinflation fueled the bond market rally," Mr. Gallagher says.
He is reluctant to ascribe the stock market's overall strength to Clinton policies.
And he blames the president for some of the market's more notable disasters last year.
"Ask anyone who held tobacco or drug stocks and they'll tell you there was a big impact there," Mr. Gallagher says.
Some analysts believe the intense focus on the administration's policies will relax some this year, providing a favorable environment for the overall market and for some of the beleaguered stock sectors.
For instance, health care, the budget and the North American Free Trade Agreement all came under intense scrutiny last year.
"We paid a lot of attention to all those things -- they were the big question marks of 1993," says Mr. Schwartz of County NatWest/Washington Analysis.
"A lot of those are now locked into place."
Even though the health-care plan is yet to be worked out, stocks in the health-care and drug groups are likely to rebound after last year's battering, says Gruntal's Mr. Battipaglia.
Those stocks will be helped by Mr. Clinton's apparent willingness to compromise on health care and by the perception that the worst news is already out about the reform plan.
"The drugs may swing back into vogue as people realize the health-care plan is not as bad as they thought," Mr. Battipaglia says.
Other stock groups that may come into the spotlight this year because of Clinton policies are telecommunications and the environment, but the implications for these industries are far from clear yet.
Mr. Battipaglia expects to see a flurry of merger and takeover activity in the telecommunications arena as the White House works to deregulate the industry.
The moves will be necessary as cable, telephone, broadcast and satellite companies are allowed to enter each other's businesses.
"On balance, the trend has positive implications," Mr. Battipaglia says.
The administration's effort to improve the environment may prove troublesome for some natural resources companies.
Mr. Battipaglia argues that environmental regulation is pushing more and more business overseas.
"We're moving toward a clean continent, which means we're pushing out of the country anything dirty," he says.
"The natural resource industry is suffering because of this trend."
If predicting the stock market's direction during Mr. Clinton's second year seems dicey, then perhaps historical patterns will offer some insight.
Lehman Brothers' Mr. Gallagher studied the stock market's performance in the second year of presidential terms going back as far as the Truman administration.
His findings don't bode well for 1994.
"There is a historical pattern that says the second year is often weak, especially for Democrats," Mr. Gallagher says.
For all presidents between 1949 and 1992, the total return on the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index during the second year of the term was 11.8%.
For Democratic presidents alone, the return was a measly 4.9%.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average surged to another record, pushing above the 3900 level.
The Dow industrials rose 22.52 points to 3914.48, its ninth record this year.
Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index slipped 0.26 to 474.72 and the New York Stock Exchange Composite Index eased 0.11 to 263.12.
The Nasdaq Composite Index climbed 1.25 to a record 794.28.
The American Stock Exchange Market Value Index fell 0.07 to 484.74.
Volume on the Big Board surged to 343.6 million shares from 310.4 million Thursday.
Despite the Dow's climb, declining issues outnumbered advancers 1,086 to 980.
For the week, the Dow industrials gained 47 points, or 1.2%; S&P 500 lost 0.19 point, and the Big Board composite rose 0.22 point.
World-wide, stock prices rose Friday in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index gained 0.18 to 114.56.
The Dow industrials were aided by a sharp gain in Caterpillar, which rose 4 5/8, or 4.9%, to 98 5/8 after the company reported better-than-expected fourth-quarter earnings.
Other economically sensitive stocks buoyed the Dow, including Bethlehem Steel, which jumped 1 1/8 to 23 5/8, Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing, which gained 1 1/4 to 112 3/8 and General Motors, which rose 3/4 to 60 7/8.
Stock prices shot higher late in the day because of traders making adjustments related to the expiration of monthly options contracts.
Technology issues were mixed.
Apple Computer jumped 3 1/2 to 33 3/8.
S.G. Warburg, Merrill Lynch, Smith Barney Shearson and Cowen upgraded their investment ratings on Apple.
On Thursday, the company reported first-quarter earnings of 34 cents a share, just above analysts' forecasts of 33 cents a share.
Intel rose 1 3/8 to 65 1/8.
Microsoft was unchanged at 86 1/4.
Novell also was unchanged at 22 7/8.
Sun Microsystems lost 1 5/8 to 26.
Computer Associates International lost 3 to 38.
Bandag, a maker of materials that retread truck and bus tires, lost 3 to 59 3/4.
The company reported fourth-quarter earnings of 84 cents a share, below analysts' estimate of 87 cents.
Silicon Graphics climbed 1 3/4 to 24 7/8.
On Thursday, the company reported second-quarter earnings of 24 cents a share, above analysts' estimates of 20 cents.
