In its heyday, Saatchi & Saatchi Co.'s advertising campaigns propelled Margaret Thatcher's political career, gave a fresh image to British Airways PLC and made Toyota Motor Corp.'s Lexus a household name.
So why can't Saatchi & Saatchi sell itself?
The one-time global advertising leader expects revenue to drop this year, despite improving advertising markets in the U.S. and United Kingdom, its major venues.
Results for 1993, which Saatchi will announce Tuesday, will be lower than anticipated, the company has said.
Add to this management shake-ups, boardroom turmoil and the loss of two major U.S. clients in just 12 months.
Saatchi's worst problems are in the U.S., which accounts for 45% of its business.
Earlier this month, the company dispatched William Muirhead, formerly chief executive of its London advertising unit, to New York to inject new life into its crucial, unprofitable North American operations.
Mr. Muirhead's creative team in London dreamed up British Air's "World's Favorite Airline" slogan.
Under Mr. Muirhead, Saatchi won more new business than any other U.K. agency between 1987 and 1993.
Saatchi is hoping the gregarious Australian can work the same magic in the U.S., where the company recently lost its accounts with auto maker Chrysler Corp. and Helene Curtis Industries Inc., the personal-care products maker.
So are shareholders, who have seen the stock drop a whopping 97% since 1986 -- even adjusting for a recapitalization and rights issue -- to a low of 134 pence ($2) a share last December from a high back then of #52.22 ($78).
Saatchi's stock closed at 146 pence, up 4 pence, in yesterday's trading on the London Stock Exchange.
Mr. Muirhead replaces Robert Kennedy, a longtime Saatchi executive whom the firm ousted in January with a #4 million payoff after he failed to engineer a turnaround.
Earlier this year, Saatchi installed a new chief executive and a new creative director at its other main U.S. unit, the Backer Spielvogel Bates agency.
Here in London, uncertainly shrouds the future of the men who founded Saatchi 24 years ago, brothers Charles and Maurice Saatchi.
Charles Saatchi, 50 year old, left the board in December.
Mr. Saatchi masterminded Saatchi's push to become a global concern and played a part in devising some of its most famous ad campaigns, including the British Air ads.
Charles Saatchi is said to have lost interest in the company now that it is retrenching.
He is now "honorary president."
But the board has halved his salary to 312,000.
Company officials say Mr. Saatchi was always more interested in the business' creative side than the nuts-and-bolts managing -- he never attended shareholder meetings -- so his absence on the board doesn't mark a major shift.
With Saatchi's acquisitions heyday over, Mr. Saatchi has turned his attention to acquiring art.
He owns a large London gallery, and his famous personal collection includes such pieces as a tiger shark embalmed in a tank of formaldehyde.
Maurice Saatchi, 47, remains chairman.
But his position too is in question.
The board recently directed the brothers to vacate their elegant, art-laden offices overlooking London's Berkeley Square.
The board complained the suite was costing the company #1.2 million a year.
The Saatchis were told they must move in with the rest of Saatchi's London staff in a plain 1960s-vintage building in a commercial part of town.
Maurice and Charles Saatchi declined interviews.
Saatchi's problems stem from overexpansion in the 1980s.
By 1990, it had racked up #666 million in debt after gobbling up companies, from a financial-services firm to a jury-selection service.
In its drive to become world leader, Saatchi scooped up competitors, then had difficulty merging cultures and client lists.
Consequently, Saatchi didn't achieve the same cost savings and synergies that mergers helped create in other industries.
"Saatchi went from fast growth, to no growth, to decline.
It's a perfect example of the mistakes of the '80s," says Anthony Simmonds-Goodings, a former top executive at Saatchi, now with the Still Price Lintas agency in London.
Saatchi has spent the last few years shedding businesses that don't relate to advertising.
It underwent a major recapitalization in 1991 and raised #73 million in a 1993 rights offering, to further reduce its debt.
Both measures helped it reduce debt to its current level of #130 million, and shored up its core businesses.
Still, results have been disappointing.
In 1992, the company had a loss of #613.7 million on revenue of #3.95 billion.
For 1993, analysts expect the company to report pretax profit of about #18 million, but that will be due "entirely . . . to currency movements rather than any growth in the underlying revenue," says Charles Scott, the finance man tapped as chief executive in 1992 with a mandate to strengthen the balance sheet.
The outlook this year "is for a fall in revenue," Mr. Scott says.
The 1994 results will reflect a loss of about #30 million in business from Chrysler and Helene Curtis.
Disposal of two subsidiaries further will reduce revenue by #20 million, the company says.
Analysts are projecting 1994 pretax profit of about #33 million, but that number may have to be revised downward if business doesn't pick up in the U.S., warns Guy Lamming, an analyst at London's James Capel & Co.
Outside director Theodore Levitt, a professor at Harvard University Business School, says Saatchi is going through a natural shakeout for a company that grew rapidly.
"It was evident things had to become much more professionally managed," he says.
He says the full effect of the recapitalization and restructuring will become more evident in the next few years.
Saatchi retains major strengths, not the least of which is its impressive client list.
Saatchi represents Procter & Gamble Co., the home and personal-care products maker; Wendy's International, the hamburger chain; General Mills, the U.S. food company; and Philip Morris Cos., the food and cigarette concern.
Saatchi is trying to attract new clients in growing markets, such as China and Eastern Europe, and win new business for Zenith Media, a unit that advises advertisers as they are negotiating fees for television or print advertising.
But it badly needs to win several big revenue producing accounts soon.
"I am making this my prime responsibility," Mr. Scott says.
TBWA Advertising, a unit of Omnicom Group, has collected 13 years of advertising for Absolut vodka into an interactive, electronic "virtual museum."
Admission is $29.95.
That's how much a set of three computer diskettes, containing 216 Absolut print ads, costs.
Consumers can order them through a toll-free number promoted in a new print ad called "Absolut Museum," or electronically through the CompuServe on-line network, a unit of H&R Block.
CompuServe users also can browse through a portion of the museum for free.
Net proceeds from the diskette sales go to the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
The agency and its clients, brand owner V&S Vin & Sprit of Sweden and Seagram Co., which acquired distribution rights last month, are producing 10,000 sets of the diskettes.
The interactive, three-dimensional software was designed by Interactive Marketing Group, New York, a unit of WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather Direct, using TBWA's ads.
The Absolut Museum will become available on CompuServe's Electronic Mall on Tuesday.
Print ads for the diskettes begin this month in Entertainment Weekly and New York magazines.
War has broken out again between Kaplan Educational Centers, a unit of Washington Post Co., and Princeton Review, just nine months after the two bitter rivals in the educational test-cramming business signed a truce.
In June, the companies signed an unusual 23-page accord in which they agreed not to lie about each other or themselves in their ads and marketing brochures.
They had agreed not to claim their preparation courses improved test scores unless they were backed by a representative study.
The pact also set other rules, including provisions for arbitrating complaints about allegedly false ads in the future.
Prior to the truce, the two companies had been trading accusations for years.
On Monday, however, Princeton Review filed suit in federal court in New York, seeking to stop Kaplan from implying in new ads that its courses for four graduate school admission tests are effective in raising students' scores.
Yesterday, a judge declined to issue an injunction, sought by Princeton Review, against new Kaplan ads in U.S. News & World Report.
Greg Rorke, Kaplan's president, said, "We are satisfied that the ads are fair and accurate."
John Katzman, Princeton Review's president, said Kaplan had agreed in court to put a disclaimer in the new ad.
But Kaplan officials couldn't confirm the claim.
In any case, Mr. Katzman said his company plans to continue its legal action.
