The Democratic chairman of the House Banking Committee abruptly postponed a Thursday hearing that Republicans hoped to use to investigate the Whitewater affair, calling instead for "full hearings" in the matter at some unspecified time.
The chairman, Rep. Henry Gonzalez of Texas, accused Republicans of "character assassination" against President and Hillary Rodham Clinton, but said "a full public airing" of the subject was necessary.
House GOP Leader Bob Michel of Illinois, echoing other Republicans, dismissed the suggestion as "just another delaying tactic" as lawmakers prepare to leave town for an extended Easter recess this week.
Whatever Mr. Gonzalez's motivation, his surprise announcement could nonetheless hasten the end of a standoff between Republicans and the president's Democratic allies.
House Democratic leaders plan to meet with their GOP counterparts this morning to discuss "when and how we might consider hearings," said Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.).
The Senate already has approved a resolution calling for the two parties to work out a date and conditions for Whitewater hearings, and House Republicans are pressing for a vote on a similar resolution this week.
Special Counsel Robert Fiske, while saying generally he prefers that Congress not hold hearings while his investigation proceeds, has indicated he wouldn't object if lawmakers examine aspects relating to White House handling of the affair once he finishes his own review of that portion, perhaps in the next few weeks.
Mr. Foley endorsed that reasoning, saying, "I think we could proceed to have hearings" on White House-related issues at that point.
Mr. Gonzalez announced the postponement of Thursday's oversight hearing into operations of the Resolution Trust Corp. by releasing a harsh letter to Iowa Rep. James Leach, the panel's ranking Republican.
The chairman accused Mr. Leach, who has led the House GOP's inquiry into the affair, of "willful disregard" of the impact on Mr. Fiske's investigations, and said "your threats to disrupt" made it necessary to put off the hearing.
In a separate letter to Mr. Foley, Mr. Gonzalez blamed Republicans for spreading "half-baked conspiracy theories and outright lies" against the Clintons.
"I would suggest that House hearings be held in a forum of broad reach -- possibly a select committee -- that can explore all the charges that have been brought, from accusations of obstruction even to the most absurd conspiracy charges," he wrote.
Democratic leaders said Mr. Gonzalez -- who has come under increasing partisan and media pressure for his pledge to keep Whitewater-related matters out of Thursday's hearing -- didn't consult them on his decision.
Mr. Foley himself called Mr. Leach to dissociate himself from the chairman's harsh words.
The White House also distanced itself from the wrangling on Capitol Hill.
"The Hill's going to have to decide what it wants to do on hearings," spokesman Jeff Eller said.
"We're not going to comment."
Mr. Leach, who had asked some 40 witnesses to testify at the hearing, expressed "disappointment" with yesterday's development and suggested Mr. Gonzalez was skirting compliance with a legal requirement to hold the RTC oversight hearing.
But he vowed to take the House floor and disclose "some new information" on Whitewater this week.
Mr. Fiske's inquiry will proceed in Little Rock, Ark., today, as David Hale is expected to plead guilty in federal court to two felony counts of mail fraud and conspiracy.
His trial on charges unrelated to Whitewater was to begin next Monday, but he settled with Mr. Fiske this weekend.
The Hale case has attracted attention because he has alleged that Mr. Clinton pressured him in 1986 to make a $300,000 Small Business Administration-backed loan to a company owned by Susan McDougal.
Ms. McDougal and her husband, James, were partners of the Clintons in Whitewater Development Co.
Mr. Hale has alleged that part of that loan wound up in Whitewater accounts.
Mr. Hale's Little Rock attorney said his client has been cooperating with Mr. Fiske for about two weeks.
"He has, and will, cooperate in every way possible," including supplying documents and testimony, said the attorney, Randy Coleman.
Mr. Fiske declined to comment on the plea agreement.
Asked yesterday about Mr. Hale's allegations, President Clinton angrily replied: "This is all a bunch of bull."
On a trip to Florida to promote his health-care plan, the president said, "My faith that the truth will win out has been sorely tested in the last few weeks, but it's still there."
In a report released yesterday, the General Accounting Office said it found "no evidence to support or refute" the "conflicting claims" about what role Mr. Clinton may have played in the SBA-backed loan.
The GAO, the investigative arm of Congress, did say that it was an example of loans made by Mr. Hale to "persons with questionable eligibility."
A lawyer involved in the Hale prosecution said he hadn't seen any documented evidence that some of the money lent to Ms. McDougal had been transferred to Whitewater.
But Sam Heuer, a Little Rock lawyer for James McDougal, said he believed the money was used by Whitewater in 1986 to purchase more than 800 acres of land near Little Rock from International Paper Co.
At the time, Mr. McDougal expected the Clintons to get out of the Whitewater investment, according to Mr. Heuer.
When they didn't, Mr. McDougal transferred the land to Great Southern Land Co., which he owned without the Clintons.
The White House has said the Clintons knew nothing about these transactions.
