Microsoft Corp., the world's largest software supplier, said it plans to launch a television channel about computers with the help of the country's largest cable-TV company, Tele-Communications Inc.
In signing a letter of intent, Microsoft and Tele-Communications, or TCI, said they will form a joint venture to launch the channel, which likely will debut next year.
TCI, based in Denver, already owns a stake in numerous successful cable channels, and its support often is the difference between life and death for an upstart.
Nathan Myrhvold, the Microsoft executive in charge of consumer technologies, said that TCI's experience in giving birth to such successful cable channels as Discovery or Black Entertainment was the decisive reason for the alliance.
Microsoft, of Redmond, Wash., said the new channel can tap demand for televised news, information and training about computer and software products, including those made by Microsoft rivals.
Besides "magazine-format" shows, the channel will offer home shopping and computer classes.
The as-yet unnamed cable channel already faces competition from Jones Intercable Inc., a cable operator that expects to launch in August a channel aimed at helping computer users get more acquainted with their computers.
The venture by Microsoft and TCI hopes to distinguish itself by offering an electronic-information service as a companion to video programming.
This service would be "synchronized" with the video show, making it possible, for instance, for viewers to participate in broadcasts or make purchases electronically.
The link between broadcast and data might offer an attractive teaching tool, for instance.
Mr. Myrhvold said that the combination would allow viewers of a show on learning how to write code for a computer to exchange their code with other viewers electronically.
The planned computer channel also would serve to illustrate the possibilities of "interactive" television and to work out the technical kinks of tying together personal computers and TVs, Mr. Myrhvold said.
The venture, however, appears to have nothing to do with efforts by Microsoft to promote software and hardware standards for interactive TV.
Microsoft and TCI have discussed joint technical standards but so far have taken no action.
Analysts said the channel sounds like a good idea.
"It potentially could strengthen the awareness of Microsoft products," said David Readerman of Lehman Brothers.
"It is a pretty ingenious way of reaching out to both existing and new users."
While the channel will promote and advertise products, it isn't likely to exclusively push Microsoft products or the views of the company.
"There is no current plan for a Bill Gates show," quipped Mr. Myrhvold, referring to Microsoft's chairman, who is considered the most influential person in the computer industry.
However, rivals questioned whether the new channel could represent information in an unbiased way given Microsoft's huge presence in personal computers.
"It's hard to give independent news and information when you're a competitor in the industry you're covering," said Halsey Minor, chief executive officer of Cnet Inc., a San Francisco company that plans to launch its computer channel in the second half of the year.
Robert Weiler, a senior vice president for Lotus Development Corp., Microsoft's largest software rival, said the new channel could be a service to computer users if it hews to impartiality but that the channel "is going to have a tough time shaking the perception of being a shill for Microsoft."
The Microsoft-TCI venture comes on top of two earlier deals between the companies that aim to capitalize on each other's expertise.
Last week, the pair said they would jointly test interactive-TV services on TCI cable systems in Seattle and Denver.
In January, the companies agreed with Pacific Gas & Electric Co. to test market energy-information services over cable systems.
For Microsoft, the decision to launch what it called "a traditional video channel" is a sharp break with its past.
Until recently, the company shied away from entertainment and publishing, building its world-wide leadership in software on the basis of its computer operating systems and such applications software as wordprocessing.
The company, however, does have a publishing arm devoted to computer books, and offers an increasing number of reference works and games for use with personal computers.
TCI, meanwhile, has routinely launched new channels but the new computer channel might be hampered by the limited channel capacity plaguing cable systems across the country.
TCI said it will roll out the channel on its own systems only after taking advantage of channel-expanding equipment.
But other cable operators may choose to offer the channel on existing equipment.
"This is a perfect illustration of the types of special services that we envision offering our customers," said a TCI spokeswoman.
"But we need additional channel capacity."
