Getting arrested is the easy part of Teamsters' President Ron Carey's job.
The hard part will be getting members of his union to approve a 25% dues increase.
Ballots were sent to the membership this week, and rejection could mean the beginning of the end of Mr. Carey's rocky two-year tenure.
In a prearranged publicity stunt, Mr. Carey, 57 years old, picketed and trespassed at an Entenmann's bakery plant in Miami on Wednesday and, as television cameras rolled, was taken away in a police car.
The crowd of unionists cheered.
It was another in a string of public-relations coups for the tough-talking New Yorker, a signal that he is willing to go to the mat for striking rank-and-filers, this time at Diamond Walnut Growers Inc., which sells nuts to Entenmann's.
But with the proposed dues increase, the successor to Jimmy Hoffa and Jackie Presser faces real danger.
In an unprecedented move, Mr. Carey went directly to the members to ask for the increase rather than call a convention of local and regional leaders.
With ballots due March 21, the next few weeks will be the most crucial since he was elected by the rank-and-file in 1991.
Without approval, Mr. Carey says the union's strike fund will be empty by June, and its general fund will run out of money some time next year.
But by declining to call a convention, Mr. Carey has incurred the wrath of opponents already simmering over what they see as his monarchic style.
"It's a war," concedes Mr. Carey, who impresses even opponents with his tenacity and stamina.
But, he adds, "I enjoy a good fight."
Mr. Carey's enemies say he is a paranoid power-grabber.
"Shortly after coming into office, he made it abundantly clear it would be the Ronnie show and nothing else," says Gene Giacumbo, an international vice president and former ally.
The last convention, just before Mr. Carey's election in 1991, started many financial problems.
Delegates voted to boost strike benefits from $55 to $200 a week -- without establishing a funding mechanism.
Now Mr. Carey wants the big increase to bail out the strike fund and help pay for some of his ambitious programs to organize workers and carry on campaigns against corporate employers.
Most opponents favor a more modest assessment -- about one-third of Mr. Carey's proposed increase.
Average dues are now about $30 per month.
Critics say his spending is out of control, with the union's general fund dwindling from $150 million in 1991 to about $50 million now.
The proposed dues increase "is a move to have more money going to the top," says R.V. Durham, a North Carolina local leader who placed second to Mr. Carey in the 1991 race for president.
Rejection could force Mr. Carey to cut staff and programs, or call a convention where opponents could try to limit his power.
It could also be a setback for organized labor because Mr. Carey has been a forceful voice on matters such as international trade and labor-law reform.
The Teamsters' president says he decided not to call a convention because he feared opponents would turn it into a "circus" that would divert attention from the financial shortfall.
Opponents say he feared debate.
They accuse Mr. Carey of some of his predecessors' sins: an autocratic style and even alleged past ties with organized crime.
"It's garbage and it's smut," Mr. Carey says, noting that government overseers of the union have said they have seen no evidence of such wrongdoing.
Among those waiting to pounce should Mr. Carey stumble is Mr. Hoffa's son, James, who worked the halls of a huge AFL-CIO union meeting near Miami this week, glad-handing organized labor bigwigs and gauging other Teamsters' support for a Hoffa run at the union's top slot next year.
Mr. Carey, who was elected on a reform slate in the Teamsters' first membership election ever, says he tried to offer an "olive branch" to opponents after he won the three-way election as president.
"Now I've changed my opinion about that," he says.
"It was misunderstood as a sign of weakness."
He now strikes back when people attack.
After the four chairmen of the Teamsters' area conferences wrote a letter opposing a dues increase without a convention, Mr. Carey fired back in a letter: "Apparently, you and your allies in top corporate management don't want members to have stable, secure funding for their $200 per week strike benefits."
Aides call Mr. Carey a charismatic leader trying to put drive and purpose behind a diverse 1.4 million-member union that has its base in warehouse, trucking, package-delivery and canning industries, but also includes public employees in New York and elsewhere, hospital workers in Rhode Island and salt miners in Ohio.
Among other victories, he persuaded flight attendants at Northwest Airlines not to leave the union, and then helped negotiate a contract that gave them an ownership stake in return for concessions.
His well-planned arrest scheme so enthralled other members of the AFL-CIO, to which the Teamsters belong, that 10 executive council members joined him in the picket line at Entenmann's.
Even AFL-CIO chief Lane Kirkland got arrested for the first time in four years.
Mr. Carey is also lining up a $50 million loan from the AFL-CIO to back any strike threats in current negotiations for a national freight agreement with trucking companies.
Opponents criticize many of his current battles as quixotic publicity campaigns.
The recent one-day strike against United Parcel Service of America Inc. for increasing package-weight limits without what the union says are adequate safety protections was ill-conceived, they say.
Many UPS members stayed on their jobs after being urged by their local leaders to defy the international.
But the walkout was extensive enough to disrupt operations, and UPS lost business to nonunion rivals such as Federal Express Corp.
UPS responded with a lawsuit against the international.
Mr. Carey's battles leave him little time for his family.
He shuns vacations, saying he likes to relax by swimming or watching public television -- particularly animal shows.
Come Monday, he'll be back at the international office in Washingtonor on the road to rally members.
"I'm charging ahead," he says.
