In a gambit to attract Hispanic television viewers in the U.S., a regional sports network will launch the first national Spanish-language sports-cable TV network in late 1994.
Prime Ticket Network, which is majority-owned by cable pioneer Bill Daniels, will unveil plans next week for "La Cadena Deportiva Nacional," (The National Sports Network).
The company is trying to convince cable operators it can replicate the early success of its regional Spanish-language network, "La Cadena Deportiva Prime Ticket," which it launched in the fall to some 700,000 homes in Southern California.
The ad-supported network joins a growing list of U.S. programmers trying to court the nation's 24 million Hispanics.
General Electric Co.'s NBC unit, Viacom Inc.'s MTV, and Time Warner's Home Box Office have all staked claims on the U.S. Hispanic market with Spanish-language versions of their services.
"We believe the demand is there and the time is right," said Roger Werner, president and chief executive officer of Prime Ticket, and former president of ESPN, the English language national sports-cable network.
Mr. Werner is promising the new Spanish-language network, which will target men, can draw new revenues to cable operators, which are now facing slow subscriber growth, strict federal rate regulations, and the massive cost of upgrading their systems.
Hispanics make up nearly 10% of the U.S. population, their numbers are growing at seven times the national average, and they have an aggregate buying power of $206 billion, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.
The group is spread out in 6.5 million homes, concentrated in California, Texas, New York and Florida.
But Mr. Werner says that cable penetration in Hispanic households is only about 18% in Southern California, compared with over 55% for Anglo-Americans, and national figures are comparable.
La Cadena Deportiva Nacional has already secured exclusive U.S. rights for more than 400 international soccer games from Mexico, Spain, Argentina and other countries, and it will run over 1,500 hours of boxing matches, auto racing, and lifestyle and news shows.
But some wonder if the new network has enough top-rated sports programming to build an audience.
"They don't have enough product to interest enough people," says Stephen Hammond, a spokesman for Univision Television Network.
Univision, the largest Spanish-language TV network, reaches over 90% of U.S. Hispanic TV homes, and owns the rights to the popular 1994 World Cup.
