SETTLERS RALLIED in Israel and the army braced for possible Muslim attacks.
Tens of thousands of right-wing demonstrators, including many Jewish settlers from the occupied territories, marched in Tel Aviv to protest Israel's peace policies.
The army, meanwhile, was on high alert against suicide attacks by Muslim fundamentalists, who had threatened violence if settlers in five areas didn't evacuate by yesterday.
Troops set up roadblocks and clashed with Palestinians in Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip.
The government broadened its crackdown against Jewish extremists, bringing the founding father of the settlement movement, Rabbi Moshe Levinger, into court on a two-year-old charge.
Rostenkowski won his race for nomination to a 19th term, garnering about half the vote in yesterday's Democratic congressional primary.
The Chicago representative faces potential grand-jury indictment after a probe of his office and campaign finances.
International inspectors were barred from conducting a full inspection of North Korean nuclear sites, Washington officials said.
The inspectors were prevented from taking samples from at least one site, and they also found evidence that seals on bins of some nuclear materials had been tampered with.
Gunmen kidnapped the president of Mexico's biggest bank and brokerage firm.
Alfredo Harp Helu, a 50-year-old billionaire who is the president of Grupo Financiero Banamex-Accival, was pulled from his car Monday as he was being driven to work.
The CIA's director announced that he will require financial statements of all agency employees and will lessen the CIA's reliance on lie detector tests, in reaction to the arrest of accused spy Ames.
Clinton hosted a town meeting in Nashua, N.H., answering questions about education, jobs and health care.
Denouncing "the people who are giving me hell in Washington," he said, "I'm going to try to give you health and take whatever it is they want to give me in return."
A leading House Democrat said details of the Whitewater affair should be aired quickly, and he suggested that congressional hearings would be in the president's interest.
Rep. Hamilton of Indiana said it was important to counter any perception that the White House is withholding data.
New medical guidelines were issued by a federal panel in an effort to improve treatment for patients with severe chest pain.
The guidelines are intended to help doctors quickly determine which patients are at low risk of a heart attack and can be treated as outpatients.
The U.S. and Russia will allow experts to visit each other's storage sites for dismantled nuclear warheads, Energy Secretary O'Leary said.
The accord is expected to help the two nations better monitor the process.
Russia and Latvia reached agreement on withdrawing Russia's remaining 12,000 troops from the Baltic country by the end of August.
Russia will be allowed to retain its Skrunda radar station for four years.
A fire in a switching center disrupted telephone service in downtown Los Angeles and some suburban neighborhoods for about 12 hours.
The blaze at a Pacific Bell office knocked out some local and long-distance service, as well as emergency 911 calls.
The U.S. is dispatching five antiartillery and antimortar radars to U.N. forces in Bosnia, to be operated by 60 members of the Jordanian military, the Pentagon announced.
The equipment can trace the trajectories of artillery and mortar rounds.
A two-day jobs conference ended in Detroit, with U.S. Treasury Secretary Bentsen telling officials from the Group of Seven nations that "there is no single solution, no one idea or action that will work for every country" in trying to reduce unemployment.
Clinton has extended a U.S. moratorium on underground nuclear test explosions by one year through September 1995, the White House said.
The decision was based in part on the restraint that other declared nuclear powers have shown in not resuming testing after China's test in October, the president's press secretary said.
Indian peacekeepers shot dead nine Somalis who attacked a relief convoy, a U.N. spokesman said, as violence appeared to be rising in Somalia.
Meanwhile, U.S. officials said at least seven airmen were killed in Monday's crash of an American gunship en route to Somalia from Kenya.
