The Federal Communications Commission, sending a mixed message on its policy against lewd broadcasts, voted 2 to 1 to let Infinity Broadcasting Corp. buy a major Los Angeles radio station.
At the same time, the commission proposed $400,000 in new fines on Infinity for lewd remarks by "shock jock" Howard Stern.
Infinity already is contesting $1.3 million in FCC fines for earlier alleged violations of the agency's indecency rules.
Commissioner James Quello, a former broadcaster, was the lone dissenter in the approval late Monday of the license transfer.
He argued that an approval "might be misinterpreted as the FCC endorsing Infinity and Howard Stern actions."
Mr. Quello, in a statement, said, "First Amendment rights were not conferred by our Founding Fathers for repulsive, indecent or possibly obscene purposes."
Commissioners Andrew Barrett and Ervin Duggan voted to approve the license transfer.
Chairman Reed Hundt abstained because his former law firm represents the Los Angeles station, KRTH-FM.
The FCC had been considering whether to pull all of Infinity's 22 radio licenses, but backed off after a federal appeals court late last year struck down key portions of FCC rules governing indecent broadcasts.
Under the rules, the agency defines indecent broadcasts as those that describe "in terms patently offensive as measured by contemporary community standards for the broadcast medium, sexual or excretory activities or organs."
Steven Lehman, a Washington lawyer who represents Infinity, said the company "is gratified that the commission granted the application."
Nevertheless, he said Infinity officials would have preferred a consensus vote.
Just what effect the vote will have on Infinity's ability to buy more stations is uncertain.
The company has applied to buy WPGC-AM and WPGC-FM in suburban Washington.
Commissioner Quello said he opposes transferring more licenses to Infinity.
Mr. Duggan left the commission Monday to become head of the Public Broadcasting Service, and Mr. Hundt will likely weigh in on that license transfer.
Separately, Infinity reported sharply higher fourth-quarter net income reflecting higher advertising revenue and added revenue from acquisitions.
Infinity said it had net income of $9.1 million, or 20 cents a share, up from $2.5 million, or seven cents a share, in the year-earlier quarter.
Revenue increased 36% to $69.8 million from $51.1 million.
Infinity said broadcast cash flow, a key measure for electronic media companies, rose to $29 million from $20.3 million.
