In another sign of Japan's continuing electronics slump, top Japanese trade negotiators have broached the idea of joining Sematech, the U.S. technology consortium formed in the 1980s to counter Japanese dominance in computer chips.
Japanese participation would mark a radical departure for the once stridently all-American organization, which receives half its $200 million annual budget from the federal government and has been cited by the Clinton administration as a model of government-industry cooperation.
The overture from Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry came during bilateral trade talks in Tokyo this month in which negotiators are trying to settle differences over U.S. access to Japan's huge semiconductor market.
Though a MITI spokesman said Sematech membership was merely an idea and not the subject of a formal petition, Japanese negotiators suggested that allowing Japanese companies to join Sematech might help to further open Japan's chip market to U.S. companies by giving U.S. chip makers a better idea of what Japanese customers want.
So far, U.S. negotiators haven't pounced on the idea, pushing instead for straight market-opening compromises by the Japanese.
"The idea was raised," said a Clinton administration official.
"We haven't done anything with it."
Formed seven years ago during Japan's economic heyday, the consortium represented a last-ditch effort to rescue the companies that make chip-manufacturing equipment from a brutal pummeling by Japanese concerns.
For years, Sematech officials spoke of the Japanese competition in aggressive, even belligerent tones, at times refusing even to let Japanese television reporters into Sematech's Austin, Texas, headquarters.
That rhetoric, though, has softened recently, in part because the U.S. chip industry is winning.
The largest U.S. suppliers of chip-making equipment are continuing to gain market share and U.S. chip makers, led by giant Intel Corp., have come to dominate the world market, as Japan's corporate titans have stumbled.
Still, even the notion of Japanese companies having access to technology developed in part with U.S. taxpayer funds could prove troublesome for Sematech and its backers in the administration.
Indeed, some analysts say such a move could jeopardize Sematech's federal funding, not to mention rile many of its member companies that now have their Japanese competition on the run.
At Intel, for instance, a spokesman said he was dubious about the idea.
"My gut would tell me that full membership would be something we would study closely," but probably not in a positive light, he said.
G. Dan Hutcheson, president of VLSI Research Inc., a San Jose, Calif., technology research concern, said full Japanese membership in Sematech would be "blatantly violating a lot of the principles on which Sematech was founded.
I think there would be a lot of problems."
Consortium officials, in public comments, are coy about their role in the negotiations.
Miller Bonner, a Sematech spokesman, said it would be up to the consortium's board and the U.S. government to decide whether Japanese companies are allowed in.
In private, though, Sematech officials have sought to advance the idea.
In a speech last month in Tokyo to a Japanese semiconductor industry group, Sematech President William J. Spencer brought up the prospect of Japanese collaboration with the consortium, though in a limited fashion.
Mr. Spencer, who is on the consortium's board, said he would be open to Japanese participation in Sematech's environmental and silicon development programs if Japan's Canon Inc. lives up to its side of the deal in a technology-swapping pact with Silicon Valley Group Inc., a U.S. chip-equipment supplier.
"Can we reconcile international collaboration in this area with Sematech's requirement to serve national interests?
We think it might be possible," Mr. Spencer told the group.
