The European Union's executive commission adopted a policy paper that rejects earlier calls for national governments to phase out price controls on pharmaceuticals.
Instead, the long-awaited document seeks to bolster the EU drug industry through more modest means, including improving the sector's public image and urging member states to bring their wildly different drug-pricing policies into alignment.
Many officials viewed the report as a setback for the industry commissioner, Martin Bangemann, who had argued that the removal of price controls would allow drug makers to invest more in innovative products.
The final version emphasizes public-health concerns -- an approach urged by Padraig Flynn, the social affairs commissioner, and backed by Commission President Jacques Delors and other commissioners.
"It was not Flynn against Bangemann, but half the commission against Bangemann," one official said.
In the end, this official added, the report's section on phasing out price controls was trimmed from four pages to one paragraph.
That passage states only that the commission is prepared to talk to member states about "the impact of price control on competition and the management of health expenditure."
Mr. Bangemann's spokesman sought to put a brave face on the changes.
Calling the final version an improvement, he said the differences amount to "a question of diplomatic style" and semantics.
"The message on pricing is in there," he insisted.
"It's all a matter of price, price, price."
Some officials argued that there was little need to dwell on prices, since many EU governments are already exploring ways to reform their price-control systems.
"All member states know that price control is not effective," said Patrick Deboyser, a member of the commission's working group on pharmaceuticals.
"The question is how to do it."
In answering that question, the commission recommends working closely with member states to promote a less fragmented EU market.
The report urges the EU to get its newly created medicine-evaluation agency up and running, for example.
The commission also hopes to create an environment more favorable to biotechnology and to promote the use of cheaper generic medicines.
Charles Goldsmith contributed to this article.
