Eli Lilly & Co. has decided to sell or spin off its entire medical-device business -- nine companies with total annual sales of about $1.2 billion, according to people familiar with the move.
The Indianapolis-based drug concern is expected to announce the decision as early as today.
The plan, endorsed by the Lilly board yesterday, is a first indication of a changed course for Lilly under new chairman Randall L. Tobias.
Lilly's resolve to sell or spin off all the device companies will sharply alter the landscape in several medical fields, since the company is the market-share leader or a strong No. 2 in several areas of medical-equipment sales.
The company for months has been considering whether to sell some or all of the subsidiaries.
Depending on the offers it receives, Lilly will either sell the medical-device division in whole or in part to other companies, spin off a portion or even arrange an initial public offering of shares representing part of the division, according to a Lilly official familiar with the decision.
The move is expected to win approval on Wall Street, because of the uneven performance of the companies and a perception that Lilly should focus on its core pharmaceutical business and boost the number of new products in its pipeline.
The company would use the proceeds to invest in pharmaceutical research and development, according to the Lilly officials familiar with the move.
"Most analysts believe the divestiture of the device division would be a plus for the company," said PaineWebber analyst Ronald Nordmann.
"Our estimate is that in the aggregate they could be worth more than $2 billion."
He said such a move could relieve some of the financial pressure on Lilly, which has seen lagging earnings in some recent quarters after years of nonstop successes.
Chief among the companies in the division is the Cardiac Pacemakers Inc. unit in St. Paul, Minn., which, besides selling pacemakers, has been a world leader in developing surgically implanted cardiac defibrillators.
These machines administer electrical impulses to slow down racing heartbeats, which are potentially fatal.
The unit, with $350 million in estimated annual sales, made the first such implantable machine to be sold in the U.S. market.
It also is one of three leading companies expected to profit handsomely in a burgeoning defibrillator market that could reach $1 billion or more in annual sales in the next few years.
Another highly successful company included in Lilly's move is the Advanced Cardiovascular Systems Inc. unit, based in Santa Clara, Calif.
This concern chiefly makes balloon angioplasty catheters; it is still the leading company in this field world-wide, although it has been overtaken in recent months in the U.S. by SciMed Life Systems Inc.
Angioplasty catheters are an assemblage of wires with a tiny balloon at the end used to compress material blocking coronary arteries.
The unit has estimated annual sales of $250 million.
Some of the other Lilly device companies have had relatively poor results recently.
For instance, Lilly's San Diego-based Hybritech Inc., unit, which makes blood tests for prostate cancer and other products, has lost market share in recent years to Abbott Laboratories.
The Physio-Control Corp. unit in Redmond, Wash., also among the nine companies in the device division, has been especially problem-prone in the past two years.
It once had $150 million in annual sales, but its production was shut down by the Food and Drug Administration until recently.
The federal agency found a host of production and record-keeping deficiencies at Physio-Control, which makes emergency cardiac defibrillators used by paramedics to revive patients who are near death.
The other companies in Lilly's medical-device division are: Devices for Vascular Intervention Inc., Heart Rhythm Technologies Inc., IVAC Corp., Origin Medsystems Inc. and Pacific Biotech Inc.
