Several major athletic footwear manufacturers, stung by the recent fashion switch from sneakers to boots, will report disappointing earnings for the latest quarter, analysts predict.
But the fashion change buoyed profits for the makers of rugged outdoor gear, they add.
Analysts estimate earnings fell 9% at Reebok International Inc. and 24% at Stride Rite Corp.
Nike Inc. has already reported a 31% earnings decline and L.A. Gear Inc. signaled last week that it would report a loss.
Meanwhile, profits climbed an estimated 43% at Timberland Co., which specializes in outdoor wear, and 24% at Nine West Group Inc., a casual leather shoe concern.
The fashion change caught many sneaker makers flat-footed, say analysts.
"For a long time the need for casual wear was satisfied by the technically advanced sneaker," says Lee Allen, president of Allen Financial Advisors, an investment consulting firm in Boston.
But taking a clue from their European counterparts, a number of U.S. leather shoe makers got more creative in designing and adding such high-tech features as waterproofing to footwear and apparel, he says.
The new fashion, widely embraced by younger consumers, hit many of the big sneaker manufacturers in bread-and-butter categories such as basketball shoes, notes Josie Esquivel, analyst for Lehman Brothers Inc.
In announcing a 31% drop in net income for the second quarter ended Nov. 30., Nike said last month that U.S. sales of its core basketball shoes fell 25%.
The Beaverton, Ore., company reported profit of $52.3 million, or 69 cents a share, down from $76 million, or 98 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue slid 8% to $805.8 million from $875.8 million.
Likewise Reebok is expected to report that fourth-quarter earnings fell to 54 cents a share from 59 cents a share a year earlier, reckons Ms. Esquivel.
Sales, she projects, slipped 5% to $616 million from $642 million.
Sales of Reebok's basketball shoes, despite a cadre of professional athlete endorsements, is expected to be down significantly as well, she says.
The category, to some extent, has also lost zip as sales of the company's cross-training shoes have gained momentum, she adds.
Attempting to regroup in the wake of a shift in consumer preference, Reebok, of Stoughton, Mass., earlier this month reshuffled its management.
Another athletic shoe manufacturer that has blamed shifting consumer tastes is L.A. Gear, based in Santa Monica, Calif.
The company last week estimated its fiscal fourth-quarter loss from continuing operations at up to $16 million, noting among other things that excess inventories continue to depress earnings.
The company didn't provide a net loss estimate.
But Gary Jacobson, an analyst for Kidder Peabody Inc., estimates a loss of 75 cents a share for the period ended Nov. 30.
But the loss would be narrower than the $1.14 a share in the year-earlier quarter, thanks in part to strong sales of children's shoes.
L.A. Gear's sales are expected to have climbed 20% to $95 million from $70 million in the year-earlier quarter.
While the sweeping shift toward outdoor footwear impacted many athletic footwear makers, an undercurrent of smaller fashion shifts affected sales of some other firms.
Stride Rite, Cambridge, Mass., whose plain-vanilla Keds sneakers have lost some of their popularity, is expected to report earnings of 20 cents a share, down 24% from 26 cents a share a year ago, estimates Lehman Brothers' Ms. Esquivel.
Sales, helped by the addition of a Loonie Toons logo on some of the company's children's shoes, should climb 2% to $110 million from $107.6 million, she says.
Even though improving sales of Stride Rite's Sperry Topsider boat shoes has been "a big corporate goal," the boat shoe division has been a drag on the company's profits, Ms. Esquivel says.
"The issue is what the overall athletic footwear industry is going to do as a result of the consumer shift," said Mr. Jacobson, the Kidder Peabody analyst.
"My guess is that 1994 will be a year of stabilization and 1995 will be a year of very modest growth for athletic shoe manufacturers."
Meanwhile, outdoor footwear firms continue to make strides.
Allen Financial's Mr. Allen projects that Timberland, based in Hampton, N.H., will report per-share earnings of 63 cents, up 43% from 44 cents in the year-earlier quarter.
He predicts sales climbed 41% to $125 million from $88.6 million.
Mr. Allen pegs part of the Timberland's success to the fact that consumers now can buy the company's Timberland shoes at two big retail chains, Nordstrom and Dillard Department Stores.
The Timberland brand also got a boost from a major advertising campaign launched in the second half of 1993.
Although the company doesn't disclose its advertising budget, Mr. Allen estimates Timberland spent $18 million on ads, 50% more than in 1992, as it expanded its marketing efforts to 30 regions in 1993 from three the previous year.
Sales gains also came as a result of a price cut on some shoe lines due to improved manufacturing efficiencies, he says.
The preference for leather shoes, particularly among women, has boosted Nine West Group's results.
The manufacturer and retailer, based in St. Louis and Stamford, Conn., is expected to report fourth-quarter net income of 36 cents a share, a 24% increase from last year's 29 cents a share, says Ms. Esquivel.
Fourth-quarter sales, she says, should climb 20% to $142 million from $118.3 million last year.
"The reason women started wearing sneakers to work was because leather shoes were so uncomfortable," says Ms. Esquivel.
"But as leather shoes have become more comfortable more women are commuting to work in Nine West type shoes."
Among smaller athletic shoe makers, K-Swiss Inc., based in Chatsworth, Calif., is expected to report fourth-quarter earnings of 22 cents a share compared with 20 cents a year ago, says Mark Friedman, an analyst for Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Mr. Friedman says the earnings gain came on the heels of "a slight increase in fourth-quarter sales," although the fourth quarter isn't its biggest sales period.
K-Swiss got a boost when Pope John Paul II purchased a pair of K-Swiss shoes during his visit to Denver last August.
The pope, who wore the shoes due to the "uneven terrain" of the Rocky Mountains, only stipulated that the standard white lacings be replaced with gold laces.
