For many, Peachtree City, Ga., is the factory town of the future.
There's not a smokestack in sight.
The industrial park in the southwestern corner of town is tucked behind patches of pansies, overlooking golf courses and manmade lakes.
Residents live on streets with sunny names like Crabapple Lane and Evian Way.
Planning laws are so strict that McDonald's had to downsize its giant golden arches.
Crime and other signs of urban blight are practically nonexistent.
It's an hour from Atlanta and separated by miles of pine forests.
Yet industry has been beating a path to the city.
Hella Inc., a headlight maker, moved a plant here from New Jersey, following a two-year nationwide search of locales.
Panasonic moved from Chicago to make its cellular phones and car stereos.
And Wilden Plastics USA just opened its first U.S. plant, where 1,000 employees will make medical diagnostic products.
So Peachtree City, once little more than a bedroom community for pilots and flight attendants working at Atlanta's Hartsfield Airport 25 miles north, has taken on a life of its own.
Only about 35% of residents hold airline jobs; the rest work in nearby factories, military bases or home offices.
Its growth has made surrounding Fayette County one of the 20 fastest-growing counties with both affluence and education well above the national average, according to an analysis of 1990 Census data done for The Wall Street Journal by American Demographics magazine, a Dow Jones & Co. publication that tracks trends.
Peachtree City's lifeline is not Atlanta or any other major urban center, but the transportation web that includes the airport, the nearby freeways and ports in Savannah, Ga., and Jacksonville, Fla.
In an increasingly global marketplace, such close and easy transportation systems are often more important to companies looking to relocate than proximity to suppliers or customers.
"It's emerging as the Southern high-tech Silicon Valley," says Mitch Williams, president of Hella, a unit of Hella KG Hueck & Co. in Germany.
"We're sitting on the least expensive and most desirable piece of land" in the country.
Hella officials said an acre of industrial land in New Jersey would have cost at least $500,000; in Peachtree City, it goes for $30,000 to $45,000 an acre.
Fayette County's population jumped about 115% to about 62,000 people in 1990 from 1980.
By 1993, it climbed to 69,000 and, if trends hold, is expected to hit 95,000 by the year 2000.
Peachtree City's success, experts say, illustrates how changes in business are helping drive populations further and further from traditional urban centers and their suburbs.
"With the empowerment from computers, people can go into business or have jobs far from old headquarter offices," says Jack Lessinger, a socioeconomist.
"So they can live in places like this."
Hella and Panasonic moved here, in part, for the transportation system.
Since most parts used in Panasonic's phones are imported from Japan, it needed quick access to air freight and other forms of shipping.
Components for Hella's auto headlights and other products are shipped from overseas, and its executives are frequent fliers.
Shipments to its former headquarters in Cranford, N.J., about 10 miles from New York City, were frequently delayed due to bad weather, and executives often found themselves stalled in traffic.
Remote as Peachtree City may seem, Hella executives say they can make it to the Atlanta airport in 25 minutes, even during rush hour.
"It's the best airport I've ever used," says Mr. Williams, citing the number of flights, lack of weather delays and parking.
"In Newark, it's a battle to go anywhere."
The company's shipments leave on time more often in Peachtree City than they did in New Jersey.
And Hella's newly built site on Kelly Drive cost $2 million, $3 million less than it would have cost to buy its 20-year-old New Jersey headquarters.
Peachtree City's industrial park also has its own airport, Falcon Field, that many companies use.
The city is an easy half-day drive to the port in Savannah and about a day away from Jacksonville's.
And local business leaders say they are not as congested as Northern ports.
The city has benefited, too, from its affordability -- its cost of living is about 25% less than New Jersey's -- and its reputation for a docile, nonunion work force.
Hoshizaki America Inc., a subsidiary of Hoshizaki Electric Co. in Nagoya, chose Peachtree City because it could draw workers from rural communities.
The hourly wage for manufacturing is about $10 an hour, compared with about $12.50 in New Jersey or nearly $15 in Michigan.
"I like the basic work ethic," says Emory Taylor, executive vice president of Hoshizaki.
Absenteeism is about 2% and there's virtually no turnover, he says.
Hella had expected 50% of its workers to move when it relocated in 1991; about 70% did.
Hella received 700 resumes when it advertised a dozen job openings recently, and Mr. Williams says he gets at least 20 resumes a month.
"All of them are from someplace else," he says.
"People who don't even know who we are want to come here."
Peachtree City also has capitalized on another fact of the modern global marketplace: that many foreign firms, particularly Japanese and German, put a big premium on quality of life.
And Peachtree City is aesthetically pleasing.
Wilden Plastics, a unit of Wilden KG, searched in Ohio, Massachusetts, Tennessee and the Carolinas before settling here.
"We wanted something similar to our Germany headquarters," about 90 minutes outside Munich, says Roger Vuillod, president.
Peachtree City, he says, "presents a nice image to clients . . .
Here, customers can sit in the conference room and watch deer graze within 30 feet of the facility."
Safety, too, is a big factor.
"Overseas, people read the worst things about our schools and our cowboy-like penchant for guns," says John Boothby, executive director of Fayette County Development Authority.
So he gets a lot of questions from industrial prospects about crime.
So does the Peachtree City visitor center.
When they ask "what's your gang problem?" says Betty Robison, who manages the information center, "I tell them it's two-year-olds on the playground."
In 1993, only 17 burglaries, 218 thefts and three aggravated assaults were reported.
Last year, its biggest crime wave was speeding golf carts.
Peachtree City police patrol on bikes and golf carts on about 65 miles of cart paths, so they're literally riding through residents' backyards, police service unheard of in big cities.
Sgt. Jeff Diller recalls searching for a six-year-old boy's bicycle one afternoon.
He found and returned it within six hours.
Kersten Gasko, a resident, tells a simple story to put foreign newcomers at ease: "My husband and I went to Europe for a month and forgot to lock the front door.
It was no big deal."
