Platinum futures prices soared on buying by Japanese industrial consumers and political instability in South Africa, which produces 85% of the world's platinum supply.
At the New York Mercantile Exchange, platinum for April delivery shot up $6.30 to $404 an ounce, while the price of the related March palladium futures contract rose $4.20 to $138.80 an ounce.
Other precious-metals markets were lackluster, however.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery was down 10 cents to $385.50 an ounce and March silver fell 8.80 cents to $5.262 an ounce.
The recent surge in the yen's value against the dollar has proved to be a major boost for the platinum market.
"The yen's rise has really brought a lot of Japanese investors into the market," said Nina Lipton, market research director for Platinum Guild International.
"Since platinum is denominated in dollars, it's very inexpensive for them.
Among other things, they're looking to hedge their stock portfolios, and platinum is one of the ways they do it."
Japan's electronics and automotive industries are two of the most important industrial consumers of platinum and similar industrial metals, such as palladium and rhodium.
Platinum and these other metals are used in the manufacture of catalytic converters in cars, and in the circuitry of electronic products.
Lately, Japanese trade groups have been negotiating contracts with Russia, a principal supplier of palladium.
To get the palladium they need, they may be obliged also to buy Russian platinum, which could help support prices for some time to come, analysts say.
The demand for platinum has helped to push its price to its traditional place, well above the price of gold.
Only a few months ago, platinum's price had fallen behind that of gold.
Also supporting the platinum market is the continuing turmoil surrounding South Africa's scheduled elections, the first in which black South Africans will be allowed to vote.
Because the country is the world's principal producer of platinum, traders watch its internal politics very closely.
"Assuming that the elections do take place, there are concerns in the market that the African National Congress will win," said Bernard Savaiko, senior analyst for PaineWebber Inc.
"The feeling is that that could lead to nationalization of the mining industry, as the ANC has indicated it favors doing," and possible supply shortages.
GRAINS & SOYBEANS: Prices of corn, wheat and soybean futures contracts slumped across the board.
Grain traders blamed some of the decline on worries about the potential for a trade war with Japan, which is the biggest foreign customer of U.S. agriculture.
Japan is projected to spend nearly $9 billion during the fiscal year ending Sept. 30 on U.S. farm goods.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the corn contract for March delivery dropped 4.5 cents a bushel to settle at $2.935.
Traders are divided over whether agriculture might get dragged into the dispute, and what that would mean for U.S. grain exports.
Japan has relatively few alternative sources for corn-although a trade war might allow corn exporters such as China, Argentina and South Africa to make inroads into the Japanese market.
The U.S. controls about 60% of the world corn trade.
Corn prices were also depressed by reports that U.S. corn exports were lower than expected last week.
Soybean prices slipped in part because a monthly survey showed that U.S. oilseed processors crushed about 3.5 million fewer bushels in January than the same month of 1993.
ENERGY: Petroleum futures generally declined as a sell-off in heating oil continued.
Crude oil for March delivery dropped briefly below $14 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, but didn't stay under that psychologically important level.
It settled at $14.06 a barrel, down seven cents for the day.
March heating oil, which had fallen more than three cents a gallon Monday, dropped another 0.77 cent yesterday to settle at 47.05 cents a gallon.
Some traders were cautious in advance of the release by the American Petroleum Institute of its latest fuel inventory figures.
As usual, the API reported the figures after futures trading had closed, and they showed major declines last week in inventories of crude oil and fuels.
Crude and gasoline inventories were down by 4.3 million barrels and 3.2 million barrels, respectively.
Stocks of distillate fuels, which include heating oil, also fell, but the decline of 3.4 million barrels was slightly under industry expectations.
