At dinner tables the world over tomorrow night, all eyes -- if not all appetites -- will be focused on a steaming heap of sheep's innards, oatmeal, onions and spices served from a sheep's well-scrubbed stomach.
Meet perhaps the most peculiar of Scottish idiosyncracies: the haggis, an indigenous dish that is the culinary star of traditional "Burns suppers," held on the anniversary of the birth of the Scottish poet Robert Burns.
At the American-Scottish Foundation's black-tie supper in Manhattan, the haggis will be paraded on a tray around all the guests to the accompaniment of bagpipes, then presented to a table of dignitaries.
An emcee will publicly address the haggis with the Burns poem "To A Haggis," in which Burns lauds it as the "Great Chieftan o' the Puddin-race."
At the poem's climax, he will ceremoniously thrust the dagger into the heart of the stomach, as it were, and the haggis will be spooned out and served.
But while haggis commands reverence among Scots and Burns aficionados, it is far from flavor of the month at the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Because the government restricts meat products from countries with a record of bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or "mad-cow disease," importing Scottish haggis is illegal.
Even tinned haggis is verboten; it wouldn't be much use at a Burns supper anyway.
"You can't stick a dirk {Scottish dagger} through a tin," says Alan Bain, president of the American-Scottish Foundation.
Instead, Burns supper organizers in America depend on domestic toil.
Charles Davidson, a Scottish butcher who owns the Royal Market in Kearny, New Jersey, makes about 1,000 pounds of haggis for Burns suppers nationwide.
It takes three days to make a haggis.
On the first day, Mr. Davidson cooks, cools and grinds the innards.
On the second, he mixes it with onions, oatmeal and "special spices" and then stuffs the mixture into the stomach.
On the third day, he boils the stomach for an hour-and-a-half to two hours.
There is one major difference between Mr. Davidson's haggis and the old-country type.
"Back in Scotland they use the `plucks' -- the heart, the lungs, the liver and the intestines," Mr. Davidson says.
"Here, the USDA won't allow you to use lungs.
I try to put most of the others in, but I use primarily liver."
