OSHA VOWS a crackdown -- but pledges leniency for small businesses.
Joe Dear, who became director of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration in November, says the agency is preparing "an initiative to increase enforcement through better targeting of the most-hazardous workplaces."
In the past, OSHA made inspections mostly in response to complaints.
Under the new policy, it will be singling out for surveillance work sites that are most exposed to three risks: confined-space problems, lead in construction materials, and tuberculosis, Mr. Dear says.
Businesses particularly affected include health-care facilities, nursing homes, construction companies and manufacturers whose plants contain potentially dangerous chemicals, he adds.
Many of these enterprises are small.
"This will send a clear message to employers on the low road that the cost of noncompliance will go up," he says.
But Mr. Dear also offers a break to owners of small, high-hazard businesses: They won't be punished for violations if they seek OSHA's help in correcting the problems.
"If you ask for help and abate by an agreed date, there's no penalty," he says.
PLEAD POVERTY, not ignorance, bureaucrats tell a boycott-law violator.
Gotko International Inc., a Houston maker of oil-field equipment with $2.5 million in sales last year, does 99% of its business overseas.
So, shortly after Kenneth Penske took over as company president in 1984, he wrote to the local Department of Commerce office asking for "as much information as possible" about what he should do to comply with all U.S. laws.
Mr. Penske says the letter -- and two follow-up requests -- all went unanswered (a claim the department doesn't contest).
But as he was to discover, ignorance of the law is no excuse.
Mr. Penske says he later signed a statement, requested by Syria, that he observed the rules of its boycott of Israel.
"I never sold anything to Israel because Israel doesn't do any oil drilling," he says.
"I had no idea I was violating U.S. law," which forbids American companies from taking part in the Arab boycott of the Jewish state.
Moreover, he says, the statement was on a checklist of items for establishing a letter of credit -- a matter that was being handled by a large U.S. bank.
As a small manufacturer, Mr. Penske says, he assumed the bank would alert him of any potential problem.
In 1988, he says, he again sought information from the Commerce Departmentagain to no avail.
Three years later, he says, he became aware of his unwitting participation in the boycott.
He says he immediately informed the Internal Revenue Service -- the agency that his lawyer suggested should be contacted -- and sent a letter of retraction to Syria.
As a result of his initiative, he says, the Department of Commerce audited his books.
Last February, it notified him that he was guilty of boycott-law violations and said it planned to fine him $190,000.
It later reduced that amount to $90,000, citing his complaints about its unresponsiveness and other "mitigating factors."
Mr. Penske says he has offered to pay $5,000 -- but only if the Commerce Department "admits its negligence."
The agency won't comment.
But in a letter to Sen. Phil Gramm (R., Texas), it indicated that the penalty could be suspended if Gotko can show the cost would cause it "severe financial hardship."
That should be easy, Mr. Penske says: His company -- which was named the Houston area's small-business exporter of the year by the Small Business Administration last March -- had 1993 losses in the tens of thousands of dollars and is saddled with hundreds of thousands of dollars of debt.
However the dispute ends, Mr. Penske wonders why the U.S. sought to fine his business a sum equal to nearly 8% of annual revenue -- while fining a unit of American Express Co. only $103,000 last year for the same alleged offense.
A BAKERY FIGHTS Vermont's bid to take a bigger tax bite out of its bagels.
The Burlington Bagel Bakery's shops always charged customers the state's 7% meals tax on bagels sold for immediate consumption -- but never on "loose" bagels taken home in bags to be eaten later.
After all, co-owner Andy Golbert says, bagels sold in grocery stores and delicatessens aren't taxed.
So when the Vermont Tax Department sent him a $50,000 bill last summer for three years in back taxes on takeout bagels, he found the penalty hard to swallow.
The department later reduced the sum to $19,000 -- covering only sales of five bagels or fewer, he says.
But Mr. Golbert maintains that he doesn't owe the state a penny.
Last week, he testified at hearings by the state House Ways and Means Committee aimed at clarifying the definition of nontaxable "bulk" foods.
"I told them I'd like to meet the guy who eats five bagels for lunch," he says.
The state Tax Department won't comment on Mr. Golbert's case.
But an official says the Legislature is considering reducing the takeout threshold to four from six bagels.
He adds that the implementation "of any law meant to tax snacks and groceries separately is always going to be awkward."
The bagel brouhaha is part of a national debate over whether the same foods taken out of restaurants and grocery stores should be taxed identically, says Linda Way, manager of state legislative affairs at the National Restaurant Association.
"The restaurant community has long argued there's an uneven playing field," she adds.
ENVIRONMENTAL RULES rate as the most onerous, a new survey shows.
In a poll by consulting firm Grant Thornton of 253 small and medium-sized manufacturing companies, 37% said environmental regulations were the "most burdensome."
That was more than double the 16% of respondents that cited tax regulations and the 15% that named workplace rules.
Michael Cantwell, the Grant Thornton's national director for manufacturing, says the fast growth of environmental regulations at all levels of government -- and their often arbitrary enforcement -- create the problem.
As environmental law "gets more complex, it places an enormous burden on businesses just to keep abreast of it, much less interpret it and fill out all the compliance reports," he says.
Moreover, he adds, small manufacturers "sense that many people at environmental agencies have an antibusiness bias."
