Responding to spreading protests of Russia's failure to meet payrolls, Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin ordered the government to begin paying billions of rubles in back wages to coal miners.
Scattered strikes by the union workers in Siberia in recent weeks had cut output.
The order last Friday for the miners, many of whom haven't been paid since November, came a day after a promise to pay billions in back wages to communications workers to settle a one-day strike that halted radio and television broadcasts.
Meanwhile, the timber industry, also demanding paychecks, threatened to halt shipments starting next Monday.
In recent weeks, Mr. Chernomyrdin also has approved payments to defense and agricultural workers.
Many reformers in Parliament have accused the cabinet of knuckling under to inflationary spending.
But officials insisted the budget deficit will be cut this year, reducing the need for central bank financing that fuels inflation.
Negotiations on a contract for the 3.2 million members of Germany's IG Metall metalworkers union broke down Friday, after two weeks of brief warning strikes.
The Gesamtmetall industrial employer group cited disagreement about working hours.
The union, declaring further talks pointless, next Monday will set a date for a strike vote.
Gesamtmetall offered job-security proposals, such as letting companies expand or reduce the workweek as needed.
IG Metall said it offered workweek flexibility but employers insisted on a pay freeze and vacation reductions.
The union has sought wage boosts between 5.5% and 6%.
Even on workdays, many Greeks party in Athens nightclubs until 7 a.m.
The government, hoping to improve productivity, introduced an order for clubs to shut at 2 a.m., the country's first official closing time.
The Public Order Ministry wants to reduce crime and put an end to students' sleepiness and public officials' absenteeism due to hangovers.
Clubs serving teenagers or violating the closing hour could lose their licenses.
Opponents said the order isn't enforceable and warned the ministry that it couldn't make people go to bed early.
Club owners said the order would ruin them financially.
Australia has agreed to stop using European geographical names, such as Champagne and Burgundy, for its wines in return for greater access to European Union markets.
The deal is the first between the EU and a competing wine producer using its place names.
In Australia's rapidly growing wine industry, exports soared to $244 million in 1993 from $15 million seven years earlier.
The industry expects annual exports to total $700 million by the year 2000, mostly to the 12-country European trade bloc.
About $10 billion a year in Russian export earnings, or 23% of last year's $43 billion total, hasn't returned to the country, the government said.
Last fall, Russia introduced a system to tighten control of export earnings in an effort to prevent capital flight, estimated at as much as $15 billion a year.
Because of political and economic instability, many Russians have moved assets to safer investments abroad.
Exporters can easily shelter capital in other countries by underreporting the value of goods sold there and depositing the difference in foreign accounts.
To protest unpaid wages, about 3,000 railway repair workers in Romania stoned windows of the government transport agency's headquarters in Bucharest, which riot police defended.
The demonstration was a prelude to several major strikes planned for this week.
Some maintenance employees weren't paid last week because the state railway hadn't paid their company $1.6 million for work conducted in the past two months.
The buying power of Romanians' wages averaging less than $50 a month has eroded, as inflation last year ran at almost 300%.
Despite some strong resistance, the European Parliament has adopted an amended European Commission proposal to promote the use of motor fuels derived from agricultural crops.
The plan would set up a preferential tax system for alternative fuels such as methanol, bioethanol and vegetable oils, now far more expensive than conventional fuels.
Proponents said the plan would help stem the loss of farm jobs, reduce the EU's dependence on imported oil, and cut smog and carbon-monoxide pollution.
But other members of the EU assembly weren't so sure.
Some questioned the measure's environmental credentials, arguing that biofuels would increase other forms of air pollution and compound water pollution caused by fertilizers.
Some Parliament members griped that the proposal was billed as high-minded but amounted to a subsidy for farmers.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
At least 150,000 workers from about 50 companies in Indonesia staged protests in nine cities, demanding a higher minimum wage and the release of arrested union leaders.
The government recognizes just one labor union. . . .
Bulgaria favors joining with Romania to build two bridges across the Danube River -- a potential $240 million job.
The only bridge linking the two countries has traffic jams.
