First Chicago Corp. reported a 27% increase in fourth-quarter net income, driven by strong credit-card earnings.
The gain exceeded analysts' expectations.
On the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, the banking company's stock closed at $42.375, up 37.5 cents, in composite trading.
Net for the quarter rose to $172.8 million, or $1.81 a share, from a year-earlier $136.6 million, or $1.53 a share.
Per-share earnings rose slightly less, 18%, due to 1993's increased number of shares outstanding.
For the year, net income was $804.5 million, up from the previous year's $93.5 million.
In spite of growing competition among credit-card issuers, First Chicago's credit-card receivables grew by 11%, to $10.7 billion, from the third quarter.
"Credit cards are the key fundamental," said Art Soter, a bank analyst with Morgan Stanley & Co.
"It's the most profitable major business they have, and it's their greatest growth business."
First Chicago was one of the first issuers to introduce no-fee cards.
"They know how to segment the market," Mr. Soter said, "and they have a pretty low-cost operation."
In an interview, Richard L. Thomas, the bank's chairman, said, "We think we are one of the best in terms of efficiency."
Some analysts, however, expressed concern that the bank's earnings are overly dependent on the card business.
When venture-capital earnings are excluded, Judah Kraushaar, an analyst with Merrill Lynch & Co., estimated that the card business contributes more than 40% of the company's profit.
Mr. Thomas, however, played down the concern: "The question does arise: How big a credit-card business should we have?
But that is a good problem to have; it's a good business."
Venture-capital investments, which provided more than one-third of the bank's profit in the past two years, produced a modest profit in the quarter-reflecting both sales and changes in market value.
Although the bank's largest holding, 9.5 million shares of Nextel Communications Inc., fell in value during the quarter, profit from other investments was large enough to produce an overall gain of $7 million, down from $48 million in the year-earlier quarter.
Total equity-securities gains were $40 million, down from a year-earlier $89.2 million.
The bank's asset quality continued to improve during the period.
As of the end of the year, 89% of the portfolio slated for disposition had been liquidated, and nonperforming loans were $277 million, down from $351 million at the end of the previous quarter.
The fourth-quarter loan-loss provision was $70 million, down from a year-earlier $80 million.
"This was the quarter when the bank really put the asset-quality problems behind it," said Henry Dickson, an analyst with Smith Barney Shearson Inc.
The bank's total assets were $52.6 billion at the end of 1993, up from a year-earlier $49.3 billion.
