It seems warehouses have grown wheels.
Called "rolling inventories," trucks have become the place of choice for just-in-time stockpiles.
Eighteen-wheelers pull up to factory loading docks to deliver parts that go almost immediately onto production lines, bypassing the warehouses.
"Companies now precisely plan their need of inventory so that intermediate warehouses aren't needed," says Don Schneider, president of trucking concern Schneider National Inc. and a member of the Chicago Federal Reserve Bank.
To be sure, just-in-time inventory methods aren't new.
But as more companies come around to this approach, trucks and railcars have begun to function as warehouses for many producers -- adding yet another anomaly to the economic recovery.
The change undercuts the usefulness of measuring warehouse inventories to track the pace of a recovery.
It also damps the booster effect inventory buildups can bring early in a recovery.
Indeed, as demand has picked up during this recovery, inventories have stayed comparatively low and manufacturing jobs remain hard to come by.
Historically, retail space and warehouse space usually mirror each other during economic expansions and downturns.
During the most recent recession, for instance, companies cut production and closed down stores due to shrinking demand.
New construction of stores and warehouses slumped.
But during the recovery, "the connection between stores and warehouses has been broken," says John Walker an analyst with F.W. Dodge in Boston.
The construction of warehouse square footage tumbled nearly 18% in 1992 and 9% in 1993, even as the economy gained momentum and space in stores and shopping centers grew 6% and 12%, respectively.
For trucking companies, the trend means new business, but also more demanding customers.
Many trucking companies say that in recent years, they've come under increasing pressure to deliver parts within a small window of time.
"There are sometimes less than 10-minute lag times," says Larry Mulkey, president of Ryder Dedicated Logistics Inc., a Miami unit of transportation-services company Ryder System Inc.
Such use of trucks enables businesses to cut space costs, freeing up capital for investments such as equipment or new employees.
"The back room decreases in size because you don't need it to store stockpiles and that means you have more floor space for selling," Mr. Mulkey says.
But a heavy reliance on trucks to keep inventories low isn't without its risks.
The General Motors Corp., Toyota Motor Co. joint venture in Fremont, Ca., once had to shut down its production line because a just-in-time delivery truck broke down on the highway.
Ken Simonson, chief economist of the American Trucking Associations, says trucking for just-in-time orders, generally works better in uncongested regions of the country.
But trucking companies have come a long way in eliminating delivery glitches.
Mr. Schneider of Schneider National boasts that not one load was late because of the icy, wintry weather that hit much of the nation recently.
Technology enables trucking companies and their clients to track a load's progress from minute to minute.
If a problem comes up, another truck can be dispatched immediately to pick up the load.
Trucks also have become more reliable mechanically.
