A group led by some of the investors who engineered Continental Airlines' emergence from Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings last year has made a bid for control of America West Airlines.
The investors are David Bonderman and James Coulter of Fort Worth, Texas, both of whom are principals in Air Partners L.P., the group that owns 28% of Continental Airlines.
Mr. Bonderman is also Continental's nonexecutive chairman.
Continental confirmed that it's a minority partner in the America West offer, as is Mesa Airlines, a small but highly successful Farmington, New Mexico-based carrier that operates regional commuter operations for several major airlines.
Terms of the proposal, which comes from a newly organized group called Amwest Partners L.P., weren't disclosed.
Spokesmen for Messrs. Bonderman and Coulter and Continental were quick to say there isn't any plan to combine or merge the operations of any of the carriers involved.
"If there are in terms of the usual reservations code-sharing, or frequent flier miles, those would be explored, and where possible implemented," said a spokesman for Air Partners.
"But the airlines would maintain their independence."
America West, which has been operating under bankruptcy court protection for nearly three years, has until tomorrow to choose a lead proposal.
Any bid must then be approved by the bankruptcy court overseeing the carrier, which is based in Phoenix, Ariz.
The only other bid for America West made public thus far has come from New York money manager Michael Steinhardt, who proposed buying 80% of America West's equity for $250 million.
An overture by the Pritzker family of Chicago was withdrawn last year.
America West's sudden popularity reflects the airline industry's view that low-cost, short-haul operations are the wave of the future.
With enviably low costs and a 1993 profit of $37 million, America West's performance beat all the major carriers except for Southwest Airlines.
Any bid for America West, however, must gain the support of some of its creditor groups.
A person familiar with one of the groups said that in terms of pure economics, the Amwest Partners bid isn't as attractive as Mr. Steinhardt's.
It's understood, though, that the Amwest Partners bid may be revised somewhat before the company selects its lead proposal.
The airline has said it's seeking an investment of $200 million as part of any plan to emerge from bankruptcy proceedings.
