A Communist Party cadre named Xu has been divorced three times.
The reason, he tells Shanghai on a call-in radio show, is that his penis is too small.
"I'm a very poor man.
I spent $2,300, almost all of my savings, to keep them happy," Mr. Xu explains to the show's hostess, Wei Lan.
"But," he says of his anatomical deficiency, "they can't be satisfied.
Still, I'm thinking of marrying a fourth woman.
I can't go a day without sex."
Wei Lan offers some of her trademark advice.
"You absolutely must not marry a fourth woman," she says.
"You think you're a poor man?
Think of the poor women who marry men like you."
So goes the all-day, all-night outpouring of neuroses on East Radio, where China's largest city airs its dirty laundry.
In a society known for puritanical squeamishness, where lovers still shy away from using the word "love" and a recent national survey showed that 60% of the population is "often or sometimes" naked during sex, the public airwaves now offer an outlet for years, perhaps centuries, of pent-up angst.
Shanghai talk radio, 792 AM, has become psychiatrist, internist and priest to the troubled -- and a continuous soap opera for everybody else.
Tune in at night to hear criminals confessing their crimes, concubines cursing their rivals, and students pondering suicide before final exams.
Nobody can lay a verbal finger on Deng Xiaoping.
Discussions of democracy remain off-limits.
But talk radio opens a window on China's social change.
Callers range from the merely self-indulgent to blatantly id-driven.
So much for China's past efforts to create selfless socialists.
One woman, a secretary, calls in to describe her anger at her boss, with whom she is sleeping.
"He spends almost all his nights and weekends at home, with his wife and children," she complains.
"I'm also his lover.
But I see him only during the day.
Why won't he spend more time with me?"
There to mull such questions is a group of government-appointed talk-show hosts.
At the top of the ratings: the acerbic Wei Lan.
Her show runs back to back with the program hosted by the also popular Wang Wei, who by his account has never met a problem he couldn't solve.
They both seem acutely sensitive that talk-radio hosts enjoy uncertain job tenure, particularly if their programs attract too much attention.
Thus they are careful to meld pop psychology with demands for filial piety and Leninist common sense.
Put another way, theirs is a party line.
Mr. Wang has a show-business pedigree dating back to his service in the People's Liberation Army, where he acted in a troupe and staged plays "about real people in real-life situations."
Currently, on the side, he appears weekly on a law-and-order television program called "Topics in Public Security."
This particular night, he shuffles into the East Radio office at 9:45, just in time for his 10 p.m. radio gig.
He scurries around in his military boots and black leather bell-bottoms in search of a pack of Double Happiness cigarettes.
He isn't allowed to smoke in the studio, but he likes to dangle them from his lips.
Then he settles himself in front of the microphone.
"We can all have a solitary feeling in the big city," he begins in a baronial radio-voice, light jazz trailing away in the background.
"We sometimes don't need much to feel welcomed -- a flower, a leaf, a letter.
You can also call someone, and that's why my lines are open."
The switchboard lights up.
A 21-year-old identifies himself as Zhou and tells Wang Wei of his lost childhood.
At age 10, he was kicked out of the house by his mother after he pawned her food ration coupons in the dead of winter.
By 15, he was stealing bicycles.
"I was arrested once," he says, breathing heavily.
"But they let me go when I tried to cut my own veins.
When I got out, I did very bad things.
I cut people."
"Little Zhou, you did what?"
Wang Wei asks.
"I cut people.
I stabbed them."
"Little Zhou, why are you calling to tell me this today?"
"I'm tired of life," he says, now sobbing.
"When I saw the blood from my veins, I was relieved.
I got pleasure from seeing blood. . . .
Today I wanted to kill a man who gave me five apples instead of six at the market.
I paid for six."
"Little Zhou, it's important not to have such impulses.
You need to control yourself."
"But I'm a madman."
"You're just confused.
Try to be a good man.
Go listen to karaoke.
Get a good dinner.
The next time you get such an impulse, count to 10 and think about the result."
On her show, "Night Talk," Wei Lan takes the mike.
A Miss Chen calls to express concern about her fiance , who was arrested three weeks before.
She didn't believe he had done anything wrong, and she hasn't been informed about any indictment.
"I miss him very much and I want him back," she says.
"Why don't you go to the Public Security Bureau and ask why he was put in jail?"
Ms. Wei says.
"I went there twice.
They took me into a room and demanded to know what my boyfriend did wrong.
I told them, `That's why I came here, to find out what he did.'
They said, `If you don't know already, then we can't tell you.' "
"That's right," Ms. Wei replies.
"If he was arrested, then of course he violated Chinese laws.
Maybe you should look for another husband."
Not all of East Radio's programming sends callers to the phones.
One afternoon show, "Today's New Topic," recently delved into the problem of traffic congestion for the 30th time in three months.
Traffic police led a two-hour discussion on how to keep sidewalks free of clutter.
More common, however, are the lengthy dialogues about family spats.
This is also referred to as the "one bed, two quilt" phenomenon, or wives who won't sleep with their husbands.
A Mr. Qian phones Wang Wei to tell of his and his wife's plans to move into a new home and leave his nagging mother behind.
"My wife and my mother fight every day.
My wife takes it out on me," he says.
"My wife told me that we move out together, or she moves out alone.
I'm now 40 years old, so I think I can live outside my mother's house."
Mr. Wang cautions against it.
"There's an old Chinese saying: `The prime minister's heart is big enough to sail a ship in,' " he says.
"Your mother is your prime minister.
She's the only one who has the whole family in her heart."
Not all callers are satisfied with such advice.
So Pamela Pak, a Hong Kong author and talk-show hostess in the British colony, tried a different approach when Beijing Broadcasting Station offered her a nighttime slot last summer.
Hosts, Ms. Pak says, "always say kids should listen to the parents, wives should make the marriage work.
But if you just answer according to Chinese values and government guidance, people will go crazy.
They have no values after Mao.
China really needs psychotherapy."
Maybe so, but she won't be the one to give it.
Before she had finished her second month on the air, the Ministry of Radio, Film and Television canceled her show.
Ms. Pak can but speculate on the cause.
It may have been the army officer who called to complain that since the 1989 army crackdown on protesters in Beijing, he hasn't been able to get a date.
Or maybe it was the convict who managed to phone from prison to say that he still stands firm on human rights.
Whatever it was, "the government decided they just didn't like me."
Wang Wei may have had that lesson in mind when asked to analyze the penis envy, unrequited love and juvenile delinquency that fills his air time.
"I refer you to the `Selected Works' of Comrade Deng Xiaoping," he tells an interviewer, taking a phantom drag on his Double Happiness.
"We're all concerned with spiritual civilization, material civilization, and the carrying out of socialist construction."
