Residents of this economically distressed state are likely to face higher taxes to cover some of the repairs from Monday's devastating earthquake.
But officials here and in Washington are still groping for acceptable long-term solutions to the problem of paying a reconstruction bill that could climb as high as $30 billion.
Compared with the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake in Northern California, this week's quake caused much more extensive damage, to schools, roads and other public facilities in the densely populated San Fernando Valley and nearby communities.
The prospect of squeezing most of the repair funds from the state budget -- already headed for a $5 billion deficit before the natural disaster struck -- frightens many economists and state politicians.
State and federal relief agencies are "terrific at taking care of people's immediate needs," said Alan Kreditor, a professor of urban planning at the University of Southern California who studied the aftermath of the 1989 quake.
"But we're not very good at coming up with postcrisis rehabilitation plans" that provide continuing aid to businesses and long-term repair budgets for public facilities.
Learning from past mistakes, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and other federal agencies are quickly funneling emergency help to the city.
Just yesterday, 11 federal emergency centers opened their doors.
President Clinton also released an additional $100 million for immediate road repairs and authorized the federal government to continue paying 100% of certain emergency shelter and food costs for homeless residents.
But the Clinton administration, along with state and local officials, faces difficult choices in coming up with a financing plan that won't significantly increase the federal deficit and avoids hitting economically hard-pressed California with a new round of hefty sales and gasoline taxes.
A major problem is that reliable damage estimates don't yet exist.
While Gov. Pete Wilson has projected that quake damage could "conservatively" be $15 billion to $30 billion, many experts are skeptical.
Some even call that estimate a ploy to pressure Washington for maximum assistance.
"I have no idea how the government justifies those figures," said Jim Lewis, director of the State Assembly Office of Research.
"At this point nobody really knows what the damages are."
Still, state and city coffers can't possibly absorb all the costs.
The state Transportation Department's highway account, for example, now stands at $130 million, after a steady 18-month decline.
Some outside engineers said the eventual cost of rebuilding damaged roadways could be five or six times that amount.
Likewise, state legislative analysts said California only has $50 million available to repair the local libraries, courthouses and other city and county buildings that were damaged.
Though Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan hasn't yet proposed any specific financing plan, the city needs authorization from state lawmakers to raise taxes.
So far, Gov. Wilson has shied away from the idea of imposing new taxes in an election year, focusing instead on shifting money between state accounts and calling for Washington to foot nearly the entire bill.
But Congress is likely to resist that approach, and many here believe the governor will have no choice but to call for new taxes, even if that prompts a bitter fight in the state Legislature.
Assembly Speaker Willie Brown Jr. this week came out in favor of raising the sales tax to pay for repairs.
Unless California "demonstrates that it's willing to absorb higher taxes," said Goetz Wolff, an economic consultant, it's hard "to make the argument that the federal government should spend at a higher rate" than now envisioned.
John Landis, an associate professor of city planning at the University of California at Berkeley, agrees: "Another increase in state taxes seems inevitable."
Measures already being considered by California lawmakers range from a quarter-cent sales-tax increase to an additional gasoline tax of two cents to five cents a gallon.
The current sales tax ranges from 7.25% to 8.50%, depending on local additions.
In addition, state Treasurer Kathleen Brown has suggested the immediate sale of $240 million in bonds, for which authority already exists.
Members of the California Legislature have suggested seeking California voters' approval this June for an additional $2 billion of new bond authority for quake-related repairs.
But such measures, which would be painful to the state's ravaged economy, may still fall short of financing the reconstruction.
Under California's constitution, revenue raised by a fuel tax can only be used for highway repairs.
That leaves unanswered the question of funding to rebuild schools, water and sewer lines and the thousands of homes and businesses badly damaged by the quake.
Homeowners have access to low-interest federal loans to make repairs, but economists say that owners of small businesses and apartment buildings throughout the region may not be able to rely on such federal help and may need special state assistance.
Meanwhile, damage from the quake continued to climb.
Eighteen hospitals have been evacuated or forced to curtail service because of structural or other damage.
With rain forecast for the weekend, thousands of people still were camped out in parks, yards, community centers and even cars.
Public-health experts warned that many risk illnesses caused by bacteria from garbage and raw sewage.
In Northern California, the Loma Prieta earthquake caused damage estimated at as much as $7 billion, less than $1 billion of which was covered by private insurance.
While the state raised $794.5 million from a 13-month, quarter-cent sales-tax increase passed soon after that quake, the same tax in today's economy would yield about $100 million less, according to state legislative estimates.
Moreover, legislators and others argue that additional taxes could delay the state's economic recovery.
With California in a four-year recession and already feeling the impact of several sales-tax increases, "initial comments suggest to me that the needed two-thirds vote can't be attained" for another tax increase, said state Sen. Bill Lockyer, a Democrat who later this month will become president pro tem of the state Senate.
Officials at the Los Angeles Unified School District say damage to schools could reach $700 million.
About 100 of the district's 640 schools were damaged, some severely, and about 200,000 of its 640,000 students don't have working classrooms.
"There is no money in the school district for this," said Leticia Quezada, school board president.
She added that while she planned to ask the state for money, she was bothered by what appears to be growing disagreement over how the state and federal government will share disaster-relief costs.
"It's disheartening to me as a local official, because now they'll go back and forth, and meanwhile our kids can't go to school," Ms. Quezada said.
For the administration and congressional leaders, the pressure to reduce the deficit clearly is much greater than it was following the Loma Prieta quake.
Despite Mr. Clinton's personal pledge to consider reducing, or eliminating altogether, local matching-fund requirements for many of the repairs, the federal government's emergency-disaster accounts were nearly drained by the Midwest flood last year and efforts to help South Florida recover from Hurricane Andrew in 1992.
Normally, the federal government pays 75%, and state and local governments pay 25%, of the cost of repairing public facilities and infrastructure following a disaster.
The federal level can be increased by the president to 90% and, in some instances, has risen to 100% of certain costs.
Thus, while some state lawmakers say they are starting to consider new taxes and bond financing, others suggest a different strategy; that one, says Tim Gage, chief consultant to the Assembly's Ways and Means Committee, is "to just tough it out and see how much the feds give us."
Frederick Rose contributed to this article.
