A new wave of inflation fears sent bond prices reeling.
Stock prices followed bonds lower and the dollar rose.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average tumbled 22.79 points to 3809.23.
Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index fell 2.70 to 464.44, and the Nasdaq Composite Index lost 3.86 to 788.64.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond plunged 1 1/2 points, or $15 for each $1,000 face amount, driving the yield to 6.81%, its highest level since June, before settling at 6.77%.
The carnage began early in the day when the Commerce Department revised upward fourth-quarter gross domestic product to a robust 7.5% from an earlier estimate of 5.9%.
Bond prices sank as traders feared such growth would stoke inflation.
But the bond market losses were tempered after cooler minds recognized that the GDP report's inflation component was revised upward only marginally.
But the bond market recovery was short-lived.
Quick on the heels of the GDP report came discouraging inflation news from the National Association of Purchasing Managers.
The prices-paid index in the group's February survey showed a sharp increase to 67 from 59.8 in January, even as the overall purchasing managers index slipped slightly because of the severe winter.
The report sent bond prices into a tailspin.
"The bond market was vulnerable to bad news on inflation and the purchasing managers' report fueled those fears," said Mickey D. Levy, chief financial economist at NationsBank.
Bond buyers were hard to find.
Even with the sharp declines in bond prices in recent weeks, many investors were reluctant to jump in for bargains.
"Our feeling is that when the market is going against you with a trend like this, you better stay away," said Eric K. Cheung, manager of the fixed-income division of Wilmington Trust, which manages $3.5 billion in fixed0income investments.
Stock prices fell along with bonds but managed to recover from their lows by the close.
The Dow Jones industrials tumbled more than 45 points before some buyers ventured back into the market.
But traders worry that the buying that often is triggered by steep stock price declines isn't occurring with the usual vigor.
Gerald Simmons, senior vice president in charge of trading at Interstate/Johnson Lane in Atlanta, said that large institutional investors aren't sweeping in to snap up bargains because they're now convinced the stock market has entered a bona fide correction whose end isn't yet in sight.
"The psychology has changed from let's buy stocks on dips to let's just walk away," said Mr. Simmons.
Among the big losers were interest-rate sensitive financial stocks and utilities, as well as transports and big economically sensitive shares that have climbed a lot in recent months.
Ned Collins, head of trading at Daiwa Securities America, pointed out that even with all the recent stock market turmoil the Dow Jones Industrial Average is still only 4.3% below its record high.
But he added that a worry is that many smaller investors who need secure investments may shy away from stocks for a while.
That could slow the money flows into the stock market.
"These people are saying let's not take a risk here," Mr. Collins said.
Overseas stock and bond markets also plunged.
In Europe, investors reacted to higher U.S. interest rates and to the German central bank's decision to reduce a key money market interest rate by an unexpectedly small 0.03 percentage point.
French shares plunged 2.5%, German stocks 1.2%, and British equities 1.7%.
"It was a mini-bloodbath," said Kenneth Joseph, an executive director at Lehman Brothers International in London.
He blamed the declines largely on heavy selling by hedge funds.
Traders added that stability won't return to European stock and bond markets until hedge funds and bank trading desks are finished selling the huge bond and bond futures positions they built up wrongly betting on lower rates and weaker currencies in Europe.
"We are very close to the lowest levels we are going to see in the short-term, but it may take several weeks before the market resumes going up," said Geoffrey Sartorius, a bond trader at Banque Nationale de Paris.
"The important thing is that longterm investors do not get scared and start selling their assets.
As long as the phenomenon is limited to traders, we cannot call it a crisis."
World-wide, stock prices dropped in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index lost 0.49 to 116.25.
Stock prices tumbled.
Volume totaled 300 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange, where 1,449 issues fell and 716 rose.
Bond prices plunged.
Ten-year Treasury bonds lost more than a point, or over $10 for each $1,000 face amount, to yield 6.27%.
The dollar rose.
In late New York trading, the currency was quoted at 1.7095 marks and 104,60 yen, compared with 1.7041 marks and 104.50 yen Monday.
