Iberia Air Lines agreed to a $500 million bailout plan for Aerolineas Argentinas SA, a move expected to raise Iberia's stake in the Argentine flagship carrier to 85% from 30%, people close to the negotiations said.
The agreement, which ends two years of acrid negotiations between Argentina and Iberia, helps consolidate the Spanish flagship carrier's Latin American strategy, viewed by analysts as key to the company's future.
The pact also increases the possibility of Iberia's reaching an alliance with other airlines that will help it survive international competition.
Ministry officials said Iberia wants to forge an alliance with United Airlines and Germany's Lufthansa.
A dominant market position in Argentina will give Iberia a bargaining chip in negotiations to reach a pact that would give those three companies a foothold in Latin America, Europe and Asia, officials said.
Under an accord reached with the Argentine government, Iberia pledged to convert $400 million of Aerolineas debt into capital.
Iberia, which currently manages Aerolineas, also will inject up to $100 million into its Argentine unit.
Iberia officials were unavailable to comment.
The size of Iberia's stake in Aerolineas will depend on whether other shareholders, including Spain's Banco Central Hispano and Banco Espanol de Credito, agree to subscribe to the capital increase.
Together, these banks own 27% of Aerolineas, with the bulk held by BCH and Banesto.
Officials said, however, the two banks aren't expected to inject more funds into the Argentine carrier.
The agreement, which enables the Argentine government to slash its stake in Aerolineas to 15% from 43%, eases diplomatic tensions that erupted between the two countries from Argentina's earlier refusal to inject state funds into its ailing airlines.
A 10% stake will be handed to Aerolineas employees, reducing the government's holding to 5%, sources said.
With debts of $700 million and losses of $220 million last year, Aerolineas has been a drag on the Spanish carrier, its biggest creditor.
Disagreements between Iberia and Argentina over which of the two should bail out Aerolineas cast doubt on the Argentine carrier's future, particularly as the air industry deals with recession.
Last week's accord was reached after Argentina pledged to maintain Aerolineas as a flagship carrier, even though the government will no longer have a majority stake.
That means Buenos Aires will continue negotiating with other governments for Aerolineas's landing rights and access to international routes.
Similarly, Argentina renounced its right to veto management decisions, agreeing to let Iberia adapt an ambitious investment plan to the market's current conditions.
