British Telecommunications PLC picked five suppliers, including Apple Computer Inc. and Alcatel-Alsthom SA, for the first trials in Europe of "video-on-demand," one of a new crop of services on which BT said it may spend billions of pounds.
Computer maker Apple and French telecommunications-equipment giant Alcatel were the two unexpected names on BT's supplier list, released as the company announced details of its plans to test market the new video services in Britain this year.
The other named suppliers were, as expected, Oracle Corp., nCube Corp. and Northern Telecom Ltd.
BT didn't disclose the names of the losing bidders, but BT officials have said previously that they had been talking with International Business Machines Corp., Digital Equipment Corp., Philips Electronics NV and others.
The contracts, the value of which BT declined to disclose, were among the most hotly contested in the European telecommunications industry -- not for their cash value, which is probably small, but for the inside track to future contracts that it may provide if BT decides to deploy a commercial video service in a few years.
A new round of open bidding would be held if that happens, BT said.
For the trials, nCube, Foster City, Calif., is supplying the main computer that runs the new service, using Oracle's software.
Northern Telecom of Canada and Alcatel are providing equipment to manage the transmission of video signals from the computer to each subscriber's homeNorthern with technology using standard copper phone wires, Alcatel using fiberoptic cables.
Completing the system, Apple is providing set-top boxes in each subscriber's home, linking their TV sets to the phone wires.
Paul Reynolds, BT's top planner for the new services, called it "pure speculation" to try forecasting the company's spending, but then added that it would be "certainly in the billions" of pounds if BT decides to launch a nationwide service.
He emphasized that such a decision won't come until after BT finishes its trials.
The services under study include video-on-demand, a new kind of so-called interactive multimedia service whereby TV viewers can pick any video from a central, computerized library and then have it pumped down TV cables or phone wires to their homes.
