Despite vigorous White House lobbying, an influential business group voted to support a health-care bill the administration opposes.
The policy committee of the Business Roundtable, an organization of chief executives of some of the nation's largest corporations, voted to back "as the starting point" for health-care reform a bill authored by Rep. Jim Cooper (D., Tenn.) and Sen. John Breaux (D., La.).
The bill has been publicly criticized by Hillary Rodham Clinton and other administration officials, partly because it wouldn't meet the administration's goal of guaranteeing health coverage to every American.
Roundtable officials wouldn't disclose the vote tally, but a White House official said it was 46-14 in favor of the Cooper plan.
That suggests that more than two weeks of intensive White House arm-twisting urging Roundtable members to refrain from publicly backing any particular piece of legislation failed to sway even a single vote to the president's side.
In telephone conference calls among Roundtable members Jan. 13 and 14, the group's policy committee had voted 45-14 to adopt a resolution supporting the Cooper-Breaux bill.
The Cooper bill would provide tax incentives to help individuals buy health insurance, while the Clinton plan would require employers to help buy coverage for their workers.
In addition, the Cooper bill would seek to stimulate market forces to hold down medical prices; the administration plan would do the same but it would limit insurance premiums if market forces fail.
Hours before the vote yesterday, administration officials, including Mrs. Clinton, were still making calls to the executives.
The policy committee was acting on a recommendation from the group's healthcare task force, headed by Robert Winters, chairman of Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
The task force includes, among others, a number of insurance firms and pharmaceutical companies.
The Roundtable's chairman, John Ong, chief executive officer of B.F. Goodrich Co., said the group wasn't endorsing the Cooper bill fully, but he said it would be the best approach because it "fosters competition which yields a better health-care product for the consumer at a lower price."
The Clinton bill, he said, would rely too much on government regulation.
Administration officials expressed displeasure, but not surprise, after the vote.
"We think it was a mistake, and we regret their decision," said Jeff Eller, a White House spokesman.
"We will continue to seek constructive dialogue with members of the Business Roundtable and businesses throughout America.
The president is a lot more concerned about the way this process ends than how it begins."
Mr. Cooper, however, was delighted.
"I thought maybe the momentum had shifted against us," he said.
Along with statements this week by the National Governors Association, the Roundtable endorsement will hinder White House efforts to win approval of the so-called employer mandate, Mr. Cooper predicted.
Earlier, Mr. Cooper clashed during a hearing with House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman John Dingell (D., Mich.) and Rep. Henry Waxman (D., Calif.), chairman of the panel's health subcommittee.
Alternately brash and thin-skinned, he snapped at Mr. Dingell: "I look forward to questioning the chairman on his bills in the future."
And the Tennesseean's penchant for cliches clearly exasperated his older colleagues.
"I'm a New Democrat," Mr. Cooper said proudly in one exchange -- to which Mr. Waxman answered: "You're a young Democrat."
The major focus of the hearing was the Cooper plan's proposed cap on corporate deductions for employee health benefits -- a tax change that would yield substantial revenue while serving as an incentive to control future health costs.
Budget estimates indicate the cap would save the Treasury as much as $79 billion over five years.
Some of this would pay for subsidies for low-income people, but about two-thirds would pay for a new tax deduction to help people pay for health coverage.
The idea borrows from one advanced by early proponents of the managed competition school of health-care reform, who proposed that workers be taxed on any benefits above a basic level.
The goal would be to use the tax code to discourage excessively generous health expenditures, but the initial idea of more income taxes was unacceptable to many conservatives.
The Cooper deduction scheme avoids this problem by taking tax deductions away from corporations rather than individuals.
But it would tend to favor the wealthy because benefits redistributed in the form of a new deduction would be worth more to higher-income individuals.
Rep. Fred Grandy (R., Iowa), a member of the House Ways and Means Committee and lead co-sponsor of the Cooper bill, acknowledged it may be necessary to make adjustments in the proposed individual deduction.
And Rep. James Greenwood (R., Pa.), an important swing vote on the Energy and Commerce panel, argued for a more generous definition of what basic benefit costs corporations could deduct.
