It is worth noting that fresher winds than Whitewater Development are blowing across the American political landscape today.
There's much wonderment, for example, that "The Book of Virtues" by William Bennett suddenly appeared this week as the nation's Number One book of nonfiction on the New York Times bestseller list.
That a book of moral tales should overtake "Private Parts" by Howard Stern suggests that indeed some new voices are finding their way into the mainstream of the nation's dialogues.
Similarly in electoral politics.
Three new Republicans took office the past few weeks -- New Jersey's Governor Christie Whitman, Virginia Governor George Allen and New York City's new mayor, Rudolph Giuliani.
These three deserve attention because their early statements and actions suggest that U.S. politics may be taking a turn toward clarity.
Clarity is the theme we've chosen because at the national level it isn't very much in evidence.
Whatever the reason, the Clinton presidency refuses to come into focus.
The new President's ambivalent political character is frustrating because he succeeded a President whose politics had collapsed into a muddle.
The "New Democrat" who won the election shows up only intermittently amid the clouds.
Now out in the country come newly elected GOP politicians who are letting voters know precisely what they are getting.
Mrs. Whitman, who was inaugurated Tuesday, dispensed with the traditional high-flown rhetoric to startle her audience with a series of policy announcements:
-- A 5% cut in New Jersey's income taxes, retroactive to January 1.
Noting that when she announced her tax-cut plan during the campaign "the skeptics groaned" (actually, they mocked the idea as dead-and-buried Reaganism), she said: "If President Clinton and his Congress can reach backward into time and raise your taxes retroactively, your governor and your legislature can cut them retroactively."
-- She proposed eliminating all income taxes for those earning less than $7,500, and a cut in the corporate business tax -- retroactive to January 1.
-- And she explicitly endorsed Jersey City's school voucher proposal: "We should give Mayor Bret Schundler the green light to test school vouchers and invite the top school experts in the nation to measure the results."
The state's education establishment -- the unions, the school boards association, even the NAACP and NOW -- opposes the idea.
Mrs. Whitman said something else that brought to mind the politics of a former California governor who then became President.
She said: "Our principal problems are not the product of great economic shifts or other vast, unseen forces.
They are the creation of government."
Interestingly, Virginia Governor George Allen was making almost precisely the same point the same day in his State of the Commonwealth speech.
Gov. Allen wants to require a supermajority vote to raise income or sales taxes "to limit the expansion of state government."
He wants to require an economic impact analysis before any new regulations are enacted.
And he ripped into the spending mandates that the state has been dumping onto local governments.
Both Mr. Allen and Mrs. Whitman endorsed the three strikes and you're out plan for criminals who commit three major felonies, and Mr. Allen wants to get initiatives and referendums on the ballot (which New Jersey Republicans promised to do a few years ago, then reneged).
Meanwhile in New York City, Mayor Giuliani calls for privatization efforts (bringing up the rear after Russia, but better late than never).
The early days of the Giuliani administration are intriguing because New Yorkers, more than any one complaint, had become particularly morose about the general conditions of life in their city.
So the mayor has ordered the police to move against aggressive panhandlers and "squeegee men" and he refuses to meet with reigning demagogue Al Sharpton.
Again, all this stands in contrast to the general muddle in Washington, where seemingly no action may be taken that is not hedged in five directions to appease five entrenched constituencies.
So far these three seem able to actually think for themselves.
As to what compass guides these Republicans, Governor Allen explicitly connects himself to "our Jeffersonian conservative principles."
He calls it "creative conservatism."
Observers profess to be slightly surprised at the self-assured confidence with which Christie Whitman has taken control of her state's agenda.
Maybe it's not so surprising.
In 1990, at the end of a debate with Bill Bradley, both were asked which figure in public life they most admired.
She replied: Margaret Thatcher.
As we said, clarity may be returning to America's politics.
