At McCormick & Co., it's annual report seasoning again.
The Sparks, Md., producer of spices and seasonings has been scenting its annual reports with the aroma of a different spice since 1977.
This year's olfactory delight: Chinese Five Spice.
"I love Chinese food," confesses Jack Felton, the McCormick corporate-communications executive who produces the annual report and doubles as its master spice chef.
Mr. Felton contends that spicing up the annual report adds a pinch of fun to a fairly bland process.
He recalls that when he first joined the company in the mid-1970s, there were a number of companies named McCormick, including a securities firm, a ship builder and a bourbon maker.
"I decided we ought to let people know which McCormick we were," Mr. Felton says, "and the best way to do that was to let them smell it for themselves."
The recipe for adding the scent is simple.
First, the document's financial pages are printed.
Then they are run back through the presses, this time with the oleo resin, or essential oil from the spice or herb of choice, blended in.
Voila: a report with a whiff of distinction.
About 50,000 copies of the report are printed each year, and the cost of adding the scent is less than a penny a copy.
The aroma has a definite effect.
A printer says he once gained 10 pounds because the printing of the reports made him hungry.
"He sent out for food all the time," says Mr. Felton.
And one recipient claims that when he left a cinnamon-flavored report on his coffee table, his dog ate it.
Financial analysts seem to savor the report.
Lehman Brothers analyst Caroline Levy describes it as "distinctive."
Steven Rockwell of Alex. Brown & Sons notes that amid the clutter of his office, the smell makes the report easier to find.
McCormick tests all the spices and herbs before using them in the report, and it's a good thing, Mr. Felton says.
He discovered that certain herbs "smell like damp straw" when moistened.
More appealing scents: those derived from cinnamon, nutmeg, vanilla, ginger and allspice.
Garlic and onion haven't been used yet.
They hardly represent the sweet smell of success and are reserved for when McCormick has a bad year.
Says Mr. Felton: "They'll bring tears to shareholders' eyes."
