You say you're sick of the cold and the ice and snow, and you're looking forward to a much-needed vacation in some sunny Caribbean hideaway?
You've bought discounted air tickets, got a good deal on a swank resort and even booked the dog at the kennel.
But have you checked your insurance?
That's right, insurance.
While most travelers probably never think about it, the kind of protection they take for granted at home may bear little resemblance to what they have when they travel abroad, especially if they're venturing outside the major developed countries.
Medicare, for instance, generally doesn't pay for hospital or medical services outside the U.S. and its territories.
If you're covered by a Health Maintenance Organization or a Preferred Provider Organization, you may be only partially covered when you're outside the country.
And your private health insurance may not foot the bill if you have to be evacuated by air from some out-of-the-way spot with inadequate hospitals and flown back to the U.S.
So, before you start packing your bags, call your medical-, auto- and homeowners-insurance plans and find out to what extent you are covered outside the U.S.
Also check your credit-card companies to see what, if any, coverage they provide.
But don't automatically sign up for the special travel-insurance packages sold through many travel agencies.
This insurance, underwritten by a number of insurance companies, provides short-term coverage, including trip-cancellation protection and emergency medical care.
The price, however, can be relatively expensive: 5.5% to 8% of your trip's total cost, depending upon how many risks you insure against.
(The travel agent often gets a commission of 30% of your premium.)
And while some of the protection available could be a godsend in an emergency, a number of independent insurance advisers doubt most people really need a lot of the coverage being sold.
"Most of the travel-related insurance isn't worth it," says Robert Hunter, Texas insurance commissioner.
"It has too many exclusions and exceptions, and it's targeted toward inexperienced travelers.
Experienced travelers seldom buy it."
"Sometimes it's a waste because you already have this coverage with your own health-insurance plan," says Peter A. Dickinson, editor of the Retirement Letter, a Potomac, Md., newsletter.
"And chances are you can get a short-term rider on your own policy that will cover you and be a lot less expensive."
Evaluating whether the protection you get from one of these policies is worth its cost requires you to find out what the policies you already have cover while you are traveling.
Then you have to look carefully at the coverage in the special travel-insurance packages.
One of the most useful types of travel insurance covers medical expenses in case of sudden illness or an accident, and medical evacuation when required.
Companies usually maintain 24-hour hotlines, and once you call, a staff member takes charge of making arrangements for a doctor's appointment, hospitalization or air evacuation to the nearest approved medical facility.
People who've been flown to safety by a medical air evacuation from a remote spot say they were grateful to have the coverage.
One satisfied customer is Robert Bent, a defense-industry consultant from Springfield, Va., who found himself in deep trouble last November on a scuba-diving vacation on Grand Cayman Island.
He ended up with a case of the bends, which is a buildup of nitrogen bubbles in the bloodstream that can result in death, even though he says he observed all the diving rules.
Mr. Bent, 56 years old, had to be flown in a specially pressurized airplane with doctor and nurse to a hyperbaric chamber at Duke University in North Carolina for two weeks of further treatment.
The tab for the air evacuation: $14,000 cash upfront on the runway or the plane wouldn't fly.
Fortunately, Mr. Bent had special coverage for this catastrophe through Access America Inc., a Richmond, Va., travel-insurance company, which arranged for the flight.
If you want this special coverage, make sure any travel policy you buy actually includes it.
Don't just assume that it does.
Check to see that medical evacuation is a funded benefit by your insurance company, advises John Cook, director of the travel-insurance division of Travelers Insurance Cos., Hartford, Conn., a subsidiary of Travelers Inc.
It's also important to examine the limitations and exclusions in any travel policy you consider.
"You must look at the restrictions, the fine print and the whereases and wherefores," says Bobbie Sylvester, a Salt Lake City travel consultant.
For example, all travel-insurance policies have "pre-existing condition" clauses.
That means you won't be covered if you suffer an illness prior to going on a trip, and that same illness flares up on your trip.
But not all travel insurers interpret "pre-existing" in the same way, so it's best to call an 800-number to get the insurance company to explain what it means.
Mr. Cook says Travelers doesn't consider a medical condition that is controlled by medication a pre-existing condition if the condition hasn't changed prior to the trip.
For example, a person who was taking high-blood pressure medication but had no heart problems would be covered for a heart attack on a trip.
The most popular type of travel insurance is trip-cancellation and interruption insurance.
It costs about $5.50 per $100 of coverage, and covers the cost of any payments you've made if you, a travel companion or a close relative becomes ill before the trip.
Many policies also provide for a refund if you have to cut your trip short for such reasons as personal illness or the death of a family member.
Trip-cancellation insurance paid off last year for Anne Miglietta, a retiree from Palisades Park, N.J.
Her husband, Hugo, had to go into a hospital for an unexpected heart-bypass operation a few days before they were supposed to leave for a week-long, nonrefundable trip to New Orleans.
Mr. and Mrs. Miglietta got their $2,400 back from Travel Guard Internationale of Stevens Point, Wis.
But Mr. Hunter, the Texas insurance commissioner, says it makes more sense to him to buy a refundable ticket in the first place.
He concedes that if you get a good low-cost deal on a nonrefundable trip package, it could be worth paying for trip-cancellation insurance -- if that total was less than the cost for a refundable ticket.
Trip-cancellation insurance can also protect you if your tour operator or the airline goes out of business.
But you have to read your policy carefully, says Stan Bosco, assistant director of consumer affairs for the American Society of Travel Agents.
Some policies pay off only if the tour operator or airline files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection from creditors.
Others pay off if the tour operator merely ceases operations, the more common danger.
"Many busted tour operators don't file for Chapter 11," he says.
"Some leave in the middle of the night."
Travel pros also warn cruise passengers to be careful not to put too much faith in cancellation waivers offered by cruise lines.
These waivers, which often cost $60 to $80, allow you to escape paying a cancellation penalty if you cancel your trip because of an illness or accident.
But they protect you only up to 72 hours before departure, says Ada Brown, owner of Seaside Travel House, Long Beach, Calif.
If you cancel in that last 72-hour period, you have no waiver.
