The U.S. is poised to launch trade-sanction proceedings tomorrow against Japan over cellular telephones, as part of a broad effort to ratchet up pressure on Tokyo.
The moves follow the collapse of a trade summit between President Clinton and Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa on Friday -- the first time in decades that a summit between the U.S. and Japan has ended in failure.
The meeting was supposed to redefine fundamentally trade relations between the two nations, but instead resulted in stalemate and frustration.
"It is better to have reached no agreement than an empty agreement," Mr. Clinton said.
"We'll just cool our heads for a while," Mr. Hosokawa said.
Their comments occurred after the U.S. called off the so-called framework trade talks, figuring Japan wouldn't agree to the fundamental U.S. demand to set import goals.
Each side blamed the other's intransigence for the breakdown.
And each side proudly huffed that its leader had finally stood up to the other, breaking a pattern of recent years, when the nations signed trade pacts that neither liked simply to satisfy the other.
Indeed, many Japanese say the summit's failure reflects a maturing of the bilateral relationship.
Rather than trembling in fear over prospects of a trade war, many Japanese portrayed the summit as a turning point, marking their nation's growth beyond the "little brother" role it has played since World War II to the U.S. "big brother."
"Our relationship in this new era is maturing to an extent each of us respects and has confidence in the judgments of the other . . . but at the same time we frankly admit what we can and what we cannot do," Mr. Hosokawa said.
"I believe this is the relationship between grown-ups."
Those words resonated throughout Japan over the weekend.
"The Japan That Said `No,'" was the headline over Sunday's editorial in the English-language edition of Yomiuri Shimbun, the nation's largest circulation daily -- an allusion to a bestselling book published five years ago urging Japan to take a more assertive stance toward the U.S.
Both leaders stressed that they wouldn't let economic tensions undermine cooperation in diplomatic and security matters.
Mr. Hosokawa vowed, for example, that Japan would work with the U.S. to try to block North Korea's nuclear-weapons program.
On trade issues, White House chief economist Laura Tyson said, "Our position is the door is open for further negotiations.
But they have to initiate."
To get Japan to knock on the door with a new proposal, the U.S. is discussing a list of options meant to increase tension in Tokyo.
In response to complaints over Japan's policy on cellular telephones, the administration is planning prohibitively high tariffs on a variety of Japanese exports.
U.S. officials also said they expect the administration to approve by executive order the renewal of a trade provision known as Super 301.
Under that law, the U.S. targets countries engaging in "unfair" trade practices, and requires retaliation unless those nations change their ways.
Tokyo hates Super 301, which was in effect during the early years of the Bush administration, because it realizes that the law is aimed directly at Japan.
At the same time, Clinton officials said, they may begin to court allies in Japan's backyard, such as South Korea and Singapore, by conspicuously offering them trade and technology deals.
The idea is to remind Japan of its political and economic dependence on the U.S., but not go so far as to undermine the Hosokawa regime.
The Clinton team views the Japanese prime minister as committed to change, but dominated by career mandarins equally committed to the status quo.
The U.S.-Japan relationship "has to go down before it goes up," said a senior U.S. official.
So far, the Japanese seem to be reacting calmly to such saber-rattling.
Several cabinet members said yesterday that, while they couldn't accept the Clinton administration's specific demands, they agreed that Japan needed to cut its trade surplus, which reached a record $120 billion last year, about half of it with the U.S.
"Even though we haven't reached agreement, that doesn't mean Japan won't do anything," a senior Foreign Ministry official said shortly after the summit fell apart.
He said Japan would continue working to change laws and regulations the U.S. claims are barriers to entering Japan's insurance and government procurement markets.
Mr. Hosokawa also indicated that Japan will move unilaterally to open its markets.
"Soon after returning home, we will consider the problem.
Our side must come up with some wisdom, and Japan will do what it can on its own," Mr. Hosokawa said on his flight back to Tokyo, Reuters news service reported.
But Japanese leaders were virtually unanimous in asserting that they will no longer take U.S. sanction threats lying down.
No one suggested that Tokyo will retaliate in kind.
Instead, Japanese officials said they would refer U.S. complaints to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the world trade referee in Geneva, where an independent panel would review the legitimacy of U.S. charges.
The Clinton administration expects to make decisions on trade strategy with Japan over the next month.
But the cellular-telephone controversy gives the U.S. a quick-strike option -- and one that illustrates U.S. complaints about a closed Japanese market.
Motorola Inc., which has spent years fighting Japanese bureaucrats, complains of being denied "comparable" access to the Japanese cellular-telephone market despite a trade agreement promising Motorola an open market.
In an area south of Tokyo, Japan's Ministry of Post and Telecommunications paired Motorola with a company that also represents Motorola's main rival, Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp.
The result, says Motorola, is that its partner spends most of its effort pushing NTT's technology, not Motorola's.
So Motorola has enlisted the U.S. government's help in getting guarantees from the company and ministry that Motorola's technology will be made broadly available to consumers.
U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor said he brought up the Motorola case recently, and "so far we've seen no movement."
Unless Japan changes its view, U.S. officials said, the U.S. plans to declare that Tokyo violated the cellular trade deal -- the first step in imposing trade sanctions.
The advantage of trade sanctions, U.S. officials said, is that they get attention in Tokyo -- but take months to put in place.
During that time, the U.S. can try to coordinate pressure on Japan in other ways, and give Tokyo time to try to find a way out of its predicament.
Mr. Hosokawa's claim that he will try to satisfy the U.S. by pursuing deregulation doesn't satisfy American government and industry officials.
"That won't change behavior, and what we have to do is change behavior," said Richard Dyck, the head of Japanese operations of Teradyne Inc., a U.S. maker of semiconductor equipment.
"It makes sense to set `affirmative action' targets to change Japanese behavior."
Still, Clinton economic officials said they have their limits.
They reject out of hand suggestions that the U.S. selectively audit the tax returns of Japanese companies.
In addition, administration officials said they weren't planning a broad effort to drive up the value of the yen against the dollar.
A stronger yen helps U.S. exports because it makes them relatively cheaper.
The yen did rise on Friday after the trade talks failed, in anticipation of U.S. currency manipulation.
But the global flow of funds is so vast, Clinton officials said, that the U.S. government can't unilaterally push the yen in any direction for a sustained period of time.
With the U.S. economy recovering and Japan's in the doldrums, market forces may weaken the yen.
If the U.S. tried to reverse that trend, and failed, it would make the Clinton administration seem impotent.
The U.S. is considering various other tactics.
It may tacitly endorse legislation by House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) to write into law the goals and measurements the U.S. tried to negotiate with Japan.
Separately, the Federal Trade Commission is pursuing an antitrust investigation, begun in the Bush administration, of the purchasing practices of Japanese car makers located in the U.S.
While the FTC doesn't appear likely to bring a case, the Justice Department also is looking at anticompetitive practices of Japanese auto companies, U.S. officials said.
In a move advocated by free-trade critics of the administration, who dislike U.S. muscling of Japan, the U.S. may bring a broad trade action against Japan at the GATT.
Such a complaint would allege that Japan's market barriers "nullify and impair" the trade-liberalization pledges Japan has made as a GATT partner.
Winning such a GATT case is a longshot, but would have the effect of putting Japan on trial for the invisible trade barriers that the U.S. says animates its grievances.
In the framework talks, Japan seized the high ground by contending that the U.S. was abandoning free-market principles.
"My administration is promoting deregulation," Mr. Hosokawa said in Washington, so the U.S. efforts "run right in the face of our basic tenet."
The U.S. demands call for a mix of government control and deregulation.
In the auto industry, for instance, the U.S. wants Japanese car makers to buy 20% more auto parts annually from foreign vendors -- a pledge that would require Japanese government oversight.
But at the same time, the U.S. is pressing Tokyo to deregulate its inspection and certification system and to loosen the grip Japanese car makers have on auto dealers.
Those moves would reduce the power of the Japanese bureaucracy.
"Trade with Japan wasn't free before," said White House economist Alan Blinder.
"We're trying to nudge the market to produce results more consistent with freer trade."
Nevertheless, the Clinton administration has clearly lost the public relations battle in Japan.
In the past, such a summit would have triggered alarm bells in Tokyo, with panic about fraying ties with the country's most important ally.
The weekend talk shows did carry such titles as "The U.S.-Japan Economic War."
But interest in the topic seemed to fade quickly.
By Sunday, the press was more concerned with taxes and Tokyo's Saturday snowstorm, the heaviest in 25 years.
The calm reaction to the summit breakdown was a welcome relief to Mr. Hosokawa, who has been battered by domestic political storms lately.
Analysts said, however, that the failed summit could start to hurt him -- if U.S. trade pressure worsens Japan's persistent recession.
"The average person prefers that he pay more attention to the economy than to nationalistic independence," said Takao Toshikawa, the editor of a political newsletter.
Japanese car makers in U.S. and Japan America to more than 75%; government Telegraph & Telephone and Japanese government with other industrialized countries competitors before introducing new products;
