The bears regained control of the bond market yesterday, pushing prices sharply lower after early gains fizzled and amid confusion over comments by a Federal Reserve official.
There has also been a fair amount of confusion for holders of certain bonds issued by GE Capital Corp., the financing arm of General Electric Co.
The company has made the highly unusual decision not to redeem $500 million of 30-year floating-rate bonds, even though it announced in late January that it was going to redeem them.
Some bond investors are worried that the company may be setting a precedent that will allow other borrowers to make redemption announcements and then renege on them at the last moment if interest rates go the wrong way.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dropped nearly a point, or nearly $10 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 92 3/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price rose to 6.87% from Monday's 6.79%.
There was no single apparent reason for the selling in the Treasury market, participants said.
Rather, they cited a general sense of bearishness.
Any rise in prices, traders said, was quickly met by selling.
"The market has proved it has a lot of difficulty holding onto higher prices," said Jerry Zukowski, economist at PaineWebber Inc.
The bond market began the day heading higher, bolstered by overseas buying from a variety of sources, players said.
As U.S. trading began, the push higher was initially sustained, although players said most of the buying was to cover shorts.
In a short sale, a trader bets that prices will decline and so sells borrowed securities in the hope of buying them back at lower prices.
Initially, buyers were encouraged by reports of comments Monday night by Federal Reserve Governor Lawrence Lindsey.
Mr. Lindsey was reported by some news organizations as saying that he expected short-term interest rates to be "three something" this year.
Traders interpreted the remark as meaning that the Fed wasn't going to aggressively push short-term rates higher anytime soon.
But an aide to Mr. Lindsey played down the remark, saying it was misinterpreted.
The aide said Mr. Lindsey was taking a "humorous" view of economic forecasting recently.
According to the text of the speech, which was delivered in Baltimore, Mr. Lindsey said: "Whatever the question is, the answer is three.
What will growth be?
About three.
What will inflation be?
About three.
What about short rates?
Three something."
Once Mr. Lindsey's comments were clarified, bond prices fell from their early highs as the market was unable to break above key technical chart points at midmorning.
With sentiment in the bond market so negative, buyers are quick to pull out, said William Shea, a senior vice president at Nikko Securities Co.
Peter Hirsch, manager of government securities trading at Salomon Brothers Inc., said that sellers simply wore the market down.
Even when the market was posting gains early in the session, "we saw better selling," Mr. Hirsch said.
The selling abated at midday but began anew during the afternoon in response to retail-sales figures that were slightly stronger than expected.
The Johnson Redbook Service reported chain-store and department-store sales rose 0.7% during the first week of March compared with February's first week.
Analysts and traders were inclined to write off the confusion over Mr. Lindsey's comments as a tempest in a teapot.
"The debate over what Mr. Lindsey said and did not say . . . really amounted to a hill of beans," said Ward McCarthy, a managing director at Stone & McCarthy Research Associates.
"The conclusion that you have to draw is, this market is still pretty sick."
As the Treasury market teetered yesterday, some investors in GE Capital's $500 million issue of 30-year floating-rate bonds fumed.
The company told investors on Jan. 26 that it would redeem the notes at face value on March 15.
But on Feb. 15, just 11 days after the Fed started to boost short-term interest rates, the company announced that it wouldn't redeem the bonds after all.
Under the terms of the indenture, every three years in March the company has the option of either buying the bonds back from investors or resetting their coupons at a rate equal to 108% of the rate on three-year U.S. Treasury notes.
This would mean that the coupon would drop from its current 8%, according to one investor, to something around 5.6%.
The decision angered Daniel Nagy, a bond dealer at Drake Capital Securities in Los Angeles.
"They did not announce that this was a mistake the same day or the next day or even that week," he said.
"They left it out there . . . and people bought and sold these notes" assuming they would be redeemed.
An official at GE Capital said the decision to redeem was an error.
Furthermore, the official argued that it makes no sense for the company to call the debt now and issue long-term fixed-rate debt to replace it, which some investors believed was the company's original intention.
Error or not, the GE decision "sets a bad precedent," said one large investor in the bonds.
"All fixed-income investors should be concerned about it because GE has taken a very liberal interpretation of an indenture," he said.
Any money-market funds that may have purchased the securities may be a in jam, Mr. Nagy said.
After a redemption notice, such bonds could be considered short-term securities by money-market funds looking to boost their returns.
The GE notes, for example, could be treated as 60-day securities.
But with the redemption notice rescinded, these funds may feel compelled to sell them immediately since they would be treated as long-term debt again, something money-market funds aren't permitted to hold.
The result is a big hit to principal.
Since the redemption was rescinded, the price of the bonds has dropped two points to 98, according to Mr. Nagy and other investors, or $20 for a bond with $1,000 face value.
New issuers poured into the corporate-bond market yesterday after weeks of sitting on the sidelines, but the rug was quickly pulled out from under some deals.
Nearly $1.2 billion of corporate issuance was sold during the session, excluding $650 million of debt sold by federal agencies.
Bonds sold by Public Service Electric & Gas Co., a unit of Public Service Enterprise Group, and Western Massachusetts Electric Co., unit of Northeast Utilities, reportedly had trouble finding buyers.
Both were sold through competitive bids.
"Competitive deals always tend to come richer than people expect," one trader noted, with the narrower yield gaps over comparable Treasurys than investors were willing to accept.
"The problem was as soon as bonds were priced, the market started going down."
But not every deal brought to market found resistance from investors.
Buyers reportedly snapped up all of KFW International Finance's $250 million issue, an official at lead underwriter Merrill Lynch & Co. said.
The financing company's 7.2% coupon guaranteed notes maturing in 2014 were priced at 99.525 to yield 7.245%.
KFW International Finance is a unit of the German public-sector investment financing agency Kreditanstalt fuer Wiederaufbau.
But both of PSE&G's issues were priced too aggressively to attract investors, one syndicate official said.
PSE&G came to market early in the session, selling $350 million of first mortgage bonds in two parts through a competitive bid.
One tranche, $175 million issue of 6 3/4% first mortgage bonds maturing in 2006 was priced at 98.771 to yield 6.902%, through a competitive bid won by CS First Boston Inc.
PSE&G also sold $175 million of 7 3/8% coupon first mortgage bonds maturing in 2014 priced at 99 to yield 7.472% through a competitive bid won by Kidder Peabody & Co.
"Investors are very defensive right now," said another syndicate official, Mike Turner at Prudential Securities Inc.
Prudential was part of the underwriting syndicate.
But a PSE&G official defended the offering, saying that market conditions were good when the debt was priced early in the session.
Officials at lead managers Kidder Peabody and CS First Boston couldn't be reached for comment.
The bonds are rated single-A-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and single-A-minus by Standard & Poor's Corp.
Meanwhile Northwest Airlines has begun its anticipated financing binge with the pricing of a $175 million asset-backed transaction in the private-placement market.
The unusual issue, managed by Prudential Securities Inc., is one of several pieces to Northwest's ambitious plan to reduce its $4.5 billion debt burden.
The asset-backed transaction provides a way for Northwest to raise funds at a more attractive rate than would be available through a bank financing or a debt offering in the capital markets.
S&P, for instance, rates Northwest's senior debt single-B-minus, which would make a traditional debt offering costly.
A spokesman for Northwest Airlines declined comment on all aspects of the asset-backed transaction.
Fitch Investors Service Inc. wouldn't comment on its analysis of the deal because of the transaction's private nature, so it's unclear why the deal didn't receive the standard triple-A designation granted to most asset-backed issues.
An official at Prudential said the deal was "well-received."
The issue was sold under the Securities and Exchange Commission's Rule 144A, which enables issuers to sell securities to large, sophisticated investors without registering the transaction with the SEC.
The company also is raising capital through a structured aircraft finance issue said to also be about $200 million and led by Lehman Brothers Inc.
Also in the works is a $400 million initial public offering, which is currently being marketed internationally, and a $400 million sale of senior unsecured notes due 2004 for Northwest's operating unit.
These two deals are said to total $1 billion.
S&P rated the senior debt offering from yesterday's session at single-B-minus.
In late trading, narrowly mixed municipal-bond prices were generally 1/8 point lower to 1/8 higher, traders said.
Munis strengthened with Treasurys in early trading.
But when Treasurys later fell, there wasn't all that much selling of tax-exempt bonds.
Some muni specialists said there was some bargain hunting going on.
"We're telling people to get started" with their purchases after the recent plunge, said George Friedlander, a portfolio strategist at Smith Barney Shearson Inc.
Judging from the warm reception for a number of new issues, investors were indeed shopping for munis again.
One offering attracting plenty of buyers was the New York City Municipal Water Finance Authority's $243 million Fiscal 1994 Series F water and sewer system revenue bonds.
The PaineWebber Inc. group that brought the two-part issue to the market repriced the bonds, lowering some yields, due to strong demand.
A highlight in today's session is expected to be the competitive pricing of California's $700 million various-purpose general-obligation bonds.
Losses yesterday in mortgage securities erased Monday's mild gains.
Late in the session, 7% securities for March delivery were down 9/32.
Government National Mortgage Association issues were at 98 22/32, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold issues were at 99 2/32 and Federal National Mortgage Association were at 98 27/32.
Prices were higher early, but that move was largely in sympathy with Treasurys.
There wasn't much chance the market would do better for a second day in a row, traders said, since there were almost no buyers in the market save for the occasional bid from underwriters looking to gather collateral for real-estate investment conduits.
The thinly traded market was dominated by professional players who, when not collecting collateral, seemed to be buying by price considerations alone, a trader said.
The handful of institutional investors who made a show Monday for the first time in days were nowhere to be seen yesterday, he added.
As for Remics, two deals were announced by the Federal National Mortgage Association, while the other was a Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. offering.
Collateral included 7% and 8% mortgage securities as well as interest-only and principal-only stripped securities.
The deals totaled $1.1 billion.
Lauren Young contributed to this article.
