"Bona kato, venu, venu," says Helen Fantom, a rosy-cheeked accountant, calling to her cat.
And Vera, the bona kato (good cat), obligingly venas (comes).
Vera no doubt is one of the few felines in the world to respond to Esperanto.
But then that's to be expected in the Fantom household, one of the few families of native Esperantists in the world.
It's natural to address animals in Esperanto," explains Ian Fantom, who with his wife taught their three children -- Gavan, age 15, Rolf, 13 and Petra, 9 -- to speak the invented international language of Esperanto before they learned English.
"People say it's not a natural language," says Rolf.
"But it was made for communication, and that's what we use it for."
The problem is, to communicate with whom?
Far from sweeping the world, as its backers once hoped, Esperanto has never, and most likely will never, become more than a quirky fad for intellectuals and utopians.
There are Esperanto clubs for everything from chess and gardening to stamp-collecting and nudism.
Esperanto congresses in cities such as Vienna and Beijing attract throngs each year.
But the world population of Esperanto speakers probably adds up to a few hundred thousand at most.
Native speakers, such as the Fantoms, number far fewer.
Esperanto, sighs Milo Simojevic, the Yugoslavian-born secretary general of the World Esperanto Association, based in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, "is like world peace: It's a nice ideal, but it won't happen any sooner than other nice ideals."
For enthusiasts, the rest of the world's near-total indifference is a source of constant frustration.
Theoretically, today's boom in travel and telecommunications should favor a universal language.
From China to Chile, more and more people are coming into contact with people they can't communicate with.
In the world of Esperanto, the Tower of Babel is just a piece of surplus real estate.
But prospects for Esperanto seem to be growing bleaker, not better.
The fall of Communist regimes that once gave Esperanto backing because of its internationalist overtones has removed a major support.
Polish radio still broadcasts programs in Esperanto, and China subsidizes an Esperanto magazine.
But sponsorship elsewhere is dwindling, as budget-trimming bites.
Moreover, new technologies hold out the prospect of automatic translation and voice-interpretation via computers.
Adding insult to injury, Esperanto is facing competition from upstart rivals such as Glosa, a synthetic language based on Latin and Greek whose promoters claim it is easier to learn.
An artificial idiom dreamed up over 100 years ago by a Polish ophthalmologist, Lazar Ludwik Zamenhof, Esperanto does have advantages over most national languages.
Its grammar is simple and its pronunciation straightforward.
Suffixes such as -o (for nouns), -a (for adjectives) and -e (for adverbs) show the functions of words.
Take the root bird-.
From it, you can get birdo, meaning a bird, birdi (to be a bird), birdeca (birdlike), flugi birde (to fly like a bird) and birdkanto (bird-song), plus a host of other words.
In theory, says Jorge Camacho, who teaches Esperanto classes in Madrid, "anyone can be the world's best speaker of Esperanto."
But as a hodgepodge of English, French and German, with a dash of Latin and Greek thrown in, Esperanto makes some language lovers' hair stand on end.
Written, it looks like a cross between Romanian and Bulgarian; spoken, it sounds a bit like Spanish, with some odd English and other languages.
"I hate it," fumes Wim Meeuws, the multilingual proprietor of a bookshop in Oxford, who refuses to stock Esperanto books.
Nonsense, say Esperantists.
"It's a beautiful language," insists Toon Witkom, a Dutch software engineer who learned Esperanto a few years ago, when he was working on a project to use it in computerized translation.
But even he concedes that "you can easily live without ever coming into contact with Esperanto."
Don't tell that to the Fantoms.
At the door of their red-brick home here in southern Anglio -- Esperanto for England -- visitors are greeted by a wooden plaque bearing the Esperanto symbol, a green star.
Tables, shelves and floors in the living room are cluttered with books -- George Orwell's Besto Farmo (Animal Farm), Agatha Christie's Murdo en la Orienta Kespreso (Murder on the Orient Express) and Hans Christian Andersen's La Marvirineto (The Little Mermaid).
Another room houses tomes that once belonged to Mrs. Fantom's Dutch father and English mother, Esperanto enthusiasts who met at an Esperanto congress in the late 1930s and taught their children the language in secrecy in wartime Amsterdam.
Mr. Fantom first learned the language as a teenager.
Heedless of the world's lack of interest, the Fantoms speak English at work or with friends, but often lapse into Esperanto at home with each other.
Their son Gavan's first word, when he was nearly one year old, was "Ne," Esperanto for "No."
As youngsters, the Fantom children sometimes had difficulty with English.
Rolf recalls having to explain to Petra in Esperanto things that other people, such as their paternal grandparents, said to her in English.
They also suffered occasional ribbing from schoolmates.
"People sometimes ask, `How do you say you are an idiot?' and I tell them the Esperanto words for `I am an idiot,'" says Rolf.
In arguments over which language is better, English or Esperanto, he adds, "I always seem to win.
Esperanto is easy to learn and it's neutral.
It hasn't got a country, so people can't hate the country, and Esperanto speakers certainly aren't going to invade anyone else's country."
The Fantoms' family vacations revolve around the language.
In the past year they have visited Germany, France and Spain, staying with fellow Esperanto speakers and attending last summer's annual Esperanto congress in Valencia.
On weekends, they take part in musical gatherings with other Esperantist families.
Apart from Esperanto's usefulness for international communication, Mr. Fantom, a balding, bespectacled computer scientist, stresses its educational value.
Children who learn Esperanto first find it easier to pick up other languages, he says.
And Esperanto's logical system of counting, he claims, is helpful for learning math.
Eleven, for example, is dek uno, or "ten one"; 20 is dudek, or "twoten"; and 22 is dudek du, or "twoten two."
So what is in store for the language?
If the Fantom children one day have their own children, will they teach them Esperanto, making them third-generation native Esperantists?
"It's up to them," says Ian Fantom.
"We're giving them the educational base.
They will have to decide for themselves whether to use it or not, as they see fit."
Sole la tempo montros.
Only time will tell.
