Well, today Webster Hubbell settles in as regent at the Justice Department.
Deputy Attorney General Philip Heymann headed back to Harvard Friday -- a "pushee," in the words of a Washington Post editorial.
Attorney General Janet Reno still sits on the throne, though uneasily, her halo askew over the departure of aide Lula Rodriguez amid vote-fraud suspicions, not to mention a stiff round of disparaging leaks.
It could scarcely be clearer that the administration of justice is now dominated by the associate attorney general, former Rose Law Firm partner of the First Lady, Sugar Bowl tackle and big Friend of Bill.
Just in case anyone missed the point, when Mr. Heymann decided to go sooner rather than later, he told Mr. Hubbell, not Ms. Reno.
Indeed, in explaining his conflict of "management style" with Ms. Reno, he told U.S. News, "When it comes to giving regular Justice input into administration policies, we have relied too exclusively on Webb Hubbell's free and comfortable access to the White House.
And although Webb is effective, there are costs to such an informal and ad hoc approach."
In our earlier scrutiny -- Who Is Webster Hubbell-I, II, III and IV -- we quoted Ms. Reno on ABC saying that during the Waco fiasco the President never spoke to her, only to Webb.
So it is of some moment that the regent has problems of his own, stemming not only from his friendship with the President and partnership with the First Lady, but his own actions in a Whitewater-related lawsuit.
The suit was against the Little Rock accounting firm of Frost and Co., over the audit the Rose Law Firm had used to help persuade regulators not to close Madison Guaranty, the thrift run by the Clintons' Whitewater partner James McDougal.
The FDIC hired Rose on the basis of the representation by the late Vincent Foster that it "does not represent" any thrifts, Madison by that time being defunct.
So with Mr. Hubbell as lead attorney, Rose set out on behalf of the government to sue its former client's accountants.
The most succinct report of these actions is in the New Yorker of Jan. 17, which added that Hubbell settled the case "for a reported one million dollars, which was considerably less than the accounting firm's insurance coverage"; and that Rose collected a fee of $400,000.
The FDIC is looking into this matter.
Presumably it will eventually report that everything's OK, because back then Mr. Hubbell whispered into someone's ear that Rose had represented Madison.
But the question still remains, how did Rose get on both sides of these issues?
To put the sinister suspicion plainly: Could it be that Mr. Hubbell and Mr. Foster, recognizing that their friends and indeed their firm were implicated in Frost's deceptive audit, managed to insinuate themselves as the government's attorney so they could fix the ticket?
The Chicago Tribune has discovered two more cases in which Rose represented government regulators.
Its Nov. 3 report discusses suits arising out of the failure of two Illinois thrifts, First American Savings and Loan Association of Oak Brook, and Home Federal Savings and Loan of Centralia.
Each had started lawsuits, later continued by the government, against the Little Rock bond firm headed by Dan Lasater.
They alleged that the Lasater firm had lost the thrifts' money in unauthorized trades, contributing to failures taxpayers had to redeem through deposit insurance.
Mr. Lasater was a big contributor to the Clinton gubernatorial campaigns and a big underwriter of Arkansas bond issues.
Also a benefactor who provided Roger Clinton, the President's brother, a job and money for debts connected to his drug problem.
Mr. Lasater was also the host of lavish parties, leading to his own conviction and jailing on cocaine charges.
The Rose firm landed the government's First American case shortly after taking on the Madison one.
The Tribune reported that while Mr. Hubbell handled most of the S&L work, this case was assigned to Mr. Foster and Hillary Clinton.
The Home Federal thrift had hired Rose before being seized by the government; but there is a controversy about Mr. Lasater being represented by a recently departed Rose lawyer who'd worked on the First American suit with Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Foster.
The Home Federal case, filed at $4.6 million, was settled for $250,000 on Mr. Foster's advice.
The First American case, filed at $3.3 million, was settled for $200,000.
An FDIC spokesman has reassured our reporter that so far as they have determined, the First Lady was not involved in the settlement.
At the time of these settlements Mr. Lasater was in prison, having given legal authority to manage his affairs to a business associate, Patsy Thomasson.
Those who keep at their bedside a Whitewater cast list will recognize her name as one of the three White House aides to visit Vincent Foster's office the night of his death.
Not to worry; the regent at Justice has recused himself.
Indeed, the whole matter is in the hands of special counsel Robert Fiske, who can sort out the Rose partner's possible conflicts of interest.
Which reminds us, what about Mr. Fiske's own firm, Davis, Polk & Wardwell?
Upon inquiry from Senator Arlen Specter, Ms. Reno said that Mr. Fiske has taken a full leave of absence, which means something other than resignation.
Davis Polk is a sprawling firm with sprawling clients, Morgan Guaranty for starters.
Seems to us there's a potential for conflict of interest with practically the whole world.
Again, not to worry: Ms. Reno told the Senator that Mr. Fiske gave assurances he was not aware of any Davis Polk client involved in Whitewater.
When the special counsel gets around to learning something about Whitewater, he will discover its largest single transaction was a land deal with International Paper Co., which standard compilations list among Davis Polk's prominent clients.
Last week the Washington Times reported that anonymous sources at the Rose Law Firm said it was shredding documents relating to Whitewater.
The Associated Press inquired at Mr. Fiske's Little Rock office and reported, "`Mr. Fiske is aware of the Washington Times report on shredding of documents.
That will be investigated by his office,' said a staff assistant who would identify herself only as Joyce."
Reuters also found Joyce while seeking Mr. Fiske in Little Rock, reporting that his office is unmarked but has a black electronic keypad beside the door.
But, not to worry.
Reports say Mr. Fiske has leased his offices for three years.
Which is to say, beyond the next Presidential election.
What all of these issues need is a good airing and explanation, not to a court but to the American public.
While Congressional Democrats are hesitant, the vehicle for such an airing will soon be available.
There will have to be confirmation hearings for Mr. Heymann's successor; the rumored designee is Pentagon counsel Jamie Gorelick, who shares with Mr. Fiske the distinction of having been one of Clark Clifford's lawyers in the BCCI case.
As a deputy is considered, Mr. Hubbell's regency at Justice is surely relevant.
All that's necessary is for the Republican minority on Judiciary to follow the example freshman Senator Lauch Faircloth is setting on the Banking Committee, and start asking the obvious questions.
