Has Attorney General Dan Morales taken the teeth out of consumer protection?
Under former attorneys general, consumer protection was elevated to a top priority.
By pursuing trade schools, pyramid schemes and misleading advertising, the state won a national reputation for tough enforcement -- and the enmity of business, which complained about activism run amok.
Now, consumer groups fear, the pendulum may be swinging the other way.
They say the attorney general's consumer-protection division has become noticeably less aggressive in the past few years.
What's more, over the past two months, a half-dozen of the agency's top consumer lawyers have been fired or left the agency, leaving the fate of scores of cases up in the air; some of the positions won't be filled.
And the consumer-protection operation recently was merged into the attorney general's antitrust division, and its chief given new tasks.
"Anytime you make that kind of mass change, it causes people to worry about your commitment," says Tom Smith, state director of Public Citizen, the consumer group based in Washington, D.C.
Nonsense, says a spokesman for Mr. Morales, who became attorney general in 1991.
The firings, he says, don't signal any policy change, but are merely unrelated personnel decisions.
"We're not going to get into explaining our management decisions, except that they are good decisions," says the spokesman, Ron Dusek.
For consumer groups, as well as for the fired attorneys, the test of Mr. Morales's dedication will come in a handful of issues -- including credit insurance, utility regulation and charity care.
"We're going to be holding Dan to his promise that this isn't a backing away from his protection of consumers," Mr. Smith says.
The agency also agrees that the changes should be judged by the results.
Says Mr. Dusek: "It's just one of those wait-and-watch situations."
With that in mind, here are a handful of consumer issues that bear watching.
During the 1980s, Texas played a leading role in multistate investigations into deceptive or misleading advertising by prominent national companies.
The office took on airlines over their fare advertising, and challenged Quaker Oats Co. and Kellogg Co. over claims about the health properties of their cereals.
Its best-known case involved an ad from Volvo Cars of North America, which showed a Volvo surviving a monster truck's efforts to crush it.
An investigation by William Goodman, one of the fired assistant attorneys general, found that the car's frame had been supported by steel beams.
Many of the advertising cases were led by Stephen Gardner, an outspoken assistant attorney general who was fired by Mr. Morales in December 1991.
Mr. Smith of Public Citizen and Mr. Gardner say that deceptive advertising has been a low priority for the attorney general's office since Mr. Gardner left.
"Marketers have had a get-out-of-jail-free card for years," says Mr. Gardner, now an attorney in Dallas specializing in consumer-fraud issues.
Mr. Dusek says that outrageous ads, like the Volvo spot, will continue to provoke a response.
But, he adds, "those are one-in-a-million cases."
And going after claims by national advertisers is less important than targeting other kinds of consumer fraud-such as in the nursing-home industry, he says.
An earlier probe into cruise-line advertising, for example, might not happen today.
"People who are able to afford cruise trips probably need our help less than children, the poor and the elderly," Mr. Dusek says.
But Mr. Smith says that view is too narrow.
Cracking down on deceptive advertising, he says, has a broad, and powerful, impact.
"It's where limits are put on the behavior of companies," he says.
Aggressive investigation into some important insurance-consumer issues has stalled, says Ed Salazar, who was dismissed as an assistant attorney general in December.
Mr. Salazar says he was fired because he wouldn't go along with the attorney general's decision in November to drop a lawsuit against Texas Farm Bureau Underwriters Co.
The lawsuit, filed in October in Travis County district court, accused the property and casualty insurer of overcharging for insurance on pleasure boats.
The insurer has denied the charges.
The same lawsuit made nearly identical accusations against State Farm Fire & Casualty Co. and Allstate Insurance Co.
Mr. Salazar says he is watching closely to see what happens to those charges.
Amy Johnson, the state public insurance counsel, whose job is to represent the interests of consumers in insurance matters, is also distressed by the attorney general's decision late last year to drop a lawsuit against two furniture retailers, Lack's Furniture Center Inc. of Victoria and J. Edelstein Furniture Co. of McAllen.
The lawsuit, filed in Travis County district court, charged the retailers with deceptive-trade practices related to credit-insurance policies, which pay off installment loans if the customer dies or is disabled.
A spokeswoman for Edelstein declines comment on the lawsuit; the president of Lack's denies the charges.
"It's definitely significant that the cases were dropped," Ms. Johnson says.
"It's pretty disturbing.
You have to be willing to file cases, pursue cases, commit resources and win them."
Mr. Salazar, who was involved in the credit-insurance cases, believes they were dropped because the companies put pressure on Mr. Morales.
He suspects that similar pressure caused the attorney general to end a credit-insurance investigation of auto dealerships last summer.
"Essentially the whole idea of credit insurance has been dropped," he says.
Mr. Dusek says the attorney general decided to abandon the lawsuits against the furniture retailers because of flaws in the case.
And he insists the agency hasn't abandoned credit-insurance cases.
Instead, the agency has decided that it's more cost-effective to take on the small number of insurers who make the policies available, rather than the thousands of retailers who sell them, even though both can violate the law.
The agency has lawsuits pending against 10 insurers, and is investigating another 10, he says.
For the past decade, the attorney general's office has been one of the most active and aggressive parties in disputes involving telephone and electric utilities.
Assistant attorney general Scott McCollough was a particularly forceful advocate for holding down utility prices.
But Mr. McCollough was fired last week -- at a time when his section had more than 90 cases pending before the Public Utility Commission or in various stages of appeal.
Most involved arcane, but potentially crucial, areas of telephone regulation: connections into local phone networks, for instance, or the allocation of costs for telephone services.
"We're completely reconfiguring the telecommunications system," says Mr. McCollough, who says he doesn't know why he was fired.
In one case to be decided by an administrative law judge, Mr. McCollough is opposing a proposal by Southwestern Bell Co. to turn over maintenance of more of the phone lines to the consumer.
Mr. McCollough argues that would shift the maintenance cost without any reduction in the price of a phone line.
The attorney general's office and Southwestern Bell are discussing a settlement, Mr. McCollough says.
But he is concerned that his replacement lacks the detailed knowledge of the case to protect the interests of the state.
Consumer groups also worry that without Mr. McCollough, the attorney general's office won't continue to play an active role in shaping telecommunications policy for the state.
He is applauded for delivering a critical, independent analysis of the telephone industry's proposals for less regulation during the last legislative session.
"It pays to have somebody who has a pretty healthy skepticism about the claims of these companies, and to look really hard at all the hype," says Bill Magness, executive director of the Communications Coalition of Texas.
"There's a whole lot of ratepayer and taxpayer money at stake."
The personnel shake-up in the attorney general's office gutted the charitable-trust section.
Ann Kitchen, the assistant section chief, was fired, and section chief Rose Ann Reeser resigned in January to work for the Texas Department of Insurance.
When she was fired three weeks ago, Ms. Kitchen was working to implement a new state law -- which she helped draftthat established the level of charity care that nonprofit hospitals must provide.
Her allies in fighting for the legislation worry that her dismissal means the agency won't be forceful in monitoring compliance.
"The charitable-trust division played a very important role in exposing the problems in this area," says John Hildreth, Southwest division director for Consumers Union, the advocacy group.
"I would hope that the changes don't mean that the department is going to be any less vigorous in its enforcement."
Ms. Kitchen, who says she was fired after being told that Mr. Morales "was changing the focus of the agency," is particularly concerned that her former employer might not seek to plug a big hole in the law: a narrow provision added to it by a West Texas lawmaker that exempts High Plains Baptist Hospital in Amarillo.
She believes it is possible to challenge the exemption.
"It's definitely a violation of the spirit of the law," Ms. Kitchen says.
Mr. Dusek says that it isn't the attorney general's job to fix loopholes in the law.
"If there is an exemption, that's a legislative decision," he says, "and it would be up to the Legislature to change it."
Advocates for the elderly are w atching to see whether Mr. Morales backs away from what has been an energetic investigation of abuses in the politically powerful nursing-home industry.
State law gives the agency a potent weapon in battling nursing-home abuses: Its attorneys can visit facilities to investigate complaints without notice, and violators can be quickly placed under the control of a trustee.
Since 1991, the attorney general has taken over or closed eight nursing homes, and sued 30 others.
No one from the elder-care section has been fired.
But there is one cloud that concerns advocates: The section chief, Mark Chouteau, while remaining in the division, has been replaced by a private Fort Worth attorney.
1973: In the wake of the Sharpstown banking scandal, the Texas Legislature passes the Deceptive Trade Practices Act, which gives the attorney general's office broad powers to seek injunctions and civil penalties against companies that engage in fraudulent activities.
1975: Attorney General John Hill separates the department's consumer-protection and antitrust activities, creating the consumer-protection division.
Late 1970s: The attorney general's office pursues trade-school abuses, boiler-room operations selling fraudulent oil and gas partnerships, and abuses in the nursing-home industry.
1977: Texas joins in one of the first large multistate consumer actions against General Motors, accusing the auto maker of putting Chevrolet engines in some Oldsmobile cars.
1987: Under former Attorney General Jim Mattox, the attorney general's office reaches a settlement with Aamco Transmissions Inc., ending an investigation into charges that the company lured customers with free inspections and then convinced them to pay for unneeded repairs.
Aamco agrees to pay $57,000 and stop the practices, but admits no wrongdoing.
December 1987: Chrysler Corp. agrees to pay $1.7 million to more than 2,000 Texas customers after a multistate investigation, led by Texas, discovered the company had disconnected odometers on cars driven by company executives and then resold the cars as new.
October 1988: The attorney general sues Quaker Oats Co. over the cereal maker's claims that its oatmeal could lower cholesterol.
Quaker halts the claims without admitting any wrongdoing.
November 1990: Volvo Cars of North America agrees to pull a television ad showing a Volvo surviving a monster truck's attempt to crush it, after an attorney general's investigation reveals that the car was reinforced with steel braces.
The company agrees to pay the state $316,000 for investigative costs.
November 1990: Attorney General Mattox sues Houston's Methodist Hospital, alleging the hospital doesn't do enough to provide charity care to the poor.
In June 1993, a law setting new levels of required charity care is signed, and Attorney General Dan Morales agrees to drop the case in exchange for Methodist's commitment to provide a certain level of charitable care.
September 1991: Attorney General Morales forms a task force to investigate charges of ``bounty-hunting'' and other abusive practices by psychiatric hospitals operating in the state.
In January 1994, his office files suit against a Fort Worth hospital, alleging it paid a high-school counselor to recruit patients.
November 1993: Mr. Morales calls for a ban on smoking in fast-food restaurants, and his consumer-protection chief threatens to sue under the Deceptive Trade Practices Act if the restaurants don't comply.
