At a stormy nine-hour meeting, shareholders approved a plan to bail out Banco Espanol de Credito, the big commercial bank seized by regulators in December.
Shareholders also voted to bring a civil liability suit against Banesto's former chairman and directors for the financial damage allegedly caused by their management.
The bank's caretaker chairman, Alfredo Saenz, said the rescue plan would pave the way for Banesto to return to profitability within a year and to begin paying a dividend, possibly in 1997.
After showing estimated losses of 605 billion pesetas ($4.41 billion) for 1993, Banesto should break even this year, he told shareholders Saturday.
Although the restructuring plan was cleared with more than 70% of the votes, many small shareholders challenged a motion to write down Banesto's capital, because the move would reduce the nominal value of each share to 400 pesetas from 700 pesetas.
But no dissenting group had enough votes to block the motion.
Among the shareholders who approved the plan was Corsair Partnership, a $1 billion investment fund led by J.P. Morgan Co. of the U.S. Corsair, Banesto's largest single shareholder with a 7.9% stake, however, reportedly voted against the motion to take legal action against the former board.
Morgan's vice chairman, Roberto Mendoza, was a member of that board.
Banesto had losses of about 50 billion pesetas a year under Mario Conde, the bank's chairman from late 1987 until his removal by the Bank of Spain in December, Mr. Saenz said.
Because the bank reported a profit during each year of Mr. Conde's tenure, the estimated loss for 1993 includes unrecognized losses and financing needs from previous years.
He also acknowledged that the bank has lost 375 billion pesetas of deposits since its takeover, and is 800 billion pesetas in debt on the interbank market.
To meet its 605 billion pesetas financial deficit -- which gives it a negative net worth of 247 billion pesetas -- Banesto will write off reserves of 244 billion pesetas and write down capital by 48.8 billion pesetas, to 65 billion pesetas.
At the same time, the bank will defer 27 billion pesetas worth of provisions for pension funds, bringing its total contribution to the rescue plan to 320 billion pesetas.
Under the bailout program, Spain's deposit-guarantee fund will provide the bank's additional funding needs by acquiring damaged assets from Banesto for their nominal value of 600 billion pesetas.
To restore Banesto's capital, the deposit-guarantee fund will subscribe to a 180 billion pesetas capital increase, giving it a 73% stake in the bank.
That shareholding will be auctioned off in April to the highest-bidding bank or group of banks.
