Flying high can be dangerous.
After years of lush gains trading stocks, bonds and currencies around the globe, some of the world's savviest trading firms are being stung badly as one market after another goes against their bold bets.
Waves of heavy selling that began in currency markets weeks ago and spread to bonds and now stocks have caught some of these traders in an undertow that threatens to drain away the fat trading profits their investors have come to count on.
From blue-chip firms like Bankers Trust New York Corp. to investment gunslingers like George Soros and Michael Steinhardt, the losses that are piling up are already staggering.
Yesterday, rumors that Bankers Trust's traders had lost hundreds of millions of dollars in recent weeks created such a wave of sell orders for the bank's stock that its opening on the New York Stock Exchange was delayed.
Bankers Trust took the unusual step of announcing that it was profitable "thus far in 1994."
The stock finally ended the day down $2.25 at $78.50.
Shares of J.P. Morgan & Co., another big bank that depends heavily on trading profits, fell $1.25 to $66.25.
The setbacks include some of the big private investment groups called hedge funds.
A fund run by Mr. Soros publicly acknowledged last week that its trading operation had taken a $600 million hit in global markets, some of which has since been recovered.
And Mr. Steinhardt, the brash New York-based speculator, has lost between 15% and 19% in the funds he manages, according to a person familiar with the losses.
That is the equivalent of about $650 million.
All this is quite removed from the investment milieu of the average participant in the stock and bond markets.
Though many of these so-called little guys have been eagerly pumping money into markets both here and abroad for two years, they seem unperturbed by the furor surrounding the hotshots.
Still, some experts fret that if the big traders' beatings continue much longer, sliding prices for securities ranging from high-quality U.S. Treasury bonds to obscure stocks traded on exchanges in Malaysia and Peru could set others to thinking about trimming their exposure.
Militating against any mass exodus, though, is the fact that the economic fundamentals that lured investors in the first place remain intact.
The U.S. economy is rebounding strongly, with inflation under control.
Many emerging nations are continuing to grow rapidly.
And even recession-ravaged Europe is looking less frail.
"The heart is ruling over the head," says Hari Hariharan, managing director at Santander New World Investments, a money-management unit of a big Spanish bank.
"Everyone's running for shelter."
Losses first showed up just where one might expect: among those traders taking the biggest risks, especially hedge funds.
One of the biggest bets some made this year was that European bond prices would rise.
They borrowed billions from banks to buy bonds.
On the way up, the heavy credit pumped these funds' performances like steroids in a bodybuilder; with a mere $1 billion, an enterprising manager might control as much as $10 billion of French bonds.
When prices went the other way, of course, the heat was on.
Not only did the funds' borrowing costs rise, but the value of their bond holdings sank.
At the same time, banks that had extended them the credit began pressing the funds to ante up more collateral.
The squeeze forced the funds to dump an estimated $60 billion of European bonds alone, traders say.
According to one European banker, Mr. Steinhardt's funds were so pressed by his lenders that they unloaded $1 billion worth of mostly German bonds in a single day, through one firm.
Similar scenarios occurred in financial markets here, in Japan and in many emerging nations.
Many big commercial and investment banks don't just lend to hedge funds -- they act like them, too.
Their proprietary trading desks, which trade their firms' own capital, have mushroomed in the last few years, as banks have learned how profitable trading can be, at least in good times.
And the past few years have been exceptionally good.
Last year alone, J.P. Morgan had trading revenue of more than $2 billion, while Bankers Trust generated more than $1.6 billion.
Of course, any sophisticated player knows you don't win them all, and is prepared to absorb occasional hits in line with the risks taken.
But while the hedge funds may play fast and loose with their speculations, the banks generally have rules that require traders to get out of their trading positions if they lose a certain amount of money within a specified period of time.
Such rules are intended to limit the banks' losses.
But in the event of a market rout, the rules can exacerbate the slide.
"As the market starts to slip and slide down, they sell a little; as the market goes down some more, they sell more," says a senior proprietary trader at a big U.S. investment bank of his own dealers and those at similar institutions.
"They begin to cause what they are trying to avoid; their liquidation causes further liquidations."
Says another trader: "One guy starts to sell, then the next guy starts to sell, and it just has a snowball effect."
The snowballing is trying even the steely nerves of senior trading managers at the firms.
Yesterday, proprietary traders at Bankers Trust "were called off the floor, severely criticized, severely reprimanded and curtailed," says a senior executive at a big European bank.
"They've had big losses but not enough to take them out of business.
They can take a $250 million, can take a $300 million hit."
But even before the admonishment, Bankers Trust traders were under pressure.
"They, like everybody else, are going through tough times.
They have traders who have been told to stop because they've reached their loss limits," says a trader at another U.S. bank.
"It's called being put in the penalty box, and no doubt there are a lot of traders in the penalty box."
A Bankers Trust spokesman declines to comment.
Investment banks have another problem, too.
As market makers in various types of securities around the world, they are obligated to buy what their clients -- including the big hedge funds -- want to sell.
When investors are trying to sell positions of $50 million to $100 million, "you want to be there for your clients, but it is very difficult to protect yourself," says Pierre Duran, managing director in charge of emerging-market sales and trading at Bankers Trust.
Mr. Duran says that despite sizable losses in emerging-market securities in the past few trading days, his division remains "deeply" in the black for the year.
But he adds: "You win some, you lose some.
If you have to give a little bit back, so be it."
One way that big traders try to manage their risks is to have investments around the world in stocks, bonds, currencies and other assets.
The theory has been that because these markets don't zigzag together, losses in any one arena will be more than offset by gains in other areas.
But in the past few weeks, most markets have been moving together, and the direction has been down.
"It is amazing how these global financial markets are so much more integrated than was thought," says Mr. Hariharan at Santander New World.
Many analysts identify the root of the troubles in rising U.S. interest rates.
And ironically, based on widespread assumptions that inflation in this country is still well under control, it isn't clear that rates should be rising.
Nevertheless, rising they are, and that is changing a lot of investment equations.
First to feel the hit was the U.S. bond market, where savvy traders don't want to be stuck with low-yielding investments when they might be able to sit on the sidelines for the moment and invest that money later in higher-yielding investments.
The rising interest rates, in turn, sent a chill through the U.S. stock market, which had enjoyed robust gains in January.
From its high of 3978.36 on Jan. 31, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has declined 3.7%.
But the losses in the U.S. bond and stock market pale in comparison to the hits taken in certain European and Latin American markets that are much less liquid.
Those markets had been propped up as much by the huge volumes of money fleeing the exceptionally low yields in the U.S. as by any fundamental prospects for long-term growth and stability.
"What we're facing quite clearly is a world-wide sell-off in bonds," says Wayne Lyski, executive vice president of Alliance Capital Management L.P. of New York.
"If U.S. Treasurys continue to fall, I don't think you can have any real rally of consequence in any emerging-market country and maybe not in Europe either."
In Europe, selling was sparked by fears that the German central bank might halt the trend to easier credit.
The source of the concern was a 20.6% jump in a money-supply measure for January.
Nervous traders sold even though there were special reasons for the money-supply increase and even though an official said the central bank was staying the course.
Emerging markets have been particularly hard hit of late.
They had been enormous beneficiaries during the past few years of the decline in U.S. interest rates.
Investors were so enamored of the high yields offered by countries like Mexico and Argentina that they were willing to overlook how much such small markets could be jerked around by the ebb and flow of foreign investors' capital, not to mention their volatile history of political corruption, defaults and currency devaluations.
At the height of the love affair, brokerage houses like Salomon Brothers were confidently telling investors that these developing financial markets were virtually investment grade.
But all the enthusiasm hinged on one condition -- that higher returns couldn't be had in safer investments.
That's why the rise in U.S. interest rates tilted the risk-reward equation for millions of investors virtually overnight.
Suddenly, there was the prospect of improving returns in the relatively docile U.S. bonds.
To get ready to buy U.S. bonds, firms moved quickly to take their substantial stock and bond profits out of those overseas markets, touching off price slides.
The declines accelerated as highly leveraged traders came under pressure in Europe and the U.S.
Some chose to sell their profitable emerging-markets securities to use as collateral on other losing positions.
"These speculative investors have had problems elsewhere," says Ignacio Sosa, head of emerging-market sales at Bankers Trust.
"So the first thing they do is sell assets that have gone up the most."
So far, some $2.5 billion in red ink has flowed from the global portfolios of hedge funds alone, and that doesn't count the losses sustained by Bankers Trust and other big brokers and dealers.
Still, there is some early evidence that the worst may be over for some of the big traders.
Many have already been forced to reduce their borrowings, a move that will ease some of the pressure to continue selling.
David DeWind, a portfolio manager at Strome Susskind & Co., a hedge fund in Santa Monica, Calif., says that as of last week the firm had eliminated its borrowings, which had run as much as four times its total capital.
Mr. DeWind says he won't be moving back into big speculative positions until he is sure things have stabilized.
"We'd rather miss the first 10% of a move upward to see if it's real rather than try to catch a falling knife, and that's what it is right now," he says.
But could it get worse before it gets better?
A lot depends on the small investors who have piled into the U.S. and foreign stocks and bonds through mutual funds.
So far, mutual-fund managers have been conservative sellers, traders say.
But if a flood of redemptions from individuals should force their hands, a whole new wave of selling could wash over the markets.
Fidelity Investments, one of the biggest investors in developing-nation bond markets, says it is taking a cautious approach.
"We'll wait out the storm before we renew the big buying programs," says Lincoln Anderson, director of global research.
"Outside the U.S. Treasury market, we're adopting a wait-and-see attitude to see what the heck is driving this market."
