A Pentagon task force, in a move that could have multibillion-dollar implications for the defense industry, has privately recommended over the Air Force's objections that much of the maintenance work currently done by military depots be turned over to the private sector.
If approved by Defense Secretary William Perry and by Congress, the position recommended earlier this week by the task force would resolve a long-running battle between the military and the defense industry.
In the post-Cold War era, the industry has sought more of the military's maintenance and upgrade work, only to see it absorbed in-house.
The defense industry has fought for just the sort of compromise that is on the verge of emerging from the Pentagon.
The recommendation is especially good news for the aerospace industry, because the Air Force, unlike the Navy and the Army, has vigorously resisted curtailing its in-house work, on which it spends about $5 billion a year.
The task force recommendation appears to place at least two of the Air Force's five big Air Logistics Centers squarely in the crosshairs of the next round of base closings, scheduled for next year.
The five centers, which employ about 50,000 civilians, are located in San Antonio; Oklahoma City; Sacramento, Calif.; Ogden, Utah; and Macon, Ga.
In more good news for the defense industry, the task force also recommends dropping the practice of putting work up for bids from both the private sector and the military depots.
In one such instance, the Navy's Norfolk depot took away from Grumman Corp. a contract to strip and repaint F-14 fighters, a surprisingly complex job.
Grumman had been charging the Navy $120,000 a plane; Norfolk's bid was $28,000 apiece.
The defense industry had deeply resented such competitions, which it contended could never be fair, because the government didn't really have to account for its overhead.
"The playing field is definitely not level," William Anders, then chairman of General Dynamics Corp., said last year.
Defense industry officials were privately pleased with their victory, but wouldn't crow about it in public for fear of stirring up opposition.
Loren Thompson, a Georgetown University professor who has represented the consolidated views of the industry before the task force, declined to comment, as did an official of the Aerospace Industries Association, a trade group that has worked to move the Pentagon toward the new position.
Air Force officials weren't so shy.
Lt. Gen. Dale Thompson, vice commander of the Air Force Materiel Command, defended the idea of continuing the competition between the military and the defense industry.
Between fiscal year 1991 and 1993, he said in a statement, "We have realized savings of more than $353 million in competition between the Air Force and private contractors."
The task force's recommendations are expected to be endorsed by the defense secretary who by law must report on the issue to Congress by the end of next week.
But the recommendations will face a critical review in Congress, where many members jealously protect the thousands of jobs that the military depots represent in their districts.
Rep. Glen Browder, the head of the congressional depot caucus, said he hadn't yet seen the task force's recommendations, but predicted that "they will have a difficult road through Congress."
"What that proposal sounds like is exactly what the industry has been hollering for all along," said the Alabama Democrat, who sits on the House Armed Services Committee.
Also, the Air Force may take the fight to Capitol Hill.
But the Air Force's credibility with Congress has been eroded by its handling of the C-17 military cargo jet program.
Others predicted that Congress, weary of the squabbling between the military and the industry on the issue, will accept any solution endorsed by the majority of both sides.
The task force's solution of reserving "core" work for the military and pushing everything else into the private sector appears to pass that test.
However, that solution could provoke a new conflict between the military and industry over defining "core."
One Navy admiral yesterday suggested that his service would seek a fairly robust definition that would give his service at least 30% to 40% of the money it spends on maintenance and upgrade work.
Currently the services get about 70%, with the remaining 30% going to the industry.
