William "Skip" Moyer, 37 years old, a Federal Express courier and father of four, was recently shot and killed while trying to deliver a package in a drug-plagued Philadelphia neighborhood.
The news pictures of Mr. Moyer's body lying next to his truck transfixed delivery workers across the country.
"I could see that we're in the same kind of business and working in the same kind of streets," says Daniel Kane, a driver for Herr Foods Inc., a Nottingham, Penn., snack-food company.
"I knew it could have been me."
With the rise of crime and random violence in America's cities, companies that promise delivery to all areas, regardless of risk, are becoming increasingly vulnerable.
Their dilemma: how to fulfill their commitment to their customers while keeping their employees safe.
Even precautionary measures and guidelines are doing little to lessen fear among workers or to guarantee routine service for inner-city customers.
William Burris, an executive vice president of the American Postal Workers Union, says his 320,000 members no longer feel exempt from danger.
"Robberies have increased significantly.
There's a great potential for violence," he says.
In the year ended Oct. 1, there were 213 robberies of postal workers nationwide, as compared to 98 in 1989, according to the U.S. Postal Service.
Mr. Moyer was walking back to his delivery truck when a man approached, tried to rob him and shot him in the face, police say.
A 48-year-old suspect has been charged with the slaying.
The killing, the first of a courier in Federal Express Corp.'s 20-year history, has the Memphis-based firm reassessing its service in perilous neighborhoods.
"We can't just simply withdraw from high-crime areas," says a company spokesman.
As a safety measure, many drivers have been issued cellular telephones with instructions to call their dispatchers and make different arrangements for a dropoff if an area looks too risky.
Also, the company is beginning to double-up workers on trucks with dangerous routes.
Drivers for Domino's Pizza Inc., the national pizza-delivery chain, have been the target of many violent assaults over the past year, and the Ann Arbor, Mich.-based company recently dedicated an entire issue of its internal newspaper, "The Pepperoni Press," to safety awareness.
Drivers are instructed not to leave their cars if a delivery area looks suspicious, and after dark, dispatchers are required to call customers back to verify orders and phone numbers.
In some neighborhoods, Domino's refuses to deliver pizzas to certain buildings.
In others, delivery service is denied after dark in the summer.
A spokesman for the company says Domino's encourages store managers to familiarize themselves with nearby pay-phone numbers, and to reject orders from phones in dangerous locations.
"There are areas where we have had incidents, and we won't go there anymore," says the Domino's spokesman.
"Those are tough decisions because we want to sell as many pizzas as we can.
But we can't put our people at risk."
United Parcel Service of America Inc. has significantly altered the way it does business after a string of holdups in recent years.
If an area is known to be dangerous, the Atlanta-based company will send a postcard requesting the customer to pick up the package from the company's retail site, or "make arrangements to deliver at an alternative site out of the embargoed area," says a company spokesman.
But companies don't want to lose customers because of their attempts to ensure safety.
Indeed, competition is tough for inner-city customers, who range from mom-and-pop business owners to elderly people who regularly have prescription drugs delivered to their homes.
"I don't think delivery companies can afford to let one incident scare them away because there are too many competitors around here," says Jim Young, head of the Germantown-Lehigh Avenue Merchants Association, which represents 105 businesses in the Glenwood area of Philadelphia, where the slaying occurred.
Some residents of Glenwood say the man charged with Mr. Moyer's killing broke a code of conduct that is indigenous to America's ghettos.
"There are certain people who come around and everybody knows that these people are hands off," says Clarence Hester, a local community organizer, minister and self-described former drug user.
"Even people involved in the drug trade are appalled at this killing because they know that you just don't mess with government officials, postal workers, UPS or Federal Express workers, because they are all servicing your own people.
It's the law of the land."
Other Greenwood residents insist that there is no special premium on the life of anyone.
Last year, eight people were slain within a 20-block area where drug activity is heavily concentrated.
"God knows this happens all the time around here," says Mr. Young.
Mr. Moyer's colleagues are finding it hard to continue with their own jobs.
At the Federal Express station near Philadelphia's Center City, parking slot number 21, where Mr. Moyer loaded his truck each day, has been vacant since his death in December.
"He parked in that spot the morning before he was killed and no one wants to park there again," says Kathy Skalish, manager of administrative duties at the 80-truck facility.
Since the slaying, a number of employees have received psychiatric counseling, provided by the company.
And instead of reassigning one person to Mr. Moyer's route, the company has divided it up.
"We don't think it's right anymore for someone to have to spend their entire day in an uncomfortable area," says Bob Sladek, one of Mr. Moyer's supervisors.
Ralph Goff, who grew up in the Glenwood area, has taken over part of Mr. Moyer's route.
Not long ago, Mr. Goff had a package to deliver on a drug-infested street, just a few blocks from where Mr. Moyer's life ended.
As he approached the block, he suddenly pulled his truck over.
In his two years with the company, "that was the first time that I was apprehensive and uncomfortable delivering something," Mr. Goff says.
So he called his dispatcher and had the customer meet the truck at the end of the block.
"I couldn't do it," he says, shaking his head.
"It was the first time."
