The Asian Development Bank, in an unusually blunt bout of self-criticism, acknowledged that it has been more concerned with meeting lending targets than with the benefits of the projects it has funded.
And it promised to do better in the future.
However, planned changes may cost more money and could slow the pace at which the bank's development lending has been growing in recent years.
The bank's self-scrutiny, contained in an internal report released yesterday, follows calls by donor countries -- notably the U.S. -- for the multilateral lending agency to take a harder look at where its money is going.
"Many delegates pointed out the need for this kind of exercise," said ADB President Mitsuo Sato.
The 56-page report, which notes that about a fifth of the bank's projects are having some trouble, suggests a one-time "spring cleaning" of inactive or slow-moving projects.
The report blames the bank's "approval culture" (the desire to meet programmed lending targets) for both speeding up the processing of loans at the expense of project design and for "insufficient consideration of local needs, demands and absorbtive capacities."
For example, the report says, loan fact-finding missions sometimes start even before project feasibility studies are completed.
Another consequence of the "approval culture" is that project implementation doesn't get as much attention as do preparation and loan approvals, the report says.
Changing the bank's institutional mind-set won't be easy, however.
"Just preaching it is not enough," Mr. Sato told reporters, pledging "very deep changes" in the bank's corporate culture and procedures and more diversification in its staff.
As a start, he plans to put project-administration on an equal footing with project-processing to offer incentives for change to the bank's employees.
The report also advocates decentralizing bank operations for greater flexibility and initiative, suggests more regular reviews of projects, and recommends incorporating the feedback obtained from past projects.
Moreover, the report says loan recipients ought to be more involved in projects.
"We might have been too paternalistic to member countries," said Mr. Sato.
"We might have been spoiling them."
If accepted, the recommendations would slow down the processing of loans.
While Mr. Sato said he doesn't expect any decline in the bank's lending, lending growth could diminish from the 7% to 8% pace of the past few years.
The changes may also cost money, although just how much isn't yet clear.
"There will be productivity gains and some resource savings as a result of the implementation of some of these recommendations.
But the trade-offs between project quality and the need for more resources will have to be closely examined," Mr. Sato said.
Still, the report will probably help clear the way for a capital increase that was proposed by the bank last year but was stymied by U.S. foot-dragging.
Mr. Sato said he is confident of securing approval to roughly double the bank's authorized share capital to $46 billion.
Bank officials said they would have to drastically cut back on lending if the increase isn't approved.
The bank's shareholder countries were asked to contribute a total of about $1.15 billion or less, with the rest of the increased capital in callable equity, which could be solicited by the bank in an emergency.
With about a 16% stake each, the U.S. and Japan are the bank's biggest shareholders.
