The Federal Communications Commission voted yesterday to force cable television operators to slash their rates by at least 7% for such "basic" services as ESPN, C-SPAN and CNN.
Coming after last April's decision to force a 10% rollback on those same services, the FCC's actions will cut the cash flow of cable companies, impede if not block capital investment and hasten a trend of cable operators selling out to telephone companies.
The commission's ruling could not have come at a worse time -- just as telephone companies are starting to compete in the cable television marketplace.
Political and regulatory momentum, the convergence of technologies, recent court actions and the almost weekly announcements of new telephone-cable mergers -- all such signs point to a day in the near future when phone companies will be allowed to provide video information and entertainment programming within their service areas.
Yet the FCC, under pressure from Congress to set reasonable rates for consumers, created policies that will arrest the continued development of the cable industry and, eventually, impair the industry's ability to provide service to customers.
The telephone companies, meanwhile, will be under no such restrictions.
They have already demonstrated an ability to dominate any communications market they enter; in the past decade, for example, phone companies have acquired most of the independent cellular telephone outfits.
A similar phenomenon could occur along the information superhighway, unless the cable TV firms get some relief from the FCC's flood of regulations.
No other business on the horizon has the ability to serve as competition to the telepone companies -- and hence to preserve a competitive marketplace.
Even before yesterday's ruling, cable companies were at a disadvantage in the race down the information superhighway.
The seven regional Bell operating companies and GTE had combined revenues in 1992 of $102.3 billion and net income of $11.1 billion.
By contrast, the eight leading publicly held cable-TV companies reported 1992 revenues of $6 billion and a net loss of $600 million.
The telephone companies made dividend payments in 1992 of more than $7.9 billion, compared with $30 million in dividend payments by the eight cable companies.
Cablevision Industries Corp. is the eighth-largest cable television operator in the country, but consider how our company measures up against the eighth-largest telephone company, Pacific Telesis.
For 1994 we have budgeted $501 million in revenues, $238 million in operating cash flow and $55 million in net losses before taxes.
On the other hand, Pac Tel's 1993 results showed $9 billion in revenues, $4 billion in operating cash flow and net income of $1.2 billion.
While CVI has never paid a dividend, Pac Tel declared $880 million in dividends for 1992.
The FCC is contributing to the red ink in our industry: Cable regulation and the rate freeze have already reduced cable television revenues by $2 billion, according to a study by Paul Kagan Associates Inc.
By imposing further cuts in cable TV rates, the FCC is effectively guaranteeing continued losses for our industry while permitting our telephone company competitors to generate massive profits.
Reregulation will only tilt the playing field further in the phone companies' favor.
If Congress and the FCC persist in inflicting economic harm on the cable industry, they may be picking the winner of the economic contest now.
Jobs are at stake here.
The cable TV industry has created more than 130,000 jobs directly, while indirectly employing thousands more in related industries such as equipment vending, manufacturing and programming.
Cable TV is already operating in a very efficient manner: We have an average of 22 employees per 10,000 subscribers, compared to the telephone industry average of 38 workers per 10,000 access lines.
In recent months the Baby Bells and GTE have imposed massive layoffs approaching 100,000 jobs -- almost equal to the number of jobs in the entire cable industry.
The phone companies also have announced plant closings as they prepare to use the extra profits from these layoffs to enter new markets.
Forcing the cable companies to sell out to these competitors will not promote the sort of job creation and economic growth envisioned by the Clinton administration.
Instead, the FCC's actions will impede the expansion of the existing broadband communications infrastructure and postpone the day when the information superhighway envisioned by the administration becomes a reality.
If cable television is to be regulated, we need regulation that will allow our firms to grow, compete and thrive as independent businesses -- not rules that will escort us to the exit doors of the communications marketplace.
Mr. Gerry is founder, chairman and chief executive of Cablevision Industries Corp. in Liberty, N.Y.
