The nation's big brokerage firms are swooping in to try to snatch top talent from Prudential Securities Inc.
In the latest move, Merrill Lynch & Co. has hired Richard Gadbois III, one of Prudential's top-producing brokers who ran a five-person group in Irvine, Calif., that specialized in selling restricted stock for company executives.
Mr. Gadbois earned gross annual commissions of more than $3 million and helped win a big chunk of investment-banking business for Prudential, brokerage executives said.
Mr. Gadbois's departure comes amid several other significant defections from the Prudential Insurance Co. of America unit this year.
Among those who have left Prudential in recent weeks are James Curley, Prudential's futures chief; William Goldfarb, a top-producing broker, and William Bee, a senior block trader.
Meanwhile, Prudential recently filed court papers to bar Dain Bosworth Inc. from hiring away any more of its employees.
In papers filed in a Manhattan state court, Prudential alleges that Dain Bosworth wrongly induced 13 Prudential employees to leave, including a manager, assistant manager and seven brokers during the past five months.
Dain Bosworth, a Minneapolis brokerage firm and unit of Inter-Regional Financial Group, couldn't be reached for comment.
Prudential has lost about twice as many brokers as it has recruited this year.
Since January, Prudential says it has lost 141 brokers to competitors, while hiring about 70; the net losses represent slightly less than 1.5% of its nearly 6,000-member brokerage force.
Last year, Prudential lost about 500 brokers to rivals, while hiring 400.
"Given all the publicity we've seen over the last six to eight months, the numbers are well within what we planned for," a Prudential spokesman said.
Prudential has set up a $330 million reparations fund to settle federal and state charges that it defrauded investors in getting them to buy $8.15 billion of limited partnerships in the 1980s.
Meantime, the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan is examining the activities of Prudential and its insurance parent in a separate criminal investigation.
Partly to stem the recent departures, Prudential has begun offering some new brokers up-front bonuses of 50% of their annual production plus 50% commission payouts, brokerage executives said.
Typically, brokers get to keep between 25% and 45% of their commissions.
"We're being competitive with what other people have been offering in the marketplace," the Prudential spokesman said.
Broker turnover typically is high on Wall Street.
And fat up-front bonuses increasingly have been used by brokerage firms in recent years to lure big producers.
But the significant departures at Prudential underscore how difficult it is for brokerage firms to retain key people amid uncertainty and regulatory investigations, brokerage executives say.
Salomon Brothers Inc., for instance, was hit with a wave of defections of investment bankers, traders and analysts in the wake of its 1991 Treasury-auction bidding scandal.
The loss of Mr. Gadbois was a blow to Prudential, brokerage executives say.
That's because, unlike most brokers, who typically deal with individual investors, Mr. Gadbois targeted high-priced corporate executives.
He built his business by seeking out California entrepreneurs and then adding clients through networking.
Associates say Mr. Gadbois, 36 years old, successfully used his extensive social contacts to win brokerage businesss.
Before entering the brokerage business, Mr. Gadbois worked for three years at the Santa Barbara (California) Yacht Club, associates say.
His father, Richard Gadbois, is a California federal judge who last year sentenced Stephen D. Wymer, the Southern California money manager who defrauded dozens of municipalities of about $174 million.
Besides selling stock for corporate insiders, Mr. Gadbois operates as a middleman, putting executives together with money managers, executive-benefit consultants and estate planners.
He is among a new breed of "144 brokers"; that is, specialists handling sales by corporate officers, directors and others of restricted stock under Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 144.
Mr. Gadbois couldn't be reached for comment.
Prudential concedes that Mr. Gadbois was a big rainmaker.
For its part, however, the firm says it is focusing more on training new brokers than recruiting rivals these days.
Prudential says it trained 155 brokers this year, and plans to train a total of 600 by year end.
Three years ago, Prudential didn't train any brokers.
"Over the last two years, we got into a mostly training, as opposed to recruiting mode," the Prudential spokesman says.
Meantime, Prudential is recruiting "quality people" from other brokerage firms.
For instance, Prudential says it recently hired an entire six-broker office from PaineWebber Group Inc. in Baltimore.
Prudential also says it hired a branch manager in Seattle, a brokerage firm managing director, and a mutual-fund marketing executive from Smith Barney Shearson Inc., a unit of Travelers Inc.
