BankAmerica Corp.'s proposed $1.9 billion acquisition of Continental Bank Corp. is yet another sign that corporate banking has been resurrected in a new technological form.
A handful of major banks are no longer just lending money to companies, but providing myriad computer-based services that mate them to their customers in lucrative, long-term marriages.
These electronic services help companies manage risk, do business overseas and slash payrolls by "out-sourcing" many financial functions to their bankers.
Dozens of highly technical products and services -- from derivatives that guard against interest-rate swings to automated lock-box systems that ensure speedy deposit of checks -- are the hottest tools of the banker's trade.
"What's happened is that we've developed a whole series of products that employ advanced technology," observes Lewis Coleman, BankAmerica's chief financial officer.
"When you get wired into a customer's information system and they get wired into you, it becomes mechanically difficult to lose that business."
Expanding a new kind of corporate banking relationship is the driving force behind BankAmerica's $1.9 billion bid for Continental.
The Chicago bank doesn't have any retail branches.
It has 2,000 corporate customers, including such publicly held companies as Chrysler Corp., Deere & Co. and Allstate Corp., major private concerns and many prosperous smaller firms.
BankAmerica, based in San Francisco, wants to sell them services; lending money is just an entree.
The same strategy prevails at the other major banks that have mastered the switch to technology-based services, such as New York's J.P. Morgan & Co., Bankers Trust New York Corp., Citicorp and Chemical Banking Corp., and more recently, NationsBank Corp. and First Union Corp., which are both in Charlotte, N.C.
At these banks, profits from nonlending sources is surging, rising to 46% of Chemical's corporate revenue for the first nine months of 1993, compared with 40% in 1992, for instance.
At Continental, only one-third of roughly $1 billion in annual revenue came from lending last year, down considerably from 1992.
"People have been predicting the demise of corporate banking for 26 years," said William Vandiver, president of the NationsBank Institutional Bank unit, who has been in banking for 26 years.
And in fact, corporate lending as a profit center is dying, but the doomsayers missed the fact that "the corporate buyer spends a heck of a lot of money on financial services.
There's an awful lot of money to be made."
BankAmerica and Continental know the potential value of corporate banking as well as anyone.
Profits from that source have soared at BankAmerica to 50% of net income last year, from 25% five years ago.
The return on assets is now higher from corporate banking than from retail banking.
Continental came back from the dead by focusing exclusively on the commercial side, generating strong profits in the last two years, after a long, rocky rebound from a federally financed bailout in the mid-1980s.
Its return on assets was 1.2% last year, surpassing the 1% level considered healthy in banking, and exceeding BankAmerica's 1.05%.
"Whatever the mythology about how bad it is, corporate banking can be very profitable if you're focused and efficient," says Thomas C. Theobald, Continental's 57-year-old chairman, who will step aside after the deal is completed.
That is expected in the third quarter, pending regulatory and shareholder approval as well as a due-diligence review by BankAmerica.
BankAmerica has assets of nearly $187 billion.
Continental's assets total nearly $23 billion.
What makes these new bankers efficient is a mastery of technology.
BankAmerica spent hundreds of millions of dollars on an international computer network in the mid-1980s.
Now only it and a handful of banks -- including Citicorp and Chase Manhattan Corp. -- can offer U.S. companies a host of essential services anywhere in the world, ranging from foreign-exchange trading to deposit and check-clearing functions.
BankAmerica has an edge over other rivals domestically because it dominates the highly automated business of check processing.
Nearly one out of every eight checks written in the U.S. rolls through its massive processing centers.
For International Business Machines Corp., which recently raised $10 billion of credit at razor-thin interest rates through Chemical Bank, "relationships are everything," says Frederick W. Zuckerman, IBM's treasurer.
"Corporate banking in terms of lending money isn't all that attractive," Mr. Zuckerman concedes.
But for banks to get IBM's more profitable fee-based business, the company wants them to commit funds to a credit agreement.
"It buys a ticket of admission to the game," says Mr. Zuckerman.
It was probably a costly ticket.
IBM received interest rates at less than one-third of a percentage point over short-term interest rates, and obtained a five-year credit line, longer than what most banks prefer.
"Banks were nice enough to do that," he says.
But Mr. Zuckerman notes that "there are all sorts of fee-based transactions done with banks around the world."
IBM, for example, turns to its banks for humdrum businesses such as registrar and transfer agent for its stock, and trustee for its pension fund.
In addition, the computer maker uses banks for foreign exchange and derivative instruments that help manage the company's risk from fluctuating currencies (60% of its revenue comes from outside the U.S.).
While declining comment on the cost to IBM, Mr. Zuckerman says that margins in those businesses "are less tight" for big banks.
Hewlett-Packard Co. became a BankAmerica customer through the bank's 1991 merger with Security Pacific Corp.
In addition to credit lines and foreign-exchange data, the bank supplies H-P with a nationwide cash-management service.
"These services are necessary to run a business like ours.
We have to have them," says Steve Pavlovich, a treasury-department manager at H-P.
Beyond providing that basic service, BankAmerica helped H-P improve productivity within its treasury function.
Five years ago, H-P had to use employees in several parts of the country to coordinate cash collections.
Today, because of new bank technology, it can coordinate the function from just one location and with fewer employees.
"Banks are a tremendous source of creativity, of financial research and development.
In that sense, we are more dependent on them," Mr. Pavlovich says.
Nonetheless, some industry analysts aren't convinced that corporate banking is the gold mine BankAmerica thinks it is.
Until the past few years, losses on corporate lending frequently wiped out most, if not all, of the industry's profits from fee-based products and services.
Lending is temporarily profitable now because of low interest rates, they say, but when rates rise, banks may find the relationship game isn't as attractive for them.
As for their customers, says one analyst: "Corporate treasurers are fickle."
Foreign competitors with fewer regulatory restrictions in their home markets are mounting a formidable challenge with their own electronic networks.
Credit Lyonnais SA, Deutsche Bank AG, Swiss Bank Corp., and CS Holding's Credit Suisse have all targeted wholesale banking in this country, bringing an international expertise.
And Canadian banks are big in the cable-television market and in lending to energy projects.
Virtually all have both debt and equity underwriting powers.
Moreover, corporate banks such as J.P. Morgan and Bankers Trust don't have the distractions of big retail operations like BankAmerica and NationsBank.
"I've never seen a company yet that is a great corporate bank and a great retail bank at the same time," says Thomas Brown, an analyst with Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette.
But Richard Rosenberg, 63, BankAmerica's chairman, and Mr. Theobald of Continental see nationwide or global electronic services as increasingly attractive.
They say banks have developed many more products that now challenge the turf of securities firms, that the high cost of building computer networks and software products deters potential new competition, and that competition actually has decreased.
Many smaller U.S. banks have abandoned business customers in their pursuit of retail profits, only to find nonbank mortgage lenders and credit-card issuers driving down margins in that segment.
Japanese banks, formerly major players, and other foreign banks are in wholesale retreat.
Mr. Theobald, a former Citicorp executive who joined Continental in 1987, says the Japanese market share in business loans has fallen to 27% from 40% several years ago.
"That's not recognized in the marketplace," he says.
"It's almost the equivalent of the Japanese auto makers cutting their U.S. sales in half."
Mr. Rosenberg says the decision to expand BankAmerica's corporate business in the Midwest was made by the board some time ago.
It is believed that BankAmerica initially made overtures to Continental's Chicago rival, First Chicago Corp., but was rebuffed.
Richard Thomas, First Chicago's chairman and chief executive officer, will only say that "generally, everybody's talking to everybody."
Mr. Rosenberg then arranged to meet with Mr. Theobald in Chicago last August.
In early December, after more meetings with the Continental chief, Mr. Rosenberg ordered his BankAmerica team, codenamed Bear, to negotiate in earnest with Continental, which was given the name Condor.
A deal was struck shortly after midnight Thursday.
Under the terms, Continental shareholders will receive $939 million of cash and 21.3 million shares of BankAmerica stock, equal to $37.50 a share.
The price is a premium of 35% over Continental's trading level before the deal was announced.
In New York Stock Exchange trading Friday, Continental's stock jumped $6.125 a share to $34.
Mr. Theobald put Continental up for sale because it needed more financial muscle and more of a nationwide scale to increase its business with corporate customers.
After its troubles 10 years ago, Continental shrank from being the sixth largest U.S. bank to 33rd.
Mr. Theobald himself stands to make an estimated $20 million from stock he purchased over the years as well as from options granted by the company.
And Continental's management as a whole holds options valued at $75 million, a BankAmerica officer said.
(The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. estimates the government's total loss on the $4.5 billion bailout at $1.03 billion.)
From BankAmerica's perspective, there were some clever angles to the deal.
In a way, the purchase is like a leveraged buyout, because BankAmerica plans to liquidate Continental's securities holdings, cutting its size nearly in half.
As a result, Continental will be overcapitalized, and BankAmerica can in effect use that excess capital to finance much of the purchase.
By eliminating as many as 800 redundant positions and overlapping offices, BankAmerica can also cut operating expenses at Continental by about $90 million a year.
It can also use its low-cost retail deposits and superior credit rating to reduce Continental's borrowing costs by at least $50 million a year.
BankAmerica will shift its U.S. corporate-banking group to Chicago.
It named two Continental vice chairmen, Michael Murray and William Goodyear, to head the operation.
BankAmerica also plans to buy back $500 million of its own shares, which will prevent the acquisition from diluting earnings per share.
In fact, Continental's operations will produce a profit in the first year, and add modestly to BankAmerica's per-share earnings after that.
But BankAmerica didn't buy Continental for its inherent profitability, but for broad strategic purposes.
It wanted Continental's list of mostly blue-chip Midwest corporate customers, and to drive future growth by plugging them into BankAmerica's network of electronic services.
It found in its acquisition of Security Pacific that surprisingly few of these customers will leave.
According to a survey by Goldman, Sachs & Co., Continental has a significant banking relationship with 16% of the 1,000 largest firms in the country.
Added to BankAmerica's 29% share, the combined operation probably will have the most corporate customers in the U.S., vaulting past Chemical with its one-third share.
Getting such customers is a tough first step in corporate banking.
Once they are in the fold, BankAmerica offers them as many as 70 different products and services.
"Once you get people hooked with credit, you have to sell them other services," says David Coulter, a BankAmerica vice chairman.
"We have very few stand-alone credit customers.
If we had them, we'd have to have a conversation to get them to do more with us or we'd part ways."
For several years, the strategy has been paying off big, and as BankAmerica spreads more customers across its investment in technology, it could become even more lucrative.
Its pretax operating margins for investment-banking deals, such as the underwriting of debt, can run as high as 70%; for capital-markets operations such as foreign-exchange trading, 50%; and for cash management services, 30%.
The revenue produced by its trading operations alone has jumped from $67 million in 1986 to $569 million last year.
And as Mr. Coleman, BankAmerica's CFO, points out: "There is a corporate customer behind practically every one of those trades."
Jeff Bailey contributed to this article.
Source: Keefe, Bruyette & Woods Inc.
Source: Securities Data Co.
