In the feverish investor climate currently surrounding entertainment companies, reports continue to circulate about possible plans by Japanese parents of movie studios to spin off part of their assets.
The most recent of these reports, that Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. of Japan, was considering an offering of MCA Inc. shares to the public, was vigorously denied by executives close to the situation.
MCA wouldn't comment on the report, which appeared in Saturday's editions of the Los Angeles Times.
These individuals said a far more likely scenario -- but one still in the discussion stage and perhaps far-off -- was some form of partnership by MCA with a cable or telephone company, most particularly Tele-Communications Inc., the cable giant which has agreed to be acquired by Bell Atlantic Corp.
TCI has a bevy of entertainment assets concentrated in its Liberty Media spinoff which might be combined with MCA to leave outsiders with a 25% to 49% stake in the new company, and MCA with a stake in Liberty.
But again, with the consummation of the merger between Bell Atlantic and TCI months away, they caution that the talks may take a long time to reach fruition.
Others point to a historical reluctance for Matsushita to make a move before action is taken by its more aggressive competitor, Sony Corp.
Sony long has been said to be considering spinning off a stake in its Columbia Pictures and Tri-Star Pictures units to the public, and has advertised its desire to take on a strategic partner.
While denying that any discussions are taking place, individuals acknowledge that selling public shares might make good sense for Matsushita, and that a wide range of possibilities have been explored.
"People talk about everything," one individual said.
These individuals say that even if Matsushita did sell a stake to a cable or telephone company, it could also raise cash -- and give incentives to its U.S. management -- by making shares available to the public.
It would also give executives an idea of how the market values MCA.
Acquired for more than $6 billion in 1990, the company's operating results have been mixed, despite some bright spots like last summer's movie blockbuster "Jurassic Park" and solid theme park attendance.
But growing enthusiasm for the value of film and TV producers as the nation begins to be wired for interactive entertainment on demand -- an ardor that has valued Paramount Communications Inc. at more than $10 billion -- has made Matsushita's investment appreciate.
And Matsushita, with its consumer-electronics business faltering, might like an opportunity to cash out a portion of this investment.
