Today much attention will be focused on last night's State of the Union message, with emphasis no doubt falling on domestic issues -- President Clinton's favorites.
But the president's foreign agenda should not be forgotten.
His concessions to Russian sensibilities at his meetings in Brussels and Moscow earlier this month threaten to strengthen rather than reduce the division of Europe and to lead to a regime in Russia that could ignite a new cold war.
In past weeks, the president has done destructive work.
By refusing to extend NATO membership east, out of concern that it would undermine Boris Yeltsin, Mr. Clinton has in fact signaled that there are still two Europes, not one.
And by acquiescing to Russian demands that Moscow be allowed to intervene militarily in the former Soviet republics in the guise of "peacekeeping," he has set in motion pressures that will preclude stability in the region and the establishment of Russian democracy, and he has set the stage for renewed Russian-American competition.
If the first of these actions has been much discussed, the second -- especially its implications for Russia's neighbors, for Russia itself and for us -- has been largely ignored.
But, in fact, it is likely to have even more fateful implications.
Of course, no one would dispute that Russia has legitimate interests in these countries that should be taken into account.
But we should not concede to Russia a right to behave toward its neighbors in ways that we would not allow any other country to get away with.
Indeed, Russian claims of a right to intervene in former Soviet "space" represent, as it were, a revival of the Brezhnev Doctrine, the notion that the Soviet state had the right to intervene in any socialist country to defend the status quo.
These days, virtually everyone recognizes that this doctrine was harmful not only for Eastern Europe but for the Soviet Union as well.
Yet similarities in the current scenario have not been understood by President Clinton or his advisers.
Instead, Mr. Clinton, Strobe Talbott (the president's nominee for deputy secretary of state and currently a State Department special adviser), and the U.S. ambassador in Moscow, Thomas Pickering, have characterized Russian military involvement in these countries as "stabilizing."
This even when Russian force has been used to seize territory or overthrow governments.
Moreover, they have failed to respond to Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev's demands that Russia have the right to send "peacekeepers" into all former Soviet republics and that the international community pay for this.
Mr. Kozyrev, incidentally, made this claim not only in a private meeting that the Russian government has denied -- to the relief of Washington -- but in a Jan. 14 article in the Russian army newspaper.
As this newspaper's European edition reported early this month, Mr. Clinton is prepared to be extremely solicitous to Russian insistence on this point.
When pressed by his advisers to urge restraint on the Kremlin, Mr. Clinton responded that "you are right on the policy" but went on to say that everyone must "understand" what the Russians are going through.
Calls for "understanding" are fine, but they miss the point.
Precisely because the states of the former Soviet Union were so integrated in the past and because there are not only 25 million Russians living outside the Russian Federation but also 35 million non-Russians living outside their home territories, the divorce between Russia and such states as the Baltics needs to be clean and nonviolent.
Unless that happens, and unless we and the rest of the international community insist that Russia behave as we would expect others to behave, the risks are all too great that the situation will spiral out of control and that we will see the restoration of a single entity unstable within and hostile to us abroad.
The first victims will be the non-Russian states.
Russian pressure on the 14 new countries is already creating a disaster: First, it is undermining the legitimacy of these governments in the eyes of their own populations, thus reducing still further their ability to manage the difficult transitions we are urging on them.
Second, it is leading to the birth of anti-Russian nationalism among these populations.
When the Soviet Union collapsed, there were virtually no physical attacks on Russians.
Now, there are likely to be, which will make Russian military intervention more likely, not less.
Our failure to oppose Russian military intervention absolutely is reducing our influence in many of these countries because their populations increasingly view us as assisting the Russian reconquest.
The next victim is Russia itself.
A newly militaristic Russia will mean that Russia will have to maintain a larger defense sector in order to control the situation and that the military will have a larger say in what goes on.
Both these things will make the transition to a market economy and a democracy far more difficult.
But the change also means that Russians will not have to come to terms with their own place in the world, with the fact that Russia should become a country, not a cause.
The strong showing of Vladimir Zhirinovsky is a symptom of this, not its source, as so many in the administration seem to think.
But the final victims will be Europe and the U.S. and the hopes for peace and prosperity in the future.
Just as a liberal and friendly Soviet Union proved to be a contradiction in terms, so too will be a "liberal" Russian empire pursuing what its defenders in Moscow and the West see as a benign "Monroeski Doctrine."
In short, by catering to Russian sensitivities, we are not doing anyone any favors -- not the non-Russians, not Russia itself and certainly not ourselves.
Mr. Goble, formerly State Department special adviser for Soviet nationality problems and Baltic affairs, is a senior associate of the Washington-based Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
