In a move that signals confidence in the economic recovery, Ford Motor Co. plans to hire about 900 new workers for a third work shift at a Kentucky truck plant.
Ford, which has until now resisted the recent industry trend toward three-shift production, also is studying the addition of third shifts at other plants that build highly profitable truck models.
The moves escalate an industry-wide battle for share in the rapidly growing U.S. market for pickup trucks, minivans and sport-utility vehicles.
Ford may announce as early as the first week in April that it will add a third work turn at the Louisville, Ky., plant that builds its popular Explorer sport-utility vehicle.
The expansion is part of a plan to continue building the Aerostar minivan in St. Louis, Mo.
Ford is considering adding an additional shift this summer at its Wayne, Mich., truck plant, where it assembles Broncos and full-sized pickup trucks, say union leaders at that facility.
Ford officials say they are still studying that move, which could result in 800 new jobs.
Ford's moves represent a potential challenge to No. 1 auto maker General Motors Corp., which has seen its lead in U.S. light-truck sales steadily whittled away by Ford and Chrysler Corp.
Ford executives have been increasingly explicit in recent months about their ambitions to replace GM as the industry's No. 1 truck seller.
Ford also wants to take a chunk out of Chrysler's roughly 50% share of the minivan market by holding on to the Aerostar even as it launches its Windstar minivan this spring.
Although Ford makes the best-selling pickup, GM sells more trucks overall through more sales divisions, including Chevrolet and GMC Truck.
Ford's ambitions to gain sales have been frustrated in recent months by lack of capacity.
After painfully paring its workforce in half from 1978 to 1982, it was reluctant to add to its payroll.
It preferred expanding production through overtime rather than by hiring additional workers to staff extra shifts or new factories.
Meanwhile, GM and Chrysler have pushed ahead with plans to capitalize on rising truck sales by adding third shifts.
GM last month said it would begin three-shift work at two Michigan plants that build vans and pickups.
Chrysler is adding a third shift to its Detroit plant that builds Grand Cherokees, a rival to the Explorer.
Now, under new Chairman Alexander J. Trotman, Ford is reversing strategy and embracing three-shift production.
Ford recently sent nine officials of the local union that represents the Wayne, Mich., truck plant to visit GM's Lordstown, Ohio, assembly plant, which is operating with three work crews.
"I was quite impressed," said Doug Howard, union chairman at the Wayne plant.
