For the past year, Anne Watts and a dozen other artists have been "taking art to places where it doesn't usually get to go" and, she says, "finding art where it doesn't usually get found."
Specifically, nursing homes where people with Alzheimer's disease live.
Ms. Watts, a 31-year-old composer and singer in a rock-and-roll band, figured that artists wrestling creative demons might share a common bond with lonely people struggling to communicate at life's end.
Art, Ms. Watts believes, engages Alzheimer's patients in the moment and mitigates the loss of self.
The act of creation helps them express feelings that are beyond words.
When Ms. Watts proposed the project to Meridian Healthcare Inc., a corporate provider of long-term care, she envisioned something quite different from conventional art therapy, where groups typically are led through a task such as coloring.
Instead, instructors would be professionals working one-to-one with residents who choose their own artistic medium and have a free hand.
"The key was giving them control," Ms. Watts says.
A simple enough idea, perhaps, but unusual in the care of the institutionalized elderly.
More than half of the U.S. nursing-home population now suffers from Alzheimer's disease or some other form of dementia, and most exist on a regimen of sedation, TV and, sometimes, physical restraints.
Meridian was already trying an approach that dovetailed with Ms. Watts's plan.
Meridian, a division of Genesis Health Ventures Inc., has established special units at eight of its facilities, mainly in the Baltimore area, where demented residents are given 40 hours a week of structured activity.
In these "special care" units, just 3% of the residents require psychoactive drugs to manage their behavior, compared with between 40% and 60% of Meridian's other residents.
No one suggests that special care halts the progression of an incurable disease.
But people involved in the effort are encouraged.
"Most health-care workers underestimate the capacities of demented patients," says Debra McConnell, Meridian's director of Alzheimer Services.
Meridian agreed to put up $40,000 to pay Ms. Watts's artists for their time -- $75 a session.
She brought together painters, musicians, collage artists, a Trinidadian ceramicist and a Filipino quilt-maker.
Some had spiked hair -- or purple fingernails, leather jackets, dreadlocks: people on the fringe about to meet another, older fringe group.
Improbably, they clicked.
Sherwin Mark, a Jewish artist from South Africa, found himself paired with a German woman who had lived in Berlin during World War II.
Jawad Abdullah of Trinidad helped Louis Music, a former mechanic from New Jersey, sculpt car parts from clay.
Completing a batch, Mr. Music told his tutor with a twinkle, "I'm not going to charge you anything for these."
Ms. Watts is impressed with the give and take.
Nursing-home art "has got this random, selfless freedom that I've seen artists strive their whole lives to achieve," she says.
Thus, in some ways, the elderly became the artists' mentors.
"It has opened my scope," says 30-year-old Baltimore artist Lyle Kissack.
He sees contact with his elderly students as a way "to refill, to get human again."
Mr. Kissack likens his work with one 80-year-old woman to archaeology.
"We're rooting through memory to the past," he says.
When she has trouble articulating an idea and begins to fade off, "I try to redirect that into her painting," he says.
So sure are her brush strokes that the nursing-home staff finds it hard to remember that when she was admitted a few months ago, she had trouble managing a knife and fork.
After a recent three-hour painting session, she was tired but elated.
"I'm perfect," she said again and again, laughing.
Later that day at Meridian's Brightwood facility north of Baltimore, Lovisah ("Lovey") Bumgarner, a silver-haired Barbara Bush look-alike in pearls, dropped wearily into a chair before a blank canvas.
But as she became engrossed, the 95-year-old former nurse stood, without the help of her cane, laying on an intricate composition of brightly colored lines.
She has completed 15 works.
When introduced as a painter, Mrs. Bumgarner says, "Yes, I am an artist."
Art seems to help allay the terrible fears of elderly residents.
Grace Gunnarsson, an 85-year-old Alzheimer's patient, is tormented by the common delusion that her children are small, alone and in need of her.
Watching children play from a window at the Meridian home in Dundalk, Md., where she lives, Grace will say, "Those aren't mine, but I know they're out there."
The obsession seems to recede when Mrs. Gunnarsson paints, according to Barbara Fleming, a recreation therapist at the residence.
"When she's with the artists, she is . . . an intelligent, functional woman," she says.
Mrs. Gunnarsson -- who worked for former Vice President Spiro Agnew when he was a Maryland politician -- sometimes jokes that she is Grandma Moses.
Her work is representational, usually scenes of her childhood on a farm.
While painting a lilac bush, she identified by name its various botanical parts.
Pointing to her framed work, she says, "I did that.
Grace -- that's me."
When multimedia artist Cathy Leaycraft first ventured into a nursing home, she says, "I was horrified, thinking why would they want to be alive?
But after a while, I saw they weren't really ready to die yet, there were still things going on, spiritual kinds of things."
The genesis of Ms. Watts's project is a story in itself.
She was playing gigs on Embassy Row in Washington, launching an alternative gallery and volunteering in a Baltimore nursing home when, in 1988, she met John Englehart.
Then 81, he had been institutionalized since 1918, when he was 11.
Diagnosed retarded and schizophrenic, heavily dosed with Thorazine, he had not been heard to speak in 15 years.
"He was this horrifying, gnomish creature," she recalls.
"He fascinated me."
On one of her daily visits, Ms. Watts slipped Mr. Englehart paper and a felt marker.
He produced an intricate drawing of a windmill, and croaked out the first real word he had been heard to speak: "Windmill."
Scores of Paul Klee-like drawings and paintings followed.
Speech, too, began to tumble out.
By the time he died, a few months shy of his 85th birthday, Mr. Englehart had established himself as a recognized artist, selling a number of his works at a one-man show in Baltimore that was critically acclaimed.
He got a three-column obituary in the Baltimore Sun.
Though Mr. Englehart's awakening was exceptional, Ms. Watts says all her aged students have been passionate, all their work distinctive.
Ms. Watts, who says working with the elderly has helped her become less selfconscious in her own music, now plans to bring in art students as well as professionals.
Nonetheless, she is skeptical about the pace of change in institutions.
"It's scary for all of us," she says, "to think of a future in a lonely place where we aren't given the opportunity to do our work and where no one wants to hear what we have to say before we die."
