Rich Yarnell (Letter to the Editor, "Ethnic Identity a Part of Troubles in Ulster," Dec. 14) is confused about the history of Scotland.
When the Romans vacated Britain in the 5th century, the area now known as Scotland was divided among four groups.
One of them, the Scots, a "warlike Celtic tribe" from northern Ireland, lived in Dalriada in the Southwest Highlands, the portion of Scotland closest to Ireland.
Throughout the next few centuries, the Scots of Dalriada maintained their ties to the parent Irish kingdom.
In 843, through war and marriage, Kenneth MacAlpin, king of Dalriada, united the land lying north of the River Forth (north of the modern Scots-English boundary): the country acquired the name of the immigrant Irish Celts.
Only 12 or 13 miles separate Northern Ireland and western Scotland.
Throughout history, people have crossed over -- in both directions.
Travel has increased in some periods, such as the first decade or two of the 17th century, following the crowning in 1603 of James VI of Scotland as James I of England, and during the rule in England of Oliver Cromwell.
I grew up in a wool town in the Scottish Borders and never heard of any increase in the 17th and 18th centuries associated with trouble along the boundary between Scotland and England that resulted from union of the two countries (formalised in 1707).
Traffic between Ireland and Scotland (and the rest of Britain), involving both Catholics and Protestants, has continued until today.
Most of the Catholic population of Scotland -- some 10% or 15% -- is descended from Irish forebears, most of whom emigrated in the last 100 or 150 years.
My wife's father traveled to England around 1905, enlisted in the British army, was wounded during World War I and married a Scottish nurse.
Such intermarriage occurs in Northern Ireland as well.
Since the original Scots came from Ireland 1,500 to 2,000 years ago and the gene pools of Scots and Irish have been continuously intermingled ever since, it makes no sense to argue that the two groups are distinguished by ethnicity.
In short, the writer of your Dec. 1 editorial "Mayhem or Mayhew" was correct and Mr. Yarnell wrong about the sources of conflict in Northern Ireland.
What separates Protestants in Northern Ireland and their Catholic neighbours is culture -- religion, history, politics.
Protestants in Northern Ireland do not want to become citizens of a country in which the per-capita income is among the lowest in Western Europe and where the influence of the Catholic Church is strong, so that divorce is difficult and legal abortion, impossible.
(Remember the case of the teenage girl made pregnant when raped, who had to go to England to obtain an abortion?)
Protestants in Northern Ireland want to remain a part of the United Kingdom (of England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland).
If confronted by a similar choice, most Americans (including many Catholics?) probably would react in much the same way.
Tucson, Ariz.
