If Hormel Foods Corp. has its way, Americans will soon be feasting on sweet and sour Spam and teriyaki meat loaf.
Now that Italian and Mexican foods have become as common on America's kitchen tables as meat and potatoes, Hormel and other marketers are hoping their versions of Asian cuisine will spur the next ethnic-food craze.
"We think Oriental is the next direction," says Allan Krejci, a Hormel spokesman.
"We want to be a part of that market."
Hormel, whose mainstay products include Spam and Dinty Moore stew, acquired a maker of Asian sauces called House of Tsang Co. in 1992 and is now test marketing four cooking sauces with such ingredients as pineapple and water chestnuts.
A new television commercial aims for the mass market by showing three smiling Americans -- of Swedish, Irish and Hispanic origin -- proudly displaying their culinary masterpieces: Szechuan shrimp, beef teriyaki and sweet and sour chicken, all made with House of Tsang sauces.
Meantime, ConAgra Inc.'s La Choy brand, General Mills Inc.'s Betty Crocker division and Mars Inc.'s Uncle Ben's unit also have created Asian cooking sauces.
The aim is to create products with an Asian flavor and image but with bland enough taste to sell coast to coast.
Mexican foods quickly became mainstream, and many big food marketers jumped on that bandwagon: Even all-American Wonder Bread has a line of tortillas.
But Oriental flavors may be a tougher sell.
Although Oriental restaurants are everywhere, many people say they are reluctant to cook the food at home because they consider many Asian dishes too difficult and time consuming.
Marketers also have found it challenging to cook up a quasi-Oriental taste with mass appeal.
What's more, it doesn't help that recent nutrition studies found high levels of fat in many Chinese dishes.
So far, some of the new Asian products are growing nicely.
Supermarket sales of Hormel's House of Tsang sauces rose 27.6% to $4.6 million in the 52 weeks ended Jan. 2, according to Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.
ConAgra's La Choy brand, which started selling four kinds of Oriental sauces in jars last summer, saw sales of all its Oriental sauces rise 10.2% to $32.3 million.
But overall, sales of Oriental products are sluggish.
Total sales of all Oriental sauces and marinades rose only 1% to $155.7 million in the 52-week period -- a much slower growth than Mexican sauces, whose sales rose a healthy 8.6% to $685.7 million.
In a two-week survey by National Eating Trends, which tracks people's home-dining habits, only 8% of Americans said they ate Oriental food at home -- compared with the 43% who said they had Italian food and the 25% who ate Mexican.
A third of the Oriental meals consumed at home were takeout, reflecting the perception that cooking Asian food -- for example, chopping all those vegetables -- is too taxing.
Marketers are trying to lure reluctant cooks by making the sauces sound simple and familiar.
Unilever Group's popular Ragu Chicken Tonight sauces feature a new sweet and sour variety that contains pineapples and bell peppers.
And La Choy's Spicy Szechuan sauce, advertises itself as a "10-minute meal," because it already contains chunks of baby corn, bamboo shoots and mushrooms.
Just add chicken or beef, which most Americans were going to have for dinner anyway, and "it tastes like something that people have tasted in a restaurant," promises Kay Carpenter, a spokeswoman for ConAgra's Hunt-Wesson Inc., which markets La Choy products.
That might be a good pitch for consumers like Connie Kully.
The part-time antique dealer and mother of four in Omaha, Neb., says she owns an electric wok and keeps soy sauce in her kitchen cabinet.
But Ms. Kully says she tends to eat Chinese food at restaurants because she can never get as authentic a flavor as she wants when she cooks at home.
"I'll consider using it, if it's going to give me the same authentic taste as the Imperial Palace," her neighborhood Chinese restaurant, says Ms. Kully.
Still, she says she's worried these days about the amount of fat in Chinese dishes.
(Labels on the La Choy sauces claim they contain little fat.
But how healthful are they?
Nutritionists at the Center for Science in the Public Interest, a consumer advocacy group based in Washington, D.C., recently analyzed a half-cup serving of La Choy's Spicy Szechuan sauce and found the "syrupy goop" high in sugar and sodium, according to the group's newsletter.)
Creating a reasonably authentic Oriental sauce that pleases everyone is tricky because tastes differ across the U.S.
"We realized that we were never going to come up with one sauce," says a spokeswoman for General Mills, which runs 13 Chinese restaurants, called China Coast, in four states.
The chain alters flavors and menus, depending on the region.
Customers in Ohio, for example, are particularly partial to fried chicken.
Another food marketer notes that New Englanders like their fried rice a darker brown color and their egg drop soup more yellow than people in other areas.
David Tsang, who creates the Asian sauces for Hormel, says he is dealing with this problem in a scientific manner.
Mr. Tsang, a former engineer, says he plugs about 50 Chinese cookbook recipes into his computer to come up with the common denominator, or basic flavor, in all the sauces.
"I do everything very methodically," he says.
Some marketers think the key to success in America is not to be too Asian.
Betty Crocker, whose Recipe Sauces include a sweet and sour flavor, says it is trying to raise consumer interest with creative menus that take Oriental food beyond its ethnic boundaries.
It recently published a cooking magazine suggesting such dishes as Oriental taco salad and orange-ginger salsa.
La Choy, meanwhile, suggests consumers mix and match among more mainstream American foods.
A bit of sweet and sour sauce "gives a whole new twist to a meat loaf," says Hunt-Wesson's Ms. Carpenter, "or a hamburger or pot roast."
And perhaps even Spam.
Tyson Foods Inc. said it will decide shortly whether to attempt a hostile takeover of WLR Foods Inc., which has rejected the poultry concern's $330 million offer.
Asked if Tyson might sweeten its all-cash bid to enter the turkey-processing business, Don Tyson, chairman, replied: "Nope."
Mr. Tyson and other executives of the nation's largest chicken processor indicated in an interview they were surprised by WLR's rejection.
"We came with a fair price -- fair for our shareholders and theirs," said Gerald Johnston, executive vice president, finance.
Tyson Foods characterizes its current fiscal second quarter as "extremely tough," because of an additional $20 million in grain costs, following a similar increase in the fiscal first quarter.
As a result, Mr. Johnston said he expects current-quarter earnings to be about 22 cents a share, vs. 31 cents a year ago.
For the full year, which ends in October, Messrs. Tyson and Johnston said they were comfortable with per-share earnings estimates in the $1.30 range.
Last year, Tyson earned $1.22.
"We'll do double-digit increased sales for the full year," Mr. Tyson said.
In fiscal 1993, Tyson reported sales of $4.7 billion.
A double-digit increase would put the Springdale, Ark.-based company over the $5 billion mark.
Of the WLR bid, Tyson executives pointed out that trading volume in WLR shares has increased recently, indicating apparent arbitrager interest.
Mr. Johnston said he interprets WLR's recent implementation of a poison pill and golden parachutes as betraying management's confidence that it has the votes to defeat a hostile takeover.
Donald E. Wray, Tyson chief operating officer, said that even if WLR slips away, Tyson could add turkey processing by contracting with growers and slaughterers.
"That's still an option," he said.
Two previous efforts to enter the field proved unsuccessful.
Tyson is test marketing fresh branded pork cuts in Marsh supermarkets in Indiana, Mr. Wray said.
The test, which could run between three and six months, will help determine Tyson's future focus in the pork industry.
The company processes about 6,000 hogs daily at Marshall, Mo.
TYSON FOODS Inc. expects earnings for its fiscal second quarter ending April 2 to be about 28 cents a share.
The figure was misstated as 22 cents a share in an article yesterday.
(WSJ Feb. 23, 1994)
