When Bernd Pischetsrieder, chairman of Bayerische Motoren Werke AG, hops onto a Tokyo flight this month, his mission will be to pull off a shotgun wedding.
His intended?
Honda Motor Co., the Japanese auto maker that Mr. Pischetsrieder now acknowledges stands to play a key role in helping BMW to realize its new global ambitions.
That has become increasingly clear to him since BMW's $1.2 billion acquisition last month of an 80% stake in Britain's Rover Cars.
Honda holds the remaining 20%.
In an interview yesterday, Mr. Pischetsrieder emphasized that BMW and Honda need to come to terms over their new relationship.
Honda officials initially were irked over BMW's coup, especially after making their own attempt to raise Honda's stake in Rover.
They declined to comment yesterday on the pending visit.
But Mr. Pischetsrieder argued that "it is in the common interest of Rover and Honda to continue the relationship."
He went so far as to suggest a "long-term relationship of cooperation between Honda and Rover and between Rover and BMW in separate product sectors."
The executive wasn't specific about just what that could mean.
But he did indicate a determination to press the issue should Honda President Nobuhiko Kawamoto prove reluctant.
"An abrupt breakup is out of the question for Honda as for Rover," Mr. Pischetsrieder said.
"We will meet."
Indeed, Honda supplies most of the engines, transmissions and designs for Rover's vehicles, and it holds valuable licenses to these components -- a situation that Mr. Pischetsrieder admits could lead to disruptions in Rover production should Honda attempt an abrupt exit.
He hopes to avoid that by forging a partnership that transcends typical industry rivalries.
"I believe the global automobile industry is in a situation today where it is necessary to get over prejudices of all kinds," Mr. Pischetsrieder said, adding that cooperating with competitors "cannot be regarded so narrowly any more."
Still, analysts are expecting Honda will try to hold out for as much as it can get.
"In the end it will be a question of money and how Honda feels it should be compensated," said Daniel Jones, an auto-industry consultant and professor at Cardiff Business School in Britain.
In the U.S., Mr. Pischetsrieder said he hopes to use BMW's healthy distribution network of 350 dealers to expand sales opportunities for the Land Rover, an upscale sports-utility vehicle built in Britain.
A quarter of BMW dealers in the U.S. already have Land Rover franchises, he said, noting he hopes to dramatically increase that number.
Mr. Pischetsrieder, however, said there aren't any plans for building Land Rover vehicles in the U.S., where BMW is currently building an assembly plant in South Carolina.
In fact, he doubts there will ever be Rover vehicles coming out of BMW plants, much less German engineers overseeing their production, he said.
"If we did that, then even if the cars had Rover labels on them, they'd end up coming out like BMWs," he said, "and that's exactly what we don't want."
