Bargain-hunting by small-company stock investors reversed an early morning sell-off, giving the small-capitalization market a marginal bounce after Friday's sharp 2.21% decline in the Russell 2000 index.
The Russell, which tracks the performance of small-cap stocks traded on the Nasdaq Stock Market and the other major exchanges, closed up 0.01 point, virtually unchanged from Friday, at 261.68, after falling nearly three points in early trading yesterday.
On Friday, news that the Federal Reserve was raising short-term interest rates sent the Russell index down 5.90 points, while the Nasdaq Composite Index dropped 20.51.
Despite nervousness about the potential for further rate increases by the Fed, analysts voiced cautious optimism about the strength of the small-cap market.
"People are looking for bargains, but there's still a modest undercurrent of uncertainty," said William Rothe, head of Nasdaq trading at Alex. Brown & Sons in New York.
"People don't know whether what happened with the Fed on Friday was an aberration or the beginning of a protracted rise in interest rates."
Chris McLellan, partner-in-charge of trading at Robertson, Stephens & Co. in San Francisco, said there was pain evident in the market but that several sectors, including software-oriented technology stocks, looked strong.
"There's been some real damage done," as a result of Friday's Fed move, Mr. McLellan said.
"It will take more than one day's reaction and bounce to convince people that the Fed tightening is not somewhat ominous long term."
In company news, shares in Manhasset, N.Y.-based Spectrum Information plunged 60% on massive volume.
News that former Apple Computer executive John Sculley was resigning after a brief stint at the helm of the tiny wireless company, and that Spectrum was restating its fiscal first-half 1994 earnings, sent the stock down 3 5/16 to 2 1/4.
The decline came on extraordinarily heavy volume of 35.4 million shares, the largest ever for a single Nasdaq stock and about half of the roughly 72 million Spectrum shares outstanding.
Ironically, the previous volume record of 34.5 million shares also had been set by Spectrum on May 20, the day American Telephone & Telegraph Co. rebuffed claims by Spectrum President Peter Caserta about the value of Spectrum's patentlicensing deal with AT&T.
Mr. Sculley said he was resigning because he felt he was deliberately misled by Mr. Caserta when induced to join the company in October.
In a statement early yesterday, Mr. Sculley cited "recent events which have made it clear that aspects of Spectrum's business are not what they were represented to be when I joined the company."
Mr. Sculley said he wasn't informed of accounting problems and an impending Securities and Exchange Commission probe.
He said Spectrum's auditors, KPMG Peat Marwick, informed him last week that the auditors could not support the current method of accounting used by Spectrum with respect to revenue recognition.
He said he directed Spectrum to restate its financial statements in accordance with KPMG's recommendations.
Spectrum, in a statement late yesterday, rejected Mr. Sculley's claim that he was not aware of the company's operations when he joined.
"Prior to and during his term at Spectrum, Mr. Sculley was fully aware of the circumstances that he now cites as his reasons for departing," Spectrum said.
The company added that "its most significant assets, including its valuable patent portfolio and related licensing agreements, are not affected by Mr. Sculley's departure."
Elsewhere in the technology group, Lasermaster Technologies, Eden Prairie, Minn., climbed 2 to 15; Tecnomatix Technologies, an Israeli software developer, added 1 to 10; and Fourth Shift, a Minneapolis software concern, gained 1 to 10 1/4.
America Online stock surged 5 3/4, or 8.9%, to close at 70 1/2, on almost triple its usual volume.
Sapiens International of Curacao, Netherlands Antilles, rose 1 3/4 to 19, on a positive article in this week's issue of Barron's magazine.
Platinum Software jumped 1 3/8 to 14 1/2.
The Irvine, Calif., company said it got an order for its SeQueL to Platinum client/server software and the local area network-based Platinum series from Huntington International Holdings PLC.
The exact amount of the order was not disclosed but a Platinum spokesman called it a "multimillion-dollar contract."
Another highflying group was the health-care sector.
Laserscope, a San Jose, Calif., designer of surgical laser systems rose 1/4 to 6 1/8, while Atrix Laboratories, a Fort Collins, Colo., drug delivery system developer added 5/8 to 7 1/4.
Coastcast, Rancho Dominguez, Calif., rose 3 3/4 to 30 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Golfer Johnny Miller, a spokesman for Callaway Golf, won the AT&T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am tournament Sunday using Callaway clubs.
Coastcast supplies club heads to Callaway.
Callaway Golf closed up 4 1/4 at 68 3/4 on the Big Board.
