Lisbon -- The very first day after this valiant, ravaged, dramatic city was proclaimed the Cultural Capital of Europe for 1994, Portugal's leading cultural institution kept its doors locked tight.
Visitors pulling up to the Museum of Antique Art on the last Sunday of February found no sign, no explanation.
Their guidebooks had told them that Lisbon's equivalent of the Louvre was open on Sundays (and official inquiries confirm that it should have been), but it wasn't.
Perhaps the staff had stayed up too late the night before, when fireworks, clowns in the street and a concert at the newly renovated Coliseum by the London Symphony under Georg Solti kicked off Cultural Capitalhood in a blur of celebration that lasted until the wee hours.
During the day on that final Saturday of February, as the torch of art passed from Antwerp to Lisbon, the doors of the National Museum of Archaeology had also been closed, in contradiction to posted hours.
Inside, preparations were under way for the ceremonial opening of "Underground Lisbon," a historical exhibition of excavated materials that will last all year.
At water's edge a few blocks away, it was also impossible to get inside the city's most famous landmark, the castlelike Tower of Belem.
Scaffolding runs up the sides all the way to the tower top; the World Monuments Fund is supporting a full-scale renovation.
Similar refurbishings are ongoing at the Museum of Antique Art, the Museum of Contemporary Art and the Tile Museum.
Fittingly, the central square surrounding the statue of the Marques de Pombal, who rebuilt the city after the earthquake of 1755, is now a mess of reconstruction, provoking traffic snarls.
And the historic downtown still shows much damage from a bad fire in 1988.
Most of the scaffolds will supposedly be down when high tourist season arrives.
Visitors will, no doubt, be able to penetrate the Museum of Antique Art and see its legendary collections of Portuguese decorative arts and paintings as well as a European painting gallery that includes works by Durer, Holbein, Zurbaran, Memling, Velazquez and, the piece de resistance, Bosch's triptych "Temptation of St. Anthony."
This Netherlandish Renaissance masterpiece will be the center of the main art exhibition of Lisbon 94, "The Temptations of Bosch or the Eternal Return," a panoramic mustering of the surreal or the surprising, as represented by Durer, Arcimboldo, Goya, Moreau, de Chirico, Dali, Magritte, Duchamp, Picabia and many others, from May 19 to Aug. 31.
Other shows will feature the history of fado, Portugal's melancholy national song form (at the Costume Museum, April to December); Oriental influence on Portuguese tiles (at the Tile Museum, July to October); Neapolitan ceramics (also at the Tile Museum, November to December); and religious tribal sculpture of Angola (March to June at the Museum of Ethnology).
In film, the major event runs through June 8, "100 Days, 100 Films," presenting the best of European cinema.
In September, the past 10 years of Hungarian filmmaking will be screened in a festival designed to show the gradual disappearance of the concept of Eastern Europe.
In dance, there will be a lineup of the usual suspects -- Merce Cunningham, Pina Bausch, William Forsythe.
The Lisbon stage will also offer a rich array of international theater, notably Peter Stein's "Oresteia," a reprise of the Moscow production (June 12-17 at the Belem Cultural Center), and Tony Kushner's "Angels in America" (dates to be announced).
For Lisbonites, these special events should brighten a grim economic period in the capital of Western Europe's poorest country.
For visitors, the contrast of battered old Lisbon with all this brave new culture may seem strained or provocative.
But Lisbon at any time, even without special attractions, puts pressure on the historical imagination in an urban center of high drama and seductively faded grace.
No city in Europe, not even Naples, has a more spectacular setting than this westernmost metropolis -- seven major hills, the broad mouth of the Tagus, the sea stretching on to America and Africa, and almost nowhere a piece of level ground.
The serious first-time tourist hardly needs the Lisbon 94 schedule to divert himself.
The Gulbenkian Museum, with its great Rembrandts, Rubenses, Manets, Degases, Houdons and unnumbered glorious ceramics and rugs from Turkey and Iran, is worth the trip all by itself.
The jewel in this crown, however, is the Tile Museum (another project of oil plutocrat Calouste Gulbenkian), originally the Convent of the Mother of God; the convent's baroque church is intact and the main attraction of the place.
On the lower half of the walls are blue tiles with biblical and pastoral scenes; above eye level are many, many paintings and elaborately carved wood.
Nine miles away is the rococo royal summer palace at Queluz, with formal topiary gardens and all the many rooms furnished to the nines.
The enormous kitchen, with its gargantuan marble worktable, is now a very fine and friendly restaurant, Cozinha Velha (local specialties, including delicious lampreys from the nearby Minho River, in red wine as in Bordeaux).
Anyone too sedentary to try any of this should simply check in to the Hotel da Lapa, a new and discreetly luxurious conversion of a historic pink Lisbon mansion in the Lapa neighborhood, among embassies and stately homes.
Try cherne (stone bass) stuffed with acorda (very thick traditional Portuguese bread-and-garlic soup) in the elegant dining room.
The hotel's garden includes giant tropical trees, a pool, a silvery view of the Tagus and a waterfall thundering over a blue-tile mural of this capital of culture and hidden surprises.
