Sir Harold Acton, the British aesthete and historian, has bequeathed his estate in Tuscany, as well as art and cash, to New York University in what the school said is "the most magnificent" and probably the biggest single gift ever given a U.S. university.
NYU President L. Jay Oliva said he couldn't place a precise value on the unique gift, which includes land, villas and art collections.
But he said he was confident the value would be "multiples" of the biggest gift to date.
According to the Chronicle of Higher Education, the largest single private gift to a university was $125 million donated in 1981 to Louisiana State University.
Philanthropist Walter Annenberg has given hundreds of millions of dollars to education, including $120 million each to the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Southern California.
Last year he made headlines by pledging $500 million for public education and donating $100 million to the Peddie School, a Hightstown, N.J., prep school he attended.
Among other things, NYU said the gift will enhance its plans to become a "global university" and speed its efforts to have every undergraduate spend a semester abroad.
NYU said it plans to add Florence to its overseas study programs in dozens of other foreign locations.
Sir Harold, who was 89 years old, died Feb. 27 at La Pietra, his estate and birthplace just outside of Florence that was a meeting place for international art, political and literary figures.
The property includes five villas on 57 acres of olive groves and gardens.
Mr. Oliva said Sir Harold's ties to the university, in New York's Greenwich Village, stretch back about 30 years to friendships made with arts faculty members.
In 1983, Sir Harold said he intended to donate the villa to NYU with the wish that the school would hold international art seminars there.
In 1991, NYU helped start a global network of urban universities whose rectors met at La Pietra in January.
In explaining the appraisal puzzle Sir Harold's gift represents, Mr. Oliva drew a New York City parallel: "Suppose somebody said they were going to give you 50 acres of Central Park and it has five beautifully maintained villas on it."
Besides Sir Harold's home -- a 60-room baroque country house filled with art, the estate includes four other Renaissance and baroque villas overlooking Florence.
The donated art collections, which NYU said will be kept intact, include 15th-century Flemish tapestries woven for the Medicis, Romanesque sculptures and a Donatello relief of the Virgin and Child.
The works also include a collection of Chinese art assembled by Sir Harold when he lived in China before World War II.
