The Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board delayed the effective date of its proposed rule that is designed to prevent bond dealers from making political contributions to win business from state and local government agencies.
The rule, which was supposed to take effect Friday, now is due to take effect 10 days after publication of an expected order from the Securities and Exchange Commission approving the rule.
The SEC hasn't yet considered the rule, but is likely to do so at a meeting next Wednesday.
Separately, the U.S. District Court in Montgomery, Ala., postponed for a week a hearing that had been scheduled for tomorrow on a lawsuit seeking to block the rule.
The suit was filed by William Blount, an Alabama muni dealer who also heads the Alabama Democratic Party.
He contends that the proposed rule is unconstitutional.
The controversial proposal would bar bond dealers from doing business with state or local government entities for two years after they make political contributions to officials of the involved jurisdictions.
The municipal-securities board, a self-regulatory body subject to SEC oversight, said the delay "will provide the time necessary for SEC consideration of and dealer compliance with the proposed rule."
It made no mention of the lawsuit.
Mr. Blount has led the Alabama Democratic Party since 1991.
He said he has made and solicited political contributions "for a myriad of candidates" for office of public entities that sell bonds.
He said his firm, Blount, Parrish & Roton Inc., "has been selected by some of those entities and has been rejected by others" to underwrite their bonds.
SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt has said he believes the rule will pass constitutional muster, but Mr. Blount argued that "every constitutional expert we've talked to says it's patently unconstitutional."
The Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board claims its rule is immune from constitutional challenge because it is not "a government actor."
But the National Association of State Treasurers, one of a number of state and local groups to attack the rule, called this stance "disingenuous."
Both the SEC and the MSRB are named as defendants in Mr. Blount's suit.
Legal experts familiar with the case expect it to end up before a federal appeals court, where challenges to SEC rules normally are heard.
