Civil war has broken out at the Teamsters union, and is threatening to end Ron Carey's bid to reform the organization.
-- The membership overwhelmingly rejected Mr. Carey's attempt to raise $100 million a year through a 25% dues increase.
Although the count isn't yet complete, final margins are expected to be as high as 3-1.
Despite the trouncing, Mr. Carey, in an odd interpretation of the outcome, called the dues vote a "strong mandate for major changes."
-- A Carey loyalist filed charges against Mr. Carey's two opponents for president in the last election, R.V. Durham and Walter Shea.
The general executive board, which is controlled by Carey supporters, could expel them from the union.
-- Leaders of the four regional conferences, the area bodies that support locals' bargaining and contract operations, set up a series of meetings to be held Tuesday to fight Mr. Carey's efforts to consolidate his power by eliminating the conferences.
At stake is Mr. Carey's bid to reform a once-Mob-controlled union.
Voted into office in 1991 as the head of the reform ticket, Mr. Carey has moved to become a national spokesman for organized labor.
He was an outspoken opponent of the North American Free Trade Agreement and has been more active than his predecessors in trying to stem membership losses at the 1.4 million-member union -- the largest of any nongovernment union.
The latest string of events comes at a time when Mr. Carey is negotiating a national contract covering 110,000 Teamsters members at trucking companies.
People close to the talks said Mr. Carey's troubles make him more likely to call a strike in the National Master Freight Agreement to show that he retains control over the union.
But it is unclear whether many locals would go along with such a call given the disputes within the union.
While the master-freight accord, which expires Thursday, is Mr. Carey's most immediate problem, he has more serious long-term difficulties.
In particular, he must determine how to maintain credibility as the Teamsters' general president at a time when opponents are fighting hard to link him to organized crime.
Candidates for the next union election, set for 1996, already have begun positioning themselves, with the most prominent being James Hoffa, the son of the onetime Teamsters boss and now a lawyer for a Teamsters local in Detroit.
In addition, Mr. Carey must determine how to keep the international running financially.
The dues increase would have raised $50 million a year for the dwindling strike fund, which is likely to run out of money by the end of the summer.
"Carey will be reviewing options, looking for cuts" to try to save money, said spokeswoman Nancy Stella.
She noted that he already proposed saving $14 million a year by eliminating the area conferences, a move the general executive board will decide on April 19.
Opponents lashed out at Mr. Carey.
"You'd like to think you can have dissension in the union without this Gestapo-type approach" of bringing charges, said Mr. Durham, a 43-year Teamsters veteran who heads a North Carolina local.
As a result of the charges, for alleged violations of the union constitution, Mr. Durham could be fined, suspended, barred from holding office or expelled, Mr. Carey told Teamster officials in an internal memo.
The charges were filed by an aide to international board member John Morris, who heads a Philadelphia local and is an ardent supporter of Mr. Carey and the reform movement.
Mr. Durham contends that Mr. Carey "orchestrated" the charges in a bid to retaliate against those who fought the dues increase.
But Mr. Carey's spokeswoman counters that he "had nothing to do with the charges."
Conference leaders will be trying to rally local unions against Mr. Carey and the international.
Despite its reputation as the union of Jimmy Hoffa and Jackie Presser, the Teamsters has traditionally been run by the locals and conferences, rather than by a strong centralized Washington operation.
Mr. Carey has been trying to change that culture by bringing more power into the international as a way, he contends, of weeding out some of the influence of organized crime and streamlining the bureaucracy.
But that has angered numerous conference leaders and local officials, many of whom are paid well over $100,000 a year in their posts.
Daniel Machalaba in New York contributed to this article.
