Worries about rising interest rates sent Treasury bond prices plunging again.
The steep sell-off propelled the yield of the benchmark 30-year bond to 6.73%, its highest level since late June, and up from 6.65% Wednesday.
The price dropped more than a point, or more than $10 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 93 23/32.
Yields of Treasurys maturing in seven to 10 years also rose sharply.
But yields of the one-year and six-month bills held steady or improved slightly, suggesting some investors found a safe harbor in shorter-term maturities.
The sell-off in the U.S. market swept into foreign markets, especially those of developing nations like Mexico and Argentina.
In those Latin American countries, bond prices dropped as much as 3 1/2 points, or $35 for a bond with a $1,000 face value.
There was no big economic news to shake the market, leaving many investors puzzled by the ferocity of the sell-off.
"This is driving me nuts," said Robert Andres, head of fixed-income investing at Martindale Andres & Co.
"It's herd instinct.
We've entered the twilight zone.
This is insane."
In fact, most of the sell-off came after a better-than-expected Treasury auction of $11 billion in five-year notes.
Admittedly, there was a stronger-than-expected report on durable-goods orders for January, but it wasn't of the significance to cause price drops like those the market suffered.
Bond investors often react negatively to news of a growing economy because they worry that it will lead to higher inflation, which erodes the value of fixed-income investments.
Also yesterday, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan addressed a Congressional committee.
But much of what he said was a repeat of comments he made Tuesday, when he hinted that there would be further boosts to short-term rates as pre-emptive strikes against inflation.
Mr. Andres and many other investors believe that the Treasury's long bond and many notes now are bargain-priced, but few want to buy with bearish market sentiment abounding.
"I think this is overdone," said Barbara Kenworthy, a portfolio manager for Dreyfus Corp.
"I think at these levels you've got good value in the market."
But will she buy?
"Quite honestly, as long as you continue to see this downward push in the market, I don't get any gratification from buying."
"The last two days have been the toughest for the bond market for the last three to four years," said Joseph Deane, managing director of tax-exempt fixedincome management at Greenwich Street Advisors, a subsidiary of Smith Barney Shearson Inc.
"Things are in disarray."
According to Mr. Deane, "There is not a tremendous amount of incipient inflation, and the fundamentals of the bond market are not that bad.
But like any market that runs to ludicrous levels, which is what happened last fall" when the 30-year Treasury bond yield dropped to 5.79%, "there are a lot of people who go over the transom" with leverage.
Right now that "fluff is being cut out."
Mr. Deane says he believes the market will "begin to stabilize in the next couple of days"
Paul McCormack, head of government bond trading at Chase Securities Inc., said the selling mostly came from professional traders and some hedge funds.
As previously reported, many hedge funds have taken beatings on European security and currency bets, and some have had problems unwinding those bets.
Traders said some could be raising cash in the highly liquid U.S. Treasury market.
Others said the hedge funds may be making money now "shorting" U.S. Treasurys.
In a short sale, an investor sells a borrowed security in hopes of replacing it later at a lower price and pocketing the difference.
While some Treasury mutual funds have been hit with heavy redemptions in recent weeks, several big mutual-fund companies, including Fidelity Investments and Vanguard Group, said they had enough cash on hand to meet redemptions.
But the fact that small investors have stopped pouring money into bond funds has one big impact on the bond market: Mutual funds are no longer there to sop up supply.
At the same time, the heavy supply of Treasury issues that came into the bond market this month weighed on prices.
"The dealer community is not that anxious to load up on inventory of bonds right now," said Ian MacKinnon, senior vice president at Vanguard Group.
That provides "some ingredients for additional weakness just from a pure technical standpoint."
The day started badly when the Commerce Department surprised investors with the report on durable-goods orders.
The report said that new factory orders for durable goods rose a seasonally adjusted 3.7% in January, stronger than the 1% increase anticipated.
Meanwhile, a successful five-year note sale was unable to keep Treasury prices from heading lower once again.
At the auction, the Treasury Department awarded its $11 billion of new five-year notes at a yield of 5.61%, below the 5.63%to-5.64% rate anticipated by most dealers.
The Treasury received bids totaling $31.44 billion and accepted $11.02 billion, for a bid-to-cover ratio of 2.85-to-1 (the bid-to-cover ratio compares bids received to bids accepted).
The bids included $516 million of noncompetitive tenders, down from $566 million at the previous five-year note auction.
Noncompetitive bids typically reflect interest from outside the Wall Street dealer community.
Dealers who weren't able to buy all the notes needed for customers at the auction began buying the notes immediately after the results were posted, pushing the yield on the new five-year note to 5.57%.
The rest of the market also strengthened, erasing losses posted throughout the morning.
But the bearish tone resumed shortly after Mr. Greenspan's remarks.
Specifically, he said that the Fed's move to tighten monetary policy earlier this month was to counter the board's previous overly accommodative stance and that the Fed may have to move again.
By late afternoon, the new five-year notes yielded 5.66%.
Meanwhile, the bearish sentiment spread southward.
According to Michael Pettis, a Latin American debt expert with Weston Group of New York, sharp price drops of U.S. Treasurys sparked a sell-off among the government bonds of Latin nations, including Mexico, Argentina and Venezuela.
Mexico's so-called par Brady bond, for example, dropped 2 1/8 points yesterday to 75 5/8, according to Mr. Pettis.
Brady bonds are made from government loans that have been restructured and converted into bonds -- under guidelines set up by former Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady.
Par bonds get their name from the fact that they represent debt that has been converted into bonds at face, or par, value of the loans.
Meanwhile Argentina's par Brady bonds dropped 3 5/8 points to 61 5/8, and Venezuela's par bonds dropped 2 3/4 to 62 1/2.
"Everyone has been a little concerned about how euphoric the market" for developing-nation debt has been, said Mr. Pettis.
"It's been too frothy," he said.
And these sell-offs "can be pretty brutal and we may be in the middle of one now," he warned.
Mr. Pettis said that a friend who is a trader in developing-nation debt was so exasperated with the horrible market conditions yesterday that he talked about quitting.
"`This is too hard,' he said to me," recounted Mr. Pettis.
All bids are awarded at a single price at the market-clearing yield.
Rates are determined by the difference between that price and the face value.
The municipal bond market's decline continued yesterday, and prices ended as much as a full point lower.
Munis, which lost ground Wednesday, have been falling in the aftermath of the Federal Reserve's tightening early this month.
Demand has dried up despite federal income-tax increases, and securities are stacking up in the secondary market despite sharply reduced prices.
In secondary trading, the yield on the Massachusetts Municipal Wholesale Electric Co.'s 5.00% bonds of 2017 climbed to about 5.65% from 5.58% Wednesday.
Despite rising yields and tumbling prices, issuers are still tapping the market.
New York State Comptroller H. Carl McCall said there will be a competitive sale of $224.1 million of New York State general obligation bonds Tuesday.
The bonds, which will be dated March 1, 1994, will mature serially over one to 30 years, Mr. McCall's office said in a release.
Proceeds from the bond sale will be used for various capital construction purposes.
Prices of mortgages securities declined again, but losses were moderated by collateral demand by underwriters.
In secondary trading, Government National Mortgage Association 7% coupons for March delivery closed 13/32 lower at 99 29/32.
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold issues and Federal National Mortgage Association issues both finished 11/32 lower at 100 3/32 and 99 29/32, respectively.
Mortgage players quickly ignored the positive elements of the Treasury auction and went back to betting on when the Federal Reserve would again raise shortterm rates.
Since rising rates lessen the possibility of an early call, or prepayment, on mortgage bonds due to homeowner refinancing, mortgage securities didn't decline as steeply as Treasurys.
High-coupon securities, in particular, look better when rates rise.
Late in trade, for example, Ginnie Mae 8.5% issues for March delivery were unchanged at 105 29/32.
Also, the announcement of five new real-estate mortgage investment conduits totaling over $2.2 billion didn't hurt.
Dealers underwriting those deals need collateral, so they were buying mortgages in the secondary market.
Lauren Young contributed to this article.
