Short interest continued its record-breaking ascent on the New York Stock Exchange, rising 3.5% to 1.37 billion shares in mid-March.
Big Board short interest totaled 1,369,775,470 shares, up from 1,323,065,502 shares a month earlier.
Short interest on the American Stock Exchange rose 3.7% to a record 108,768,190 shares from the 104,865,316 (adjusted) shares reported in mid-February.
The surging levels of short interest on the Big Board in recent months partly reflect increased opportunities for arbitrage because of the growing number of corporate takeovers, some analysts say.
RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp., Walt Disney Co. and Chrysler Corp. led the group of companies with the highest levels of short interest.
Hanson PLC's short position surged to 19 million shares from 7.6 million.
Traders who sell securities "short" borrow stock and sell it, betting that the stock's price will decline and that they can buy the shares back later at a lower price for return to the lender.
Short interest is the number of shares that haven't yet been purchased for return to lenders.
Harry Strunk, an investment consultant in Palm Beach, Fla., said short sellers had a difficult time in January, when the stock market soared to new highs.
Rising stock prices make it more expensive to buy back shares in the market.
However, the decision by the Federal Reserve Board to raise the federal funds rate slightly in early February was beneficial to short sellers, he said.
A higher interest rate prompts money to migrate from the stock market to other securities, such as Treasury bills and bonds.
As a result, some stock prices fall, which makes it easier for short sellers to buy back shares and cover their positions.
The level of negative sentiment measured by the Big Board short interest ratio rose to 4.52 from 4.24.
The ratio is the number of trading days at the exchange's average daily trading volume that would be required to convert the total short interest position.
Average daily Big Board volume was 302.5 million shares.
Big Board and Amex short interest positions were calculated for the month including the 20 trading days through March 8, with March 15 as the settlement date.
The following tables show the Big Board and Amex issues in which a short interest position of at least 250,000 shares existed at mid-March or in which the short position had changed by at least 50,000 shares since mid-February.
