One of Metallgesellschaft AG's big German bank creditors announced its opposition to a 3.2 billion mark ($1.84 billion) rescue package for the metal, engineering and trading concern.
Norddeutsche Landesbank of Hannover, reflecting reservations shared by some other creditors, broke ranks with the big Frankfurt banks as creditors.
Deutsche Bank AG and Dresdner Bank AG and major stockholders have been lobbying Metallgesellschaft's more than 100 creditor banks to approve the plan today.
Banking sources and analysts still believe the plan will be accepted, but NordLB's objections indicated that consensus won't come easily.
Metallgesellschaft's new chairman, Kajo Neukirchen, said last week that the company faces liquidation unless banks backed the proposal.
It includes a new share offering to raise 1.4 billion marks, a request that banks convert 1.3 billion marks of Metallgesellschaft debt into subordinated equity and a new 500 millionmark credit line.
NordLB Chairman Manfred Bodin said this week that not all of Metallgesellschaft's bank creditors would approve the rescue plan.
Mr. Bodin contends that the terms of the financial package were practically dictated by the company and its leading bank allies.
NordLB is one of the company's top five bank creditors, with exposure of 240 million marks.
He asserted that the company's big shareholders weren't bearing their share of the burden.
These include Deutsche Bank, Dresdner Bank, insurer Allianz AG, Daimler-Benz AG and the government of Kuwait.
That group, which represents 62% of the company's equity, already has endorsed the planned equity increase.
Mr. Bodin also objected to the proposal that banks absorb any shares stemming from the rights issue that go unpurchased by smaller shareholders, who account for 38% of Metallgesellschaft equity.
Deutsche Bank, which heads the steering committee of bank creditors, called Mr. Bodin's criticisms unfounded and not representative of sentiments held by other bank creditors.
"The proposed concept, the fundamentals of which have already been accepted by a number of reputable national and international banks, wasn't dictated, but came under the time pressure of requirements set by corporate and bankruptcy laws," Deutsche Bank said.
Deutsche Bank also rejected a proposal from Mr. Bodin to write down Metallgesellschaft's equity and bring its commercial paper and bonds into the debt restructuring, claiming this would impair the company's borrowing abilities for years.
Banks are under pressure to save the company, as they have a total credit exposure of nine billion marks, and a court-directed liquidation might repay banks only 40% of their loans under German law.
