Democrats in Congress are proposing to pare the basic benefits package in the Clinton administration's health plan and make further concessions to small business as a means to win votes for their goal of providing health coverage for all Americans.
The House Ways and Means health subcommittee is considering an alternative plan that would guarantee a benefit package costing -- for a single person -- about 14% less than what the administration has proposed, according to preliminary budget figures released yesterday.
And Rep. Fortney "Pete" Stark (D., Calif.), the panel's chairman, indicated he is open to suggestions by his colleagues that small business be exempted from having to provide coverage for millions of workers already insured under family plans paid for by their spouses' employers.
The idea of such an exemption was advanced most vigorously by Rep. Benjamin Cardin (D., Md.), a member of the subcommittee.
Small-business concerns are clearly a sensitive issue both for Democratic swing votes in the subcommittee and in the House more generally.
The bill before the subcommittee would require large employers, beginning next year, to pay 80% of the cost of a minimum benefits package for their employees.
But companies with 100 or fewer workers would be exempt until January 1997, and then would have the option of buying into a new government program like Medicare to provide basic coverage for people without private insurance.
Estimates by the Employee Benefit Research Institute, a nonprofit research organization in Washington, indicate that about a quarter of all workers in such small companies currently are covered by relatives' health plans.
And though large employers complain this amounts to shifting to them the cost of health coverage, Democrats are anxious to look at any option that would help blunt opposition from the small-business lobby.
"It's not entirely fair," said Mr. Cardin.
"But we've given up purity."
The alternative plan presented to the subcommittee, largely the work of Rep. Stark, reflects his faith in the Medicare model and his willingness to throw out, or streamline, mechanisms in the president's proposal.
Under his plan, insurance premiums would be established according to whether there are one or two working adults in a family-regardless of the number of children.
And the benefits package would be less generous and impose a higher deductible than the one proposed by the administration.
The Congressional Budget Office has yet to complete estimates of the budget impact of the Stark plan, but the chairman said preliminary numbers indicate premiums for his minimum benefits package would be $2,400 for an individual worker.
About $600 of this represents costs associated with the blanket coverage for children.
The remaining $1,800 can be compared with the CBO's estimate that the basic benefits for a single individual under the president's plan would cost $2,100.
Though the overall costs would appear to be less under the Stark plan, the simplified premium system disguises considerable cost-shifting from households that have children to those with no children.
There also would be cost-shifting between employers depending on the composition of their work forces.
A company with a young, predominantly single work force might end up paying more than it would under the president's plan, while its employees might get less in real benefits.
Perhaps more troubling for liberal Democrats is the risk that Mr. Stark's approach would create different classes of health coverage.
Moreover, cost controls in his plan essentially would perpetuate the price discrepancies that currently occur between what doctors charge privately insured patients and those whose health care is financed through government programs like Medicare.
"The chair is amenable to do anything that will get votes," joked Mr. Stark in one exchange.
As a practical matter, the negotiating process won't begin until next week, when CBO estimates will be fully available.
As if mindful of this, Republicans were content to strike a cordial note in the discussions.
But Rep. William Thomas, a GOP subcommittee member who, like Mr. Stark, is from California, indicated that the minority would like to make sure the president's plan is put to a vote to test support -- and likely embarrass the administration.
Yesterday's subcommittee discussions coincided with an American Medical Association meeting in Washington.
The physician's group is walking a tightrope as it tries to cobble together a health-reform agenda that matches its 290,000 members' diverse views.
Reaction to Mr. Stark's proposal was largely negative: James Todd, the AMA executive vice president, said expanding Medicare would be "one more step into total government domination of the healthcare system."
In an effort to demonstrate its own unity, the AMA released a recent letter it sent to President Clinton calling for reforms that guarantee health benefits for every American without raising "significant barriers between patients and physicians."
The White House, asked to send a representative to the meeting, chose to name House Energy and Commerce Chairman John Dingell (D., Mich.) as its proxy before the physicians.
But the big-fisted Michigan Democrat, struggling for votes in his own panel, was scarcely effusive in his praise of the Clinton bill, which he said has "many flaws" and is unnecessarily complex.
The president's so-called employer mandate -- the requirement that employers help pay for their workers' insurance" -- probably will be altered," Mr. Dingell said.
But he criticized the AMA, which once unequivocally backed an employer mandate but now says it's open to other ideas, for retreating from taking a stand on how to finance universal health coverage.
"It's great to be for universal coverage," Mr. Dingell said, "but you've got to understand it has to be paid for."
Hundreds of AMA members are slated to lobby on Capitol Hill today on the health issue and on physician demands for malpractice changes -- including a $250,000 cap on noneconomic damages and limits on plaintiffs' attorneys' fees.
Consumer advocate Ralph Nader accused the AMA of pushing a plan that "will drastically restrict the rights of health-care consumers."
Meanwhile, Mr. Clinton, speaking before a Washington business audience, was alternately sympathetic and defiant toward the insurance industry, which has spent millions to slow his proposal.
"We must set up a system in which insurance companies themselves will not be forced into bankruptcy," Mr. Clinton said.
But he criticized the industry's television commercials, which play on public fears about government interference in their health coverage.
"When I see all these ads that say we can't do it, I say these people are telling me my country is dumber than these other countries," the president said.
"I don't believe that."
Rick Wartzman and Jeffrey H. Birnbaum contributed to this article.
