The United Steelworkers union struck Wheeling-Pittsburgh Corp.'s steel unit, which could force the nation's 10th-largest steelmaker to miss part of the industry's strong recovery.
The USW, which represents 4,700 workers at Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp., called the strike at 3:25 a.m. yesterday, after talks collapsed and its labor agreement expired.
Wheeling-Pittsburgh, which emerged from Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law proceedings in 1991, is alone in being hit by a strike in the current round of labor talks.
Several major integrated producers, including Inland Steel Industries Inc., National Steel Corp. and Bethlehem Steel Corp., reached pattern agreements last year similar to the one under negotiation at Wheeling-Pittsburgh.
Likewise, USX Corp.'s U.S. Steel Group softened an initial hard line somewhat and reached an agreement last fall, long before its pact expired in January.
A strike-bound Wheeling-Pittsburgh could lose shipments and profits if the work stoppage is prolonged.
"It is tough to walk away from this strong of a market with prices and profit margins as they are," said Christopher Plummer, an industry consultant with Resource Strategies Inc.
The company has to weigh that against agreeing to a contract it believes will make it uncompetitive in the future, he added.
Even if the strike lasts long, analysts don't expect other domestic steelmakers to benefit greatly because they are already operating at or near capacity.
"Everybody is sold out on flat-rolled" steel, said Charles A. Bradford, an analyst with UBS Securities.
As a result, imports may have to fill the void for now.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Wheeling-Pittsburgh's stock fell $1, or 5.5%, to $17.25.
A top union goal in the talks at Wheeling-Pittsburgh is for improved pension benefits, including a provision that allows pension payments after 30 years of service.
But Wheeling-Pittsburgh, based Wheeling, W.Va., said it is hamstrung by an agreement with the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. relating to the termination of its pension fund when it was operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy court protection from 1985 to 1991.
The company said its contract proposal addressed the union's "pension demands in a manner consistent with the terms of the existing agreement" between it and the Pension Benefit Guaranty.
It is also offering wage increases, signing bonuses, benefit enhancements, additional holidays and guaranteed employment.
The union also wants improvements in health care and better funding of retiree insurance.
And while it agreed to some work-rule changes, the union said it refused to go along with a company proposal that would essentially merge all crafts, thus eliminating worker specialties.
However, a Wheeling-Pittsburgh spokesman contended that the company's contract proposal is "substantially similar to that agreed to with the other steel companies."
