Japan: A Nation "Proportionate to Its Height."
Seem strange?
Hang on.
Japan is looking for a new national slogan.
It is an unofficial search, of course, but the unofficial old slogans just won't work anymore.
With Japan trying to reinvent itself politically and economically -- including parliament's passage of sweeping electoral reform over the weekend -- everyone is vying to be known as the person who came up with the slogan for the New Japan.
Consider this.
Japan: The Normal Nation.
That is the entry by political boss Ichiro Ozawa.
What does it mean?
To Mr. Ozawa, normal nations eagerly helped the U.S. stomp Iraq.
Pacifist Japan didn't.
Normal nations consider world interests, such as free trade.
Japan doesn't.
Japan "is a single-lung country," Mr. Ozawa writes.
Japan is "far from a normal country."
Some brand Mr. Ozawa's call for normalcy "dangerous."
Others find it funny.
"Which nation does he think is normal?
Iraq?" cracks Beat Takeshi, an actor/comedian turned political critic, in a recent magazine article.
The Japanese, of course, aren't alone in conjuring up hokey political mantras.
Gerald Ford tried to craft economic policy around his "Whip Inflation Now" campaign.
China is precariously balancing communism and capitalism with its "One Nation, Two Systems" saying.
Slogans have always been popular here.
When Japan began to modernize more than a century ago, it turned to inspirational maxims to define its path.
"Revere the Emperor, Expel the Barbarians!" (i.e., foreigners) was a popular rallying cry in the mid-19th century.
It was superseded by the more phlegmatic "Western Learning, Japanese Spirit."
The sloganeering reached a peak of sorts in the 1930s, when the Japanese military ravaged Asia under the banner of "Co-Existence, Co-Prosperity."
(A generation of Hollywood war movies telegraphed this into the simpler "Banzai!")
Shortly after the war, a chastened nation adopted mottoes that set its basic course: "Catch Up and Surpass" the West, and "Double Your Income."
The basic point: Japan would focus on economic development at home and leave messy foreign-policy matters to Uncle Sam.
Lacking a better idea, the nation's leaders tried to tweak that basic notion into the 1980s.
"The Hometown Concept: To ward a Humanistic and Prosperous Japan," was one prime minister's vision, an impassioned plea for a more geographically balanced pork barrel.
In the early 1990s, another premier offered the "Lifestyle Superpower" manifesto.
That formula, however, doesn't work anymore.
The economy has matured.
The people want more out of life.
And the world -- especially the U.S. -- will no longer tolerate Japanese free-riding.
Japan no longer has a working slogan -- and that, some say, is a crisis.
The hyperbole is flying.
"Japan, a nation lacking a philosophy, could face a downfall comparable to the eclipse of the ancient city of Carthage," Yasuhiko Shibata, a senior fellow at the Yomiuri Research Institute, warns in an essay.
The special-interest groups, not surprisingly, are trying to fill the vision vacuum.
"Air, Sun, Water, Rice," declares a banner hanging from the headquarters of Japan's agricultural lobby, which recently lost the fight to keep Japan's import ban on rice.
Keidanren, the big business lobby, endorses "Symbiosis," a gentler version of co-existence/co-prosperity with the world.
But now the mainstream politicians are coming to the rhetorical fore.
A recent issue of Views magazine put it best for this fad-mad nation, declaring 1994 the year of the "boom" in "Treatises of National Identity."
That grates on serious political journalists.
"The Japanese are desperate in the need to search for an identity," says Masahiko Ishizuka, an editorial writer at the Tokyo daily Nihon Keizai Shimbun.
"But it's very difficult and dangerous to describe the country in that kind of abstract, moody way.
I'm not for any slogan.
The nation's future is too complicated a matter to be described that way."
Kiichi Miyazawa, the last leader of Japan's post-war old-style government who was deposed by the new wave last year, says the competition "terrifies" him.
Sure, Japan has had slogans before, but this open competition between individual pols is unseemly in a nation of "self-efface ment."
"This is not the Japan as I know it," he says.
"It's as though they are from other countries."
Those sentiments are not stopping the suggestions.
How about "A Small but Shining Nation"?
That's the title of a book released last week by cabinet spokesman Masayoshi Takemura.
"Let's give up the audacious idea that Japan will become the sun of the world," he writes, "and become a star that twinkles in the night sky of the world."
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, for his part, invokes a Japanese idiom that translates roughly into either "A Country of Quality and Substance" or "A Country of Unpretentious Excellence."
That means "we should get rid of frills as much as possible . . . with a cultural lifestyle and beautiful nature," according to the Views summary.
But perhaps the ideas of former Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto measure up best.
He has taken his vision to book length in a volume titled "Vision of Japan."
Japan's actions should be "proportionate to {its} height," he declares.
In other words, there are some things Japan can't do well, and others it can.
"Tall people are good at cleaning chimneys," he explains in an interview, "but shorter people are better at cleaning sewers."
