America Online Inc., its online computer service clogged by a sharp rise in new subscribers, said it will begin rationing access to the system during peak hours.
The Vienna, Va., company, which provides shopping, electronic mail and news services, has seen its stock price rise strongly on surprising growth in its subscriber base.
After the company announced its new restrictions on access yesterday, its shares ended $1.75 lower, closing at $62 apiece in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
America Online recently said it had added 70,000 new users last month alone, pushing its total user base to 600,000 from less than half that number a year ago.
Such gains had sent the company's share price soaring, rising $10 since last Thursday.
But the explosive growth has apparently exceeded the company's hardware capabilities.
When the system overloads, customers end up getting busy signals, or they hook up to the network but can't get "inside" to access its various services.
Some America Online subscribers have begun voicing their frustration by joining an online discussion on the Internet, a public network, called "AOL going downhill."
When an America Online employee sent a computer message defending the company, one user retorted that the employee should "get a clue" and demanded that the company improve access and customer support.
America Online declined yesterday to specify the number of users it will allow onto the system during peak hours each evening.
Analysts estimate that the system can serve at most 8,000 users at a time but that it needs to serve twice that number simultaneously.
The capacity problem also has delayed the roll-out of new Internet services that the company had said would start appearing by late last month.
Analysts view that as a good thing, for the moment, because a new array of Internet services would invite new users to subscribe and add to the company's current overload.
Although Wall Street analysts remain bullish on the company, some issue the caution that if access problems persist, the service risks a backlash.
"It isn't a pleasant thing for any subscriber," said Rick Martin, analyst for Chicago Corp., adding that the company's current difficulties would cause it to "lose some" users but not core subscribers.
The company said it has purchased hardware and hired additional personnel to expand the capacity of the network.
In a letter to subscribers, the company said: "if these problems have . . . resulted in you feeling you are overpaying for the service . . . we'll make an appropriate adjustment," promising possible refunds.
"We're taking the problem seriously," Steve Case, America Online's president, said.
But, he added, "it appears to us that the majority of our customers aren't affected by this.
It really has to do with the peak usage periods."
