The White House lobbied aggressively to stave off an embarrassing vote by an influential business group in favor of a rival health-care bill.
The Business Roundtable, a group of chief executive officers of some of the nation's largest corporations, is scheduled to vote this afternoon on a recommendation by its health-care task force to support legislation authored by Rep. Jim Cooper (D., Tenn.) and Sen. John Breaux (D., La.).
The prospect of the business group backing the Cooper bill led the White House to invite a group of top executives to meet yesterday afternoon with Hillary Rodham Clinton and senior administration officials.
President Clinton himself dropped by for a few minutes, according to participants, underscoring the urgency of the Business Roundtable vote.
Among those at the meeting were the chief executives of TRW Inc.
Procter & Gamble Co., Boeing Co., Aluminum Co. of America, DuPont Co. and UAL Corp.'s United Airlines.
Administration officials, including economic adviser Robert Rubin, Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman and senior White House health-care aide Ira Magaziner, told the group that it would be unwise to back a particular health-care bill at this stage.
"We told them to look at all of the options on the table," said Alexis Herman, who heads the White House's office of public liaison.
"Why foreclose your options this early in the process?
We think that's a message business understands."
The administration officials stressed that they understand the business community's concerns about the Clinton health-care plan.
But they said the president has shown he's willing to compromise on such issues as caps on health-insurance premiums and the shape of proposed regional insurance-buying pools.
Beyond that, the administration officials questioned why the CEOs would want to endorse the Cooper bill when it wouldn't guarantee health coverage for everyone.
They noted that big companies already provide medical insurance for their workers.
President Clinton has made "universal coverage" the one point on which he won't yield, even threatening to veto any legislation that doesn't meet that standard.
Ms. Herman denied that yesterday's meeting was a last-minute scramble, characterizing it instead as part of a continuing effort by the administration to reach out to business leaders.
But the White House clearly is worried about the bipartisan support the Cooper bill enjoys.
At the White House's request, Reps. Dan Rostenkowsi (D., Ill.) and John Dingell (D., Mich.) have been contacting companies to make the administration's case.
Rep. Rostenkowski called a group of top executives to a meeting on Capitol Hill last night.
In addition, Messrs. Rubin, Altman, Magaziner and White House Chief of Staff Thomas McLarty have been working the phones.
Among those who have been contacted by the White House are Eastman Kodak Co., Ford Motor Co. and Xerox Corp.
If the White House succeeds in quashing a roundtable vote in favor of the Cooper bill, it will be a considerable victory.
The pro-Cooper resolution already was approved by the roundtable's policy committee in a lopsided vote earlier this month.
But the White House asked the business group to delay announcing the vote until after the president's State of the Union address last week.
The roundtable agreed to reconsider the vote at its policy committee's annual meeting today.
While the administration lobbied roundtable members yesterday, President Clinton stepped up his attack on the nation's health-insurance industry.
In two separate speeches, he asserted that insurers are wasteful, discriminatory and an impediment to a fulvly functioning health-care system.
"Insurance companies have set up a system which enables them to slam the door on people who aren't healthy enough to get covered," Mr. Clinton charged during a speech to the American Hospital Association.
Later, he told the National Governors Association: "We do have a system, unlike any other in the advanced countries in the world, in which insurance companies decide who's covered and who isn't, what the cost of insurance is, and what's covered in specific policies."
Democrats on Capitol Hill also scorned the insurers.
At a Senate Finance Committee hearing, the health-insurance lobby heard angry words about its multimillion-dollar advertising campaign designed to undercut the Clinton health plan.
"You're scaring people," said Sen. Jay Rockefeller (D., W.Va.) in a sharp exchange with former Rep. Willis Gradison, an Ohio Republican who resigned from Congress last year to head the Health Insurance Association of America.
Mr. Gradison noted that his group supports many insurance reforms in the Clinton administration's bill.
Sen. Rockefeller also suggested that the president's professed willingness to compromise on such issues as the premium caps wasn't "particularly useful."
In response, Mr. Clinton later said, "I would caution Sen. Rockefeller to not think that I have left his position.
If we change positions, he and I, we're going to try and do it together."
Jeffrey H. Birnbaum and Michael K. Frisby contributed to this article.
