LAST YEAR'S sales buzzword, "one-price," is being replaced by "value-pricing."
Value-pricing is a higher price, closer to what dealers expect to get for the vehicle, with some bargaining room.
"One-price" means no haggling.
Even one-price purists are haggling.
General Motors' Saturn unit, which popularized one-price selling, is advertising lease deals and subsidized interest rates in some markets, which amount to discounts of the one-price policy.
Ford Motor offers a one-price Escort, but some dealers are discounting it.
Auto dealers at their convention earlier this month in San Francisco said too many buyers like to haggle.
"It was a frenzy last year," says Larry D. Rine, whose Bottom Line Price Concepts in Skokie, Ill., sells one-price sales kits to dealerships.
This year his booth drew less interest.
"Dealers are so entrepreneurial -- maybe I should say predatory -- that they can't stand losing the possibility of a person walking in and paying full sticker," he says.
As Joe Gallant, a car dealer in Bangor, Maine, puts it: "When Jeep Grand Cherokees are bringing over retail, I'm not going to sell them under retail."
NOW THAT BMW owns Land Rover, what's next for well-heeled truck buyers?
How about a pickup with leather seats?
The GMC Truck division of GM will offer them in a big Sierra extended-cab pickup in an effort to make its vehicles more appealing as substitutes for luxury cars.
"Our role is to be in the upscale truck market," says Roy S. Roberts, the division's general manager.
Coming are overhauls of the boxy dashboards in many GMC pickups.
Archrival Ford is working on a product to compete with GM's Suburban utility vehicle, which sells to the $70,000-a-year-and-up families who used to buy Cadillacs.
Mr. Roberts says sales growth for such upscale trucks could push total truck sales in the U.S. to 50% of all vehicles sold, up from 20% a decade ago.
Keys Locked in the Car?
GUESS WHEN PEOPLE most use the roadside-assistance programs that most car companies offer: When somebody locks the keys in the car.
The No. 2 reason is running out of gas, according to J.D. Power & Associates, the market-research concern.
Chevrolet boasts that its operators can have aid on the scene in many areas within 15 minutes of a call.
"Value is a package -- not just style or whatever," says Jim C. Perkins, Chevy general manager.
"Someday there will be a ranking of roadside-assistance services."
Some roadside-assistance offers have their limits, though, as J. David Power, the president of J.D. Power & Associates, learned.
"They wouldn't help me with my blowout," Mr. Power recalls.
He says the car maker, which he won't disclose, argued that a tire problem was the responsibility of the tire maker.
(For the record, Chevy says it wouldn't leave somebody stranded with a blowout, but there likely would be a service fee that the car owner would then have to claim from the tire maker if the tire were under warranty.
And Mr. Power concedes that only 2% of roadside-assistance calls are for tire problems.)
IN THE OLD DAYS, having your car recalled meant getting a letter in lawyerese and a hassle to get your car fixed.
Now car companies are trying to use recalls to score points with customers.
Saturn won admiration for its straightforward handling of some highly publicized recalls, one of which involved replacement of 1,836 cars shipped with bad antifreeze.
In a recall of 352,767 vehicles for a potential engine-fire problem, some dealers treated owners to barbeques and trips to the movies while repairs were being made.
Other car makers are rushing to top that.
Just this month, Chrysler recalled 17,800 of its new Dodge Ram pickups to fix a relatively minor seat-latch problem.
Chrysler is testing three approaches to determine which customers like best.
In one, customers simply drop off the vehicles for repairs.
In a second, customers get freebies, such as a carwash and a loaner.
In the third, somebody from a Dodge dealership picks up and returns the truck.
Chevrolet telephoned all 46,000 owners of its new S-10 pickup, which is being recalled to fix fuel tanks that could cause a gasoline spill in a crash.
"When you first reach people, they're a little bowled over to hear who you are and what you're calling about," says Mr. Perkins, the Chevy general manager.
Customers are offered a loaner vehicle for up to four days while repairs are made, a full tank of gas and a carwash.
Lease or Buy?
Used or New?
NOW THAT FORD is moving big-time into leasing used cars, the big debate is whether it's a good idea, either for customers or for car companies.
Ford argues that it's a good deal for car buyers because they will be able to lease a well-maintained, two-year-old car with a complete warranty for $100 a month less than they'd pay to lease a new car.
That should be particularly attractive to those who want to re-lease their car.
Ford thinks used-car leasing will help ensure customer loyalty.
"It's going to take off and grow like anything," predicts a GM official, adding that Ford's program is "a very logical thing to do."
Robert J. Eaton, Chrysler chairman, expresses little interest in leasing used cars.
"Our whole objective is to sell the car and be done with it," he says.
"This is a cyclical industry and . . . in a down market, you may have a real problem."
But cars returned after a two-year lease tend to be in the worst shape, says one auto executive.
The two-year lessees "are not making any commitment to a car whatsoever," the executive says.
