Roy Marsden is back as the pensive Inspector Adam Dalgliesh in a new two-part mystery, titled "Natural Causes."
And happy we are to see him in this adventure concerning a corpse from which the hands have been hacked off.
Additionally, the lonely Dalgliesh has been given -- or more precisely, been encumbered with -- a love interest, though one happily short-lived.
Something about Dalgliesh as a grateful love-puppy seems out of kilter.
It also brings out the worst in the scriptwriters.
Things get so low, indeed, that we are reduced to hearing lines from the brooding girlfriend informing us that Dalgliesh may be the sort of man who just "can't commit."
Fortunately, Dalgliesh spends most of his time pursuing murderers in this, as ever, wonderfully gloomy "Mystery!"
-- 9-10 p.m. EST on PBS.
PBS air dates and times vary so check local listings.
The story of a young woman's descent into paranoid schizophrenia, and her subsequent treatment and recovery, this is a grim film all right.
It is also a deftly made one in which Diana Ross delivers a harrowingly persuasive performance.
-- 9-11 p.m. EST on ABC.
This HBO special is based on the experiences of former New York medical examiner Michael Baden and some of the notorious cases the doctor helped solve.
Its dumbed-down tone and lurid mood music aside, there is much to relish -- if that is the word -- in this neatly packaged hour.
Who can resist a story of a homicide involving a human foot in a shark's stomach?
It helps that Dr. Baden delivers data about stomachs and their contents with the loving absorption characteristic of those who are experts in their field.
Watch this to learn what ingested potatoes can tell a medical examiner -- as opposed, say, to carrots.
But the subjects of these stories are frequently less palatable than this.
There are a few pictures here that are not for the squeamish -- or even the unsqeamish -- so be warned.
-- 10:15-11:15 p.m. EST on HBO.
The subject is deinstitutionalization of the insane in this chapter of "Frontline."
The film, set in Northampton, Mass., at a center for liberated ex-mental patients from Northampton State Hospital, provides as eloquent a picture of the results brought about by progressive-minded advocates of unrestricted liberty for the deranged as any we have lately seen.
The film does, it is true, offer benign examples of released patients wandering in happy confusion through the town's streets, but its real center is clearly on the violent mentally ill and their endangered families.
The filmmakers recount the plight of a minister and his wife whose habitually violent psychotic son brutally assaulted them.
Because of the new rights laws won for the mentally ill, their son had the right to refuse hospitalization and any treatment.
One Judge Reardon finds no reason to re-commit him, notwithstanding psychiatric testimony about the risk of continuing violence.
The activist lawyer who won the landmark 1978 lawsuit that gave mental patients the right to wander the streets freely and untreated -- and to live in degradation -- is on hand here too, to explain the wisdom of his vision.
-- 9-10 p.m
EST on PBS.
"Nova" undertakes the history of codebreaking and the experts who undid the best security arrangements of Germans and Japanese, both in the first and the second world wars.
It is as fascinating a history as one could wish, beginning with the famous Zimmerman telegram that precipitated the U.S. entry into the First World War, and on to the German "Enigma" machine of World War II, and the still more impenetrable Japanese device called "Purple Analog."
It is also, of course, history of a life-and-death sort, when one considers that the deciphering of the Japanese naval code made it possible to prepare the offensive at Midway that spelled the beginning of the end for the Japanese.
This is also the story of men, like William Friedman and his fellow cryptanalysts, and of wartime lives spent at the codebreaker's art.
And who could ask for anything more?
-- 8-9 p.m. EST on PBS.
