Drug and diagnostic test makers are rushing to capitalize on the new medical consensus that bacterial infections underlie peptic ulcers.
Doctors, meanwhile, are bracing for a dilemma every time a patient with chronic stomach pains walks into the office.
Last month, a panel of medical experts assembled by the government concluded that a bacterium called Helicobacter pylori "appears to play an important contributory role" in causing peptic ulcers.
The panel said a two-week course of an antimicrobial drug, such as an antibiotic, plus an ulcer-healing medication would rid the stomach of H. pylori and cure the ulcer.
This would allow hundreds of thousands of patients to be weaned off long-term use of such ulcer drugs as Zantac and Tagamet.
Many doctors already are changing the way they treat ulcers.
Last month, in the wake of the panel's announcement, doctors sent 2,000 blood samples to the Roche Biomedical clinical laboratory in Burlington, N.C., to be tested for signs of H. pylori infection.
That was up from 1,300 in January and triple the intake of January 1993, says Barbara A. Body, director of microbiology and serology at the lab.
Demand for H. pylori testing "is getting so high that we're expanding it to two more sites," Dr. Body says.
Roche Biomedical is owned by the U.S. unit of Roche Holding AG.
The blood test, offered by many clinical laboratories for about $80, is currently the simplest and cheapest way to tell whether an ulcer patient is infected or whether the ulcer might stem from other causes.
A number of companies, however, are champing at the bit to market new H. pylori tests that are quicker and simpler.
The potential U.S. market for such tests is $50 million to $70 million a year, estimates Quidel Corp., a producer of medical diagnostic tests in San Diego.
Quidel recently gained federal approval to market a blood-test kit that can be used in a doctor's office.
The test, which will sell for $7 to $10, gives a result in five to seven minutes, says Mark Francois, director of investor relations.
Hycor Biomedical Inc. in Irvine, Calif., also is developing a doctor's-office version of the blood test it sells to the big clinical laboratories, which takes an hour to do.
"Doctors like a simple test, one that can give a result in 10 to 15 minutes," explains Richard D. Hamill, a pharmacologist who is Hycor's chief executive.
Hycor, meanwhile, has developed a urine test for H. pylori with results that "correlate beautifully" with the blood-test results, Dr. Hamill says.
The company is waiting for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to develop new guidelines for such urine tests before it seeks marketing approval from the agency, he says.
Cortecs International Ltd. in Britain already is selling a saliva test for H. pylori to clinical laboratories in Europe and Canada.
Cortecs expects to meet soon with the FDA to discuss steps for getting it approved for sale in the U.S., says Michael Flynn, president.
A doctor's-office version is in final stages of development, he says.
The blood, urine and saliva tests have one drawback.
The antibodies to H. pylori that they detect persist in the blood, urine or saliva as long as a year after treatment has eradicated the bacterium.
So the tests are good for the initial diagnosis of an H. pylori infection, but they can't tell for many months whether the drug treatment was successful, raising the question of whether further treatment is needed.
To get around this problem, Meretek Diagnostics Inc. in Houston is developing a breath test that, until now, has been used only in research.
The H. pylori is unique in that it secretes an enzyme, called urease, that breaks down urea into ammonia and carbon dioxide.
The trick used in experiments on H. pylori infections is to have the patient eat or drink a food spiked with a powdered urea that contains a rare form of carbon known as carbon-13.
If the patient has an H. pylori infection, the carbon dioxide produced by the bacterium will contain carbon-13 and will appear in the patient's exhaled breath in about a half hour.
The experts agreed that the breath test is ideal for diagnosing the infection before and after therapy.
The holdup in widespread use of the breath test is that it requires a mass spectrometer, a lab instrument that costs $130,000 to $150,000, to analyze the puffs of breath that the patient has exhaled into a capped bottle.
At least one instrument maker, Europa Scientific Ltd. in Crewe, U.K., is working to get the cost of a mass spectrometer dedicated solely to diagnosing H. pylori infections down to $80,000 to $90,000, or even $75,000, says Andrew Linton, the company's sales director.
The market for such tests may extend well beyond the four million Americans who have peptic ulcers, depending on how family doctors, internists and gastroenterologists resolve a dilemma over which patients they should test and treat.
The expert panel recommended only that patients with peptic ulcers be tested for H. pylori and treated if they were infected, implying that ulcer diagnosis should come first.
Ulcer diagnosis usually involves an expensive and uncomfortable examination of the stomach with an endoscope, or at least with a barium X-ray.
With quick, easy tests for H. pylori, doctors and patients alike will be tempted to forgo the uncomfortable endoscopy.
Doctors may simply run a test for the bacterium in every patient who walks in with a long-lasting or repetitious gnawing or burning pain in the upper abdomen of unknown cause (a condition called dyspepsia).
If the bacterium is found, the patient will be treated with the two-week antimicrobial regimen to see whether it relieves the problem.
But, the expert panel noted, many people have H. pylori infections but don't have ulcers, including many patients with gastritis, a stomach inflammation that also produces dyspepsia.
It isn't yet known whether ridding these patients of the bacterium will cure their gastritis.
If not, then the testing and antimicrobial therapy would be a waste of time and money.
But at least one gastroenterologist, David Y. Graham at the Baylor College of Medicine, who pioneered some of the therapies against the bacterium, says, "If a physician decides to test and treat all patients with H. pylori infection there's nothing wrong with that."
"In reality, no one needs this infection" even if he or she doesn't have an ulcer, Dr. Graham says.
One of every six infected persons will develop ulcers, he notes.
Moreover, both ulcers and H. pylori infections are linked to a higher-than-normal risk for gastric cancer.
And there are indications that simple gastritis without ulcers may be helped by getting rid of the bacterium.
After all, Dr. Graham says, if doctors routinely use antibiotics against colds and flu, they'll likely use them against a bacterium as common as H. pylori, ulcer or no.
