Regarding your story on Athens's use of $3 million in sales-tax funds to woo a fish hatchery ("Tax Aimed at Creating Jobs Misses Mark," Feb. 2), additional information on the project might change the way readers view the project.
First, from the outset of this project, there was strong community support for the "idea" of this facility.
Not only were we interested, but 33 other East Texas cities picked up bid packets, with 11 competitive bids eventually submitted.
There was intense interest in this project, and the Athens Economic Development Corp., Athens Municipal Water Authority, Athens Chamber of Commerce and private donors joined in the successful bid.
Second, the Athens Economic Development Corp. obtained a Texas attorney general's opinion that local sales-tax revenue was a proper use of funds for this project.
Further, the commitment of funds did not impair the opportunity for economic development in other areas of Athens.
Third, while the state fish hatchery, with its 19 jobs and $1 million annual local expenditures, is important, the heart of the deal was the Texas Freshwater Fisheries Visitor Center -- and the visitor and tourist impact for the local economy.
Estimates range from 300,000 to 500,000 visitors annually, with point-of-sale revenue ranging from $8,000,000 to $36,000,000.
That income will multiply through the Athens economy an average of 3.5 times, which yields a sum between $28 million and $126 million subject to sales tax annually.
The city of Athens could expect new revenue between $420,000 and $1,890,000 annually, and the Athens Economic Development Corp. could expect to recover $150,000 to $472,500 annually.
Fourth, Athens is committed to increasing the economic wealth of the entire community.
We believe a strategy of combining the development of industrial prospects with tourism represents the most-effective return for our community.
For instance, Texas Department of Commerce has documented one job is created for every $63,000 of tourism revenue.
As a result, we could see 125 to 600 new jobs in tourism, and a significant opportunity for investment throughout our economy.
In addition, those visitors will also travel to other areas of East Texas, leveraging the effect for the entire region.
Thomas L. Maxfield
Athens Visitor Initiative Program Inc.
How about that.
The Wall Street Journal questions our spending practices in Athens.
I'm way ahead: I've had my questions for years.
I never cared for fishing.
I barely even eat fish.
Little did I know that the ever-elusive bass would be my and my town's savior.
I can't resist the urge to be sarcastic, but I am very serious about this question: What does all this tourism do for the common man, who doesn't own a retail business or have the money to start one?
I'm all for tourism, but let's take care of our own first.
After all the jobs that were lost over these past few years, this is like a slap in the face to most of the people who are out of work.
We need the lost jobs back.
It's plain and simple.
Has our city lost faith in the common folks' ability to work, spend money and boost our economy?
If the mentality of "tourism is our only hope" continues, all that will be left in Athens are city officials, retail merchants (whose only customers are city officials), one bass shrine and tumbleweeds, because we common folk can't live without real-money-paying jobs.
Three million dollars is a lot of money to this small town.
Get involved in our city, folks.
Use your right to vote as your freedom of speech.
There are a lot of things slipping by us in our apathy.
On yet another sarcastic note, I am looking into the fish-food business.
I get the feeling that the only thing that will multiply as a result of our $3 million is bass.
Please prove me wrong.
