President Clinton's welfare-reform working group will recommend a gambling tax as part of a proposal to the president at a cabinet meeting tomorrow.
The levy, a 4% excise tax on net gambling revenues, except state lotteries, is expected to raise $4 billion over five years.
Withholding taxes on winnings also would be increased.
The proposed excise tax on gambling establishments -- which would take 4% from revenues after payment of winnings and allotments to state coffers -- is certain to draw fierce opposition from casinos and Indian groups, which have expanded their presence in casino gambling in recent years and wouldn't be exempt from the tax.
Casinos and Indian groups have strengthened their position in Washington during the past year.
The gambling proposal highlights Mr. Clinton's difficulty in fulfilling his much-vaunted pledge "to end welfare as we know it," from which he has already harvested substantial political capital.
Advisers have been divided for weeks over the measure, which takes precisely the type of tax-raising tack the president has avoided in his current budget.
Some advisers have asserted that the political pain of floating a tax isn't worth the gain of a somewhat heftier welfare plan.
But the president's welfare working group -- consisting of White House advisers and top officials from large executive branch agencies -- has determined that the reform plan, drafts of which already are eliciting yawns on Capitol Hill, can't afford any more shrinkage.
Almost completed versions of the plan circulating last week envisioned spending of about $6 billion a year in 1999, when the plan would be fully implemented.
That figure is an already discounted price made possible by slowly phasing in the program over five years and mandating reforms only for those born after 1972.
Even that pared program, however, had a huge problem: Months of searching for cuts in antipoverty programs to satisfy the president's promise that welfare reform would be "deficit neutral," gleaned only $4 billion by 1999.
The plan omits a key feature in keeping welfare rolls from growing-child care for the working poor costing $2 billion a year.
At a Saturday meeting, working group members decided that was going too far and backed the gambling tax, which will bring in about half the money needed.
It would be enough for a pared program, offering child care just to working poor families born after 1972, the target group for the rest of the program.
Members of the working group said the president could sign off on a welfare proposal after this week's meeting, and have a bill to Congress soon thereafter.
Meanwhile, the president's proposal is being attacked on Capitol Hill as too little, too late.
A House Republican proposal, which produces about twice the funding of the White House version by more vigorously cutting current benefits to noncitizens, has received substantial support among Democrats.
Though it offers the central feature of the Clinton plan -- a two-year limit on welfare benefits -- the Republican proposal would have a greater impact on the current welfare population than would the Clinton plan, putting almost twice as many recipients in some sort of job-training and search program by 1999.
A White House official, speaking not for attribution, said that any proposal the president sends to Congress will "certainly get pulled toward the right by moderates and conservatives.
We're expecting that."
