December wasn't a bad month for U.S. trade, but 1993 was awful.
The U.S. trade deficit was the biggest in five years, and the trade gap with Japan grew to a record.
The Commerce Department said the overall trade gap was $7.41 billion in December, $2.27 billion less than in November.
The narrowing was due to a 4.9% increase in exports, led by capital goods, and a 0.6% decline in imports as purchases of industrial supplies and consumer goods fell off a bit.
The surprise December improvement caused many economists to begin ratcheting up their estimates of fourth-quarter growth.
The Commerce Department said last month that the economy surged at a 5.9% annual rate in the fourth quarter, but it will revise its estimate twice more, based on more-complete information, such as the trade figures.
Brian Horrigan, an economist with Loomis Sayles & Co. in Boston, said that growth "could be revised as high as 7%."
But the encouraging December performance didn't prevent the U.S. from turning in its largest trade gap since the $118.5 billion in 1988.
Last year's deficit ballooned to $115.78 billion from $84.5 billion in 1992.
Slowing economies overseas, particularly in Europe and Japan, put a big crimp on U.S. exports last year.
Although exports still climbed to a record last year, imports grew more than twice as fast, widening the trade gap.
In addition, the U.S. trade deficit with Japan hit $59.32 billion last year, its highest level ever.
The big gap highlights the Clinton administration's concern about opening Japanese markets to more U.S. products.
Commerce Undersecretary Jeffrey Garten said the U.S. particularly would like to open Japan up to U.S.-made telecommunications, space, infrastructure and medical equipment.
Analysts said the narrowing of the trade deficit in December isn't likely to continue.
For one, much of the export growth came from civilian aircraft, which tends to cause big jumps in the dollar value of exports but isn't sustained month after month.
Furthermore, the weakness in imports was caused almost entirely by falling petroleum prices and didn't represent a decline in consumer strength, Mr. Horrigan said.
Mr. Horrigan estimated that the trade gap will widen further in 1994, perhaps by as much as $30 billion, as overseas trading partners remain economically weak.
But the poor performance isn't likely to hurt overall U.S. economic growth severely.
That's because other sectors of the economy, such as housing, capital investment and autos, are quite strong.
"The trade drag is not going to take the punch out of this party," Mr. Horrigan said.
All figures have been adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
U.S. merchandise trade balances by region; in billions of U.S. dollars, not seasonally adjusted
