The Clinton administration said that high-level talks with North Korea probably won't go forward next week, following Pyongyang's refusal to honor a pledge to grant international inspectors full access to its declared nuclear facilities.
The International Atomic Energy Agency said in Vienna that its inspectors were denied adequate access to one of seven nuclear facilities during their recent inspection.
As a result, the inspectors weren't "in a position to verify that there had been no diversion of nuclear material at the facility," an IAEA statement said.
The inspectors were trying to determine whether North Korea was working on a nuclear-weapons program.
The IAEA board of governors plans to meet Monday to discuss the situation.
Before the meeting, the group's 35 members will try to cobble together a resolution.
One possible outcome, according to a senior U.S. official, is a condemnation of North Korea that would urge the regime to permit the completion of the inspection by a certain date or face further actions.
Another possibility is that the international agency may turn the matter over to the United Nations Security Council, which would decide whether to impose trade sanctions on North Korea.
Pyongyang has warned that it would consider such a step an act of war.
North Korea's failure to honor its agreement to permit the inspections of all seven sites sets off a diplomatic chain reaction.
The U.S. had agreed to hold a third round of high-level talks with North Korea next Monday in Geneva if Pyongyang permitted the inspection and also exchanged envoys with South Korea in talks between the two on denuclearization issues.
That exchange hasn't yet been agreed to; the two sides are to hold another working session on Saturday.
Referring to the planned U.S.-North Korea meeting, State Department spokesman Michael McCurry said that "in light of this announcement from the IAEA, it would appear that that meeting on Monday is now doubtful." communications, as well as publicly, the U.S. has urged Pyongyang to allow completion of the inspection and the exchange of envoys.
The White House's handling of the drawn-out negotiations with North Korea is being sharply criticized at home.
Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.), a conservative member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, said the administration's North Korea policy had "failed miserably."
And at the Pentagon, the feeling among many military and civilian experts is that the administration didn't bargain skillfully and that the only question was whether it now could somehow soft-pedal the issue so it won't have to take a harder line.
"A war with North Korea is the last thing they want to have, so my gut feeling is that at the end of the day, they'll push an appeasement approach," said one Pentagon expert.
He said that such a policy could be justified on the grounds that the North Korean regime eventually will collapse, and so U.S. patience will be rewarded.
The administration also isn't certain that the U.N. would wield the weapon of international sanctions.
China, which has a veto as a permanent member of the Security Council, doesn't support such a move.
Mr. McCurry said that during a recently completed trip to Asia by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, the U.S. discussed the issue in China and Japan, "and I cannot say in either location there was enthusiasm about sanctions."
David Kyd, the IAEA spokesman, said that at six of the sites, agency inspectors were permitted to do most of their work, including replacing cameras and film that are part of a permanent monitoring system.
However, he said in an interview yesterday, the inspectors "immediately encountered resistance" at the seventh plant.
The North Koreans say the facility is a radio chemical laboratory, but Mr. Kyd said the IAEA describes it as a reprocessing plant where plutonium, which is used to make nuclear weapons, is separated from spent nuclear fuel.
He said the inspectors weren't permitted to sample radioactivity levels in the building or on certain parts of the equipment.
