Private-sector health cost strategies and the debate over President Clinton's health-care reform plan are fueling robust earnings growth at the nation's health maintenance organizations.
Analysts expect HMOs to report earnings gains well over 20% -- and in one case a 73% jump -- for the quarter ended Dec. 31, the result of surging enrollments and moderating health-care costs.
The industry is poised for a continued stellar performance, analysts argue, as it plays a major role in changing how health care is delivered in the U.S., even before Congress passes reform legislation.
"HMOs are in the forefront of economically based health reform," said Kenneth S. Abramowitz, analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co.
"They are delivering cost-effectiveness, and employers and employees want to buy into that.
That's why their membership is growing at 10%."
But the measure of that success also poses a new challenge.
An industry that once depended heavily on premium increases for profit growth now faces a climate where the ability to manage costs will separate winners from losers.
Premiums, the monthly membership charges that are an HMO's revenue, will rise nationally by 5% to 6% for 1994, and just 3% to 4% in California, according to Eleanor Kerns, analyst at Alex. Brown & Sons, Boston.
That's down from about 8% nationally last year and 16% in 1990.
While growing enrollments will increase revenue, profits will depend on, among other things, how skillfully HMOs work with doctors and hospitals to control use of services.
With burgeoning memberships, Ms. Kerns added, many HMOs have amassed enough purchasing power to negotiate favorable contracts with doctors and hospitals.
Several companies are also growing through acquisition, a trend reflected in FHP International Corp.'s recent agreement to acquire TakeCare Inc., a move that would double its enrollment to more than 1.6 million members.
The major driver of HMO performance is increasing acceptance, among employers and consumers, of managed-care efforts to contain costs.
"Corporations are finally getting more serious about controlling health-care costs," said Bernard F. McDonagh, managing director at Piper Jaffray Inc., Minneapolis.
They're "forcing employees into managed-care systems with a sense of urgency that they didn't have before."
In addition, the debate over President Clinton's health plan has put a spotlight on HMOs, which are part of the underpinnings of the program.
The attention has put HMO stocks on a roller-coaster in recent months, but some analysts suggest it has been a boon to the companies.
"It has increased awareness of what managed care is, and that awareness has stimulated enrollment," Ms. Kerns said.
Meanwhile, many HMOs are using state-of-the-art technology to track costs and the use of services.
And what some analysts call the "Hillary factor," a reference to First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton's attack on runaway costs in the system, has prompted many providers of services to hold down prices.
"All of those factors are coming together to give a very good cost picture," Ms. Kerns said.
The expectation that the federal Medicare program for the elderly will encourage more beneficiaries to join HMOs could pose a problem for some companies, Mr. McDonagh warned.
"The government is still an unreliable payer in the Medicare business," he said, adding that few HMOs will be able to avoid Medicare patients.
Some HMOs, however, actively recruit them.
PacifiCare Health Systems Inc., Cypress, Calif., gets about 50% of its revenue from Medicare, which set a rate increase for 1994 of just 2.5%.
The company was expecting about 5%.
But PacifiCare shares the risk of such decisions with its doctors and hospitals, and Ms. Kerns said the lower rate isn't likely to affect 1994 profit.
She expects PacifiCare to report earnings of 50 cents a share for its fiscal first quarter, up 28% from $10.7 million, or 39 cents a share a year earlier on revenue of $484.8 million.
The estimate excludes a tax gain of 10 cents to 12 cents a share.
Commercial enrollment is growing at about 10% annually, while enrollment by Medicare recipients is growing at a 30% clip.
PacifiCare didn't comment on the forecast.
United HealthCare Corp., Minneapolis, is expected to report a 43% jump in fourth-quarter earnings to 66 cents or 67 cents a share, from $32.2 million, or 46 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue was $388.4 million.
Ms. Kerns expects the company to report at least a 20% growth in enrollment for HMOs it has owned or managed for more than one year.
Acquisitions over the past year will boost membership by nearly 40%, she said.
The company is also reaping benefits from specialty services, including its Diversified Pharmaceutical Services unit, which manages prescription-drug benefit programs for HMOs and employers.
United HealthCare declined to comment on the predictions.
Analysts expect U.S. Healthcare Inc., Blue Bell, Pa., to post a 33% earnings increase to 73 cents or 74 cents a share, from 55 cents a share a year earlier on revenue of $573.3 million.
Ms. Kerns said that the HMO has been particularly effective in containing costs through case management and other methods, and that fourth-quarter results also benefited from the elimination of state government-imposed surcharges for uncompensated care in New Jersey.
U.S. Healthcare declined to comment.
Foundation Health Corp., Rancho Cordova, Calif., is expected to report earnings for its fiscal second period of 75 cents to 80 cents a share, or at least 21% more than the $9.6 million, or 62 cents a share, a year earlier on revenue of $334.1 million.
Foundation's immediate future, however, is clouded by its recent loss of a $3.5 billion five-year contract to Aetna Life & Casualty Co. to provide care for military retirees and dependents.
Foundation has had the business since 1988.
The Pentagon ordered the contract rebid after the U.S. General Accounting Office determined that the award to Aetna was improper.
Even if Foundation ultimately fails to win the contract, Mr. McDonagh said, its commercial business is growing rapidly and the recent acquisition of California Compensation Insurance Co., a worker's-compensation insurer, will help replace lost revenue.
The company didn't have any comment on Wall Street expectations.
FHP, based in Fountain Valley, Calif., is expected to post profit of 28 cents a share for its fiscal second quarter, a 47% jump from $6.2 million, or 19 cents a share, a year earlier on $464.5 million of revenue.
FHP declined to comment.
Ms. Kerns anticipates that Oxford Health Plans Inc., Darien Conn., will report a 73% jump in earnings for the fourth period to 26 cents a share from $2.4 million, or 15 cents a share, adjusted for a 2-for-1 stock split.
Oxford didn't comment.
