The assassin of presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio is a loner who apparently met frequently with a group fed up with Mexico's tightly controlled political system.
The emerging portrait of Mario Aburto Martinez, the 23-year-old mechanic and California migrant worker who has admitted to killing Mr. Colosio, is likely to cause new concern in Mexico.
This has been a year of so much turmoil in Mexico that authorities had been hoping Mr. Aburto would prove to be an insane gunman operating alone.
While it's not clear what group he was associated with or how large it is, simply the idea that he was part of a group raises the prospect that Mexico might have to add organized political violence to its list of problems.
Witnesses to Mr. Aburto's confession said he told them that he belonged to a vaguely described group.
They said he claimed he had planned the murder with the group's help.
And Graciela Gonzalez, a 16-year-old whom Mr. Aburto was apparently trying to woo, said, "He said he was fed up that the PRI always wins," referring to the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, which has held power for almost seven decades and is the longest ruling party in the non-communist world.
Miss Gonzalez, who met Mr. Aburto at his workplace in February, said that "he wanted to do something so that his party could win."
(Yesterday, however, a government-owned newspaper reported that Mr. Aburto said he acted alone and didn't belong to an armed political group, contrary to his confession.)
A few days before the shooting, Miss Gonzalez said, Mr. Aburto and his friends got drunk in celebration of having come to some sort of decision.
She described Mr. Aburto as "serious, kind and gentlemanly.
In other words, I never looked at him as a person capable of doing this."
Miss Gonzalez said she doesn't know the name of the political group, though she did rule out Mexico's two leading opposition parties.
Miss Gonzalez, who has been questioned by authorities, said Mr. Aburto also told her that last year he had spent four months in Chiapas, but she said she learned little about why he was there.
A supervisor at the factory where Mr. Aburto worked said Mr. Aburto mentioned Chiapas only once: to criticize a guerrilla leader known as Subcommander Marcos for failing to take off his mask.
It wasn't clear that Mr. Aburto's time in Chiapas was more than coincidence.
In Chiapas, in fact, rebel leader Subcommander Marcos denounced the assassination of Mr. Colosio as a setback for democracy.
In a communique from the jungle, the rebel leadership blamed the murder on hard-liners within the PRI who are worried that Mr. Colosio would go too far to clean up Mexico's political system.
A trunk of Mr. Aburto's personal possessions, which showed up at a low-level court office late last week, included some provocative books.
In addition to a Bible and some pornographic material, the trunk included a work by Karl Marx and a book on the 1963 assassination of U.S. President John F. Kennedy, a court official said.
There was also a book by Rafael Loret de Mola, whose novel, "The Interim President," caused a stir last autumn.
It tells of the assassination of a Mexican presidential candidate in order to enable the sitting president to retain power.
But a court official couldn't say which of Mr. Loret's books was found.
Miss Gonzalez said Mr. Aburto was upset with his parents' divorce plans.
His father lives in the Los Angeles area and his mother in Tijuana.
Like many in the dusty barrio of weather-beaten homes and outhouses, Mr. Aburto used Tijuana as a staging area for forays into California to work.
Several neighbors and co-workers of Mr. Aburto describe him as a very controlled man, who gave little information about himself.
His family was reportedly Jehovah's Witnesses in Roman Catholic Mexico.
Mr. Aburto also was reportedly kicked out of school twice because he refused to respect the Mexican flag.
Two witnesses to his confession say he showed little emotion until one of the nine people in the interrogation told him Mr. Colosio had died from his head wound.
Mr. Aburto has reportedly said that he only meant to wound Mr. Colosio, even though he shot the candidate in the head at point-blank range.
Xavier Carvajal Machado, a Tijuana law school professor, and Jose Luis Perez Canchola, head of a state human rights commission, both witnesses to the confession, emphasized Mr. Aburto's serenity during the interrogation.
"Aburto isn't crazy," Mr. Carvajal Machado said.
"He is a person who is very serious, very tight-lipped and very cold."
But during the confession, Mr. Aburto also displayed a consistent lack of logic.
"I did it to get press attention and . . . to declare my pacifist ideas and to denounce armed groups that are in different parts of the country and that I have personally belonged to," Mr. Aburto said in his confession, according to a document read to reporters.
When pressed twice by investigators about why a pacifist would kill someone to bring attention to his views, Mr. Aburto refused to answer.
