Alusuisse-Lonza Holding Ltd. reported a 31% drop in group net income for 1993, but the company forecast a major increase in earnings this year after slashing dependence on primary aluminum.
"Our earnings in 1994 should be considerably better," said Theodor M. Tschopp, chief executive officer.
A profit boost won't come from a "major improvement in the market situation, but through restructuring," he added.
In 1993, consolidated earnings fell to 83 million Swiss francs ($57.1 million) from a year-earlier 121 million francs.
The same period saw a reduction in sales of 5.5%, to 6.2 billion francs ($4.3 billion) from 6.5 billion francs.
Operating profit fell 21%, to 278 million francs from 350 million francs, and cash flow fell 10%, to 523 million francs from 583 million francs.
In 1993, the Swiss concern was hurt by miserable conditions in the aluminum industry.
European aluminum producers have been hit hard by poor economic conditions, overcapacity and exports from countries in eastern Europe.
The company has responded by closing smelters, sharply cutting primary aluminum production and concentrating on "upmarket" products for the automobile, machinery and construction industries.
The smelter closings, along with "strict cost-containment and productivity-enhancement programs," will position the aluminum division for "significantly enhanced performance," says the 1993 annual report, highlights of which were released at a news conference.
Mr. Tschopp said the company's strategic target remains a further reduction in the company's dependence on aluminum as it strives for an equal sales split between chemicals, packaging and aluminum.
Taking into account this year's acquisition of the Canadian packaging company Lawson Mardon Group Ltd., Mr. Tschopp said the breakdown is aluminum 43%, packaging 36% and chemicals 21%.
If the group is to reach it's target of an equal balance between its three divisions, "we must make a chemicals acquisition," said Peter Kalantzis, executive-board member in charge of chemicals.
Meanwhile, analysts are optimistic.
"Starting in 1994, we expect a strong recovery in earnings," said Serge Lederman, chief analyst at Lombard Odier, a Geneva bank.
He expects net to increase to 179 million francs this year and to 300 million in 1995.
UBS Global Research forecasts an improvement in net this year of around 50%, and a 23% jump in 1995.
"We view the group's new strategy as positive," says a UBS report.
