So it's agreed: The nation's welfare system is a moral and fiscal disaster.
A consensus seems to have formed that welfare dependency must be curbed, subsidies for illegitimacy questioned, and opportunities for work expanded.
But instead of constructively using the force from this rare alignment of the political planets, the Clinton Administration is delaying action on welfare reform, making it unlikely it will pass Congress this year.
Instead, it will single-mindedly pursue its grandiose overhaul of health care, on which there is clearly no consensus on what to do.
Every administration reaches forks in the public policy road where the direction it takes speaks volumes about its priorities.
This is one of them.
On Monday, President Clinton told his Cabinet that health care was so complex he wouldn't have time to attend to welfare reform until the nation's health care concerns are cured.
The President lashed out at his critics, arguing that Republicans hadn't wanted to change welfare until he took office.
That's a stretch.
It would be news to the Reagan Administration, which worked with Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan in 1988 to pass the first major bill to move welfare recipients into the work force.
GOP Governors Tommy Thompson of Wisconsin and John Engler of Michigan have signed legislation phasing out some welfare programs.
The President is trying to avoid a painful truth: Pushing radical welfare reform would alienate his party's multiple liberals.
White House officials admit they're concerned about recent statements by liberal House Members that they might not back a health care compromise if he challenged their sacred welfare cows.
Welfare reform would also alienate the unions, still angry at the President for whipping them on Nafta.
The only unions that are growing today are those for government workers, and they fear any public-sector workfare program could mean fewer jobs for their members.
The politics of the opposition to welfare reform raises an interesting issue for the people actually trapped in welfare to think about.
The factions standing in the way of restoring their dignity are mainly traditional white liberals and unions, both bulwarks of the modern Democratic Party.
They're not the ones sitting for hours at the humiliation factories called welfare offices, but they seem to feel they own what former social worker Bob Woodson calls the "Poverty Pentagon" and the people dependent on it.
The people wanting to do something are often those who know it all too well.
"Going on welfare closed a door between my parents that never reopened," says former welfare recipient Rosemary Bray.
"Daddy became one of the shadow men who walked out back doors as caseworkers came in through the front."
Indeed, a great many black Americans support radical steps to restore the country's work ethic.
A 1992 survey of blacks in 10 Southern states by the Atlanta Constitution asked: "Do you believe that everyone who gets welfare should be required to work, including women with young children?"
An astonishing 81% of black Americans agreed.
Nationwide, a Fabrizio/McLaughlin poll last August found 91% of blacks wanted able-bodied welfare recipients to work for benefits.
Popular demand for a radical overhaul of welfare is so great that a politically acute liberal such as New York Governor Mario Cuomo has put the issue front and center.
Yesterday in his annual State of the State address, he called for reducing fraud by fingerprinting welfare recipients and requiring that teenage welfare recipients earn their assistance through school attendance or part-time work.
Last November, liberal Democrats in Wisconsin helped pass a bill that will end all welfare by 1998, and will devise a whole new system by next year.
Bill Clinton was elected in 1992 in part because his pledge to "end welfare as we know it" convinced many voters that he was a New Democrat.
Last month, he said Charles Murray's analysis of the perverse effects of welfare was "essentially right."
Sounds good, but it's just impressive blather.
As to action, he has decided to stand welfare reform in a corner while he attempts a quixotic federal takeover of the one-seventh of the nation's GNP now spent on health care.
It's an instructive decision.
People with less hubris would have taken on a more doable piece of the health care issue, say ensuring portability of insurance.
That would have left political capital to do welfare, too.
Instead we get Hillary Clinton's pipedream.
Meanwhile, we have a welfare system in which people are truly suffering -- physically, emotionally and morally -- and obviously have been for a long time.
Large parts of our greatest cities are a daily disgrace to the country's idea of itself.
For whatever reason, Bill Clinton is now wandering down the wrong fork in the road.
