The investment world demonstrated again how interconnected it is, as stock markets from Manila to Madrid tumbled as much as 7% following Friday's 2.4% decline on Wall Street.
Nonetheless, money managers and equity strategists remain basically optimistic.
"Investors slightly overreacted to something that had been well-forecast, well-thought about and should have been well-discounted," said Andrew Garthwaite, a global strategist at S.G. Warburg & Co. in London.
"All we're talking about here is a trading decline in the market -- not a fundamental shift in view."
The multimarket drops represent "more of a correction than a collapse," said Francis Wong, a fund manager at Prudential Asia Fund Management Ltd. in Hong Kong.
If so, it was a hard-smack kind of correction, particularly in Asia's smaller stock markets.
Based on the Dow Jones World Stock Index, Hong Kong fell 5.8%, Thailand 6.6%, Malaysia 4.7% and Singapore 3.4%.
But in Japan -- home of the world's second-biggest stock market -- the index fell only 0.9%.
Tokyo's Nikkei 225-stock index tumbled 287.03 points, or 1.4%, to 20014.40.
In trading Tuesday, the Nikkei index spurted 501.95 points to close the morning session at 20516.35 on reports that Japan's government had moved a step toward breaking a stalemate over economic policy.
Monday's first-section volume was estimated at 300 million shares, down from 377.5 million shares in the previous session.
Decliners swamped gainers, 746-293.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues fell 13.36 points to 1601.44.
European stock markets started off on a similarly dismal note, but recovered from their lows after investors saw that U.S. share prices in New York were rebounding.
Based on the Dow Jones index, the British stock market fell 1.3%, Germany 2.4% and France 1.7%.
Meanwhile, Switzerland, Spain, the Netherlands, Sweden and Norway were off between 2% and 2.8%; Italy fell 1.3%.
At one point, German shares were off as much as 3.4% and British as much as 2.9%.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.83, down 0.81, reflecting the lower Asia/Pacific and European markets and higher American markets.
Coal stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 107.97, up 3.73, or 3.6%, with Cyprus Amax Minerals of the U.S. posting a 9.5% gain in its local currency.
Plantations stocks trailed at 215.28, down 11.96, or 5.3%, with Asiatic Development of Malaysia sliding 9% in local currency.
Even before the Federal Reserve's modest interest-rate increase on Friday and subsequent U.S. stock-market sell-off, markets in Asia and Europe were fragile.
After soaring last year on fast economic growth in Asia and in Europe on falling interest rates and very optimistic corporate-earnings forecasts, stocks were trading at valuations that stood well above historic norms.
In early January, stock markets in Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines and Indonesia climbed to records -- only to suffer severe setbacks late in the month.
Last week, those in Britain, France, Switzerland, Italy, Holland, Spain, Sweden and Denmark also rose to highs, but not with much vigor.
On Thursday, they fell after Germany's central bank failed to lower interest rates as many investors had expected.
Some analysts still worry that the dollar could rise to levels that would make the Bundesbank reluctant to cut interest rates for fear of reigniting inflation; that's because many basic materials, such as oil, are priced in dollars.
"That is a risk for stock markets in Germany and France in particular," said Marcus Grubb, an international equity strategist at Salomon Brothers International in London.
Another risk is that instead of just reassuring financial markets of its antiinflation credentials, the Fed "could be signaling a sharp rise in inflation in the U.S., which could delay further falls in global interest rates," said Mr. Grubb.
"It could also choke off the estimated $1 billion to $2 billion a month of U.S. mutual-fund investment going into European stocks."
Much of that money has also been invested in fast-growing Asian economies where the monetary policies of several countries are either directly or indirectly tied to that of the U.S. "People out here will look to Wall Street for direction," said Richard Cohen, an equity salesman at Baring Securities Ltd. in Singapore.
Even without direct financial or policy links, "You can get contagion-markets reacting to each other for reasons other than the fundamentals," said Sushil Wadhwani, director of British and European equity strategy at Goldman Sachs International in London.
"Even if individual investors do not sell equities when interest rates start to rise, share prices may, nevertheless, fall because other investors mistakenly believe that individual investors were about to sell."
He warned: "The danger with that kind of selling is that if it gets out of hand, it can become self-justifying."
But dismissing such a risk as unlikely, he said he viewed the sell-off "as a buying opportunity."
Similarly, Mr. Grubb called the stock declines "a very irrational reaction in the markets."
He noted that economic growth -- especially in continental Europe -- was much slower than in the U.S. and predicted that interest rates in Europe, including Germany, were headed lower.
In addition, Mr. Grubb noted that even with the Fed's tightening, bank-deposit rates in the U.S. are still very low.
"So mutual-fund cash flows are going to continue to be strong, even if they are reduced over the course of the year," he said.
Pessimistic about the prospects for German stocks -- along with many other strategists -- Mr. Grubb said he was drawn to European stock markets "where authorities are likely to ease without waiting for the Bundesbank and that will also benefit from the dollar rally: the United Kingdom, Switzerland, Sweden and Spain."
Meanwhile, Goldman Sachs is telling "clients that Europe and Japan should suffer least in all this," said Mr. Wadhwani.
"Next in the pecking order should be the U.S. and Latin America."
He said the world's most vulnerable stock markets were those in Asia, except for Japan -- "essentially because their interest rates are linked directly to the U.S."
One of Mr. Garthwaite's favorite stock markets is Britain, which -- selling at 16.3 times estimated 1994 earnings -- is among Europe's cheapest.
"That puts the earnings yield above the 10-year bond yield, which is usually a good sign of value," said the S.G. Warburg strategist.
He added that "apart from Belgium, the British stock market has the highest dividend yield" among 27 world stock markets analyzed by his firm.
Still, Mr. Garthwaite said, "I've got to be cautious."
When markets "sell off so quickly on something that was so wellknown about," he explains, "it shows that equities are increasingly vulnerable."
London's Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index dropped 56.3 points, or 1.6%, to 3419.1.
The FT 30-stock index lost 35.9 points, or 1.34%, to 2633.9.
Volume was 894.3 million shares, compared with 785.1 million shares Friday.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
