MORE MARKET researchers are getting wired on computer networks and finding that focus groups in cyberspace are faster and cheaper than the old-fashioned kind.
The latest and potentially biggest venture involves BKG America, a New York research firm specializing in children, teens and Generation X. It has an exclusive agreement with America Online to conduct electronic research with five- to 29-year-olds.
BKG will collect data via broad surveys and in-depth electronic chat sessions and sell the findings to corporate and ad agency clients.
The service, American Dialogue, begins this month, with BKG electronically probing 600 households with five- to 12-year-olds.
Marian Salzman, BKG America president, says marketers want realtime feedback, particularly from the 20- to 29-year-olds who make up Generation X.
Other companies are doing consumer research on line.
Viacom's Nickelodeon network established its own private forum of eight-to-12-year-olds last year on the CompuServe network, a unit of H & R Block.
Prodigy Services, a joint venture of International Business Machines and Sears, Roebuck, markets a focus-group package to companies and counts the three major television networks among its users.
BKG plans to wire up 5,000 to 10,000 children and young adults by offering them free America Online software.
Electronic participants also get $35 to $50 per session-the amount paid to members of traditional focus groups.
Electronic research is cheaper than gathering data face to face, Ms. Salzman says.
A typical in-person focus group costs $4,000, she estimates.
Electronically, it could be done for $1,500.
And although electronic research doesn't yet allow visual observation, Ms. Salzman says that isn't a problem.
"The degree of intimacy in this medium makes up for what you're losing," she says.
Consumer experts are intrigued by the idea but caution that it won't replace traditional focus groups yet.
Barbara Feigin, executive vice president at Grey Advertising, notes online users are "a tiny sliver of the population."
Users -- mostly upscale, highly educated men -- are a fine subject for research about high-tech products, she says, but not massmarket items.
"They aren't the true target," she says.
"They're not the ones who are going to buy it."
THE PHILADELPHIA property management firm of Rubin Strouse Realty is trying to adapt consumer marketing tactics to the commercial real-estate business.
The office and industrial division of Rubin Organization is hoping to attract new tenants and keep existing ones with the "RubinEdge," a package of perks and discounts to make commercial tenants feel good about their landlord.
Rubin Strouse's stab at creating a real-estate brand name comes as the commercial business is desperately in need of customer loyalty.
"Tenants are playing musical chairs, moving from one property to another," says Joseph F. Coradino, Rubin Strouse president.
"We hope that they will say, `All things being equal, we'd rather be in a Rubin property.'"
Rubin Strouse's office tenants receive a personalized identification card entitling them to small amenities in the lobbies of Rubin properties, such as free umbrella loans on rainy days or doughnuts and coffee on cold mornings.
Local retailers and restaurants offer cardholders discounts.
The company also produces newsletters for the tenants in its commercial buildings.
Rubin also has begun a bulk-buying program covering about a dozen properties, giving those owners cheaper prices on all they buy for their buildings, from elevator maintenance to paper products.
BAD NEWS FOR thrifty shoppers: Marketers issued about the same number of cents-off coupons last year as they did in 1992, ending 20 years of steady increases.
Manufacturers distributed 323 billion coupons last year, roughly on par with 1992, according to Carolina Manufacturers Service, a Winston-Salem, N.C., firm that tracks coupon usage.
The 322 million issued in 1992 marked a 10% increase over 1991, when companies were eager to woo recession-battered shoppers.
Coupon distribution began its decline at the end of 1992, CMS says, because many companies exhausted promotion budgets early in the year.
In 1993, coupon usage didn't pick up partly because everyday low-pricing policies become popular.
"All the traditional ways of promoting products have been called into question," says Joan Johnson, CMS manager of marketing communications.
Shoppers, too, are apparently less interested in coupons.
They redeemed 7.7 billion coupons last year, a mere 2.3% of all manufacturers' coupons distributed, down 3% from the 7.9 billion redeemed in 1992.
The redemption rate for free-standing inserts, those glossy coupons in Sunday newspapers, was even lower, at 2.1% in 1993, compared with 2.3% in 1992.
CMS says manufacturers have diminished coupons' effectiveness by featuring more than one per page in inserts and by giving consumers less time to use them.
In 1993, coupons had an average life of 3.8 months; in 1988, they lasted twice as long.
VALENTINE'S DAY is still more a holiday for women.
According to Godiva Chocolatier, a unit of Campbell Soup, 80% of American men say they intend to give their Valentine a gift, compared with 65% of women.
Both men and women consider flowers the most romantic gift, followed by jewelry, lingerie, chocolates and perfume. . . .
In the last six months, 62% of shoppers left a store without buying anything because they couldn't find a sales clerk, according to a Yankelovich Partners survey for MasterCard International and the National Retail Federation.
