The good times in small stocks just keep on rolling.
Small-capitalization stocks, as measured by the Russell 2000 index, pushed into record territory last week, led by robust showings from semiconductor shares and other technology issues.
Following this year's strong start and 1993's impressive 17% gain in the Russell 2000, analysts are increasingly convinced that the small-stock rally that began in earnest in November 1990 has long legs.
Friday, the Russell 2000 index gained 0.63 point to 261.27.
For the week the index was up 2.09 points.
Typically, small stocks tend to fall on tax-related selling late in one year and then rebound in January, hence the oftcited "January effect."
But many analysts are convinced that the market's current momentum reflects more than just the traditional early-January bounce in smallcap performance.
"The long-term bullish case for small caps is still very solid," says David Bostian, chief economist and market strategist at brokers Herzog Heine Geduld in New York.
"Small caps have been doing much better relative to the S&P 500 since late 1990, with a few periods of minor laggard behavior.
I think we'll see a lot of new money going into the sector."
Conventional wisdom holds that bull market cycles in small stocks last five to seven years.
Hence, the current rally should be securely in mid-stride.
But that's scant comfort to those worried about a sudden about-face in what is often a volatile market.
Such worries have been justified in previous cycles.
Indeed, small caps historically have outshone their bigger brethren only when mid-cap and large-cap stocks were on an upward trend.
When the big guys have stumbled, small-cap stocks -- with their thinner markets -- traditionally have fallen harder and for longer periods of time.
If and when the broad market stumbles, analysts such as Mr. Bostian are going to keep a close eye on small stocks for clues about how strong the market for those issues is.
"My guess is that we're very close to an intermediate correction in the broader market," he says.
"One important clue to the continuation of small-cap leadership will be superior performance by the Russell 2000 during this forthcoming decline."
He's looking for small-cap stocks to retreat less than big issues.
"That would show real market strength" for the long term, he says.
The Russell 2000 tracks the performance of some 2000 small-cap stocks, with market valuations between roughly $60 million and $590 million, traded on the Nasdaq Stock Market and the major exchanges.
-- Small-stock valuations, in relation to projected earnings growth, are well below historic highs, a key factor in a market that has been driven largely by earnings momentum.
-- Tax policy changes that took effect last year provide an additional incentive for upper-income investors to seek capital gains in the small-stock market, where growth-oriented, nondividend-paying issues dominate.
The new law raised the top income tax rate to 39.6% while leaving the top capital gains rate at 28%.
-- Small-cap market leaders, including technology, biotech and selective health-care stocks, seem set to power ahead after a year of intermittent jitters, while some promising but highly speculative sectors, like wireless communications, will need to prove they can deliver.
Technology stocks, which took a beating in November when the overall Russell 2000 dropped 3.4%, seem to have weathered a long-awaited correction, while beaten-up health stocks appear to be making a comeback on a growing sense that a health-care reform package is still a long way off.
And, say some, the mild correction in the hot technology sector was just what the market needed.
"If a short, sharp correction is enough to blow the fluff out of the market, I'd rather have that than a long, drawn-out one," says Claudia Mott, director of smallcap research at Prudential Securities in New York.
Overall, Ms. Mott thinks small stocks are relatively cheap and are going to continue to outperform the market.
Specifically, she notes that small-cap stocks are trading at a lower price-earnings multiple, in relation to estimated long-term earnings growth rates, than large-cap companies.
"Valuations are still very attractive, but I don't think valuations alone can carry this cycle," Ms. Mott says.
Fundamentals should also prove supportive this year, she adds.
In terms of first-half earnings reports, "People will be looking for good first and second quarters because we had such a strong economy in the fourth quarter.
What's more, we haven't gotten any damaging interest rate news."
Per-share earnings of the Russell 2000 companies are expected to grow 23% this year, well above the 16% projected growth for big-cap companies, according to estimates by Frank Russell Co. of Tacoma, Wash.
But any failure to meet earnings expectations will result in drubbings of individual stocks, as has been the case in recent weeks, Ms. Mott and others emphasize.
Jeffrey Applegate, chief investment strategist for CS First Boston, is looking for the widened margin between capital gains taxes and ordinary income taxes to give small stocks a powerful boost this year.
Certainly that's been the case in the past when ordinary income has been taxed more heavily than capital gains, and Mr. Applegate suggests that tax policy may be a more potent influence on the performance of small stocks than any other single factor.
"Small caps only began outperforming in late 1990," he says, "and that's because the capital gains tax rate was rising until 1990."
Still, Mr. Bostian, the Herzog Heine Geduld economist, says government policy might be a mixed bag in the end for small-cap stocks this year.
"The question is whether benefits to small-cap investors from capital gains will more than offset the potential damage to the earnings of small-cap companies that will result from the health-care reforms," he says.
"Nobody knows exactly how successful the administration will be in getting its health-care cost-cutting mandates through Congress."
Propelled by the outlook for healthy fourth-quarter earnings, small-company stocks continued to rally, with key indexes again closing at record levels.
The Russell 2000 index of small-cap stocks traded on the Nasdaq Stock Market and the major exchanges rose 0.63, or 0.2%, to 261.27, its third straight record close.
The Nasdaq Composite index was up 4.50, or 0.6%, at 792.31, its second consecutive record close.
On Nasdaq, gainers finished ahead of decliners, 1,723 to 1,365.
Total Nasdaq volume was 298 million shares, compared with 290 million on Thursday, while National Market volume was 258 million shares, compared with 247 million.
Among the most active of the top small-company gainers was Skolniks, which was up 1 1/8, or 8.8%, to 13 7/8 on news that the company reached agreements with two distributors that more than double the number of supermarkets and convenience stores to which its bagels will be delivered.
The company said 2,400 locations are being added through an agreement with Wal-Mart's McLane distribution division, and 1,200 more locations through Core-Mark International, a closely held distributor based in San Francisco.
Precision Systems was one of the biggest small-cap losers of the day, dropping 1/4, or 6.2%, to 3 3/4.
The decline came after the company reported a loss of 41 cents a share for its first quarter ended Nov. 30, compared with the year-earlier net of three cents a share.
One of the most active small-company stocks was Robomatix Technologies, which went public Wednesday in an initial public offering of 1,750,000 shares priced at $7.75, below the company's anticipated price of $8.50 to $9.25.
The stock was down 1/8, at 7 3/4.
National Media rose 2, or 24%, to 10 1/4 after it confirmed that it received a $10-a-share proposal from ValueVision International for stock that would give ValueVision a 50.1% stake in the company.
Baltimore Bancorp rose 1 3/4, or 11%, to 17 3/8 after the company confirmed it is in talks with several bank holding companies regarding the possible sale of the company.
The gain followed Thursday's 12% increase.
Larry Bauman contributed to this article.
