Conservative investors are putting billions of dollars into investments that don't disclose past performance, current returns or annual fees.
What's more, these people are committing themselves to making payments for years to come, and paying commissions that typically range from 60% to more than 100% of their first-year payments.
The investment?
Tax-deferred "cash-value" life insurance policies.
Unlike "term" life insurance, which provides only death protection, cash-value policies -- whole, universal, and variable life -- also include tax-deferred investment accounts or mutual funds.
Many people use them to save for college, retirement and other purposes.
But while these investors probably wouldn't consider other investments without checking past performance, current returns, sales commissions and annual fees, few ever think of evaluating life insurance in the same way.
That can be a bad mistake.
Although the tax-free buildup in a good whole-life policy can make these products attractive investments for some people, it isn't wise to invest in anything you don't understand.
If the costs are too high or the returns are too low, even tax deferral and a guaranteed death benefit won't make a policy desirable.
High annual costs and mediocre performance can offset the benefits of low commissions.
And without some basic information, you can't knowledgeably weigh one agent's proposal against another's.
So how can you evaluate a policy?
Insurance industry executives say to focus on some key factors that provide reliable clues to whether a company is at the top of the pack in terms of investment performance, cost, commissions and continuing service.
Start with performance.
Forget agents' "illustrations."
Since your cash values will reflect the performance of the life insurance company's investments, it makes sense to begin by looking at whether it has been among the top performers over the past 10 and 20 years, according to A.M. Best Co.
A good agent will be glad to show you the 20-year dividend history, says Joseph D. Sargent, president of Guardian Life Insurance Co., New York.
It's easier to look at past performance if you're investing in variable life policies, since you allocate your investment dollars into mutual funds, which report returns the same way other mutual funds do.
Unfortunately, most of the funds in variable life policies are too new to have significant track records, and even when you know the track record on the fund, that doesn't tell you what your return would have been after insurance company fees and death-protection costs.
Another factor to consider is the impact of costs.
Companies that don't keep expenses under control may include those that are badly run, in financial trouble or in the process of expanding away from the core business.
Although there's no simple way to compare costs among different companies, experts say good indicators include low turnover among agents, since the company won't spend as much to attract and train new agents.
(Another plus of good retention rates: They typically indicate that a company has better-trained, more productive agents -- which means your agent will more likely be around in years to come to answer questions about your policy).
"Persistency rates" -- how long the policyholders stick around -- is another important clue to costs.
Companies that don't retain policyholders tend to have higher acquisition costs.
Industry figures show that, on average, about 50% of insurance investors drop their policy within five years.
But the persistency rate is significantly higher at some companies: At Principal Mutual Life Insurance Co., Des Moines, Iowa, 65% of life-insurance policies remain in force at the five-year point, and at Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Co., Springfield, Mass., the figure is 73%.
High persistency rates can also boost performance.
"Good persistency lets the company take a longer-term view with its investments, so it can ride out cycles in real estate and the bond markets," says Robert Carlson, executive vice president of Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Co., Milwaukee.
In short, companies with lower turnover of agents and policyholders have lower operating costs.
Among the top companies in terms of performance histories and cost control include Northwestern Mutual, Guardian, Principal, Massachusetts Mutual and State Farm Life Insurance Co., Bloomington, Ill.
What about commissions?
Up-front sales and marketing expenses can range from 65% to 75% of first-year premiums at blue-chip companies, such as those above, to more than 165% at some other companies.
A growing number of low-load life insurance polices, which are sold directly over the phone, bypassing agents, can save investors thousands of dollars in commissions.
But before rushing into low-load policies, don't ignore other costs and performance.
You won't come out ahead buying from a low-load company if it has high annual operating costs and flabby performance.
The parallel in the mutual funds landscape could be a fund with no front-end load, but high annual 12b1 fees, steep annual expenses and dull performance.
"I'm disappointed in many of the low-load companies," says Elliott Lipson, a fee-only insurance consultant in Atlanta.
"Typically, the only advantage with low-load is if you surrender early," that is, cash in your policy within the first seven or so years.
"If you look at performance, the difference between low-load and traditional policies evaporates by the eighth or ninth year," Mr. Lipson says.
He adds that companies with zero up-front commissions, such as USAA Life Insurance Co., San Antonio, compare favorably, however, and let you build up cash values quickly.
If you decide to stick with a traditional, agent-sold policy, a good agent can reduce commissions almost to the level of low-loads by blending the high-cost cash-value policy (which contains the tax-deferred investing component) with a low-cost term-life policy, says John E. Sebastian, a sales representative with American Pension Benefits Inc., in Orlando, Fla.
In these types of policies, cash values can be almost as high as low-load policies in the early years, he says.
Finally, it's crucial to choose companies that have high ratings for financial soundness.
Industry experts say that's because the high start-up costs and continuing expenses make insurance a good investment only when it is a long-term investment.
R. J. Reynolds Tobacco International Inc. said it plans to invest in a cigarette making-and-packing facility in the Czech Republic.
The facility is part of a $100 million commitment earmarked for the Czech Republic over the next five years by RJR Tobacco, a unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.
RJR began importing Camel cigarettes into the country in 1993.
The new plant will have a production capacity of about 2.5 billion cigarettes annually.
