Columbia Gas System Inc.'s main pipeline subsidiary filed a long-awaited reorganization plan, but creditor groups including crucial natural gas suppliers said the plan fell woefully short of their demands.
Under the Chapter 11 reorganization plan, filed in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Wilmington, Del., Columbia Gas System's main pipeline unit, Columbia Gas Transmission Corp., is proposing to pay $900 million to settle claims by gas suppliers.
The company's huge obligations from above-market-priced gas supply contracts drove it to make the Chapter 11 filing in mid-1991 to force a renegotiation of the contracts.
Columbia Gas says it expects a court-appointed mediator will recommend valuing the contract claims at about $1.13 billion.
However, natural gas producers, including some of the nation's largest oil and gas companies, have valued the claims at $10 billion to $13 billion.
Thus, Columbia's reorganization proposal is far short of their estimates and is likely to lead to further legal delays in resolving the Chapter 11 proceeding.
The stock market, nonetheless, viewed the proposal positively.
Columbia Gas shares rose $3.125, or 14%, to $26.25 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
"The proposal as it relates to producers is simply not close to reality," said John Airey, an attorney representing a committee comprised of hundreds of gas producers in the Appalachian area, who put their claims against Columbia at more than $7 billion.
"It's simply a continuing effort by Columbia to not pay the value of the claims."
In its filing, Columbia Gas Transmission proposed paying 100 cents on the dollar for about $1.75 billion in secured claims and interest held by the parent company, and $2.8 million in tax to the Internal Revenue Service.
Among unsecured creditors, the company proposes paying $900 million in settlement of gas supplier contracts, plus about $650 million for other unsecured claims, including $300 million owed to the parent.
The $3.3 billion distribution is based on an estimated value for the company of $3.1 billion, as well as a proposal by the parent to inject $200 million in cash or stock into the unit.
The Unsecured Creditors Committee, which also opposes the plan, wants about $1.75 billion in debt owed by the unit to the parent converted into equity, which would make it subordinate to the unsecured creditors' debt.
The committee also wants the parent to return $500 million in various payments made by the unit, and return millions of dollars of oil and gas properties which had been transferred out of Columbia Gas Transmission.
Although the producer claims have been the key to the bankruptcy-law proceeding, the unsecured creditors claims have proved a serious sticking point.
Columbia has proposed to settle them for about $200 million, and has also agreed to discharge certain potentially expensive environmental claims.
The filing assumes the Chapter 11 proceeding will wind up June 30, but Columbia said the actual date will depend on a number of pending legal steps and required approvals.
Reorganization expenses are expected to total about $66 million by mid-1994, Columbia said.
The parent's reorganization plan will be filed at a later date, and the companies expect to emerge from Chapter 11 protection simultaneously.
