In a closely watched libel case, a federal appeals court said an author may proceed with a lawsuit alleging that a harsh book review published by the New York Times ruined his career.
The ruling by a three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals here was a procedural victory for investigative journalist Dan Moldea and could encourage other authors to sue over negative reviews.
Writing for the majority, Judge Harry Edwards said that simply because a potentially harmful statement appears in a book review doesn't insulate the publisher from being sued.
Judge Edwards compared a review calling a journalist "sloppy" -- as the Times review did -- to a published description of a brain surgeon as having "clumsy hands."
Both criticisms could be the basis of suits, he said.
The dissenting judge, Abner Mikva, warned that the ruling would "open up the entire arena of artistic criticism to mass defamation suits."
Lawyers who represent media clients worried that the overall tenor of the majority opinion would deter trial judges in Washington, and possibly other jurisdictions, from rejecting libel claims in the early stages of litigation.
Friday's ruling didn't directly address the merits of the suit against the Times; instead, the appeals court said a trial judge had erred in 1992 by throwing out the suit before it even got to a jury.
A spokeswoman for New York Times Co. said the publisher is considering seeking a rehearing by the full, 10-member appeals court.
Mr. Moldea sued the Times in 1990, after the newspaper published a scathing review of his book, "Interference: How Organized Crime Influences Professional Football," which alleged connections between the National Football League and organized crime and gambling.
The reviewer, a Times sports writer, said the book contained "too much sloppy journalism" to be trusted.
Demanding $10 million in damages, Mr. Moldea claimed that the review portrayed him as incompetent and, because of the Times's influence, effectively ended his career as a free-lance journalist and author.
But the trial judge ruled that the Times couldn't be sued for libel because the review contained only unverifiable statements of opinion and indisputably true assertions.
The Supreme Court, in a 1990 ruling, rejected the previously widespread judicial view that statements of opinion were entirely protected against libel suits.
Friday's decision by the Washington appeals court said a libel suit concerning a book review should go before a jury if the plaintiff can show two things: that the review was based on possibly untrue statements, and that it plausibly could have harmed the plaintiff's career or reputation.
The majority said some of the characterizations of Mr. Moldea's book were "sufficiently factual" to allow a jury to determine their truth or falsity.
Moreover, the majority said a jury could conceivably find some of the statements in the review to be false.
One such statement was that Mr. Moldea misportrayed a pre-game meeting between former New York Jets quarterback Joe Namath and an opposing player as "sinister."
Mr. Moldea argues that he depicted the meeting as innocent.
