Ned Meara, a buyer for Grand Union supermarkets in Wayne, N.J., spends much of his day fending off line extensions from the nation's largest consumer-products companies.
Things have gotten so bad, he frets, that one day a salesman will probably offer him right- and left-handed bathroom tissue.
Product-line extensions have long been viewed as a cheap, low-risk way to make extra sales.
But the obsession with adding a new flavor, size or formulation to a brand is starting to backfire, leaving store shelves clogged with slow-moving products.
"It's gotten totally out of control," says Mr. Meara.
Line extensions represent nearly 75% of new-product introductions, compared with 63% in 1990, according to Marketing Intelligence Service Ltd.
"Line extensions are the major reason why big brands are hurting," says Al Ries, chairman of Trout & Ries, a marketing consulting firm in Greenwich, Conn.
"Everybody sells everything, and nobody is making any money."
The result is a parade of doomed products, Mr. Ries says, including Life Savers gum, A.1. poultry sauce, Clorox detergent and Coors Rocky Mountain sparkling water.
A few companies are pruning product lines or investing in new offerings, such as Unilever's Lever 2000 soap and Surf detergent.
Both have been far more successful than most line extensions.
But usually, companies add a flavor or scent to a brand rather than spend the $30 million needed to create, advertise and ship a new product line.
The main reason product managers resort to line extensions: "To get a quick fix for the next quarter," says Albert Tuhy , a senior buyer for Walgreen Co. a large drugstore chain.
While new products have a 80% to 90% failure rate, line extensions have a higher chance of survival.
And with less invested up front, companies often have more modest sales goals for line extensions.
Marketing executives defend line extensions as the best way to build a business.
Executives at Kimberly-Clark Corp.'s Kleenex unit say line extensions have allowed the brand's volume to grow in a period of slow population growth and increased use of over-the-counter cold remedies.
"We try to get facial tissue in every room of the home," says James Bernd, executive vice president of Kimberly-Clark.
"If it is there, it will get used."
Mr. Bernd's philosophy has led to 20 varieties of Kleenex facial tissues, including lotion-impregnated tissues, boxes with nursery-rhyme drawings for children's rooms and a "man-sized" box, with tissues 66% bigger than regular Kleenex.
"In case we have a lumberjack shopping in our stores" quips Mr. Meara, the Grand Union buyer.
Executives at RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. concede that line extensions sometimes get out of hand.
Its A.1. poultry sauce was a flop.
"We quickly learned that A.1. means beef," says a Nabisco spokesman.
But Nabisco hasn't forsaken line extensions.
Its latest offering: Life Savers gelatin.
The Bayer Select line is a classic example of a poorly conceived line extension, Mr. Ries says.
It was introduced in the fall of 1992 by Eastman Kodak Co.'s Sterling Winthrop drug unit to combat the rapid growth of nonaspirin pain relievers, such as Tylenol and Advil.
But the Bayer name has been linked to aspirin for nearly a century, and Trout & Ries say any nonaspirin product with the name is likely to fail.
Indeed, Bayer Select is off to a slow start.
Despite an estimated $100 million marketing budget, the Bayer Select painkillers account for less than 2% of the $2.46 billion analgesic market, according to Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.
The line's sales were $43.8 million for the 52 weeks ended Dec. 19.
"They have not done well in relationship to what they spent," says Mr. Tuhy, the Walgreen buyer.
Sterling Winthrop recently replaced the executive with direct responsibility for all Bayer products in the U.S., and late last week changed the brand's ad agency.
Marketing experts say Bayer risks blurring its image as the top aspirin by targeting Tylenol and Advil.
Bayer Select is "a bad idea gone bad," says Jack Trout, president of Trout & Ries.
Bayer Select has 11 products, each for extremely specific ailments, from menstrual pain to sinus pain to backaches.
The recently dismissed ad agency, Ayer, created the line's clunky slogan, "Exactly What's Right for Exactly What's Wrong."
Sterling won't comment on whether the slogan also will be dropped.
The ailment-specific product line is confusing to consumers and has diluted Sterling's massive promotion of it.
"By breaking up this money into a million different pieces, you are not putting it behind any one idea to make it stick," says Mr. Trout.
William G. Pietersen, president of Sterling Winthrop's consumer health group, notes that Bayer Select has a larger market share than many rivals.
Still, he acknowledges that its volume goals were "overly ambitious.
We are not there yet."
He adds that "it's too early to call the results in terms of ultimate levels of success."
Still, Mr. Tuhy is considering dropping some Bayer Select items from Walgreen stores.
He says manufacturers are getting more cautious about jamming line extensions into stores, given the expense of shipping products that don't sell.
At least Mr. Tuhy hopes so.
"Our stores aren't getting any bigger," he says dryly.
Former Chrysler Corp.
Chairman Lee Iacocca says he is forming a new merchant bank looking for deals in the entertainment, airline and gaming industries, and has gotten advice from long-time friend and billionaire investor Kirk Kerkorian.
Mr. Iacocca said yesterday in a telephone interview from his Los Angeles home that Mr. Kerkorian isn't financially involved with the new venture.
"I hope one day Kirk will be involved with the company," Mr. Iacocca said.
"I've learned a lot from him.
I got interested in entertainment, airlines and gaming because of Kirk."
Mr. Iacocca plans to formally announce his new venture, Iacocca Capital Partners, today with himself as the largest owner.
Deals will be financed by Mr. Iacocca and his two principal partners, but may also include investments from pension funds and affluent investors, he said.
Jefferies Group Inc., a Los Angeles-based investment concern, will provide securities trading and investment-banking support and hold a minority stake.
Mr. Iacocca wouldn't say how much of his own money he has invested in the new company.
"I've invested quite a bit," he said.
"I've sold a lot of Chrysler stock and I invested some of it" in the new company.
Another partner, Michael Klein, said the venture "will have the potential to do multi-hundred-million-dollar transactions."
Mr. Klein, who set up his own Beverly Hills, Calif., firm last year, worked for many years as an investment adviser and broker at Bear, Stearns & Co.
In 1987, he helped to establish the firm's media and entertainment group, which handled deals for many Hollywood studios, including MGM/UA Entertainment Co., a predecessor of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc. that was controlled at the time by Mr. Kerkorian.
The third partner is William S. Elkus, a Los Angeles money manager who represents some of the nation's wealthiest families.
Mr. Iacocca said the group doesn't have any ventures to announce yet, but is completing a deal with a small software company trying to sell interactive television systems to airlines.
The relationship between Messrs. Kerkorian and Iacocca dates from 1989, when Chrysler explored selling a nonautomotive unit to Mr. Kerkorian, who in turn asked Chrysler to buy into film studios he was looking to sell.
Neither deal worked out.
But Mr. Kerkorian eventually bought Chrysler stock, which has grown to a 8.9% stake, with a market value of nearly $2 billion.
Mr. Iacocca also is a director of MGM Grand Inc., a Las Vegas hotel and casino company that is 76%-owned by Mr. Kerkorian.
Last year, Mr. Iacocca sold 1.2 million Chrysler shares at an indicated value of $53.3 million, according to Securities and Exchange Commission filings.
Mr. Iacocca, now 69 years old, retired as Chrysler's chairman in December 1992 but remains a consultant to the auto maker until January 1995.
He will be chairman of the new investment venture.
