Gold-futures prices soared on concerns about political instability in the Clinton administration and in South Africa, the source of much of the world's gold supply.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery was up $8.10 to $388.20 an ounce, while the price of the May silver-futures contract rose 8.2 cents to $5.422 an ounce.
At the New York Mercantile Exchange, platinum for April delivery climbed $5.80 to $402.80.
"The catalyst for the rally was Whitewater," the investigation of President Clinton's involvement in a failed land-development venture, said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
"Basically, it creates a tremendous air of uncertainty surrounding the presidency, affecting the U.S. dollar and U.S. government assets such as bonds.
This kind of chaotic situation tends to bring a flow of money into metals."
Heavy buying of gold-futures contracts by commodity funds, which are managed pools of investors' money, helped to push the price of the gleaming metal through key "resistance levels," analysts said, which triggered even more orders to buy futures contracts.
One such level was $384 an ounce, a price that gold prices had tried and failed to penetrate repeatedly in recent days.
The gold market also derived strength from sharp declines in bond prices and the value of the U.S. dollar versus foreign currencies.
Continuing riots and political unrest in gold-producing regions of South Africa lent additional support.
Another constructive factor was the failure of large available supplies to deflate prices.
"Gold has held up well in the face of the fact that Japan is planning to sell 90 tons of gold, or about three million ounces, left over from the minting of the emperor's commemorative wedding coin," said Fred Demler, metals economist for E, D & F Man.
"The fact that the market didn't collapse on that news is seen as a positive."
In coming days, news about the Whitewater affair is likely to continue to dominate precious-metals markets, Mr. O'Neill said.
"If this were to develop into a situation where the president would be forced to resign, it could push gold prices sharply higher," he said.
"I don't think the rally would last, however.
This type of nervousness tends to cause short-term movements in the metals."
ENERGY: World oil prices were generally lower with crude down between four cents and seven cents a barrel in New York and London futures trading.
Heating oil, influenced by the promise of warmer weather in the U.S., led the slump.
The U.S. futures contract for April-heating oil fell 0.51 cent to settle at 43.28 cents a gallon.
Despite the oil market's general weakness, however, fresh buying developed whenever prices dropped to certain support points, traders said.
Crude futures showed such technical resilience near $14 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Yesterday, April crude reached a low of $14.01 a barrel before rebounding to settle at $14.14, down four cents for the day.
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Grain-futures prices continued to edge lower on concerns about the big size of Brazil's soybean crop.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, soybeans for July delivery were down 1.25 cents to $6.75 a bushel; July corn fell 2 cents to $2.8475 a bushel; and July wheat was off 3.50 cents to $3.2225 a bushel.
Many analysts expect the South American crop to come in at about 38 million to 40 million metric tons, which would be a record.
