William R. Lewis, Jenny Craig Inc.'s chief financial officer, became the second executive this month to resign after a short tenure at the operator of weight-loss centers.
Mr. Lewis, 52 years old, had held the position for about a month.
He left, people familiar with the situation said, because his business associate, Albert J. DiMarco, quit last week as the company's president and chief operating officer.
Mr. DiMarco, 50, left after three months on the job, citing "personal reasons."
Mr. Lewis had worked for him at Horsham, Pa.-based Nutri/System Inc.
Mr. Lewis could not be reached for comment.
Mr. DiMarco succeeded Ronald E. Gerevas, 54, in late November 1993.
The company's chairman and chief executive officer remains Sid Craig, 61, who founded the company in 1983 with his wife, Jenny Craig, who serves as vice chairman.
Jenny Craig Inc. said in a statement that W. James Mallen, 50, would postpone his previously announced retirement to serve as chief financial officer until a successor for Mr. Lewis is found.
Mr. Mallen had held that post from the company's founding until Mr. Lewis's appointment this year.
The string of high-level management departures has added to the woes of Jenny Craig, which, like other weight-loss center operators, has been beset by government investigations, bad publicity about dieting techniques, and a shrinking market.
Early last year, the Federal Trade Commission launched an investigation of 11 diet-industry firms, including Jenny Craig, alleging false and deceptive advertising.
Although several major firms agreed to settle the case and offer corrective publicity, Jenny Craig refused, maintaining that the company's ads had always been forthright.
Press reports and lawsuits complaining of "yo-yo" diets have plagued the $1.87 billion industry.
Years of growth rates of 10% or more peaked around 1989, and are now headed downward, industry analysts say.
Firms have been forced to reposition themselves to emphasize "weight management," or keeping weight off after it is lost.
"These problems are endemic to the industry, and Jenny Craig is doing better than the industry as a whole," said Todd Berko of Kidder, Peabody & Co.
He blamed Jenny Craig's problems on "a combination of factors," including lower sales on a per-center basis.
"What's going on with this stock is not rocket science," Mr. Berko said.
Jenny Craig's stock is trading near its 52-week low of $6.25.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, the shares closed yesterday at $6.375, unchanged.
