QVC Network Inc.
Chairman Barry Diller is asking Wall Street stock traders how he can improve his bid for Paramount Communications Inc., amid indications that Paramount's board may endorse a rival bid by Viacom Inc. at a meeting today.
People close to QVC say Mr. Diller is considering at least two ways of restructuring QVC's offer for Paramount-currently valued at roughly $10.2 billion, or $84.72 a share -- without necessarily boosting the total price.
Those people said Mr. Diller may reduce or eliminate preferred stock in QVC's offer while boosting the amount of cash in the offer by a comparable amount.
In addition, they said, he is exploring ways to offer some protection against a drop in the price of QVC's stock, which makes up more than one-third of the value of the homeshopping company's bid.
Viacom, which revised its own bid on Tuesday, has gained the backing of many stock traders for its offer -- despite a lower current market value of about $9.8 billion, or $81.97 a share -- by offering a security that increases in value as Viacom's stock price declines.
At its meeting today, the Paramount board is likely to be told that takeover stock traders, known as arbitragers, as well as active traders known as hedge funds, generally prefer the Viacom offer.
Longer-term institutional investors are generally neutral, but as the bidding war for the publishing and entertainment giant has escalated, many of them have sold their stock, leaving the outcome largely in the hands of arbitragers and hedge funds.
As a result, the Paramount board may endorse the Viacom bid in some equivocal way, or may stick with its existing endorsement of QVC's offer for the time being, because the bidding process still has about 10 days to go, traders speculate.
The bidding rules set by Paramount give both bidders until Feb. 1 to submit their best bids.
But it's unclear whether either side will abide by that deadline.
Mr. Diller met with two large Paramount holders late Wednesday to solicit their ideas at the offices of Allen & Co., QVC's investment banker.
The holders were Omega Advisers Inc., a large hedge fund company run by Leon Cooperman, the former chief investment strategist at Goldman, Sachs & Co., and Baker Nye L.P., an arbitrage fund company.
The two funds hold an estimated six million Paramount shares.
Omega has publicly announced its preference for the Viacom offer.
The preferred stock being offered by QVC to holders of 49.9% of Paramount stock has a face value of roughly $958 million.
If that were shifted to the cash side of QVC's bid, QVC could boost the bid's cash component, currently $92 a share for 50.1% of Paramount shares, by almost $16 a share.
That could be just enough to top the cash in the Viacom offer, currently $107 a share for 50.1% of Paramount shares.
Mario Gabelli, whose Gabelli Funds own about four million shares of Paramount, said that with such a small gap between the bids now, just a decline in the stock market could hurt QVC's prospects in the contest.
Mr. Diller "has to come to grips with the fact that if the market is down the day before the tender closes, the arbitrage community is going to have a bias toward Viacom," Mr. Gabelli said.
"Barry is going to have to bring up either the front end or the back end" of the QVC offer.
Mr. Diller has indicated to some traders that he is averse to offering the same kind of stock-price protection as Viacom, the cable-TV concern, because it creates a possible future liability that could weaken his company financially.
One way QVC could provide price protection for its stock would be to have BellSouth Corp., the regional telephone company that is already investing in QVC, announce plans to buy additional QVC stock after the Paramount acquisition.
