To learn why Luther Sowers once corresponded with "Dear Abby" on the subject of chastity belts, it helps to visit his peculiar workshop in the pine woods of North Carolina.
"I make everything," Mr. Sowers says, igniting a blowtorch, "except profit."
Heating a hunk of steel, he starts hammering it into the shape of a conquistador's helmet.
He takes a break and adds several links to a shirt of chain mail.
Strewn across a nearby workbench are silver spurs like those George Washington wore at Valley Forge.
Mr. Sowers also fashions 20th-century attire, such as an exact replica of Pancho Villa's bandoleer.
Strictly speaking, Mr. Sowers is a "master armorer," one of a tiny breed of artisans capable of making museum-quality helmets, visors and other chivalric apparel.
But outfitting knights is a hard way to make a living these days.
So the 53-year-old craftsman has branched out, becoming a master counterfeiter for all historic occasions.
"There's no copyright on the past," says Mr. Sowers, who is largely self-taught and uses everything from coat hangers to car fenders in his fabrications.
Museum curators and movie prop managers praise Mr. Sowers's obsessive attention to detail.
But this same expertise makes him the critic from hell when it comes to period films.
Commenting on "Gettysburg," for instance, he complains that Martin Sheen, as Robert E. Lee, wears "the most awful costume I've ever seen."
"The button placement is poor and so are the sleeve seams."
Likewise, "The Last of the Mohicans" -- for which Mr. Sowers crafted several swords -- rates only a C-plus.
"The bearskin on the grenadiers' hats was all wrong," he gripes.
"It wasn't in use for another 20 years."
The movie "Geronimo" fares better, but he blasts the film for its overweight cavalrymen.
Fat, in fact, is Mr. Sowers's pet peeve.
Few soldiers from earlier days carried as much heft as modern men, he says, "and when you get to the size of a Pavarotti, even the best-made costume just looks like a barrel with cloth around it.
I refuse to make uniforms for porkers."
Actually, Mr. Sowers is much more of a stickler than that.
Because few Civil War horsemen weighed over 135 pounds, he won't outfit cavalry re-enactors with more than a 34-inch waist.
He also bristles when prop houses request gear to fit 6-foot-tall actors for "The Sound of Music" or other World War II dramas.
"Soldiers raised in the Depression were smaller than us," he explains.
"You're lucky to find a Nazi storm-trooper's jacket bigger than size 40."
Mr. Sowers's fetish for martial gear goes back to childhood.
The son of a postmaster and part-time farmer, he grew up reading Prince Valiant comics and watching pirate films starring Errol Flynn.
When his high-school Latin class held a banquet, most students wore togas.
Mr. Sowers turned up in full gladiatorial garb.
"My dad used to complain that the barn leaked because I'd used the roofing for a Roman breastplate and sword," he says.
After art school and a stint as a schoolteacher, Mr. Sowers returned to his parents' farm to pursue his childhood hobby.
Working in a makeshift studio, and attracting business through word of mouth, he has built a clientele that includes the National Park Service and museums at sites such as Colonial Williamsburg.
"When Luther reproduces a sword or piece of armor, he gives it all the right dimples and handmade imperfections," says William Brown, a curator with the National Park Service.
"You can't tell his work from the original."
Such historic absolutism, though, doesn't extend to tools or materials.
Part tinker, part tailor, part military tactician, Mr. Sowers has a workshop that looks like a cross between a museum basement and an auto-body shop.
In a corner, a mannequin in a suit of armor keeps watch over workbenches strewn with scraps of leather, paint thinner and car fenders.
"German armor from 1580 is the exact same thickness as the hood of a 1953 Buick," he explains, adding that "newer cars are so thin that there's not enough metal in them to beat properly."
Mr. Sowers also has found that coat hangers, clipped with bolt cutters, do just fine as the links for reproduction chain mail.
Despite such modern ware, most of Mr. Sowers's labor still boils down to a lonely man beating metal or sewing cloth for hours on end.
This has given him an almost mystical affinity with the artisans of former centuries.
He wonders, for instance, if they developed tendon pain, as he has, from holding and hammering steel, or cramped hands from the repetitive strain of linking chain mail.
"If they became apprentices at 12, they'd be cripples by middle age," he says.
He also feels awe for those who toiled with needle and thread (a skill he learned from his grandmother).
Sewing and embroidering one uniform can take 100 hours.
"When you think of a Napoleonic army of 500,000 men, each one wearing hand-sewn trousers, vest, coat and hat," he says, "you begin to realize that more hours have probably been spent sewing than at any other human occupation."
The labor-intensive nature of his work is one reason Mr. Sowers makes a relatively modest living (about $30,000 after expenses last year).
Another reason is that two of his principal clients -- museums and theaters -- have little money to spend while more lucrative business from film studios is notoriously irregular.
Mr. Sowers's productivity also is pared by his own personality.
A loquacious man, he answers all his own phone calls, often from collectors who enjoy chatting for hours about obscure military matters.
"If I had a secretary," he says, "they'd be bothering me every two minutes asking, `What's a sabretache' or `How do you spell shako?'"
(A sabretache, by the way, is a leather pouch worn by 19th-century cavalrymen, and a shako is a stiff cylindrical cap common in Napoleon's days.)
Mr. Sowers also takes frequent breaks to stoke his wood stove, feed his horses and his pet Labrador, Blitzkrieg, or to check on his mother, with whom he shares the farmhouse in which he was raised.
"Luther can do anything he sets his mind to, except things I want done, like fixing window cords or clearing brush," Ruth Sowers says, shaking her head.
Mrs. Sowers also has become accustomed to the strange traffic flowing to and from her son's workshop, including crates of lances, muskets and surplus military jeeps and trucks that Mr. Sowers hires out for use in films, sometimes as "destruction vehicles" to be burned or bombed in battle scenes.
"If the FBI ever burst in here," Mr. Sowers says, "they'd think I was some sort of David Koresh, warehousing weapons of mass destruction."
Not all seeking out Mr. Sowers are historically or militarily minded, however.
Which brings us back to chastity belts.
Some years ago Mr. Sowers read a "Dear Abby" letter from a wife with a possessive husband.
She wanted to know where she could find a chastity belt to calm his jealousies, a question advice columnist Abigail Van Buren couldn't answer.
As it happens, Mr. Sowers had studied a British Museum monograph on the subject.
He wrote to "Abby," saying anyone seeking such an item might contact him.
Several readers did, though none commissioned a chastity belt.
The reason, Mr. Sowers suspects, is that he included one caveat in his letter.
With characteristic perfectionism, he informed her: "I would need several fittings and test trials to guarantee the product."
