The nation's two biggest stock markets called an informal truce in a four-year advertising skirmish.
The New York Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq Stock Market have quietly agreed to pony up $5 million apiece to put into a common fund for ads extolling the virtues of stocks for retirement planning, among other things, brokerage executives said.
In the process, the Big Board and Nasdaq -- which have fought for years over listings of corporate America's prized companies -- also agreed not to take subliminal potshots at each other in their own continuing ad pitches, according to the executives.
"That's much better than having it go down the drain in a squabble over `my system is better than yours,' " says John Keefe of Keefe Worldwide Information Services Inc., a New York consultant.
The Big Board and Nasdaq publicly deny ever trying to belittle each other.
But in recent years, high-tech Nasdaq, which trades through dealers and bills itself as "the stock market for the next 100 years," has painted the Big Board's 202-year-old auction market as antiquated and more suited for an 1800s-style trading cabal.
Meanwhile, the Big Board has politely suggested in ads that its auction market offers better prices and a fairer deal to small investors than -- who else? -- Nasdaq's dealer market.
The Big Board's ads at times also have featured such "Nasdaq defectors" as Warren Buffett, the legendary investor and chief of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.
The turf tiff was among yesterday's topics at a conference of Wall Street legal and compliance executives.
The conference's keynote speaker -- Joseph Grano Jr., the new chairman of the National Association of Securities Dealers, which runs Nasdaq -- is seeking commitments from the Big Board, Nasdaq and the much-smaller American Stock Exchange for the joint advertising effort.
Mr. Grano says he is attempting to raise a total of $20 million from the nation's exchanges -- including $5 from each broker at the major brokerage firms -- to fund the new advertising strategy.
He refuses to discuss specific commitments, though the Big Board and Nasdaq "have agreed to support the effort," he says.
The Big Board and Nasdaq declined to comment on any monetary commitment.
"This isn't a call for an end to advertising, but to get away from the subtle attacks" by the exchanges, says Mr. Grano, also the brokerage chief at PaineWebber Group Inc.
He says investors get "confused" when the markets publicly pick on each other.
The Securities Industry Association, a trade group, says it has exhorted the two exchanges to lay off each other for several months.
"All this back-and-forth nattering merely decreases public confidence in the market," says Marc Lackritz, the trade group's president.
"We've urged both markets to at least redirect some of their advertising resources to a positive type of joint campaign."
The stock markets have long used ads to promote business, of course.
But the upstart Nasdaq really got under the Big Board's skin a few years back, as the New York exchange was preparing to launch its 200-year birthday bash.
One of Nasdaq's most memorable TV ads was a slow-motion scene of a trading floor in which frantic brokers wildly waved their arms and barked orders, with a backdrop of medieval chanting.
The narration: "Is there a rational alternative to the traditional trading floor?
Not having one."
Fade in to the Nasdaq logo: "the stock market for the next 100 years."
In a recent print ad that appeared in this newspaper, Nasdaq pointedly noted that two of its major market makers are Merrill Lynch & Co. and American Express Co.'s Lehman Brothers Inc. unit.
However, the Big Board lists the shares of Merrill and American Express.
Joseph Hardiman, Nasdaq's chief, declined to comment on any aspect of the exchange's ad strategy.
Nasdaq's ads "don't attack other markets," a spokesman says.
"The message of our ad campaign is that Nasdaq has arrived."
The negative stuff, the spokesman adds, "was probably our first generation of ads."
The Big Board hasn't been as direct as the more aggressive Nasdaq.
Late last year, the Big Board ran print ads in which it boasted that its auction market "is designed to ensure the best possible price on transactions."
The Big Board pitch came on the heels of a Forbes magazine story saying that small investors are better off trading through an auction market than through a dealer market, because of Nasdaq's wider "spreads," or the difference between bid and asked prices.
The Big Board, for its part, says it has taken the high road on the ad front.
"We have absolutely no comment on the Nasdaq's advertising," says Robert Britz, a Big Board senior vice president and head of its advertising and marketing departments.
Mr. Britz says the Big Board currently has a philosophy of not putting down the competition.
"Either you have a product to sell or you don't," he says.
Negative advertising "in the end is not going to win."
What about the perception that some Big Board ads take shots at Nasdaq's dealer market?
"If we choose to highlight the merits of the way we do business, and someone else chooses not to do business that way, are we taking a shot at them?" asks Mr. Britz.
"I don't think so."
If so, he adds, "it's unintended."
Don't look for the ad truce to end the carping between the two markets.
Unlike Nasdaq, "we threw very little money at advertising last year," says Mr. Britz, the Big Board advertising chief.
Both exchanges refuse to fess up how much they spent, so this newspaper called on Competitive Media Reporting, a New York adinformation company.
No contest here, says Jeffrey Somerstein, an account manager.
His final tally on 1993 ad spending: $2.8 million for the Big Board and $14.3 million for Nasdaq.
