In the early hours of June 29, 1969, a raid on a homosexual bar in New York's Greenwich Village resulted in a full-blown riot involving 400 men, some hurling bottles, garbage and even a parking meter at police.
The rampage, near the Stonewall Inn, is considered the spark for the gay and lesbian liberation movement.
Twenty-five years later, major companies are in discussions with a nonprofit organization, Stonewall 25, about whether to participate in a planned commemoration in Manhattan on June 26.
There have been only a few takers so far, including Campari, an aperitif produced by Italy's Davide Campari-Milano SpA, and Private Label Water, a San Mateo, Calif., company that produces spring water and puts different company logos on the bottles.
But Stonewall 25 says it is talking with such major companies as Sony, American Express, Gap, Philip Morris's Miller Brewing unit and Hiram Walker & Sons about potential sponsorships.
The times they certainly are a'changing.
A headline that appeared in the New York Daily News shortly after the Stonewall riot, "Homo Nest Raided, Queen Bees Are Stinging Mad," would be inconceivable today.
Further, marketing experts say there is little risk for companies to align themselves with an event that caters to what used to be called an alternative lifestyle.
Planners of Stonewall 25 contend the violent nature of the event being celebrated isn't a problem.
"The Boston Tea Party was a riot," says Susan Jester, executive director of Stonewall 25.
"Some companies will still be skittish, but we're finding few that turn us down immediately."
She says, for example, that Sony is donating huge television monitors, measuring 18 feet by 20 feet, to place in Central Park during the June rally.
Sony didn't return calls seeking comment.
Stonewall 25 says sponsorship would entail donations ranging from "below $10,000" to $200,000 and would allow marketers to display their logos prominently at Stonewall 25 events, including the planned rally in Central Park and festivities in Greenwich Village.
The companies that choose to sponsor Stonewall 25 "gain so much by demonstrating they are keeping up with the times," says Jackie Silver, a market research and advertising consultant.
"Of course, there is always a risk that some conservative minority will react negatively.
But that is shrinking nationwide and certainly in New York."
Increasingly, marketers, particularly liquor and entertainment companies, have been recognizing the gay community and its spending power.
A spokeswoman at Hiram Walker & Sons, a subsidiary of British beverage concern Allied-Lyons, says Stonewall 25 is being considered because it "fits within our framework of identifying cultural activities to reach a large number of consumers at a single event."
Campari plans to be a major presence at the Stonewall commemoration.
It has concocted two new drinks, the Stone Wall and the more potent Stone Wall Riot for the event.
The recipes will be advertised in magazines catering to homosexuals, including Out.
In addition, Campari will have its logo splashed across banners and cocktail napkins in saloons and restaurants.
"We want to increase usage among certain segments of the population," says Jess di Pasquale, Campari's director of marketing.
"There is a high potential in the gay community because of Campari's taste and color, and it is considered a sophisticated drink that they can connect with."
Mr. di Pasquale says it isn't Campari's intention to "make a political statement.
We aren't aligning ourselves with rioting.
Instead, we're recognizing loyal customers."
Ms. Jester says Nestle Beverage, whose overall parent is Switzerland's Nestle SA, was planning to advertise in the gay bimonthly magazine 10 Percent, an official Stonewall 25 sponsor, through the end of the year.
The ads, she says, would be profiles of gay and lesbian individuals who made a contribution to society.
Discussions were also under way for Nestle Beverage, which makes coffees and hot cocoa mix, among other products, to become a sponsor of Stonewall 25.
But, much to Stonewall 25's surprise, a Nestle spokeswoman says the company isn't going to advertise in the magazine and won't be a sponsor of the New York events.
The spokeswoman acknowledged discussions had taken place between Nestle and Stonewall 25, but declined to provide details.
Instead of participating in the June anniversary, Nestle says it will hold a luncheon honoring gay and lesbian individuals.
There was no such hesitation on the part of Private Label Water, which places labels for such companies as Gap and Blockbuster Entertainment on bottles.
Already, bottles with a Stonewall 25 logo, including an upside-down lavender triangle with the globe in its center, are appearing on store shelves.
"I'm from San Francisco and I'm a straight African-American male who believes in inclusion, not exclusion," says Lunis H. Williams Jr., chairman of Private Label Water.
To be sure, Stonewall 25 sponsors aren't going to flood the so-called mainstream media with ads trumpeting their involvement with the summer event.
But news coverage of the event is expected, and any company whose logo is contained on banners near the stage will receive national exposure.
Robert Dilenschneider, an expert in crisis management, says, "In today's politically correct environment, there is nothing the companies have to fear."
He adds that it is highly unlikely that a conservative group will compile a list of Stonewall 25 sponsors and call for a boycott of those products.
Says Ms. Jester, "Stonewall 25, above anything else, is a human rights march."
Philip Guarascio, General Motors' top executive overseeing advertising and marketing activities, said "contrary to published reports in the media, I have no plans to leave my position at General Motors."
Mr. Guarascio, 52 years old, issued the statement in response to reports in advertising trade publications, saying that he was considering an offer to run Ted Turner's $1 billion cable-television sales organization.
"It's flattering to be considered for key positions with other highly successful firms, however, my commitment remains with General Motors," Mr. Guarascio said.
A spokesman at Turner Broadcasting System also said that Mr. Guarascio hadn't accepted a position there.
As general manager of GM's advertising and marketing operations, Mr. Guarascio oversees the auto maker's $1.3 billion media budget, and is considered by many to be a powerful media buyer.
But Mr. Guarascio doesn't have a corporate vice president title.
And a portion of his compensation package is tied to bonuses, which GM hasn't paid in recent years.
General Mills said it reached an out-of-court settlement of a lawsuit against Gag Foods Co., a Woodland Park, Colo., novelty-products maker, and Callaghan Promotions of Birmingham, Mich., a novelty distributor.
The two companies marketed parodies of the Minneapolis food giant's products.
Last year, General Mills sued the two companies, alleging that Gag Foods' "Roadkill Helper" and its line extension, "Spotted Owl Helper" looked too much like Hamburger Helper meal stretchers and with an unpleasant twist.
Under the settlement, the two companies will end production of the two products after selling current inventory.
Kevin Johnson, the owner of Gag Foods who invented the products, said although he's glad the case is settled, he's a bit disappointed that he can't ever again parody a General Mills product.
Still, Mr. Johnson will continue to sell other "Roadkill" products, such as the Roadkill Cafe T-shirt (including a menu of appropriate items) and Roadkill Pizza with disfigured toppings.
