The Mexican ruling party named as its new presidential candidate Ernesto Zedillo, whose lack of name recognition and political inexperience may mean this August's elections aren't a sure thing for the party.
Mr. Zedillo, 42 years old, is still the favorite to win.
The ruling party, the PRI, has never lost a presidential election in its nearly seven decades of existence.
Besides, Mr. Zedillo will benefit from sympathy votes stemming from last week's assassination of the party's original candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio.
But members of the opposition said they welcomed the chance to run against Mr. Zedillo, whom they think they can paint as a technocrat too green to handle Mexico's complex political situation.
"He's very beatable," said one adviser to the PRD, the main opposition party of the left.
He said Mr. Zedillo lacks sizzle.
In recent days, political analysts and members of the opposition say, the PRI had been sounding out the opposition parties about the possibility of delaying the elections or amending the constitution so that sitting members of the cabinet could run.
But the analysts and the opposition say the overtures were rebuffed, both because this was a matter of principle and because the opposition wanted to run against Mr. Zedillo.
Mr. Zedillo, who has never held elected office, doesn't even have the wholehearted support of his own party.
In the days since Mr. Colosio's assassination, various hardline factions within the party, upset over President Salinas's recent political reforms, had floated other names they would have preferred to Mr. Zedillo, who is expected to be even more of a Salinas clone than Mr. Colosio would have been.
And in an astonishing show of dissent in a country where party discipline is paramount, 78 out of 201 official advisers to the PRI announced that they had signed a statement yesterday morning opposing any attempt by the party to change the constitution or delay the elections.
The only senior official who spoke up on behalf of Mr. Zedillo was Pedro Aspe, the finance minister, who praised his economic work.
Mr. Zedillo did pick up an important endorsement when Manuel Camacho Solis, the government's mediator with the rebels in Chiapas, released a statement saying that he supported Mr. Zedillo, while also calling on him to continue a wide-open national dialogue to increase democracy in Mexico.
It was Mr. Camacho's flirtation with a maverick run for the presidency that had complicated the early months of Mr. Colosio's campaign.
Mr. Zedillo himself didn't do much to create any excitement.
His acceptance speech mainly tried to wrap him in the mantle of Mr. Colosio.
Afterward, as he tried to walk down the steps of PRI headquarters to greet some of the crowd of 4,000, the stepped-up security forces quickly pulled him back.
Mr. Zedillo is known as an exceptionally bright economist who made his name in the early 1980s with a scheme called Ficorca that effectively managed the foreign debt of Mexican companies during the economic crisis here.
"It was really ingenious," said Deborah Riner, the chief economist at the American Chamber of Commerce.
"The private sector would have gone under without it."
Mr. Zedillo hasn't always been right.
His 1978 doctoral thesis in economics at Yale University, for instance, suggested that Mexico should amass more foreign debt on the assumption that oil prices would continue rising (instead they collapsed, plunging Mexico into its economic crisis in the early 1980s).
Mr. Zedillo did, however, catch the eye of Mr. Salinas, and succeeded him in the cabinet of President Miguel de la Madrid when Mr. Salinas resigned to run for president in 1988.
Mr. Zedillo retained the position of budget minister under President Salinas, then became education minister two years ago.
While there, Mr. Zedillo removed one of the impediments to educational reform by decentralizing much of his control.
That way, the previously powerful teachers union had to deal individually with authorities in Mexico's 31 states and in Mexico City and couldn't shut down the country's education system as it had in the past.
Mr. Zedillo, however, ran into trouble when his ministry selected some expensive new history textbooks that were full of errors and that cut off Mexican history at 1964.
The ploy seemed designed to prevent students from reading about the government's massacre of students in 1968.
Mr. Zedillo left the education ministry to become Mr. Colosio's campaign manager, but the lackluster start to the campaign did little to improve his credentials as a politician.
Unlike most PRI presidential candidates of the past, Mr. Zedillo comes from modest beginningshis father was an electrician, his mother a schoolteacher.
He attended a middling Mexican university before going to Yale.
(If Mr. Zedillo wins, he will become the third consecutive president of Mexico to be an Ivy League-trained economist.)
An avid cyclist who has been seen at cycling events around Mexico City, he is married with five children.
Separately, a spokesman for the federal attorney general said the office will charge a second man in the assassination of Mr. Colosio.
As previously reported, authorities had detained the man, Tranquilino Sanchez, because a videotape had appeared to show him clearing the way for Mario Aburto Martinez to shoot Mr. Colosio in the head.
The government had previously said Mr. Aburto was acting alone.
The newspaper Reforma also reported yesterday that a 16-year-old girl whom Mr. Aburto was wooing said she saw Messrs. Sanchez and Aburto talking a few days before the assassination.
