The big bond-market rally in 1993 translated into another year of solid profits for the nation's primary dealers of government securities.
According to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, those firms collectively earned $1.3 billion during 1993, up from $1.2 billion the prior year.
The figures were disclosed by the New York Fed during a closed-door session with primary dealers during the Public Securities Association's annual meeting Saturday.
There are 39 firms designated as primary dealers, and it is through the primary dealers that the Fed conducts monetary policy.
In addition, primary dealers are responsible for underwriting the huge volume of government debt issued every year.
Accompanying the rise in profits last year was an increase in volume.
Average trading volume excluding mortgage-backed securities was 13% higher in 1993 than in 1992, according to the New York Fed's figures.
And of the 39 primary dealers, 34 were profitable in 1993.
That compares with 35 profitable operations during 1992.
Last year's bond-market rally provided the fuel for the gain in earnings, dealers said.
Over the course of the year, the yield on the Treasury's 30-year bond fell from 7.35% to a low near 5.75%.
"A bull market floats all boats," said Bill Feezer, an excutive vice president at Sanwa Securities Inc.
In addition to the drop in long-term interest rates, there were other factors that also contributed to the increased profits, Mr. Feezer and others said.
During 1993 there was a surge in issuance by state and local governments that were taking advantage of the lower interest rates by selling new debt designed to pay off older, higher-interest securities.
That resulted in a boom year for underwriters of municipal debt.
In addition, there was a flood of cash from the mortgage-backed securities markets.
With historically low interest rates creating a frenzy of mortgage refinancing by homeowners, owners of mortgage-backed paper found themselves holding securities of shorter effective maturities as prepayments rose.
In order to offset that trend, investors funneled cash into longterm Treasurys.
Yet another reason primary dealers did so well in 1993 was the rush by small investors into mutual funds.
Confronted with the extremely small returns provided on bank savings, individuals poured money into mutual funds, much of which flowed into the bond markets.
But now that the bull market in bonds has ended and the Federal Reserve has begun raising short-term interest rates, the outlook for 1994 isn't as rosy, dealers said.
"It's looking less favorable," Sanwa's Mr. Feezer said.
