An air war has broken out on the Eastern front.
After years of relative insulation from the pitched airline rivalries elsewhere in the U.S., the East Coast is feeling the blitzkrieg of dramatic fare cuts.
While travelers are cheering, this structural shift in the country's largest air-travel market threatens to wreak havoc on high-cost carriers, notably USAir, and could trigger a shakeout among some of the low-cost aspirants making strafing runs in the region.
The battle amounts to much more than a passing fare war.
It is a strategic fight between two different kinds of airlines: lean, nimble carriers offering value pricing, and large, full-service "majors" charging higher fares.
And the East Coast, which represents 37% of U.S. air travel and encompasses many of the nation's important business cities, is well worth fighting for.
USAir and Delta Air Lines, in particular, are facing a showdown over their historically profitable bread-and-butter business: sales people packing shuttle flights between Boston and Washington, executives flying to Pittsburgh from New York, Northeastern families seeking the sun in Orlando.
Low-cost aggressors see the incumbent carriers as vulnerable, but also believe the vast East Coast market will yield more fruit if fares are substantially lowered -- and that is exactly what they are doing.
In late January, Continental Airlines announced plans to expand its low-fare "CALite" flights -- now operating mostly in the Southeast -- up and down the coast, starting next week.
To defend its turf, normally somnolent USAir jolted the industry by pre-emptively slashing ticket prices as much as 70% to many coastal cities -- and by making the new fares permanent.
Soon after, Southwest Airlines, a paragon of low-price, no-frills flying, said it planned to beef up its East Coast beachhead in Baltimore, adding six new gates by next fall to its two already there.
And America West, another lower-cost carrier, announced it would make its Philadelphia debut in April.
To guard its ground, Delta, one of the slow-moving, high-cost majors, extended indefinitely a program offering low fares in 12 Southeastern cities.
Beginning to nip at the edges are as many as 28 start-up carriers that have formed in the past two years, targeting Eastern cities stretching from Boston to Miami.
"The time was ripe for the East Coast high-fare structure to crumble," says Harold Shenton, a vice president of Avmark Inc., an Arlington, Va., consulting firm.
Between 1982 and 1992, fares in the Eastern U.S. more than doubled in short-haul markets, helping drive passenger traffic down 12%, according to a study by ATX Inc., an airline-in-planning headed by former Continental and Eastern airlines chief Frank Lorenzo.
By contrast, the Western U.S., populated by expanding low-cost lines such as Southwest, saw a 75% jump in traffic over the decade, with fares rising by only 5%.
ATX, which still lacks government permission to fly, has targeted the East because, as Mr. Lorenzo declared last year: "It's so obvious.
The public is begging for an alternative product."
Tom Parsons, publisher of Best Fares magazine, says, "Nobody has really challenged the East Coast since PeopleExpress."
In the early 1980s, that Newark, N.J., carrier bought its way into Eastern markets by charging 30% to 90% less than competitors.
(It later failed, a victim of too-rapid expansion and an ill-fated move overseas.)
The airlines' battle for the East will be a windfall for long-suffering passengers.
And it probably will stir more discretionary flying and lure some travelers from cars and trains.
Some aviation consultants think air traffic could jump 50% in some cities.
And why not?
Until last month, a round-trip flight from Providence, R.I., to Orlando, Fla., cost $986, while one from Boston to Charlotte, N.C., cost $808.
Today, the first costs $458 and the other $598.
A round trip between Newark and Greenville/Spartanburg, N.C., priced at $682 before, now is $298.
Unlike heavily restricted promotional fares of the past, these are refundable tickets requiring no advance purchase.
But some airline specialists worry that these unrestricted low fares could provoke a financial debacle similar to the disastrous summer of 1992.
That was when AMR Corp.'s American Airlines launched a so-called value-pricing program that sparked a 50%-off fare war nationwide.
The U.S. airline industry had a $2.5 billion operating loss that year.
USAir's cuts "could be the son of value pricing," warns Robert Harrell, vice president of American Express Co.'s airfare management division.
USAir cut business fares up to 50% and leisure fares up to 70% on roughly a quarter of its routes.
Some newcomers, such as Kiwi International Air Lines of Newark and Valujet Airlines of Atlanta, could get hurt despite their lower costs.
"Some of the smaller airlines won't survive," predicts Avmark's Mr. Shenton.
"As fares decrease, people won't need to go out of their way to get low fares" from the smaller carriers.
But with costs more than 50% higher than Continental's and 60% higher than Southwest's, USAir could be the first major airline to suffer the effects of sharply lower revenue, airline specialists predict.
Some of the higher costs are unavoidable for the airline, a unit of USAir Group Inc. of Arlington, Va.
Its dense networks in the Northeast and Florida consist mostly of short routes, traditionally more expensive to operate.
The Northeast also has higher labor costs, sometimes brutal winters and normally congested airports.
For now, USAir's major cost-cutting drive is its "Project High Ground," a plan begun last month to speed the way it services and turns around planes at airports.
Borrowing a page from Southwest, USAir is trying to halve the time its planes spend on the ground.
Instead of waiting for all the passengers to leave before cleaning a cabin, for instance, USAir's cleaning crews have begun entering the rear of the plane, picking up behind people as they exit out the front.
USAir expects to turn planes around fast enough to generate at least one more daily departure per plane.
In the 18 markets where the project is under way, USAir figures it could sell 3,500 more seats at no extra operating cost.
Industry specialists, however, believe USAir can achieve only limited success with the program.
What the airline really needs, they contend, is an overhaul of its entire cost structure, starting with labor.
"The kind of flexibility USAir needs isn't in existing labor contracts," says Rose Ann Tortora, an analyst with Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette.
"If you've got to remodel the house, you need the cooperation of all the residents."
USAir had a shot at a major remodeling and blew it.
In 1992, it persuaded its unions to make wage concessions.
But the airline struck a one-year-only deal and saved $170 million.
Wages have since snapped back, and the unions now are sitting atop multiyear, no-furlough guarantees, an obstacle to a company already burdened with headquarters staff in three cities and a fat work force of about 46,000.
USAir acknowledges costs must fall, but says it had to slash its fares quickly.
"I can't afford to let the other guy get established here" in the East, says Robert Fornaro, a USAir senior vice president.
For their part, Continental and Southwest merely wish to parlay their lower costs into competitive advantage in USAir's backyard.
Despite the severity of the new discounts, Easterners still face comparatively steep ticket prices.
On flights of 300 miles or less, East Coast passengers currently are being charged fares that on average are more than double those charged Westerners, says a study by the American Express air-fare group.
A 190-mile flight, which averages about $156 round trip out West, currently runs $319 in the East.
The price gap prompted Southwest and Continental to invade USAir's hub at Baltimore/Washington International Airport last fall.
The groundwork the two began laying last summer for their separate assaults ultimately forced USAir into its defensive posture.
Baltimore, which offers a preview of what is likely to come, seems an unlikely spot for a first skirmish among the majors.
Commanding 55% of the Baltimore airport's daily flights, USAir appeared to have a lock on the mid-Atlantic region, especially with its other hubs in Philadelphia, Pittsburgh and Charlotte.
Baltimore held attractions for the newcomers.
Landing fees are lower than at nearby airports, and gate rentals are reasonably priced.
Proximity to Washington and southern Pennsylvania makes the city a huge travel market.
With low fares to entice them, the masses could easily be funneled into the airport by an efficient interstate-highway system and 30 trains that roll into the airport's rail station daily.
In Baltimore, Southwest's first East Coast destination, the airline employed its time-tested start-up formula.
It dispatched the "diamond team" -- a half-dozen planners from marketing and sales, promotion, advertising and public relations that handle all new cities.
The team subscribed to the Baltimore Sun newspaper and pored over specially prepared demographic data, and quietly fanned out in search of events, sports teams or cultural institutions to sponsor.
Southwest quickly signed up the Orioles baseball team for advertising and joint-marketing promotions, including ticket contests.
And to ensure that the locals didn't mistake Southwest for some fly-by-night operator, the airline flooded the market with newspaper and TV ads, stressing its young jet fleet and industry-beating profitability.
Then Southwest did what it does best.
It offered rock-bottom prices, including introductory one-way fares of $19 to Cleveland.
Baltimore responded.
In the fourth quarter, passenger boardings at the airport jumped more than 30%, and USAir's market share slipped four percentage points, to 51%.
Southwest now says Baltimore is one of its most successful new cities, and it wants to add more flights as soon as it get the needed planes and its six new gates.
Continental already had eight flights a day from Baltimore, but it targeted the city and others served by USAir for its low-fare CALite operation.
Not quite a carbon copy of Southwest, CALite provides assigned seats, offers a first-class cabin and awards frequent-flier miles.
Continental had to retrain its CALite personnel, many of whom were accustomed to the more leisurely pace of nonhub cities.
Workers who once had hours to stock galleys and load baggage now have only minutes.
In Greensboro, N.C., for example, workers who once handled three flights a day had to gear up for 30.
Since emerging from Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings with a far lighter debt load last April, Continental has shed money-losing Pacific routes, shrunk its unprofitable Denver hub and beefed up short-haul service.
But its boldest move has been CALite, an attempt to exploit its less-restrictive union contracts.
Starting next month, Continental will begin boosting CALite flights to more than 800 a day from 300.
By year's end, CALite service will account for nearly two-thirds of Continental's flights.
Though some analysts wonder if Continental is expanding CALite too quickly, others are enthusiastic.
"There's no reason why Continental Airlines shouldn't be one of the profitable U.S. carriers," says Sam Buttrick, a Kidder, Peabody & Co. analyst.
So far, Continental's approach hasn't translated into profits, but the carrier expects it will by year end.
Southwest, the only consistently profitable airline flying short routes, remains the model.
And it doesn't like this wave of emulation, however flattering.
Speaking before financial analysts this month, Southwest Chairman Herbert Kelleher warned Continental and USAir that he would retaliate in their long-haul markets if they "plan on coming into our niche in a way that irritates us."
And just what would constitute provocation?
"Basically," he said, "it's when we get very, very angry."
Wheelabrator Technologies Inc.'s Wheelabrator Engineered Systems Inc. unit said it acquired Memtek Corp., a unit of New York-based Horsehead Resource Development Co.
Terms weren't disclosed.
In a news release, Wheelabrator Engineered said Memtek will maintain its headquarters in Billerica, Mass., and sales offices and operations in Medford, N.J., Canton, Mich., Orange and Moorpark, Calif., and Singapore.
The company said Memtek makes wastewater-treatment systems and products for domestic and international markets.
Wheelabrator Technologies's business is refuse-to-energy services.
