The deal between the West and Russia these days goes like this: The West generously sends money and the Russians, with equal generosity, accept it.
So don't expect much thanks, or economic reform, from the latest International Monetary Fund loan.
The deal for $1.5 billion was struck between IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin late Tuesday.
The IMF had been holding out, either because it was serious about conditions it had set or because it was serious about seeming serious.
But Mr. Camdessus ultimately agreed that the Russians have a budgetary and anti-inflation plan the IMF can live with.
Of course, the IMF has cohabited with a lot of flabby budgets.
Even if things go according to plan, Russia's 1994 deficit will be $35.9 billion, or 9% of gross domestic product, our Elisabeth Rubinfien reports from Moscow.
But Mr. Camdessus called that deficit "compatible with sustaining the inflation pace."
It is not clear what the current "inflation pace" really is, but some might think it higher than a prudent lender would desire.
The issue on loans to Russia, however, isn't prudence, but what has driven Western politics toward Russia for 45 years, fear of Russian militarism.
If you count official and unofficial debt relief and Germany's $4 billion bribe to rid itself of Russian troops, the West has forked up some $58 billion to Russia over the past two years.
A further $17 billion is promised, some of it contingent on Russia meeting certain conditions.
By any standard, $58 billion is not loose change, Mr. Camdessus suggested recently when a reporter implied that Western support was niggardly.
But as a proud nation, Russia doesn't like to accept charity, or at least not if it is expected to offer something in return.
For that reason, it is not at all clear that the new Russian parliament, or State Duma, will forgo the temptation to expand Mr. Chernomyrdin's deficit still further.
After watching the performance of the U.S. Congress for the past 12 years, how could any self-respecting parliament approve a budget without adding billions more?
The Americans have demonstrated, after all, that "it's just money."
Mr. Camdessus deserves credit for at least attempting to insert a matter of principle into the Russian economic debate.
Venturing into the realm of social policy, the IMF has tried to encourage the Russians to set up a system of unemployment insurance.
The idea, so the managing director says, is to wean the Russians away from a more costly and wasteful policy of simply subsidizing factories and farms to keep people employed.
The Duma resists that change because many of its members, as managers, draw their status and power from those same subsidies.
The IMF went ahead with the $1.5 billion without any assurances that the Duma will accept serious reforms.
To its credit, it has been relatively tight so far in an effort to encourage some seriousness.
Other lenders, such as the European Union, might do well to follow that lead.
One thing is certain: If the West keeps offering money without seeing real reform policies in place first, the Russians will somehow swallow their pride and keep on accepting it.
