Seeking capital to emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law proceedings, America West Airlines selected a $220 million bid led by David Bonderman and James Coulter, Fort Worth, Texas, investors who are major shareholders in Continental Airlines.
But America West's unanimous board decision drew fire from the company's unsecured creditors committee, whose support is critical for a reorganization plan to be approved.
The committee instead threw its support behind a rival bid led by New York money manager Michael Steinhardt.
A battle now looms between the two investment groups.
The split between the airline's board and its creditors represents the latest divisions inside a company torn apart over the past year by bitter management feuds.
At stake is control of the nation's ninth-largest airline whose low costs, modern fleet and resurgent profitability have made it an industry plum.
America West is clearly coveted by Messrs. Bonderman and Coulter, principals in Air Partners L.P., which helped Continental emerge from bankruptcy court last year and now has a 28% stake in the airline.
The two men hope to forge an alliance between Continental and America West that includes a combined frequent-flier program, joint marketing and sales initiatives and the sharing of flight codes in the computer reservation system.
The investment group, named AmWest Partners L.P., also includes Fidelity Investments Inc., the nation's largest mutual fund company, Mesa Airlines, a Farmington, N.M., commuter carrier, and Continental itself.
The group has offered to exchange $100 million in unsecured debt and $120 million in new equity in return for a 37.5% interest of the reorganized airline.
Unsecured creditors would receive a 45% interest and, if that interest represents full recovery on their claims, existing shareholders would receive 10%.
A secured creditor, leasing giant GPA Group PLC of Ireland, would receive a 7.5% stake in exchange for unspecified concessions.
America West Chairman William A. Franke was optimistic that the AmWest bid would succeed and that the company, which has been in bankruptcy court for 2 1/2 years, would emerge from Chapter 11 by September or October.
Steinhardt's Plan America West snubbed Mr. Steinhardt, who proposed to pay America West $200 million in equity in exchange for 49% of the reorganized company's common stock.
The remaining interests would go to creditors.
Both investment groups said they have made the superior bid.
Mr. Steinhardt's representatives say that his offer values America West's total equity at $408 million, compared with the $320 million valuation by AmWest.
They also say that their bid doesn't saddle the airline with $100 million of additional debt.
But AmWest's advocates said their offer delivers $20 million additional cash upfront and promises operational benefits with Continental.
Unlike AmWest, which said it would keep management in place, Mr. Steinhardt planned to make changes at the top, perhaps bringing back Michael J. Conway, the carrier's ousted chief executive officer who lost his battle with Mr. Franke for control of the airline, according to people familiar with the situation.
Mr. Conway and a spokesman for Mr. Steinhardt declined to comment.
Mr. Franke declined to compare the two bids, citing confidentiality agreements, but said that Mr. Bonderman brought "obvious synergies" with Continental.
America West will now prepare a reorganization plan, backed by AmWest's money, and submit it to the bankruptcy judge.
The unsecured creditors committee is considering filing its own plan backed by Mr. Steinhardt, according to the committee's financial advisers, Blackstone Group of New York.
