In four years of revamping and restructuring, the amalgam of the old Burroughs and Sperry computer companies has cut its work force by 40%, taken charges totaling $1.6 billion, and shifted its vision away from hardware to focus on higher-profit services.
Unisys executives won't even mutter the "M word," mainframes, any more, preferring to call their muscle-bound computers enterprise servers.
The result: a not-so-shabby nine straight quarters of profits.
Yet Unisys's stock price, despite a recent bump up to its 52-week high of $16 a share, languishes well below better days of $47 a share, because the most important line, revenue, keeps falling.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Unisys stock closed yesterday at $15.50 a share, unchanged.
Unisys Chief Executive Officer James Unruh isn't expecting an upturn in revenue until possibly the second half of this year.
"It's their single biggest problem," says James Cassell, vice president of the Stamford, Conn., consulting firm Gartner Group.
"They can't make the most of what they've got."
Today, Unisys takes another stab at reaching out to new customers and dividing itself from the pack.
It will unveil a system that could make it easier for airlines, banks and other service companies to research their customers' buying habits.
Called the DataCentral Server, Unisys has designed a mainframe -- oops, enterprise server -- that can search other databases for information.
That would let clients, such as an airline handling ticket reservations, hunt up what hotel or auto rental a traveler prefers.
More importantly for Unisys, the new product could bring as much as $1 billion over five years and lure customers that now use rival hardware and software, bearing brand names such as International Business Machines Corp.
Currently only a 10%-to-15% portion of Unisys's sales is made to newcomers.
The rest relies on the aging base of customers of the old Burroughs and Sperry.
When they merged in the mid-1980s, the goal was to become the world's No. 2 computer maker, in part by reaching an entirely new set of buyers.
The new DataCentral Server takes aim at reaching out by working with non-Unisys gear, starting with the airlines-reservation business, where the company is already a strong contender.
The new system stands out because of its ability to draw data from different sources.
While this process usually takes hours as the computer laboriously translates data from one format to run on another, Unisys has packaged a system that can do it all instantaneously, drawing from IBM, Digital Equipment Corp. and eventually other brands.
The key is an innovative "accelerator" that does the transaction process at the same time that another part of the machine does the search process.
Airline aficionados are excited about the development.
"It's long overdue," says Randy Petersen, president of Frequent Flyer Services, which manages and advises travel agencies.
"The amount of information airlines have that they don't know what to do with is tremendous."
The system will sell for between $500,000 and $1 million for an initial entry.
But customers are expected to purchase many different kinds of applications and pay a lot more.
Unisys hopes that DataCentral, by getting a jump on the market ahead of IBM and others that are working on similar query systems, will convince the world that it can provide the link between "open" systems and "proprietary," or incompatible, ones.
Indeed, Unisys is cobbling together an impressive array of challenging and prominent contracts.
Mr. Unruh hopes customers will be impressed by the company's willingness to accept difficult assignments.
They include a $1 billion contract this year for an Amazon-region environmental surveillance system; a contract to computerize the largest savings bank in Russia for $127 million; and other banking-automation contracts in Eastern Europe totaling $400 million.
Last year Nasdaq awarded Unisys a $25 million contract to provide a system that could handle 800 million trades a day.
"I have never been more convinced that being services-led is the correct path for Unisys to take," Mr. Unruh has said repeatedly.
But the services sector is a hard business to make money in, when a company is up against the likes of IBM, Andersen Consulting and General Motors Corp.'s Electronic Data Systems.
Unisys's profit margins are better than IBM's at this point, 23% compared to 14%, according to Mr. Unruh.
Mr. Unruh also is pushing on the hardware front, leading IBM and rivals in the transition to more cost-efficient, "cooler" CMOS chips that let mainframe-sized machines do away with old, costly water-cooled systems.
Unisys started shipping its machines last fall, while IBM plans to announce its new generation of CMOS-based mainframes next month.
Mr. Unruh recently told analysts that he was seeing an increase in orders of the new machines.
But analysts still weren't overly impressed.
While unit sales of the "servers" may be up, revenue last year for enterprise systems fell 21% to $1.7 billion, because of lower prices and the transition to the CMOS systems.
And when IBM does begin shipping its new machines, Unisys could find itself again in the shadow of Big Blue, analysts predict.
If the new moves don't work, Mr. Unruh promises he'll keep at the cost-cutting.
As he tells analysts, "We're not finished yet."
