General Motors Corp. will take a $758 million charge for the first quarter to reflect the cost of disability and certain other employee benefits, but the auto maker repeated its "no excuses" pledge to show a profit in North American operations this year.
The $1.05-per-common-share charge won't cut into GM's cash flow.
But it does represent the costs GM could bear largely because of its generous disability-benefits program.
A GM spokesman declined to say how the charge will affect first-quarter results.
However, most analysts expect GM will earn enough from operations in the January-to-March period to more than offset the charge.
GM said $30 million of the total charge would be allocated to its GM Hughes Electronics Corp. unit, and reduce first-quarter net income attributed to GM Class H stock by eight cents a share.
Separately, GM yesterday told workers at its Wilmington, Del., car-assembly plant that the company will study using the factory to build a new small vehicle, instead of closing it in 1996 as originally planned.
A decision could come by November, GM and the United Auto Workers union said in a joint statement.
GM's decision to consider saving the Wilmington plant, which employs 2,800 workers, is another sign of Detroit's bullishness about the outlook for domestic vehicle sales and exports.
GM had said it would close the Wilmington plant in late 1992 as part of a broader plan to close 23 factories and cut North American assembly capacity by about 25%.
Now, however, with U.S. sales rebounding and Japanese auto makers hobbled by a strong yen, GM, Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. are moving to expand capacity and preserve jobs.
The announcement also represents an olive branch from GM President John F. Smith Jr. to UAW Vice President Stephen P. Yokich, who in recent weeks has sanctioned a series of strikes or strike threats at key GM plants to protest management efforts to cut jobs and boost productivity.
Mr. Yokich accompanied GM Vice President Thomas Davis, head of GM's Lansing Automotive Division, in announcing the plan to Wilmington workers.
A GM spokesman wouldn't say what kind of vehicle is under consideration, but said it isn't one now produced by GM.
However, the charge highlights the risks GM is taking if it hangs on to more UAW jobs than it can support with its shrunken U.S. market share.
For 1992, GM took a $20.8 billion noncash charge to reflect the projected cost of its retiree medical benefits.
That charge and a total of more than $10 billion in losses from 1990 to 1992 have reduced GM's shareholder equity to $5.6 billion from $27.33 billion in 1991.
GM's chief financial officer, G. Richard Wagoner, said in a statement that GM still intends to show a profit from North American operations, "no exceptions, no excuses."
Mr. Wagoner will get help keeping his promise from a booming U.S.-vehicle market.
After a strong first quarter, GM is likely to add even more production to second-quarter schedules.
The planned charge was announced after the close of the stock market.
GM common stock fell $1.375, or 2.4%, to close at $56 a share in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday.
