Your page-one article "How Drug Firms Saved Puerto Rico Tax Break After Clinton Attack," Dec. 21, graphically details what we endure: the insidious influence of giant mainland companies over the daily lives of the island's 3.6 million second-class citizens.
While these firms boast of Section 936's higher-paying high-tech jobs, the facts belie their claims.
Not one such new job has been created since 1975 and, worse, many of my patients are unable to even afford the medications they manufacture.
They fill their prescriptions on lay-away, buying required dosages as needed.
No wonder islanders were easy prey to threats of job loss and companies bolting the island if 936 was eliminated.
When unemployment runs twice the mainland's and per-capita income is half of Mississippi's, half of a loaf of bread is better than having none at all.
Section 936 money permeates the island's economy and politics -- from the banks who take in the billions to the public officials, professionals and business people who prosper from it.
They have a vested interest in keeping Puerto Rico a U.S. appendage, as statehood would end corporate America's great treasury raid.
This power and influence was no more evident than in our recent status plebiscite as similar 936 threats were bandied about to a frightened electorate, compromising our right to freely express self-determination views.
Notwithstanding these false promises of "statehood without taxation," a majority of islanders rejected commonwealth for the first time in 40 years.
Our island has been a U.S. possession for 95 years and our people American citizens since 1917, longer than any other territory not granted statehood or independence.
Puerto Ricans have earned their right to a 5lst star through commitment to American ideals at home and in defense of freedom abroad.
Miriam Ramirez de Ferrer, M.D.
You failed to examine the essential value of the Section 936 tax incentive to the Puerto Rican economy.
You make the subjective and unsubstantiated observations that Section 936 is "ill-conceived" and "widely viewed as one of the most inefficient provisions of the U.S. tax code."
In fact, Section 936 has been remarkably successful in meeting its objectives of job creation and economic development, transforming Puerto Rico from the poorhouse of the Caribbean into a thriving industrial economy.
Manufacturing accounts for nearly 40% of the island GDP.
Annual salaries in manufacturing generally average more than $22,000, and average more than $35,000 in the pharmaceutical industry.
Altogether, about 300,000 jobs, or nearly one-third the island's total employment, are directly or indirectly generated by Section 936.
As Puerto Rico's economy has improved, it has become one of the world's largest markets for mainland goods and services.
Three hundred thousand jobs created on the island, 200,000 jobs created on the mainland and a vastly improved quality of life for our fellow citizens of Puerto Rico at an annual "cost" of $3 billion are not the results of an "ill-conceived" or "inefficient" program.
Indeed, few, if any, domestic or foreign aid programs have an economic impact equivalent to that of Section 936.
The article suggests that there is something sordid in the companies' "commingling their own interests with those of the Puerto Rican workers."
Of course their interests are commingled.
Puerto Ricans would not have jobs if the companies can't afford to operate in Puerto Rico.
Carl A. Nordberg Jr.
Puerto Rico, U.S.A. Foundation
