The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission withdrew its earlier conditional approval of a planned merger between PSI Resources Inc. and Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co., but left the door open for the combination to proceed.
The two Midwestern concerns are seeking to form a new company to be known as CINergy Corp., which would rank as the nation's 13th-largest investor-owned utility.
The plan to complete the merger by midyear could now be pushed back into the third quarter, they said yesterday .
In August, FERC granted conditional approval of the two companies' merger.
But since then, a number of so-called intervenors, including state regulatory agencies from Ohio and Kentucky and certain big energy customers, filed for reconsideration of various aspects of FERC's August order.
They contend, among other things, that state commissions, as well as FERC, should be allowed to rule on the planned interstate merger.
FERC signed off on the merger with the understanding -- encouraged, the commission says, by PSI and CG&E statements -- that state regulators would be granted such authority.
But PSI, Plainfield, Ind., and CG&E, Cincinnati, have subsequently contended that state clearance isn't required, because of amendments made to their original filing.
FERC yesterday said it was "deeply concerned about the state of the record on the issue of whether this merger will impair effective regulation."
At a commission meeting yesterday, Elizabeth Anne Moler, chairman of the commission, said she was "deeply troubled" by representations from the two companies.
It ordered the intervenors and the utilities to undertake settlement talks under the guidance of an administrative law judge.
The commission's trial staff will also be a party to the negotiations.
If a settlement hasn't been negotiated within 60 days of the first conference, FERC said it intends to issue a further order, setting issues for a possible hearing.
James E. Rogers, PSI's chairman, president and chief executive officer, said, "We have made significant progress toward resolution of several critical issues through direct negotiation with state regulatory commissions, and are confident of our ability to conclude a settlement successfully."
He noted that in November, PSI and CG&E had actually asked the FERC to order a settlement conference, but earlier this week asked FERC to set aside that request, "in light of progress made through direct discussions."
FERC said the commissioners hadn't acted on the merits of the issues raised by the intervenors, but only seeks to "preclude the merger from going ahead pending settlement and commission review of the settlement."
Under terms of the merger pact, which is pegged to the price of CG&E shares, PSI holders would receive CINergy stock with an indicated value of $27.37, or a total of $1.56 billion.
