Part of the CBS Olympic broadcasting team in Lillehammer, Hank Kashiwa is back amid the European-led international ski fraternity.
He earned his bid as a world-class racer for more than a decade, including a spot on the U.S. team at the 1972 Winter Games.
In his day job as president of Volant Ski Corp. in Boulder, Colo., however, Mr. Kashiwa is rather outside the fold.
His is a niche equipment maker, just as Americans generally have become more peripheral to ski manufacturing.
When a U.S. consumer buys downhill skis, odds are nearly 3 to 1 he'll get a European import.
Cross-country skis almost certainly come from across the Atlantic.
The same with boots and bindings, the link between skier and slats.
The major remaining exception to this rule is K2 Corp., in Vashon, Wash., on an island in Puget Sound.
But even K2's downhill skis, which it says have 20% of the U.S. market and 10% world-wide, draw nearly half their component value from abroad.
The materials base for the "hard goods" in skiing is mainly overseas -- in Europe primarily, and in Japan, which equips its home market and does little exporting in this industry.
There's nothing wrong here -- manufacturing is a global enterprise and skiers are entitled to the best buy.
But why is renewed American industrial prowess not so evident in this $5 billion international sector?
Skiing is a special case, it turns out.
But a world of more stable currencies might change things.
Skiing is different, first of all, because the U.S. market is not the driver that it is in most consumer goods.
Only 5% to 10% of Americans ski regularly -- less than in any major industrialized nation except Britain.
This means that, even at more than a million ski sets sold annually, the U.S. packs barely half the punch of Japan and maybe a third that of Europe.
With its origins in the Alps (downhill) and the Nordic countries (cross-country) and its networks of craftsmen (down to the buckles on the boots) centered on the Continent, the sport has good reason for congregating commercially in Europe.
However, the U.S. industry enjoyed a sizable opening from World War II till the early 1970s, during which time it introduced the metal ski and later the hard-plastic boot.
Howard Head's ski company in Timonium, Md., was a major player, but his namesake brand and other onetime U.S. products, including Lange boots, are now made in Europe or, in the case of once-popular Hexcel skis, not at all.
Performance skiing, such as at the Olympics, is nearly entirely a European expo.
American Tommy Moe won his downhill gold medal this week on skis from Dynastar of France.
Even at the recreational end of the market, however, the U.S. has retreated with its supplier base.
But production siting doesn't just reflect physical imperatives.
David Currier, an Olympic teammate of Mr. Kashiwa's and now marketing director at Volant, observes that the sport and the industry are laced with social ties that extend into the distribution and sales arms.
Cracking that Euro-centered complex is something even the Japanese have not tried.
Volant is attempting to capture attention with a stainless steel ski that it claims boosts performance.
Mr. Kashiwa's brother, a Los Alamos National Laboratory engineer who once worked at K-2, developed the ski and Volant got off the ground in the late 1980s with capital from Mike Markkula (its chairman) and other Silicon Valley executives.
It has yet to turn a profit, but Hank Kashiwa says that can be done next year with sales reaching 35,000 to 45,000, adding "I better."
Even at that target level, Volant wouldn't be noticed on many lifts.
By contrast, production at K2's Vashon Island facilities (where parent Anthony Industries also puts out the smaller Olin and Pre lines) is estimated to hit 400,000 a year, with more than 700 employees.
K2 trails only French-based Rossignol in popularity on the U.S. slopes.
Tim Petrick, K2's general manager, also touts the company's inroads into Japan, where the jazzier American ski image helped it to double sales in four years, to nearly 100,000 pairs.
The gains came after a fight over access, and in fact K2 has benefited from a U.S. government-funded "trade adjustment assistance center" in the Northwest.
While accenting the degree of hand craftsmanship in its assembly, K2 has been able to keep costs down -- well below what Olin experienced at its prior Connecticut location, says Mr. Petrick, who was in charge of relocating that division.
But the essence of mass ski-making may be in machinery, such as at the $35 million capped-ski plant Rossignol opened in France in late 1992, and investment capital is bound to be attracted by Europe's existing infrastructure.
Capped skis, which encase a usually wood or foam core in hard plastics, can be more efficient to make than traditional laminated skis.
Volant's twist is to return to (lightweight) metal for its caps.
K2 and other makers use fiberglass surfaces that better lend themselves to the striking colors that characterize today's skis.
It's often hard to separate fad from fact in ski technology.
The truth probably is that only skilled recreational skiers notice much difference on the mountain.
Like many others, ski products sell as much on sizzle as on steak.
That means American makers can beat the Japanese, but the major European lines, which nearly all have U.S. marketing arms, have learned to best both.
Currency counts, too.
Was it a coincidence that the U.S. ski industry was routed to its Vashon Island bulwark during the great monetary upheavals?
Today, even K2 utilizes production in Norway, near Lillehammer, to serve its overseas markets (including Japan) with less exchange-rate risk than a dollar-based product.
Even in snowboarding, the youth-centered cross between surfing and skiing that was an American idea and now accounts for more than 10% of the ski trade, currencies are a factor.
Burton Snowboards of Burlington, Vt., the dominant name in that submarket, relies on an Austrian plant for much of its output, although the privately held company reports it still is mostly a U.S.-Canadian producer.
In both the "radical" culture of snowboarding and in the increasingly mature market for downhill skiing, there may be hope for a decent U.S. base in the sport.
Snowboard "shredders" have their cult heroes but basically rebel against too much manipulation.
In the Alpine segment, meanwhile, European brand association with the world's great ski racers may no longer be such a trump: Can American baby boomers fathom how their needs on the slopes relate to Tomba on TV?
The Olympics are a boon to the business, no question.
But in the future sales may increasingly hinge on offering the average skier reliable turns, stability and good value.
Manufacturers struggling to answer that call might ask as much of monetary authorities.
