Battle lines began forming in the House yesterday over how quickly and easily Baby Bells should be allowed to provide long-distance service.
During the first subcommittee hearing on a bill to open competition in the telecommunications industry, Rep. Mike Synar (D., Okla.) and other congressional supporters of long-distance carriers said federal regulators should help to decide whether a Baby Bell can offer long-distance service within a state; the bill currently leaves that decision to the states.
For their part, the regional phone companies are seeking to shorten the waiting period for entry into long-distance from the five years designated in the bill, co-sponsored by Reps. Jack Brooks (D., Texas) and John Dingell (D., Mich.).
And their backers on the Judiciary Committee, including Republican Hamilton Fish of New York and Democrat Rick Boucher of Virginia, said the bill should impose a tougher legal standard on outsiders striving to block a Bell company's application to provide long-distance service.
In addition, the Baby Bell supporters said the bill should be changed to allow the regional phone companies to offer "incidental long-distance" services, such as collecting television programming sent by satellite, without any federal review.
Under a 1982 consent decree, Baby Bells are barred from providing these and other long-distance services.
Bell Atlantic Corp. had to apply for a waiver from the Justice Department for its planned acquisition of Tele-Communications Inc., because TCI has cable-programming interests.
Longdistance companies want to keep that restriction on Baby Bells intact.
Anne Bingaman, the Justice Department's top antitrust official, said in testimony yesterday that it makes sense for Bell companies to be able to provide such incidental long-distance service, as well as certain cellular-phone transmissions, without seeking federal approval.
Still, she and Larry Irving, assistant commerce secretary, made clear that they wouldn't recommend any change that would upset a compromise worked out last year by Mr. Dingell, chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, and Mr. Brooks, chairman of the Judiciary Committee.
Ms. Bingaman, referring to a "delicate balance," said she thinks the bill's division of regulatory powers is "just exactly right."
The bill requires a Baby Bell to apply to the Federal Communications Commission and the Justice Department before entering long-distance or manufacturing -- another business they are barred from by the 1982 decree.
Bell companies don't want to upset the balance, either, since they'll have to fight the consent decree in court if the Brooks-Dingell bill doesn't replace it.
"We're supporting the bill, and we want to work with the two chairmen to make it better, unlike some parties in the debate," said Aubrey Sarvis, a Bell Atlantic lobbyist.
He said American Telephone & Telegraph Co. is trying to kill the bill, but an AT&T spokesman denied that, saying, "We're going to work to improve it."
AT&T and other long-distance carriers are scheduled to testify next week.
Sprint Corp. yesterday said it would propose amendments to the bill, but wasn't specific.
