Arizona economists still smarting from memories of the state's uncharacteristic bust in the late 1980s are beginning to talk of a new, if limited, economic boom.
"If it's not a boom, it's a miniboom," ventures Marshall J. Vest of the University of Arizona in Tucson.
After several slower-growing years, employment will rise sharply this year and put Arizona "right up there with the fastest-growing states in the nation," he says.
"And this year we will have, for the first time in a decade, both the construction industry and the manufacturing industry increasing at the same time."
While agreeing that the housing sector is "pretty amazing," Tracy L. Clark of Arizona State University in the Phoenix suburb of Tempe adds cautiously, "If I was going to use the term `boom,' I'd probably restrict myself to the construction industry and the single-family housing markets."
After a string of year-to-year declines, Arizona's residential building surged 36% in 1992 and 19% last year.
Tucson -- whose population of 720,000 ranks second to metropolitan Phoenix's 2.3 million -- is growing especially fast.
The missile-systems division of General Motors Corp.'s Hughes Aircraft Co. is heating up the Tucson housing market by relocating there 4,000 employees, mostly white-collar, from Southern California.
Pima County Supervisor Ed Moore says the influx of higher-income workers has led to an extreme shortage of $300,000-plus houses.
He estimates that not more than 20 are available right now.
Another element in the construction boomlet, ironically, is a legacy from the speculative building of the mid-1980s.
Developers who might have had trouble justifying new housing projects have found it cheaper to build on the sites abandoned a few years ago.
In many places, pipes, wiring and other infrastructure were in place when the projects went bust.
Behind Arizona's rebound is the bottoming-out three years ago of its disastrous overbuilding, much of it related to savings-and-loan abuses.
Meanwhile, the improving national economy has led many major Arizona employers to start hiring again.
Motorola Inc., the state's largest private employer, is adding slowly to its work force of 20,000.
The unemployment rate, which at 7.5% in 1992 was a shade above the nation's, fell to an average of 6.3% last year and is headed toward 5.6% this year, First Interstate Bank says.
It expects the U.S. rate to stay around 6.8% of the labor force.
Other signs of strength in Arizona include a drop in office vacancy rates and gains in population, personal income and retail sales that slightly outpace the nation's.
Many economists applaud these relatively modest gains.
Brian Cary, an economist who tracks six Western states for First Interstate, explains that the growth rates of the early 1980s probably weren't sustainable, and he sees the current Arizona economy "on firm ground."
Mr. Cary discerns little of the financial overheating that devastated the state in the mid-1980s.
Arizona's construction industry is getting a short-term boost from shaky Southern California; nonresidential builders already have taken jobs at earthquake-damage sites in Los Angeles.
The quake also may bolster Arizona's tourist trade.
Vacationers seeking "a warm-weather destination somewhere other than Los Angeles" may go to Arizona, Mr. Cary says.
Arizona's fortunes could get a further lift from the state government, which is running a budget surplus and is discussing a $100 million cut in personal income taxes this year.
Another plus could be the North American Free Trade Agreement, which seems sure to help border states that already have strong ties to Mexico.
Explaining Tucson's rapid growth, Prof. Vest says, "Tucson started the corrective process a year before Phoenix and solved the oversupply a year sooner."
And Tucson, only about 40 miles north of the Mexican border, will especially benefit from Nafta.
But Arizona State economists contend that Phoenix and surrounding Maricopa County will regain the lead.
Tracy Clark, who is also economics editor of the area's quarterly Blue Chip Economic Forecast, believes that Phoenix will soon reflect the national economic recovery faster, in part because of the city's better transportation links.
