The Justice Department filed a civil fraud suit against ITT Corp. for submitting false claims on Defense Department contracts, a move ITT criticized as "unjustifiable" because the company had turned itself in.
The suit, filed in federal district court in Newark, alleged that ITT's avionics division in Nutley, N.J., knowingly claimed $360,000 in labor costs on several government contracts when, in fact, the labor had not been performed in connection with those contracts.
The government's complaint said that ITT supervisory employees physically altered and rewrote worker timecards to move the labor hours to contracts where the government would pay.
It said the false claims were submitted to the government from late 1983 through early 1986.
The company didn't dispute the improper billing, declaring that it had received an internal allegation in April 1990 and confirmed the violations in a company investigation.
Then, under an agreement with the Defense Department that many defense contractors have signed, ITT reported the findings in May 1990 and cooperated with the government probe.
"By initiating legal action against ITT, the government fails to live up to the spirit of the disclosure program and the expectations of ITT," the company said in a statement.
"The actions are unjustifiable and perplexing."
ITT spokesman James Gallagher said that on two other occasions, ITT had discovered violations, reported them to the government and resolved the disputes "amicably."
In the latest case, which he said was filed on the last day possible under legal timetables, "we said we made a mistake, and we'd pay what we owe.
We thought they were happy."
He said there appears to be "great ambiguity" as to whether the government will take legal action in such situations.
"If the program is going to work," he said, defense contractors need to know what to expect when they identify problems.
The suit seeks triple damages and civil penalties under the false claims act, as well as common-law remedies.
Civil penalties can range from $5,000 to $10,000 for each false claim.
ITT's businesses include automotive products, fluid technology, defense, forest products, hotels and financial services.
