The District of Columbia is facing a serious cash squeeze, and may have to borrow from the Treasury.
Ellen O'Connor, the city's finance director, said the cash squeeze stems in large part from uncertainty over the fate of Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly's plan to defer $230 million in payments to a city pension fund.
The proposal has encountered strong political opposition, and the pension fund's board has gone to court to force the mayor to make the payment.
Commenting on an article in Sunday's Washington Post, Ms. O'Connor denied that the city faces a near-term financial crisis.
But she readily acknowledged that "We have some very serious long-term problems."
These include difficulties familiar to many major American cities: a shrinking tax base due to the migration of businesses and middle- and upper-income taxpayers to the suburbs, combined with rising costs associated with the remaining, largely low-income population.
But Ms. O'Connor stressed that the district has had no problem raising money on Wall Street, and is confident that the city won't lose access to the market, as happened to New York City during that city's financial crisis in the 1970s.
"It's not a market-access problem," Ms. O'Connor said in an interview.
In fact, she said, Washington plans to sell as much as $200 million in revenue-anticipation notes on Wall Street next month.
While confirming that Treasury borrowing is under consideration, she said the possibility of it being used is "remote."
As the nation's capital, the district has long had unique status.
It routinely borrowed from the Treasury until the 1980s, and it still has the authority to do so.
But it hasn't exercised that option for a decade.
The city's attempt to defer pension-fund contributions is considered a highly unusual move that indicates considerable financial stress.
Ms. O'Connor said the fate of that proposal and the upshot of city-council action on the district's budget should be clear within the next month or so.
"We'll have to go to Treasury if we lose the lawsuit and have a budget that isn't balanced," she said.
She said the city needs long-term assistance in meeting its pension obligations.
She also argued, as district officials have for years, that the city needs more federal aid and greater political autonomy.
