California disaster authorities said damages from Monday's earthquake "conservatively" could range from $15 billion to $30 billion, an estimate far higher than most experts had suggested.
If damages reach the higher end of the first official estimate, from Gov. Pete Wilson's office, they would approach the $30 billion cost of Hurricane Andrew, the 1992 disaster in Florida and Louisiana that ranks as the nation's costliest so far.
The staggering California estimate, coming even as a sense of normalcy began to return despite the continuing aftershocks here, was contained in an appeal by Gov. Wilson to President Clinton.
The president toured the quake-hit region yesterday and conducted a town meeting in Burbank, just southeast of the temblor's Northridge epicenter in the San Fernando Valley.
At the meeting, President Clinton announced $140 million in federal funds as the first installment of relief money.
This included $45 million to clean up debris-filled streets and start repairs, and $95 million in loans to small businesses damaged by the earthquake.
But the president warned that key waivers of requirements for local matching funds couldn't be decided until better damage-cost estimates were available.
Housing Secretary Henry Cisneros cautioned that "it seems to us that the cresting of the housing problem is still ahead."
Preliminary estimates indicated that more than 4,000 dwellings were damaged or destroyed.
President Clinton had this promise for quake victims: "We will stay with you until this job is finished."
The quake, which measured 6.6 on the Richter scale, was the worst disaster in Los Angeles history, based on casualties, which totaled more than 4,300 dead and injured, local authorities said.
The death toll yesterday rose to 46, still below the 58 killed in the 1971 quake in Sylmar, just northeast of Northridge.
About 52,000 individuals and businesses still were without electricity yesterday, with 40,000 lacking water, and 35,000 lacking natural gas.
The state damage estimate was based on a computer model devised by EQE International Inc., a San Francisco consulting firm.
EQE, in a separate statement, estimated overall damages at $15.1 billion, the lower end of the state's range.
Of the total, residential damage was estimated to be $5.8 billion, with commercial damage $3.7 billion, industrial damage $1.5 billion, and the rest in other damages, EQE said.
It estimated insured losses at $1.5 billion to $1.9 billion.
Kevin Eckery, the governor's deputy press secretary, said the upper end of the range came from the state Office of Emergency Services, which has long experience in calculating disaster costs.
He said the range is "a very, very rough estimate."
EQE's model relies on such factors as known fault lines and the seismic history of the region but doesn't reflect actual inspection of the devastated area.
In his plea, Gov. Wilson asked President Clinton to follow the precedent established after Hurricane Andrew and Hawaii's 1992 Hurricane Iniki.
In those disasters, he said, 100% of the public assistance costs were covered by federal disaster aid.
Without full funding, state and local governments would be required to pay 25% of the costs.
Los Angeles-area commuters yesterday struggled to get to work as most large businesses opened for the first time since the quake.
With six major breaks in the area's sprawling freeway system, many drivers were forced to use car pools, trains or buses.
One man said a commute that last week took 45 minutes yesterday took four hours.
The city's new Metrolink train service, connecting areas north of the quake zone to downtown Los Angeles, operated at capacity even after adding five cars to its usual three-car trains.
The superintendent of the Los Angeles Unified School District announced that schools will remain closed through the end of this week.
But dozens of schools in the San Fernando Valley may not reopen for several weeks, the superintendent said.
As seismologists and engineers reviewed updated measurements of the quake, many were amazed at the violence of the vertical shaking of area highways.
According to the U.S. Geological Survey, measurements of stress on one collapsed overpass near the epicenter reached an indicated 2.3 times the force of gravity.
Even more than 15 miles to the south, instruments embedded in a portion of the Santa Monica Freeway measured the upward acceleration of the roadbed at 1.8 times the force of gravity.
Such g-forces, as they are called, are comparable to the acceleration experienced by fighter pilots making violent manuevers.
The violence of the quake could prompt many owners of plants, shopping centers and other commercial buildings to invest in upgrading facilities to better withstand such forces.
Since earthquake insurance rates are expected to continue to rise, some businesses may find such long-term investments more economical.
