Foreign investors are turning skittish toward South Korean securities.
Amid growing tension over North Korea's suspected nuclear weapons program, the premiums foreigners pay for Korean shares on the over-the-counter market have plummeted.
Meanwhile, the Korean Composite Stock Index, the main barometer of blue-chip shares, has declined moderately since inter-Korean negotiations broke down 10 days ago, and Korean borrowers are finding the international bond market a bit less welcoming.
Seoul share prices rebounded yesterday; the composite index ended the day at 883.25, up 10.57 points, or about 1.2%.
That's still down about 1% from the level just before the talks collapsed, however.
North Korea's saber rattling "is a definite negative," says W. Todd Kilborn, the Seoul manager for Worldsec International Ltd., a Hong Kong-based equities trading company and an affiliate of Japan's Mitsubishi Bank.
"Koreans tend to see what the foreigners will do and foreign sentiment has been real bad."
The Korean stock market was one of Asia's best performers from last September to February, rising nearly 50%.
Then the finance ministry cooled prices by directing Korean institutions to winnow their holdings.
The measures worked too well, however: By March 10, the ministry was trying to shore up prices by cutting the level of deposits investors must place with brokerages to back up buy orders.
But no government hand could repair the damage done by North Korean negotiators when they stormed out of inter-Korean talks March 19, threatening to turn Seoul into a "sea of fire" if South Korea didn't back off what Pyongyang said were unreasonable demands.
Foreigners have sold Korean shares heavily this month.
In the first 23 days of March, they sold 58.9 billion won ($73 million) more than they purchased.
That selling led to a sharp decline in prices on Seoul's over-the-counter market for shares available to foreign investors.
Because the government limits foreign investors to holding no more than a total of 10% of the shares in Korean companies, the portion of the shares available to foreigners usually trades at a big premium to the official stock market price, at which domestic investors buy and sell.
Just before Pyongyang's tantrum, foreigners were paying a premium of about 50% for shares in Korea Electric Power Corp.
In the past week, however, that premium has plunged to about 3%.
Share prices for closed-end Korea equity funds managed overseas also have dropped.
The typical premium to net asset value on such funds is about 5%, down from 25% earlier this month, brokers say.
"Broadly speaking, the events of the last week have not been encouraging for foreign investors," said Peter Thorn, branch manager for the Seoul arm of W.I. Carr (Far East) Ltd.
"But one could interpret this as a good buying opportunity."
He said shares of Samsung Electronics Co., whose premium has fallen to about 20% from 50% before the talks broke down, look particularly tempting.
The heightened tensions on the peninsula are also unsettling the bond markets.
Yields on Yankee bonds from the Korea Development Bank and the Korean Export-Import Bank have edged up to a premium of 1.16 percentage points over similar U.S. Treasury bond issues, compared with 1.08 points earlier this month, according to figures released last week by the Korea Stock Exchange.
As a result, foreign bankers say, some firms are shelving loan requests.
"Korean companies are quite price sensitive," noted the country manager of a major U.S. bank, "and if they can't get good terms, they're likely to just hold off."
