Come the spring thaw, there is the possibility that another major flood may hit the Midwest, and Monsanto wants to be prepared.
So, in addition to the more than $2 million the agricultural-products maker and its employees have already given to a $5 million American Red Cross rural-relief fund it spearheaded for flood victims, the Monsanto Fund has set aside some $200,000 for potential use at two particularly susceptible river towns where it has plants.
"No one really `plans' for a disaster.
But we have contingency funding," says Marilyn Hartnett, corporate contributions manager at Monsanto.
"And from my point of view such disaster-anticipation is going to be a consideration" in the 1995 budget, too, adds Ms. Hartnett.
Prompted by the unusual spate of natural disasters in recent years, Monsanto and some other companies are taking private-assistance efforts to another level -- advance disaster relief.
Companies are also concentrating on aiding communities where they have facilities, workers or customers.
Those that lean toward product gifts are figuring out new ways of getting the right goods to the right place or giving cash.
And many companies are establishing matching-gift funds when employees donate.
But in some cases, the disaster funding means other projects or grants go undone.
Monsanto, for instance, notes that the bulk of its philanthropic budget is committed to longer-term projects but adds that when a piece of its discretionary funds flow to flood relief, "something else goes."
And American Red Cross officials are watching for "compassion fatigue" on the part of corporate donors.
John Wm.
Thomas, senior vice president of development for the American Red Cross in Washington, D.C., and the group's chief fund-raiser, hopes that anticipating disasters may help both corporations and the Red Cross itself better budget their resources.
"We are saying to companies, we need your help for L.A. -- but we may need your help in three or four months, too, if it floods" in the Midwest, he says.
As society increasingly turns to the private sector for assistance, corporate involvement in disaster relief is likely to grow, says the Conference Board, an economic research group in New York.
Its recent study found that 90% of companies polled provide some sort of disaster relief.
Those polled showed aid soaring from $21.6 million in cash and products in 1990 to $48.3 million in 1992, although not all supplied 1990 data.
While cash gifts are common, the value of donated products is typically more than three times as high as the cash contribution.
Pharmaceutical and food companies in particular have a long track record in disaster relief.
For 12 years, Johnson & Johnson has used a formula based on the number of deaths and injuries in deciding how many of its "disaster modules" to send.
The modules are shipping containers loaded with bulk medical supplies such as bandages, gloves and over-the-counter medicines.
But the New Brunswick, N.J., healthcare concern can also adapt quickly.
On the morning of the Los Angeles quake, Curt Weeden, head of corporate contributions and another member of the J&J disaster-relief committee heard the news on the way to work.
The J&J early birds spoke with Los Angeles sources before the daylong quake-induced phone disruptions began.
So, while others were still seeking information, J&J had decided not to dispatch the modules.
Instead, it used a network of private voluntary organizations in the area, such as the local Red Cross, to arrange for less surgical, more practical goods.
Within a day or so, personal-care items such as toothbrushes, disposable diapers and feminine-hygiene products were being given to earthquake victims.
A small number of corporate donors, including the Avon Products Foundation, have recently turned over their product donations to a middleman -- Gifts In Kind America in Alexandria, Va.
For a fee of under $50,000 a year, the agency handles Avon's merchandise donations.
"We can't run this program at that price," says Glenn Clarke, president of the Avon Foundation, calling the service "efficient and timely."
Many companies have simply been learning as they go.
After Hurricane Andrew, Kmart Corp. and others concluded that piling goods on a truck and racing to the disaster scene didn't work well.
So, the morning after the L.A. quake, Kmart's disaster-relief committee sent a bulletin to all store managers not to accept any collections at the store.
Instead, Kmart itself focused on gifts of cash and drinking water.
Corporations and relief agencies generally recognize 1989 as a sort of watershed year for company giving after Hurricane Hugo was followed by the San Francisco earthquake.
Live television coverage of subsequent disasters has fueled the trend.
Anheuser-Busch Cos., for instance, says it has given some $5 million in cash and over 17 million cans of drinking water since 1989.
(The Red Cross figures that corporations have contributed about 25% of total disaster giving since 1989.)
General Motors Corp., a longtime national Red Cross supporter, added the Salvation Army as an option as it and the United Auto Workers prepare to give as much as $1.45 million in Los Angeles earthquake relief.
The auto maker and the union together are donating some $450,000, split 50-50 between the Salvation Army and the Red Cross.
Additionally, GM will match up to $500,000 in gifts from employees, retirees and dealers to both groups.
The split will be decided on how the workers write their checks.
GM previously had approached disasters on a case-by-case basis but is now looking at a more formal policy, says Deborah Dingell, president of the General Motors Foundation.
GM has long had a disaster-relief plan in place on the sales side to assist its dealers.
Says Mrs. Dingell: "We are now trying to tie in the charitable and community side."
