To the fury of rival banks, the French government appears set to ride to the rescue of Credit Lyonnais, the state-owned banking colossus that has been maimed by its own aggressive expansion strategy.
Officials confirmed reports in the French press that the government is considering a recapitalization of the bank of as much as four billion francs ($677 million).
With government help, Credit Lyonnais is also likely to remove as much as 28 billion francs of soured real-estate loans and other dubious assets from its balance sheet by shunting them off into a separate company.
Credit Lyonnais plunged into the red in 1992 and is expected to show another hefty loss in 1993 following a huge spending spree during the late 1980s by its former chairman, Jean-Yves Haberer.
Under his stewardship, the bank expanded its presence throughout Europe, but also ran into major financial and legal problems.
Among other things, Credit Lyonnais is currently the unwilling owner of Hollywood's troubled MGM film studio and is also implicated in a major Swiss fraud inquiry.
Full details of the rescue package aren't expected to be announced before Credit Lyonnais reports its 1993 results at the end of next month, and a Finance Ministry spokesman declined to comment.
But the troubled bank's private-sector rivals aren't waiting for the final text; they are already crying foul at the very idea that the state will help Credit Lyonnais clean up its balance sheet.
The chairmen of Societe Generale and Banque Nationale de Paris, which was only recently privatized, are both arguing that any government assistance to Credit Lyonnais would distort fair competition.
Given that most of the bank's problems are self-inflicted, they say, Credit Lyonnais should solve them on its own, perhaps by selling part of its huge asset portfolio, which is valued at more than 60 billion francs.
Marc Vienot, chairman of Societe Generale, has said it would be "shocking" if Credit Lyonnais were allowed to bounce back without paying for at least some of its own mistakes.
And one official at another big French bank gripes that, "We kept hearing that it was so active and dynamic while we were supposed to be sleepy because we were doing traditional banking.
I don't see why taxpayers should now put it back on its feet."
Despite such complaints, the government seems willing to step in because it hopes to ready Credit Lyonnais for privatization.
That remains a long-term goal; the first stage involves ending the bank's status as a national embarrassment.
Mr. Haberer was pushed out late last year and succeeded by Jean Peyrelevade, the former chairman of France's biggest insurer, Union des Assurances de Paris.
Mr. Peyrelevade has been moving fast to curb the bank's excesses and reorganize its management.
He is expected to appoint Pascal Lamy, the chief of staff to Jacques Delors, the president of the European Union Commission in Brussels, to a top position in the bank, over the heads of current senior management.
Officials in Brussels close to Mr. Lamy confirmed the imminent appointment.
Mr. Peyrelevade has also moved to rein in subsidiaries such as Altus Finance that, under his predecessor, became vehicles for some of the bank's biggest, and most risky, financial moves.
Among other things, Altus acquired a $3.25 billion portfolio of high-risk, high-yield "junk" bonds of the failed Equitable Life Insurance Co. of the U.S.
Banking analysts say a major housecleaning is long overdue.
Moody's Investors Service last week placed the ratings of Credit Lyonnais and its subsidiaries under review, and some other analysts say the bank's rating would tumble were it not owned by the French state.
ALTUS FINANCE, a subsidiary of Credit Lyonnais, in 1991 acquired a $3.25 billion junk-bond portfolio from failed insurer Executive Life Insurance Co. of the U.S.
In an article yesterday, the failed insurer was incorrectly identified as Equitable Life Insurance Co.
Equitable Life remains a going concern.
(WSJ Feb. 10, 1994)
