Although the Olympic flame won't be extinguished until Saturday, already the call along Madison Avenue is: "Let the negotiations begin!"
In fact, American Telephone & Telegraph just snared folk hero and gold medal speed skater Dan Jansen to star in a series of commercials, industry executives say.
The advertisements also are expected to feature Mr. Jansen's passionately supportive wife, Robin.
While details of the campaign couldn't be determined, Mr. Jansen is expected to be an integral part of AT&T's ad campaign leading up to the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
Mr. Jansen's representative, Fred Fried, executive vice president of Integrated Sports International in East Rutherford, N.J., declined to confirm the AT&T deal.
Mr. Fried would say only that he is close to finalizing a deal involving Mr. Jansen and "one of the best corporations in America."
An AT&T spokesman declined comment.
The phone is just starting to ring for Mr. Jansen and other winners on the U.S. Olympic teams.
Clearly, the ho-hum reception from advertisers for the 1992 Winter Olympics' athletes won't be repeated.
Sports marketing experts believe that four Olympic athletes, in addition to the photogenic Mr. Jansen, will become endorsement stars once they trek home from Lillehammer, Norway.
They are: Nancy Kerrigan, who is leading in the women's figure skating competition; Bonnie Blair, who set a women's record for Olympic gold medals; and U.S. Alpine skiing medal winners Tommy Moe and Picabo Street.
These athletes share an asset that makes them especially attractive to consumers and, therefore, to advertisers: Each comes with an engaging story to go along with the medals, and each is enormously personable.
What's more, the athletes are highly recognizable, a big plus to advertisers.
After all, the Games are enjoying recordsetting audiences.
On Wednesday, for instance, the three hours of coverage (which featured Ms. Kerrigan and Tonya Harding competing on the ice) was watched by 48.5% of U.S. homes with television sets, making it one of the most-watched broadcasts on television, ever.
"Every viewer is a potential customer, and the high ratings can only whet the appetite of advertisers," says Nova Lanktree, president of Lanktree Sports Celebrity Network in Chicago, which matches sports celebrities with commercials and speaking engagements.
Each athlete in his or her individual way embodies the Olympic spirit, says Marty Blackman of Blackman & Raber Ltd. in New York, which consults with ad agencies on the use of celebrities.
For instance, Mr. Jansen's tale of overcoming personal and professional adversity -- his sister died before he skated in the 1992 Winter Olympics and a medal eluded him -- is "inspirational," says Mr. Blackman.
Ms. Kerrigan is competing months after she was clubbed in the knee, allegedly by individuals close to Ms. Harding.
She also has a mother who is legally blind.
After a brief wild streak in adolescence, Mr. Moe was sent to Alaska where his father put him on the right track.
Ms. Blair, the chipper record-breaking athlete, has her family support team, called the Blair Bunch.
And Ms. Street is the offspring of self-described 1960s hippies who didn't even name her until crossing the border between the U.S. and Mexico presented problems.
Ms. Blair's agent, Parkes Brittain of Advantage International, said from Lillehammer yesterday that she is being bombarded with offers.
Mr. Brittain says Ms. Blair will be on a national television commercial for a "services company," but declined to be specific.
Kellogg said earlier this week that the cereal company will feature her picture on "limited edition" boxes of corn flakes.
"What you see with this group is what you get," says Ms. Lanktree.
"There is little risk for advertisers who might fear embarrassment from celebrity endorsements."
Marketers say each celebrity has close family ties, and perhaps siblings or parents will crop up in ads.
"I could see commercials for Moe and his dad," says Stephen L. Disson, managing director of D&F Consulting, a Washington sports marketing consulting firm.
Mr. Jansen was ice cold for endorsements after the 1992 Olympics, presumably because he failed to win medals.
That's all changed, of course, with the skater's record-breaking performance in the 1000-meter race.
"We love the exposure we're getting," says Mr. Fried, who adds that Mr. Jansen won't become "overexposed."
There will be "several deals, not many," he says.
Mr. Jansen, he adds, "has legs, no pun intended.
He spent 10 years building up to this moment.
He can carry a company's message of Olympic commitment."
Ms. Kerrigan, marketing experts say, doesn't even have to win a gold medal this afternoon.
She already has endorsement deals with Campbell Soup (showing her elbowing a beefy hockey player), Seiko and Xerox, among others.
"She has carried herself beautifully," says David Burns, of Burns Sports Celebrity Service in Chicago.
"She has charm and beauty."
Mr. Burns says Ms. Kerrigan's fee will be huge, especially since she has already signed a deal with Walt Disney for over $1 million that calls for a made-for-television movie, a book, home videos, appearances at Disney theme parks in Florida and California, as well television commercials.
One product category that won't be considered: security systems.
All of the athletes, with the exception of Ms. Kerrigan, are perfect candidates for companies that want to stress speed in their message, say the marketing consultants.
That includes the fast-food companies, with their fat ad budgets.
Ms. Blair, for instance, has already appeared in a McDonald's commercial.
And Mr. Brittain says a new deal may be renegotiated.
And where does this leave Ms. Harding?
After all, she has a high level of recognizability.
"Please," says Ms. Lanktree.
She has been "a lost cause since the Kerrigan clubbing story broke."
Adds Mr. Burns: "Tonya's phone won't ring at all."
A second review is underway at American Telephone & Telegraph Co., three months after the big client shook up its agencies by reshuffling about $200 million in television and print advertising.
This time, direct marketing of AT&T consumer services, including long-distance, is at stake -- a business worth a combined $300 million in billings, said industry executives.
Twelve agencies divide the business at present.
AT&T is one of the nation's biggest direct mailers to consumers.
Nine agencies are under consideration for the direct marketing assignment, said Russ Natoce, AT&T division manager of marketing communications.
After narrowing the search to about six agencies, AT&T plans to name the final roster of two to four agencies in mid-March, Mr. Natoce said.
Two surprise contenders are Saatchi & Saatchi Direct, a unit of Saatchi & Saatchi Co.; and Lowe Direct, a unit of Interpublic Group.
Also competing are units of several traditional AT&T agencies.
They include FCB Direct, a unit of Foote, Cone & Belding, which won the bulk of the business in the last review; WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather Direct; Young & Rubicam together with its Wunderman Cato Johnson unit; and Ayer's Worldwide 1 on 1 unit.
Three other incumbents that specialize in direct marketing are vying for a place, including Steinert & Associates, New York; Phillips Agency, Horsham, Pa; and Bronner Slosberg Humphrey, Boston.
Ad Note . . .
AMERITECH: The Chicago office of WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather has withdrawn from Ameritech Corp.'s review of its residential phone service account, with estimated billings of $35 million to $40 million.
An agency spokeswoman cited a decision to "honor our long-standing relationship wtih AT&T." Left in the pitch are Chicago agencies Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Leo Burnett, and the incumbent, Tatham Euro RSCG.
