ONE OF THE seminal events in the history of the personal computer was the invention of the electronic spreadsheet, a type of software program that permits people to link numbers and formulas to each other and then almost instantly calculate how a change in any one figure affects all the others.
It was only after the first popular spreadsheet program, Visicalc, appeared on the old Apple II machine that PCs began to penetrate businesses in significant numbers.
And it was the next great spreadsheet program, Lotus Development's 1-2-3, that helped propel the first IBM personal computer to success.
Ironically, however, the spreadsheet is one of the least understood -- and therefore one of the most underutilized -- types of software.
Microsoft studies show the vast majority of spreadsheet users do little more than make lists of data and perform only simple calculations on those lists, such as adding them up.
So, in recent years, the top spreadsheet publishers have launched serious efforts to make them easier to use.
Microsoft's Excel spreadsheet for Windows and its chief rivals, Lotus' 1-2-3 for Windows and Borland International's Quattro Pro for Windows, each have added shortcuts and automation features that the others have quickly copied.
Now it's Microsoft's turn again.
It has just released the latest edition of Excel, version 5.0, and it is a mix of catch-up features designed to match innovations from its rivals, plus some original ease-of-use improvements they undoubtedly will adopt soon.
In particular, the software giant has tried to build into Excel some of the "IntelliSense" technology introduced earlier this year in Microsoft Word, which causes the software to make intelligent guesses about what users want to do.
In addition, Excel has been redesigned so that its menus and commands are almost identical to those in Word.
The result is a very good spreadsheet that inches ahead of its rivals.
But it isn't a dazzling new benchmark in the field.
Most people can't go wrong buying Excel 5.0, but I was disappointed that the company didn't do even more to make things easier.
EXCEL 5.0 PLACES notebook-style tabs at the bottom of each spreadsheet, a feature created by Borland to better identify spreadsheets and navigate among them.
From Lotus 1-2-3, Microsoft has borrowed "in-cell editing," which allows users to enter and edit data right in its location on a spreadsheet, rather than using a separate area at the top of the screen, as has been traditional.
Another catch-up feature is the "pivot table," introduced in Lotus's Improv program, which permits users to view data quickly from different perspectives.
For instance, you can view sales by product line for each quarter, or by quarter for each product line, with a couple of mouse clicks.
New features in Excel 5.0 include a "tip wizard," which watches how you work and suggests quicker alternatives.
It's a potentially good tool that supposedly learns your habits over time and adjusts to them.
However, when you start using the program, it tends to offer gratuitous advice a lot.
There's also a "function wizard" that walks you step by step through the process of entering formulas that use financial, statistical and other functions.
It even remembers the ones you use most often.
Another nice addition is called drag and plot.
It allows you to highlight a range of numerical data, then drag those figures on top of a chart, using the mouse.
When you release the mouse button, Excel redraws the chart to include the new figures.
But Excel's designers have placed most of their emphasis on managing lists of data, the task Microsoft says spreadsheet users perform most often.
THERE ARE THREE new automation features in Excel 5.0 to make handling lists of data much simpler than in prior spreadsheets.
First is an "auto filter" that automatically figures out row and column headings in a data table and lets you view categories of information with a few mouse clicks.
An automated subtotals feature makes it much easier to get totals on subcategories of data, such as payroll for specific departments.
And automated sorting makes it a breeze to arrange data in a wide variety of ways.
Still, I wish Microsoft had included in Excel many more "wizards," automated routines for creating specific kinds of documents.
These might have included profit-and-loss statements or payroll or sales reports.
Several other Microsoft programs include such document-creation wizards, but not Excel.
In addition, I wonder why the company, which introduced the "auto-sum" button for instantly toting up a column of figures, hasn't followed up with one-step methods for performing other common calculations, such as an "auto-average" or "auto-count" button.
My only other caution about Excel is that it is a very large program.
It runs barely acceptably on computers with the most common memory configuration, four megabytes.
But if you use very complex calculations, very large spreadsheets or lots of charts, the program becomes too slow for comfort on such machines.
Heavy-duty users shouldn't buy Excel 5.0 unless they have at least six megabytes of memory, which adds to the cost of hardware.
Also, a typical installation takes around 15 megabytes of hard-disk space, and, if you install every feature, it can top 20 megabytes, so you'll need a hefty hard disk.
Excel 5.0 is a very nice spreadsheet.
But I think Microsoft could have done better.
