Bond market rallies at home and abroad buoyed stock prices.
The dollar was mixed.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average advanced 23.92 points to 3856.22.
Standard & Poor's 500-stock index rose 2.17 to 466.91, and the Nasdaq Composite Index jumped 4.50 to 795.05.
The gains occurred as interest rates fell.
The yield on the Treasury's 30-year bond slipped to 6.79% from 6.83% Friday.
The stock and bond market rallies were touched off by news of this past weekend's low wage settlement between Germany's powerful IG Metall metalworkers union and employers.
Norbert Braems, a managing director at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Deutschland in Frankfurt, said the settlement should give Germany's central bank latitude to lower interest rates.
The German stock market rose 2.4%, the French 1.9% and the British 0.9%.
"You had good news from Europe and decent news on the commodity front so you had the makings of a day in which U.S. bond prices rose," said Joseph Liro, economist at S.G. Warburg.
The unexpected turn in European rates sparked a reassessment of the U.S. rate outlook.
Several investors, who last week had made bearish bets on U.S. bonds, turned around yesterday and started covering those positions.
Easing commodity prices prompted some investors to step up buying.
Oil prices fell sharply in a sell-off triggered by disappointment that key oil ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries didn't signal any move to cut output at a meeting in the Persian Gulf region over the weekend.
Stefan Abrams, director of equity strategy at Trust Co. of the West, said yesterday's stable bond market paved the way for higher stock prices.
"Rising interest rates are a sure-fire sign that the economy is robust and profit gains will be healthy," said Mr. Abrams.
"Now as rates stabilize, equity prices are back on the move, as they should be."
Mr. Abrams said he believes the most attractive investment opportunities in the coming months will lie in manufacturing and technology companies, which were among the leaders in yesterday's rally.
Many of these companies have become so lean and mean that even a small jump in revenue will translate into big profit gains, he added.
"There is profit leverage out there," Mr. Abrams said.
"It just so happens that it doesn't belong to the same group of companies that had it in the 80s."
World-wide, stock prices advanced in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index gained 0.41 to 115.45.
Stock prices rose.
Volume totaled 285.6 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange, where 1,443 issues climbed and 762 fell.
Bond prices gained.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year issue rose more than 3/8 point, or more than $3.75 for each $1,000 face amount.
The dollar was mixed.
In late New York trading the currency was quoted at 1.7195 marks and 105.55 yen compared with 1.7190 marks and 105.65 yen Friday.
