IN YET ANOTHER attempt to revive a market that has been stagnant for a decade, beer makers have modified an old idea: big bottles.
Quart-sized bottles have been available for decades, but they have held mostly low-priced beers aimed at a low-end market.
The new generation of big bottles has achieved a prestige that could help increase the total market for beer, says Robert S. Weinberg, a St. Louis beer consultant.
As with many of today's beer industry trends, this one started with regional brewers and microbrewers.
Operating with limited capital, they began packaging their beer in individual 22- or 24-ounce bottles because it was cheaper than putting out the same volume in 12-ounce bottles.
But customers liked the big bottles for another reason: They could try new beers without paying for a six-pack.
And now, consumers are buying the bottles of ales and porters to share over dinner as they once shared bottles of fine wine.
"It's a ceremonial drinking situation," says Mr. Weinberg, "and a concrete example of market development."
So far, the big bottles haven't added much spark to beer sales -- beer volume increased only 0.5% in 1993 -- but some, like Mr. Weinberg, think it may happen soon.
The package allows consumers to experiment with beer, Mr. Weinberg says, which could add to sales.
The concept also is getting the endorsement of the large brewers.
Consumers can now buy everything from Adolph Coors's Winterfest, a winter beer, to Stroh Brewery's Schlitz in the large bottles.
The budding trend has had an unanticipated side effect: lower demand for aluminum cans.
The popularity of the 12-ounce long-neck beer bottle has been reducing can usage, contributing to the deterioration of aluminum prices.
IT'S HARD TO tell who brewed the beer you're drinking these days.
So-called phantom breweries listed on the labels of products brewed by Coors Brewing, G. Heileman Brewing and Miller Brewing are in line with the big brewers' recent efforts to catch the cachet of regional and microbreweries.
Although Miller kept its company name on its line of Miller Reserve specialty brews, it chose to credit Plank Road Brewery with its new Icehouse beer on the label.
Plank Road was the name of the brewery Frederick Miller bought in 1855 in Milwaukee, but today's Icehouse is made in the same Miller breweries nationwide as Miller High Life.
Coors, meanwhile, puts Zima Beverage Co. on its Zima brand, which is brewed in its Memphis brewery along with its nonalcoholic Cutter and Castlemaine XXXX, an Australian beer brewed under license.
Heileman brews Windy City Ale, which it credits to the Windy City Brewing Co., and markets in Chicago.
And Heileman masquerades as the Emerald City Brewery for the purpose of bottling its Emerald City Ale for the Seattle market.
"It's to try to create an image consistent with a product that's brewed in small batches," says Randy Smith, a spokesman for Heileman.
"If the name of a major brewer was on the label, people wouldn't think the beer had all the special characteristics they expect in a beer of that nature."
This isn't a new idea.
Rheingold Brewing of upstate New York put the name Forest Brewing Co. on the label of the nation's first light beer, Gablinger, in 1967.
"They were afraid to associate their own name with a beer that might fail," says Joe Owades, a California beer consultant.
The beer did fail, and Heileman now owns the Rheingold brand.
THE PROLIFERATION of microbreweries and brewpubs around the nation has spawned a bevy of beer-of-the-month clubs.
Celebrator Beer News, a microbrewing-industry newspaper, and Beer the Magazine each list seven companies offering to send six packs of hard-to-get small brews from different breweries to its customers each month.
The subscriptions cost from about $15 (plus shipping) to $22 (no shipping added) a month for two different six packs a month.
Even though the clubs' shipments aren't allowed in some states, including Texas, North Dakota and Washington, they are finding plenty of customers.
Beer Across America, the first to offer the service, started with 400 members two years ago and now claims 58,000 members (although the number fluctuates, rising right after gift-giving seasons).
But growth of a club can limit the number of breweries able to contribute to monthly shipments.
To produce 58,000 six packs -- or about 1,000 barrels -- in a month would overwhelm many small breweries, most of which produce fewer than 15,000 barrels a year.
To solve the problem, Beer Across America in January started splitting its membership into three parts; each third of the list is sent a different beer, says co-owner Todd Holmes.
The clubs have risen because interest in microbrews has outpaced any advances in distribution for small-volume beers, says Paul Shipman, president of Redhook Brewing Co., a Seattle microbrewer.
But while many microbreweries want the onetime economic shot in the arm they get from providing beer to a club, it doesn't really help them sell beer in their mostly local markets, he says.
COORS, WHICH SPENDS heavily on literacy programs, is bombarded by snide comments about the spelling of Artic Ice.
Coors folks say they spelled it with only one "c" so they could trademark the name.
"Miller didn't spell 'Lite' right either," retorts a spokeswoman. . . .
Antialcohol group Marin Institute blasts the beer industry for making donations to such charitable groups as United Cerebral Palsy and Muscular Dystrophy associations.
