Figgie International Inc., bowing to pressure from its bankers, pressed two key executives to resign and, for the first time, moved to limit the power of the company's founder and chairman, Harry E. Figgie Jr.
According to a person close to the situation, the board forced the resignation of Vice Chairman Harry E. Figgie III, the son of the founder and the man whom many blame for the manufacturer's current financial problems.
Directors also sought and received the resignation of the company's senior vice president of finance, Joseph Skadra, this individual said.
In addition, Harry E. Figgie Jr. relinquished his vote on the board's nominating committee, which will eventually choose Mr. Figgie's successor.
The board named two outside board members to the panel, which no longer includes any Figgie executives.
"It seems to be a statement by the board that they want to get away from the problems of the last few years," said Phil Brannon, vice president of Mabon Securites Corp. in New York.
The Willoughby, Ohio, company, which makes fire trucks and sporting goods, among other things, declined to say much about the departures, other than that the board had accepted the resignations.
"The board was well aware of the investment community's and various constituent concerns about our current financial situation," a spokesman said.
Stock Price Jumps Wall Street heralded the step.
In trading on the Nasdaq Stock Market, Figgie's Class B shares jumped $1.625, or 17.6%, to close at $10.875.
But some still think the actions didn't go far enough.
Harry Figgie Jr., 70 years old, is still in the chairman's seat.
"A lot of people were hoping he would be moved aside for the next generation," said T. Edward O'Neil, research director at S.W. Ryan & Co. in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.
In other news, the company said it hired financial-turnaround adviser Jay Alix & Associates of Southfield, Mich., to assist in its restructuring.
The company also said it will announce soon, possibly today, its long-delayed fourth-quarter and 1993 results, which it has previously indicated won't be pretty.
It signaled in mid-February that its 1993 operating losses and year-end adjustments would be greater than previously expected.
It also plans to meet with its bankers today, to discuss a new long-term financing package.
At a meeting with top executives in mid-February, bankers expressed concerns about the need for new management, according to a person who attended the meeting.
Harry Figgie III will assume "active leadership" of Clark-Reliance Corp., the Figgie family's closely held manufacturing company.
He had presided over a costly modernization program during his father's nearly 18-month illness, which contributed to Figgie International's current liquidity problems, according to people close to the situation.
The board last month elevated director Walter M. Vannoy, 66, to be co-vice chairman and designated Mr. Vannoy as second-in-command.
Known as "Doc," since he is a physician, Dr. Figgie will remain a director until his term expires at the annual meeting, which hasn't yet been set but is usually in June.
Dr. Figgie couldn't be reached for comment.
Mr. Skadra, 52, joined Figgie in 1970.
He also could not be reached for comment.
A company spokesman said the concern has a preferred candidate for the chief financial officer post, but declined to provide a name.
