Making the rounds in Hollywood this week after gaining control of Paramount Communications Inc., Viacom Inc. chairman Sumner Redstone has caused a blizzard of speculation about possible candidates to head the struggling studio.
Moving to assemble a new management team, Mr. Redstone has been meeting with Hollywood executives and seeking out names of potential candidates for the post of studio chairman.
But for now, Hollywood executives emphasized, Mr. Redstone isn't close to hiring any of the rumored candidates -- or others whose names might not have yet surfaced.
One senior industry official said Mr. Redstone is "out meeting with the world" in an effort to compile a list of candidates.
Said a former Paramount executive: "It really is a Hollywood guessing game."
Viacom, which last month prevailed in a five-month bidding war for Paramount against QVC Inc., officially gained control of the company last week.
Paramount's Hollywood operations were overseen from New York by Stanley R. Jaffe, president of the parent company.
But Mr. Jaffe, during whose three-year reign the studio remained mired in a box-office slump, is leaving the company.
Under Mr. Jaffe, the motion-picture operations were run by Sherry Lansing, his long-time movie-producer partner before the two joined Paramount.
The television operations, meanwhile, were run by Kerry McCluggage.
As a result of Mr. Redstone's high-profile and whirlwind sojourn, however, the Hollywood rumor mill is running at full speed, churning out several names for the job.
Among them are: Michael Fuchs, chairman of Time Warner Inc.'s HBO unit; Jonathan Dolgen, president of Sony Corp.'s Sony Pictures Entertainment; Jeff Sagansky, president of CBS Inc.'s CBS Entertainment unit; and Arthur R. Barron, a former Paramount executive and current chairman of Time Warner Inc.'s Time Warner International.
None of the executives or Viacom officials could be reached for comment.
But Mr. Dolgen, for one, recently signed a contract extension with Sony.
And Hollywood insiders said it was unlikely the job would be accepted by Mr. Fuchs, whose HBO has had contentious relations in the past with archrival Showtime, a Viacom unit.
It is unclear whether Mr. Redstone will replace Ms. Lansing as chairman of the motion picture division, or whether he will name an executive to head the overall studio, which would include the motion-picture division and the television operations.
One top industry executive, however, speculated that she would remain at the studio.
