Sony Corp., hailing the beginning of a recovery in its core consumer-electronics business, said pretax profit in the three months ended Dec. 31, rose 6.8% from a year earlier, even as sales declined 3.7%.
"It is the first time we have seen bright spots for some time," said Yukio Ozawa, a Sony investor-relations manager.
Analysts generally greeted the news with enthusiasm, saying that the electronics giant is beginning to see an upturn in replacement demand for products such as televisions and videocassette recorders.
Some, however, argued that Sony still faces daunting long-term problems because of its dependence on low-profit manufactured goods.
"Sony is on the recovery track, and I think they will do quite well," said David Benda, an analyst with Barclays de Zoete Wedd Research (Japan) Ltd.
"Over the longer term, however, I'll stick to the idea that they have structural problems similar to those in the rest of the industry."
A turnaround at Sony would be a welcome signal to other Japanese electronics giants, which for years have struggled in the face of low-cost competition and saturated markets.
Over the past year, Japan's electronics companies have added to their list of problems a strong yen, which makes exports more expensive overseas and reduces the yen-denominated value of overseas sales.
Sony said its third-quarter consolidated pretax profit rose to 56.46 billion yen ($543.8 million) from 52.84 billion yen, while sales fell to 1.067 trillion yen from 1.108 trillion yen a year earlier.
Significantly, quarterly operating profit, which reflects its core business performance, also rose 18% to 70.2 billion yen, up from 59.3 billion yen a year earlier.
Sony took a 131 million yen loss on foreign exchange during the quarter -- a marked contrast with the past several quarters, during which the company had a windfall after successfully hedging against the yen's rise.
But Mr. Ozawa said he was heartened by rising sales of Sony's core consumer-electronics products in Japan, Europe and the U.S. Sony noted that its overall sales in Japan rose 2.8% to 287.19 billion yen in the quarter even as Japan's worst postwar downturn dragged on.
Mr. Ozawa said the company's gains were due largely to new Sony products such as CD-ROM drives, which play computer and game software from compact disks, and its recordable compact-disk player, the MiniDisc.
Analysts, however, said Sony had reaped greater benefits from pent-up replacement demand for more traditional products.
Sony may also be profiting at the expense of its smaller competitors.
Pioneer Electronic Corp. reported yesterday that group pretax profit in the third quarter ended Dec. 31 plunged 74% to three billion yen from a year earlier, as sales fell 17% to 139.85 billion yen.
Pioneer also lowered its sales and profit forecast for the year ending March 31, citing the strong yen and increased competition.
Sony's vaunted "software" side -- its Hollywood studios and music operations -- fared worse.
While music sales in the U.S. grew 46% on a dollar basis, Sony's movie business declined 11% in dollar terms, largely because of several disappointing films.
On a yen basis, Sony's entertainment revenue fell 0.2% during the quarter to 238.46 billion yen.
For the nine months to Dec. 31, Sony sales fell 7.4% to 2.834 trillion yen while pretax profit rose 19% to 113.1 billion yen.
Sony slightly revised its forecast for the year ending March 31 and now projects a pretax profit of 100 billion yen, an 8% increase over the previous year.
