Vernon B. Schwartz may soon become another casualty of a campaign by California's state employee pension plan to exert its influence in U.S. executive suites.
Mr. Schwartz, chairman and chief executive of Catellus Development Corp., a big real estate concern, is expected to step down soon as a result of board opposition led by the pension plan, known as Calpers, according to directors and others familiar with the company.
Calpers, the nation's biggest state employee pension plan with assets totaling about $80 billion, owns 40% of Catellus and directly controls two seats on its board.
Mr. Schwartz declined to comment, as did Calpers officals.
According to people familiar with the company, Catellus directors voted to oust Mr. Schwartz at a meeting earlier this month.
The directors later agreed to a proposal from Mr. Schwartz that he be given a few months to phase himself out of the company.
Catellus directors said much of the opposition to Mr. Schwartz was led by Tom C. Stickel, a former financial executive nominated to the board by Calpers early last year.
Although Mr. Stickel declined to comment, people close to the board said that shortly after becoming a director, Mr. Stickel began openly opposing Mr. Schwartz's strategies for turning around the real-estate concern, which had a net loss of $34.4 million for the nine months ended Sept. 30.
More recently, opposition to Mr. Schwartz has been spearheaded by two other directors, both executives of Chicago-based JMB Realty Corp.
JMB Realty has a contract with Calpers to represent the pension plan's interests before the board.
Calpers bought its stake in Catellus in 1989.
The stake's value has slipped steadily in recent years, as the real estate bust hammered Catellus's portfolio of office buildings and land.
Catellus stock, which traded as high as $15 a share in early 1991, closed Friday at $8, unchanged, on the New York Stock Exchange.
On Jan. 14, William D. Crist, president of Calpers's administrative board, sent a letter to Catellus board members questioning the company's operations and management.
He asked directors to independently review the company and "take action as necessary to accomplish changes."
Changes at GM, Kodak, IBM If Mr. Scwhartz does depart, he will become the latest in a string of high-profile executives to be pushed out after opposition from Calpers.
In recent years, Calpers has been engaged in a "corporate governance" program, using its investment clout to challenge management of companies that it perceives as underperforming.
Pressure from Calpers, which usually owns much smaller stakes than its 40% Catellus holding, contributed to the departures of chief executives at General Motors Corp., Eastman Kodak Co. and International Business Machines Co., among others.
This spring, Calpers is planning proxy fights at Boise Cascade Corp. and U.S. Shoe Co.
