EMPLOYEES FEEL the heat as companies try to cut travel costs.
At Miles Inc. in Pittsburgh, executives who ask for an upgraded rental car are told their choices will be noted and subject to management scrutiny.
Such moral suasion helped to save the company $2 million in 1993, says M. John Guarneri, travel-services manager.
Xerox asks senior managers to keep closer track of subordinates' travel habits; company managers get a monthly report on what airlines and hotels were used, and then compare the prices with cheaper options.
Use of senior-citizen coupons rises among small and midsize firms with workers 62 and older, says Pittsburgh travel consultant Kimberly Nissen.
Lynn Hardt of Cost Controller newsletter in Storm Lake, Iowa, suggests travelers making a series of long-distance credit-card calls from hotel rooms not hang up after each one.
Staying connected to the carrier by pressing the pound key might eliminate the hotel surcharge of 50 cents or more per call.
Citicorp says its travel load is rising again, as the company expands.
WANT A LENIENT financial checkup?
Hire a more senior accountant.
University of Dayton accounting professor Kenneth Rosenzweig and philosophy professor Marilyn Fischer, who teaches business ethics, asked 265 accountants for their views on 13 management moves.
They found that senior-level accountants were more tolerant of earnings manipulations than were junior colleagues.
One example: recording an expense in the wrong year.
"People come in with high standards, and those may get compromised by the pressure of corporate life," suggests Prof. Rosenzweig, theorizing "persistent pressure for short-term earnings growth tends to diminish accountants' ethical values."
UNIONS FRET over White House tactics on health-care reform.
Organized labor has much to gain from overhaul of the current system.
"Healthcare reform would be a huge economic benefit for our members," says Arthur Coia, president of the laborers' union.
But labor leaders worry about Clinton's negotiating style of creating broad guidelines and letting others lay the path to the goal.
"We've been getting different signals from the administration," says clothing and textile workers' president Jack Sheinkman.
"We're fearful now they may be giving away some of the basic tenets."
Unions worry that the selling is becoming tougher.
"It's hard to lobby . . . because we don't know what the president might have given away," says AFL-CIO lobbyist Robert McGlotten.
White House officials -- from Vice President Al Gore to adviser George Stephanopoulos -- attend an AFL-CIO meeting in Florida to assure union leaders of their commitment.
COLLEGE LADIES and gentlemen, start your resumes.
"America's Top 100 Internships," a new book by Mark Oldman and Samer Hamadeh, rates corporate internships by such factors as busywork, pay and quality of life.
Among the "nirvana" internships (low on busywork, high on job experience): Apple Computer, Boeing, Intel, Microsoft, the Washington Post and the National Tropical Botanical Garden in Kauai, Hawaii.
Wonder how the last one got in?
UP IN THE AIR: The Association of Flight Attendants faces negotiations with 13 carriers this year.
Last week, negotiators for the union's 18,000 United Airlines members once again declined to join the employee buyout of the airline.
The carrier's strict flight-attendant weight policy and foreign hiring are two big sticking points.
IN THE MONEY: CEO compensation is highest in the communications industry, the Conference Board says.
Chief executives in broadcasting and publishing had median pay of $885,000 in 1992.
Meanwhile, executives looking for salary increases should head for Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Singapore and Taiwan, where average raises this year should run double the inflation rates, William M. Mercer Inc. predicts.
WASHINGTON MULLS requiring employee-safety teams; companies take sides.
The House Labor Committee may vote this week on a bill that would force firms with 11 or more workers to set up worker-management teams to monitor safety.
Business groups and Republicans oppose the measure, which is backed by organized labor and the White House.
Many companies already have such teams in place.
Greyhound Lines, which uses committees, backs the plan, as do Potlatch and Gelman Sciences of Ann Arbor, Mich.
Still, many companies fear a government mandate.
San Francisco's Granite Construction "strongly opposes" the proposal, which a spokesman argues could hurt worker-management relations.
Adds Gene Elrod of Dallas-based Peerless Manufacturing, "I think it's a problem for the government to come in and mandate anything, worker groups or not."
It's tough to quantify whether teams reduce injury rates, says Greyhound safety director James Renforth.
Still, he adds, "I don't think anybody can prove that it hurts."
THE CHECKOFF: For Worker's Memorial Day in April, the AFL-CIO prints 100,000 stickers with the slogan "Our Jobs Are Killing Us." . . .
Returning from a picketing event in a poor Miami community, seven union presidents find their bus boarded by a huckster selling three pairs of women's shoes for $2.
There were no takers.
