These days, evil would seem to be rooted in quangos.
"Peers Attack Quango Culture," blared one recent headline here.
"Redwood Accused in Quango Scandal," said another.
A Daily Telegraph article on the difficulty of killing quangos likened them to "the Hydra -- you cut off the head of one and another nine grow in its place."
Indeed, the nation abounds with warnings of quango proliferation.
Quangos -- acronym for quasi-autonomous non-governmental organizations -- are public bodies charged with oversight or implementation of a particular assignment; nationwide there are an estimated 1,500 of them.
The sense that their numbers are growing -- no one really knows for sure -- is prompting many to call for the return to Parliament of Sir Philip Holland, author of "Quelling the Quango" and "Quango, Quango, Quango."
Before retiring in 1987 as Britain's greatest-ever quango hunter, he eliminated more than 300 of them.
"I deplore the existence of quangos," says Sir Philip.
But government officials keep creating new ones, each with its own name: The Home-Grown Cereals Authority, the Advisory Committee on Scotland's Travelling People, the Advisory Panel on the Importation of Sexually Explicit Films for Health Purposes.
Supporters say committee members perform vital functions, often for little or no pay.
In a House of Lords debate last month on quangos, Baroness Miller of Hendon said her work on a family-health committee paid less than she paid her cleaning lady.
Yet many quango executives receive much more than that -- as much as #70,000 ($105,000) a year -- in positions that are appointed rather than elected.
"The quangocracy is a system of political patronage," says Sir Philip, noting that certain "quangurus," as he calls them, tend to land one quango job after another.
In his nearly 20 years in Parliament, Sir Philip killed such quangos as the Location of Offices Bureau, the Furniture Development Council and the Advisory Committee on Rhodesian Travel Restrictions.
But he says he has failed to persuade any new member of Parliament to take up the cause, and little wonder.
During the recent House of Lords debate, critics -- when pressed -- admitted that even they served on some quangos.
