Officials at the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms are investigating whether Miller Brewing Co. is basing the marketing of an ice beer -- Molson Ice -- on the product's higher alcohol content.
Most ice beer, which is brewed at temperatures so cold that ice crystals form, is about 5.5% alcohol by volume, compared with 4.5% to 5% for regular and light beers.
But it is against federal law to trumpet a beer's alcoholic kick in advertising.
Antialcohol activists are also worried about the highly advertised introduction of a more potent beer because beer is overwhelmingly the beverage of choice among underage drinkers.
Beer industry observers say regulators are particularly concerned about a television commercial for Molson Ice that focuses on a label displaying a 5.6% alcoholic content just as a deep-voiced narrator intones that Molson Ice is a "bolder" drink.
Molson Ice is marketed in the U.S. by Miller Brewing, a unit of Philip Morris Cos.
BATF officials won't discuss specific ads.
"We have noted in several ads for ice-beer products a certain prominence of the alcohol content.
We have concerns about how that is being used, and we are investigating," says Jack Killorin, a spokesman for the bureau.
Miller adamantly denies its ads are illegal.
The company notes that the Molson Ice label was approved by federal regulators and that it is legal to show it in advertising.
Ice beer marks the latest clash between a brewer and regulators over the issue of potency and advertising.
In 1991, G. Heileman Brewing Co. withdrew its PowerMaster malt liquor after the BATF told the company to drop the word "Power" from its name.
PowerMaster would have contained 7.3% alcohol by volume.
The Molson Ice ads are the first test of how rigorously regulators will police rules that went into effect last year allowing brewers, for the first time since Prohibition, to disclose on packages how much alcohol their products contain.
Congress had banned beer makers from including the alcohol content on their labels fearing that it would lead to "strength wars," with brewers offering ever-stronger beers to consumers.
That law was recently overturned after a court challenge by Coors Brewing Co.
Rival brewers complain that Miller is risking a dangerous backlash with its advertising for ice beers, which are one of the hottest new beer products in years.
Most brewers have rushed to market with an ice beer, and Miller alone has five different ice beers on the market or in test.
The ice age has led to an unusual rift between the two largest companies in an industry where rivals usually present a unified face to the government.
The nation's largest brewer, Anheuser-Busch Cos., has made its Ice Draft 5% alcohol by volume -- the same as its popular Budweiser brand.
"We think it is suicidal to market a product based on its alcohol content," says August A. Busch IV, vice president of brand management at Anheuser-Busch.
"It could give the industry a real black eye."
Critics also say that advertisements for Miller's Lite Ice brand are pushing its 5.5% alcohol content, with the slogan "More of What You Want: Less of What You Don't Want.
New Rules."
"Kids drink to get drunk," says George Hacker, director of the alcohol policies project for the Center for Science in the Public Interest.
"That's more of what they want in a beer."
In addition to the ads, some of Miller's sales force are actively promoting the relative kick of the ice beers in visits to liquor stores and bars.
When Miller introduced its Molson Ice last year, the company put out the word on the street that it had "more buzz for the buck," says John Bequeath, general manager of Greens Beer and Wine in Atlanta.
"They talked it up with bartenders."
He says Miller is using a similar strategy to introduce its Lite Ice, which was rolled out nationally earlier this week.
"My Miller rep was just in and he said that they are going to stress the fact that Lite Ice has a good kick to it," Mr. Bequeath says.
"He said that was going to be one of their big marketing ploys."
In addition to wallet-size cards and posters that compare the strength of Miller Ice offerings with rivals, retailers say Miller representatives also were sticking orange neon stickers on beer coolers calling attention to the alcohol content of Icehouse, another Miller brand.
Miller employees are also deriding Anheuser-Busch's product as "thin ice."
Because of such tactics, Anheuser-Busch has complained to the BATF that Miller is illegally making strength claims.
The tactics themselves are not illegal, but BATF officials say such actions in the "chain of commerce" are relevant in determining whether the ads break the law.
Miller acknowledges that there may be isolated examples of its representatives posting the alcoholic content of its ice beers in public places but stresses that its promotions to retailers are legal and are conducted in close consultation with the BATF.
A spokeswoman for Miller also says there is some confusion about what's allowed under the new rules.
