Less than a month before last November's elections, the National Rifle Associations' Political Victory Fund gave $275,000 to the Republican National Committee's state election fund.
It was the NRA's first contribution to a national party in 3u years.
Over the next few weeks the GOP then parceled out a little more than that to the two biggest races of the year: $200,000 to George Allen's gubernatorial candidacy in Virginia and $154,000 to the GOP effort in New Jersey.
Was there any connection?
Maybe not in the legal sense, but certainly there was a de facto link.
The NRA's unusually big contributions to the RNC dwarfed what it gave to Republicans in Virginia (where there were no limits on what could be given) and in New Jersey (where there were fairly strict limits).
And these contributions weren't revealed to the public until well after the election; if the NRA had contributed this money directly to the state campaigns, it would have been public knowledge by Election Day.
This is relevant because by October the NRA was a liability to Republicans in both states.
In New Jersey, for example, the GOP gubernatorial contender, Christine Todd Whitman, a week before the election, declared that she had never "sought the NRA's endorsement or ever received money from the NRA. . . .
I had only understood that they would not be a part of the race."
(There is no indication that Ms. Whitman or Mr. Allen know about the NRA's circumvention -- and in New Jersey, to comply with state law, the money technically was funneled for get-out-the-vote efforts for legislative candidates.)
Thus rather than give money directly in these states and risk political embarrassment, the NRA chose to "launder" the contributions through the RNC.
This is only the latest in a series of abuses in so-called soft money, or funds that are not subject to campaign contribution rules.
A review of the financial reports covering the last half of 1993 reveals this isn't the RNC's only scam.
There's also $200,000 of receipts listed from the National Policy Forum during the last half of the year.
Party and forum officials explain this actually was a loan repayment.
The forum is a tax exempt foundation set up by RNC Chairman Haley Barbour to develop ideas and issues for the party.
It also is an attempt to avoid campaign finance laws by establishing a new ruse -- a party-launched foundation -- in case the current soft-money abuses are curbed by Congress.
As a foundation, the National Policy Forum refuses to reveal its donors.
This, it says, is so the directors -- mostly GOP officeholders -- won't have their idea-generating work affected by the stain of money interests.
But Mr. Barbour, who remains its chairman, and Michael Baroody, its president, know the identity of these secret contributors.
The personable Haley Barbour cheerfully insists this all is innocent.
The party gave more than $1.5 million combined to the New Jersey and Virginia races and not only was there no connection with the NRA contributions, he's not sure if he even remembers them.
In short, the RNC chairman says he may not have known about a huge contribution from a notoriously controversial interest group, and as head of the RNC he launched a foundation but it's merely a nonpartisan idea factory.
Sure, and Whitewater is primarily a vacation spot.
These are political hustles, pure and simple.
The Democrats, however, don't come out with clean hands either.
Take the $250,000 contribution last Dec. 10 to the DNC's fund to promote health legislation.
It was from Carl Lindner, the chief executive officer of American Financial Corp., a big Cincinnati-based conglomerate whose interests range from insurance and banking to broadcasting and Chiquita bananas.
Mr. Lindner, who was the infamous Charles Keating's mentor, has long played the influence-peddling game.
But he has mainly worked the Republican side of the aisle; from 1988 to 1992 he and his company gave the GOP more than $900,000 of soft-money contributions, and he was a major George Bush fund-raiser.
He has been active in conservative causes, opposing the controversial Mapplethorpe art exhibit in Cincinnati and fighting pornography.
It's unlikely that Mr. Lindner suddenly has seen the ideological light at age 74.
Instead he's seen who turns on the light in the Oval Office and is trying to buy influence there.
He won't return phone calls to give his own explanation.
These are hardly isolated incidents; the latest Federal Election Commission filings are full of examples of how rotten the system is and of contributors far more interested in influence or access than principles.
Integrated Health Services, a Maryland health care and nursing home company, gave $100,000 to the Republican National Committee two days after last November's elections when the GOP seemed to be riding high.
By December, however, President Clinton had bounced back in the polls.
Integrated Health Services then gave the Democrats $115,000.
The godfather of playing both sides has been Dwayne Andreas, the head of Archer-Daniels-Midland Co., which loves the taxpayer's help in promoting ethanol.
During the 1980s Mr. Andreas's largesse was mostly focused on the Republicans.
Last year the emphasis switched; Mr. Andreas's wife gave the Democrats $55,000 in the last half of last year and his companies doled out more than $100,000 to the DNC.
This system of campaign financing is truly venal.
Soft-money contributions, exempt from the normal federal restrictions, initially were intended for a noble purpose: party building through such activities as get-out-the-vote drives.
Instead they've turned into mechanisms for covert influence-peddling, money-laundering and evading the intent of the campaign finance laws.
It's imperative that Congress this session not only enact the Senate-passed curbs on soft-money contributions but toughen those provisions to handle some of the abuses evident this year.
For as Fred Wertheimer, president of Common Cause, which has been battling the pervasive and pernicious influence of soft money for years, says: "If we want to clean up corruption in Washington, the soft-money scam has to be shut down."
