The U.S. rejected Japan's latest package of market-opening measures as lacking in substance, and prepared to intensify its trade battle with Tokyo.
Anticipating that reaction, Tokyo's Nikkei 225-stock index sank 1.2% yesterday.
The index fell another 1.5% on Wednesday, closing the morning session at 19414.48.
Meanwhile, the dollar fell to 102.75 yen, a decline of more than two yen in two days.
A stronger yen is bad for Japan's export-dependent economy, because it makes Japan's goods more expensive overseas.
U.S. trade negotiators haven't made a stronger yen an explicit part of their strategy, but many currency traders are acting as if a stronger yen is U.S. policy.
That tends to strengthen the yen -- and put additional pressure on Tokyo to make more concessions.
U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor, in the Clinton administration's first public response to the Japanese plan, said it lacked the "concrete steps" that the U.S. had sought before reopening trade negotiations.
The U.S. expects Japan to produce a broader plan to increase imports that includes firmer commitments, said Mr. Kantor, calling Japan's proposal "a work in progress."
Tomorrow, the U.S. intends to ratchet up pressure on Japan further.
The U.S. trade representative's office will release a thick book of trade barriers world-wide -- including a 50-page section on Japan that is twice as long as last year's.
The U.S. also will decide by April 30 whether to bring trade actions involving U.S. exports of telecommunications gear, medical equipment, computers or glass to Japan.
If the U.S. does pursue a case, it would use the threat of trade sanctions to pressure Japan.
In unveiling the market-opening measures Tuesday, Tokyo had hoped to prove to the U.S. that Japan is serious about reducing its massive global trade surplus.
Yet in the areas of potentially greatest impact -- deregulation and macroeconomic stimulus for the ailing Japanese economy -- it put off difficult decisions for several months.
For instance, Japan said it expects to extend its one-year tax cut and will contemplate spending more on public works to stimulate the economy, but the government deferred those decisions until late June.
Similarly, the government said it will accelerate deregulation in several fields, including housing, telecommunications and finance, but won't announce specific measures until later.
Mr. Kantor, whose rhetoric can be brusque, was fairly restrained in evaluating the Japanese plan.
Several times, he said the U.S. assessment simply echoed analyses by Japanese newspapers and by Japanese business leaders, who called Tokyo's plan wanting.
He said the U.S. wasn't discouraged by the Japanese offer and expected an "enhanced package."
So-called framework trade talks with Japan collapsed in mid-February at a summit meeting of President Clinton and Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa.
Separately, Japan said it will abandon its voluntary limits on automobile exports, which it claimed have been rendered meaningless by the low level of Japanese auto exports.
Such exports have been falling since 1987 and are expected to continue doing so, largely because of Japanese auto makers' production in the U.S.
At the same time, Honda Motor Co. and Mazda Motor Corp. announced plans to boost purchases of foreign auto parts, joining Japan's three other big auto makers in making such plans public.
Honda said it will increase its local procurement of parts in the U.S. to $4.65 billion in the year ending March 31, 1996, from $3.21 billion in the year ended March 31, 1993.
Mazda said it also planned to expand its local procurement by roughly 15% from 1994 to 1997, although many of those parts will be used in vehicles sold by Ford Motor Co. and made at a Ford-Mazda venture in the U.S.
For his part, Mr. Kantor said the offers weren't as large as expected.
He also said he was "concerned that the government of Japan isn't involved in this so-called voluntary effort."
