The little guys raked in big bucks from the investing public last year.
Small companies backed by venture capitalists raised a record $6.9 billion in initial public offerings last year, concludes an annual survey by VentureOne, a San Francisco research concern.
The figure, boosted by investors' revived interest in high-technology industry, surpassed the 1992 record of $5.5 billion, the firm reports.
Though many companies outside the study's scope also went public last year, the VentureOne survey sheds light on a particularly entrepreneurial and fast-growing group: concerns that have won support from venture capitalists.
For many entrepreneurs who turn to venture capital, earning big profits -- on paper, at least -- is the ultimate goal in going public.
The average annual revenue of surveyed companies ranged between $3.2 million for medical-compounds producers and $87 million for electronics and computer concerns.
The average number of employees ranged from 53 at medical-compounds concerns to 1,418 at health-care services.
Depending on the industry, the average amount raised from venture capitalists before the concerns went public ranged from $11 million to $24 million; average age of the companies ranged from 5.4 years to 10.7 years.
Computer start-ups dominated the public offerings last year, VentureOne says.
These businesses raised about $2.5 billion in 1993.
That's almost $1 billion more than in 1992.
In the electronics area, for example, there were 24 IPOs, up from 14 in 1992.
On average, such start-ups were 10 years old, had 359 employees and had previously raised $14.6 million from venture-capital investors.
The typical concern had annual revenue of $87.3 million and net income of $1 million.
"High-tech companies, many that hadn't been able to go public previously, finally came into maturity" in 1993, says investment banker Sanford Robertson of Robertson Stephens & Co., in San Francisco.
"They became mature at a time when technology stocks were getting more of an audience in the public market."
Yet there was a paucity of offerings last year among biotechnology and health-care companies, the darlings of the new-issues market in 1992.
Uncertainty over President Clinton's health-care reform proposals and the biotechnology industry's failure to come up with a blockbuster product, stifled interest in those industries, the VentureOne report says.
Total health-care offerings slid 56% to $740 million from $1.7 billion in 1992.
So far, at least, the overall boom in public offerings shows little signs of abating in 1994.
Mr. Robertson says that his firm plans to underwrite 12 new issues during this year's first quarter.
Robertson Stephens participated in 24 IPOs in all of 1993.
Nonetheless, David Gleba, president of VentureOne, doesn't expect 1993's favorite industry segments will maintain their popularity this year.
"The public market has a fashion streak," he says.
"It is willing to invest in high-risk development concepts but just as willing to dump them" because companies haven't delivered results fast enough, he explains.
In 1993, investor interest in these young companies often focused on the new media and communications industry segments.
The spotlight on interactive media and the emerging information superhighway helped early-stage companies such as 3DO Corp. and BroadBand Technologies Inc.
3DO, in San Mateo, Calif., raised $44 million to develop interactive multimedia games.
BroadBand, a Research Triangle, N.C., company that is developing technology to enable phone companies to deliver video-on-demand services to the home, raised $63 million.
The high-tech revival also benefited a wide spectrum of computer technology companies.
Among them: Intuit Inc., which makes Quicken accounting software; Powersoft Corp. and Gupta Corp., providers of client-server software; and Auspex Systems Inc., a provider of network servers and advanced network services.
But companies outside the computers and new media fields made three of the largest offerings.
American Mobile Satellite Corp., a Washington, D.C., satellite operator, raised $178 million.
The company, partly owned by Mtel Corp., McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. and General Motors Corp.'s Hughes Communications unit, plans to launch its first satellite this year.
PetsMart Inc., a chain of petfood supermarkets based in Phoenix, raised $130 million.
San Francisco's Kenetech Corp., which owns U.S. Windpower Inc., a large developer of wind-power energy technology, raised $99 million.
Kenetech also had one of the highest valuations when it went public last September: $487 million.
