Beverly Enterprises Inc. and Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp. said they are discussing joint ventures in certain markets in a bid to attract more managed-care business for both companies.
Amid industrywide pressure to cut costs, consolidate operations and forge the sort of comprehensive delivery systems backed by the Clinton administration, such a move would mark one of the first major alliances between a long-term-care provider and a for-profit hospital chain.
Still, both companies denied a report in USA Today yesterday indicating that the discussions have involved the acquisition by Columbia/HCA, a Louisville, Ky.-based hospital concern, of all or part of Beverly, a Fort Smith, Ark.-based operator of nursing homes, with 1993 revenue of $2.9 billion.
"To my knowledge, there have been no discussions about mergers or acquisitions," said Jerry Moore, Beverly's executive vice president for managed care and a participant in the talks, which he said have occurred "sporadically" since December.
Ownership issues aren't being discussed, a Columbia/HCA spokeswoman added.
Instead, Mr. Moore said the companies have discussed jointly marketing their services in certain cities.
"We have talked about doing some pilots, and that's the extent of the discussion," he said, adding that the companies haven't talked about specific markets, timetables or detailed plans.
But just the rumor that acquisitionminded Columbia/HCA might be sniffing around was enough to trigger a sevenfold increase in trading of Beverly stock on Tuesday.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange on Tuesday, Beverly shares closed at $14.625, up 62.5 cents a share, or 4.5%.
Shares of Columbia/HCA closed at $42.75, up $1.625, or 4%.
In less than a year, Columbia has gobbled up Galen Healthcare Inc. and HCA-Hospital Corp. of America, its largest competitors among for-profit hospital chains, to form a system with 190 hospitals in 26 states and two foreign countries and estimated annual revenue of $10 billion.
In its core markets, Columbia/HCA also has snapped up a host of individual outpatient surgery centers, rehabilitation hospitals and other facilities as its seeks to offer one-stop shopping for employers and insurers in search of lower-cost managed care.
Beverly has a nationwide network of 758 long-term care facilities and heavy overlap with the Columbia/HCA hospital system in large states such as Florida, Texas and California.
Moreover, like many other long-term-care providers, it recently has moved to upgrade many of its facilities to provide subacute services, which involve the care of patients who no longer need more-expensive hospital care but are too sick to go home.
Still, few industry analysts expect Columbia/HCA to move full-scale into the nursing-home business, a low-margin industry beset by regulatory and labor troubles in recent years.
Instead, most envision an agreement similar to one announced last October with Dallas-based Medical Care America Inc., in which Columbia/HCA and the operator of outpatient surgery centers will jointly own facilities in six states and jointly negotiate contracts with insurance companies and other third-party payers of medical bills.
"I would see alliances emerging in some markets," said Margo Vignola, an industry analyst at Salomon Brothers.
"But buying Beverly?
No, Columbia doesn't need it."
Some industry observers predicted that, after so many major acquisitions, Columbia/HCA will create commotion on Wall Street with even its most tentative moves to forge alliances.
"This is going to happen a lot," said Todd Richter, a Dean Witter Reynolds analyst, "because Columbia is talking to virtually every major health-care provider in the United States."
For the fourth quarter, Beverly reported net income of $16.8 million, or 17 cents a share, compared with a net loss of $32.5 million, or 44 cents a share, a year earlier, after charges.
Revenue rose 6.4%, to $732.9 million, from $689 million.
Columbia/HCA, which has not yet reported fourth-quarter results, had a third-quarter net loss, after charges, of $115 million, or 77 cents a share, compared with a year-earlier net loss of $164 million, or $1.17 a share.
Revenue was up 4.7% to $1.24 billion from $1.18 billion.
