Investors won't have any say in setting the residual value of their Prudential Securities Inc. limited partnerships when trying to tap into a reparations fund set up by the brokerage firm.
That's bad news for as many as 325,000 investors seeking redress from Prudential through the fund, set up as part of an October settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission and state regulators.
Prudential has been accused of misleading investors on the risks and returns of $8.15 billion of partnerships in the 1980s.
Residual value plays a major role in determining the value of partnerships -- and what damages investors ought to receive.
Investors had expected to be able to present evidence on damages through residuals in the SEC-sanctioned reparations process.
That participation was important to them because residuals often aren't easy to calculate: Unlike stocks or bonds, many partnerships are illiquid, and thus can't easily be resold in the secondary marketplace and converted to cash.
Instead, the Prudential Insurance Co. of America unit and an independent claims administrator currently are negotiating how to set a framework for determining residual values.
The talks could lead to an agreement by this week or next; until then, most claims won't have a chance of getting settled.
The gap in setting residuals is huge.
Prudential says the residual value of its partnerships totals more than $1.5 billion.
It arrived at that figure by using such measures as comparable sales, replacement cost and discounted cash flow based on projections.
But the partnerships' true value -- or the price investors could fetch for them in the market -- is barely half of what Prudential claims, some partnership experts say.
Indeed, partnerships' residual values have been a major sticking point in private arbitration and court cases.
"My spine is shivering as I think about it," says William Jordan, a Florida State University accounting professor who has testified as an expert witness in many partnership cases.
"My fear is Prudential will be allowed to price them according to asset value as going concerns -- but they're not worth what their assets are, and nobody's in there telling the other people's story."
For investors, the chasm over residuals reflects the potential pitfalls in the reparations process.
It also underscores the importance of not rushing into a settlement before assessing how the settlements shake out from the $330 million restitution fund.
Investors have a year to file claims -- though about 18,000 investors already have filed them -- and Prudential is required to keep a settlement database.
Residuals most often affect real-estate and airplane-leasing partnerships.
But the stakes for most Prudential partnership investors are high.
Consider: Of their $8.15 billion outlay, partnership investors have received just $3 billion in distributions.
The bulk of whatever remaining value is left is residuals.
Prudential's residual tab will go a long way toward determining how much it ultimately will pay in the restitution fund.
The $330 million is merely a "down-payment," the SEC said; the restitution fund is open-ended.
Setting residual values "really does impact what we'll be paying out," says John Murray, Prudential's director of corporate-risk management.
Under the settlement accord, investors who bought any of 708 Prudential partnerships between 1980 and 1990 have received a claims form to try to recover their money from the firm.
Prudential will offer a settlement or reject the claim.
If investors are dissatisfied, they can submit the claim to an arbitrator, selected by the claims administrator, who then will make a ruling.
Any investor who submits a claim can recover compensatory damages that cover losses, but not punitive damages or attorneys' fees.
Investors also will be eligible to recover interest, calculated at the annualized Treasury-bill rate during the time of the investment.
Residuals also affect how much investors will receive in interest.
The discussions on residuals have intensified in recent weeks.
Irving M. Pollack, the claims administrator, has cautioned Prudential on its cash-flow projections, among other things.
"I'm not interested in what this may be worth in the year 2015 -- you've got to have a realistic valuation," says Mr. Pollack, who is a former SEC commissioner and enforcement chief.
"We're going to be fairly hard-nosed on it."
Mr. Pollack says his associates have "done a lot of spade work" in gathering data to set residual values.
But he concedes that determining residuals is extremely difficult and points up the complexity of his task.
"I've got to be fair to claimants, but I can't be unfair to Prudential," Mr. Pollack says.
Prudential, for its part, says it recently retained another appraisal company to gauge cash flow.
Though some residuals are based on estimates, and others on market values, they are both fair, according to Prudential.
"Nobody would tell you that these values are always firm," says Prudential's Mr. Murray.
"There's an art form out there for the appraisal processan art form that has been around a long time, and is as good as you're going to get."
One thing is clear: Investors won't have any input in setting residuals, barring an extraordinary event.
Such as?
"They found gold under some building," says Mr. Pollack.
Says Prudential's Mr. Murray: "Somebody has to make a decision on what it's worth."
Some lawyers are considering urging their clients to sell the partnerships in the secondary market to demonstrate how little the investments are worth.
The idea, the lawyers say, is to fix investors' losses, and not make them subject to any speculation or guesswork.
Mr. Jordan, the accounting professor, even has suggested that investors ought to be able to tender their partnerships to Prudential, at the residual value set by the firm.
This would prod Prudential to more accurately reflect the partnerships' value, he says.
