About 115,000 investors who bought Prudential Securities Inc. energy limited partnerships could receive checks as early as April from a $90.7 million settlement with the firm.
A federal judge in New Orleans on Friday approved the settlement in a class-action suit that accused the big brokerage firm of misleading investors on the rewards and pitfalls of $1.45 billion in 35 oil and gas partnerships, which have slumped to half their value.
Barring an appeal, the settlement caps one of the most closely watched court cases involving small investors on Wall Street.
Though the investors in many cases won't nearly receive all their money back -- and the judge suggested they should have gotten more -- they fared better than the few pennies on the dollar received by Prudential investors in a 1991 settlement involving VMS Realty Partners partnerships.
More important for the investors, the settlement promises to end the three-year-old case and finally return some of their original outlay on the partnerships.
Federal Judge Marcel Livaudais Jr., who approved the accord, said he had received reams of letters from elderly investors who had implored him to sign off on the deal.
"They say, `I don't want to wait another five years, I want my money now,'" the judge said.
"My concern is possibly for those who want to opt in."
On the surface, the energy-partnership settlement comes to just eight cents on the dollar.
How much investors receive will vary widely from partnership to partnership, depending on performance.
More broadly, however, the settlement brings to $1.24 billion, or an average of 85 cents on the dollar, the amount investors will end up getting for their original $1.45 billion outlay.
That's because investors have already received $655 million in distributions, plus $491 million from the sale of the partnerships to Parker & Parsley Petroleum Co., a Midland, Texas, oil and gas company.
"The settlement has to be viewed in the perspective of the sale -- we would never have entertained the settlement but for" the deal in June with Parker & Parsley, said George Riess, a New Orleans lawyer for about 150 plaintiffs, who endorsed the accord.
"That makes it very fair and adequate and reasonable."
Stuart Goldberg, the settlement's major objector, had told the judge that investors ought to receive $780 million.
During a three-day hearing, Mr. Goldberg presented evidence in a bid to prove that Prudential had deceived investors by, among other things, borrowing to inflate distributions.
On Friday, William Jordan, a Florida State University accounting professor, testified that Prudential misled investors by failing to disclose in prospectuses certain borrowings, which were used to hide the partnerships' poor performance.
Mr. Goldberg couldn't be reached to comment; any appeal must be filed within 30 days.
Judge Livaudais, who sits on the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana, for his part, said he had bought investments over time himself and never bothered to read a prospectus.
"No one's ever told me they were misled by the prospectus," the judge said.
"I have no knowledge of anyone ever relying on one."
A principal claim of plaintiffs was that they were misled by the Prudential sales force.
Throughout the hearing, Prudential insisted that the losses stemmed solely from an unexpected plunge in oil and gas prices.
In a statement, Hardwick Simmons, Prudential Securities' president and chief executive, said: "We are very pleased to have achieved another important step in putting the partnership problems of the '80s behind us."
Judge Livaudais surprised observers by ruling from the bench Friday, immediately following the end of testimony and final arguments; he had been expected to request briefs and make a ruling next week.
Despite the evidence brought by Mr. Goldberg, securities lawyers widely expected Judge Livaudais to agree to the accord, thanks partly to the endorsement of several plaintiffs' lawyers who last year objected to an earlier settlement offer by Prudential.
There was incentive for plaintiff lawyers to settle, of course: They stand to receive as much as $27 million in legal fees.
This means investors technically end up with a total of roughly $65 million from the accord, which will be doled out by April or May, plaintiffs' lawyers say.
Letters confirming investors' holdings are expected to be mailed within three weeks, if there's no appeal.
In its earlier proposal, Prudential offered to pay investors $37 million in cash and interests in the partnerships in a reorganized form.
In February, Judge Livaudais said he had "serious reservations" about the original Prudential offer and said more data were necessary before he could rule on it.
In April, Prudential said it would withdraw the offer to first arrange a sale of the partnership assets.
As part of the current accord, Prudential agreed to pay $120 million to investors.
But the settlement amount effectively was knocked down to $90.7 million because nearly 16,000 investors decided to exclude themselves from the deal.
Those investors who decided to opt out now can try to snatch a share of an open-ended reparations fund set up by the Prudential Insurance Co. of America unit as part of an October settlement with federal and state regulators.
If investors don't like the settlement offered from the reparations fund, they can still file a private arbitration or legal claim.
But a major advantage for investors of Prudential's accord with regulators is that it waives the statute-of-limitations for bringing a claim -- a major hurdle in court or arbitration cases.
For Prudential, the $90 million settlement is applied toward the reparations fund, which was set by regulators as being at least $330 million.
