Conflicting signals about the direction of the mark and yen left the dollar dithering yesterday.
Sterling, though, advanced briefly on encouraging U.K. business-confidence data.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7508 marks, down from 1.7540 marks late Monday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 111.70 yen, up a bit from 111.60 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4946, up from $1.4920.
About midday Tuesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 111.66 yen and at 1.7518 marks.
A 4.9% plunge by the Nikkei stock average -- the Japanese market's worst day in more than two years -- boosted the dollar in Asian trading, as international players liquidated yen holdings.
But the gains dissipated later in the day, as players decided that the same Japanese political problems that sparked the stock market drop may actually support the yen.
If the Japanese government is too fragile to pass economic-reform legislation, they said, U.S. officials might begin calling for a strong yen as a means to cut Japan's trade surplus.
Furthermore, if the Nikkei's weakness continues, the effect of foreigners selling off yen holdings may be countered by Japanese covering losses by repatriating capital from overseas -- and buying yen in the process.
"In a sense, it's a pure wash," said Ann B. Finaly, an assistant vice president at Industrial Bank of Japan.
Barring any spectacular developments, the dollar should trade sideways this week, she said, with a bias toward a stronger dollar remaining.
Strong U.S. economic fundamentals are supporting the dollar, traders said, with data due this week on December durable goods and fourth-quarter Gross Domestic Product expected to reinforce perceptions of a muscular U.S. recovery.
Japan's economy, meanwhile, is sinking deeper into recession, and figures on trade, household spending and retail sales are expected to confirm that.
But the weakness of the Hosokawa government, and the slim likelihood that it will be able to push meaningful political or economic reforms through parliament, has raised the specter of renewed U.S. interference in the foreign-exchange market.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, on a visit to Tokyo Sunday, made it clear that the U.S. still expects progress on opening the Japanese automobile, insurance and government procurement markets, despite the recent political upheavals in Japan.
If no progress is made, the U.S. will have to "re-examine" the trade talks framework, Mr. Bentsen said.
"A lot of people are nervous that Mr. Bentsen is going to come out and call for a stronger yen," said Ms. Finaly.
The outlook for the mark was also muddled Monday.
Inflation figures from the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia were lower than market expectations.
Yet Bundesbank directorate member Egon Meister was quoted Monday as saying that "forced easing" would be counterproductive for the German economy, and suggesting that the Bundesbank is concerned about the current weakness of the mark.
