General Motors Corp., scrambling to cash in on a rising market, said it will add another assembly-plant's worth of truck capacity and, according to union officials, dropped plans to slash 1,200 jobs at a major parts-making complex in Flint, Mich., thus averting a production-crippling strike.
The separate actions highlight GM President John F. Smith Jr.'s determination that GM must pump out every vehicle it can as he pushes to make good on a vow to return the company's North American vehicle operations to a profit this year after more than four years in the red.
To boost truck production, GM said late yesterday it will add a third production shift this spring at its Flint, Mich., full-size van factory and add a third work turn in January 1995 at the Pontiac, Mich., East plant that builds full-size pickups.
Those two extra shifts of production will mean jobs for 1,900 GM blue-collar workers who might otherwise have been idled.
GM also will extend production of its current S-10 Blazer sport utility vehicles through November at its Pontiac, Mich., West assembly plant.
That plant was scheduled to close permanently in September.
All together, the extra shifts and work extensions could give GM as many as 180,000 to 200,000 extra trucks a year.
A GM spokeswoman would say only that the added production is "a sizable number."
Just 12 days ago, amid complaints from his marketing operations that they were running short of popular, high-profit truck models, Mr. Smith declared during a speech in Chicago that "we've got to come up with innovative ways to increase truck production."
Turning toward the head of GM's domestic truck operations, Clifford J. Vaughan, Mr. Smith added dryly: "Cliff's working on that.
Attaboy, Cliff."
Meanwhile, GM officials yesterday backed away from a showdown with the United Auto Workers union over labor costs in its parts operations, after the union threatened a strike at an AC Rochester division factory in Flint that would have shut down nearly all of GM's domestic assembly operations.
The seven plants in the Flint East complex supply spark plugs, fuel pumps, instrument clusters and a variety of other parts used in various GM vehicles.
GM refused to discuss specifics of the Flint labor agreement, saying only that it was a "win-win" for both union and company.
But Dale LeBeau, president of UAW Local 651, said GM approved a tentative local agreement that will hold employment in its AC Rochester Flint East complex at its present level of approximately 7,000 workers instead of cutting the work force by some 17%, or 1,200 jobs.
GM agreed to bring additional work back into Flint to maintain the current employment level, he said.
The Flint settlement will keep GM's factories running, but it represents another setback for GM's campaign to cut labor costs that are the highest in the industry.
In January, GM agreed to add 100 workers at its Shreveport, La., plant to end a four-day strike prompted by GM's attempt to run the assembly line faster with fewer workers.
GM unsuccessfully sought a two-tier wage structure for parts workers in last year's national negotiations, looking to scale back wages and benefits that total nearly $43 an hour and are more than double what workers at most independent parts makers earn.
J.T. Battenberg III, who heads GM's parts operations, sold off several uncompetitive parts operations last year.
But now his drive to slash labor costs at the businesses he wants to keep seems to be running into increasing resistance from the UAW.
"GM can still get productivity gains," said analyst Ronald Glantz of Dean Witter Reynolds.
"But it will have to keep the same number of workers and give them more work to do."
That path means that GM will continue to have higher part costs in many areas than competitors such as Chrysler Corp. or Toyota Motor Corp., which rely heavily on outside suppliers.
GM stock closed at $61.625 a share, down 12.5 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
The union has scheduled a Friday ratification vote for the Flint labor agreement.
In addition to Flint, GM has 28 other locations -- out of a total of 117 locations -- where it has yet to reach local labor contracts.
