Ontario Hydro said it plans to cut generating capacity by 8.4% to reduce its electricity surplus and lower costs.
The state-owned utility said it expects to cut 200 million Canadian dollars (US$147.8 million) from its operating costs over the next 10 years by shutting down parts of three generating stations.
Two of the four units at the Lennox oil-fired generating station near Kingston, Ontario, will close, as well as two of four units at the Lambton generating station near Sarnia, Ont.
In addition, the utility plans to mothball one of eight units at its Bruce nuclear generating facility near Owen Sound, Ontario, by September 1995, two years ahead of schedule.
The closures will remove 2,700 megawatts of capacity from Ontario Hydro's total installed capacity of 32,231 megawatts.
A spokesman for the utility said total surplus capacity is estimated at between 3,000 and 5,000 megawatts, over and above the 22% margin already allowed above daily peak requirements.
Maurice Strong, chairman of the utility, said the cuts were made necessary by a drop in electricity sales over the past four years in Ontario, which has been hard hit by the recession.
Even if demand increases beyond current expectations, he said there will be "more than adequate capacity" available.
"The consequences of not taking action at this time would place unacceptable burdens on the corporation's financial conditions and its rates," Mr. Strong said.
Hydro, which froze its rates this year after three successive years of large increases, now plans to seek a 1.4% rate increase for 1995, in line with the utility's inflation expectations.
The costs associated with the closure will bring Hydro's final loss for 1993 to C$3.5 billion, the upper end of a previous forecast.
Eleanor Clitheroe, the utility's chief financial officer, said previously that before the impact of one-time restructuring charges and asset write-offs, Hydro recorded a small operating profit for the year.
She said the utility expects to report a profit of C$600 million in 1994.
