One day several years ago, deep in recession, the people of the Gudbrandsdalen valley uncorked a bottle of their potato-and-caraway libation called Aquavit and took a hard look at themselves.
It wasn't a pretty sight.
What did they see?
They saw lonely trolls, their mythological mascots which even the most charitable Norwegians would describe as ugly, evil and a little bit stupid.
The valley's residents had sculpted a huge concrete troll with a huge wart on its head -- the largest troll and wart in the world -- to attract tourists to the area.
The big troll, alas, wasn't working.
They saw an ominous oil shadow extending from the North Sea.
The offshore oil boom was enriching coastal counties and sucking the life out of the Norwegian interior.
Young women were fleeing the valley in droves.
The long winter nights were not only cold, they were boring.
They saw a rigid, insular citizenry approaching the 21st century with all the zest of a poached salmon.
One of the valley's prominent businessmen stood up at a town meeting and called his neighbors "nosy, cheap and envious."
Even the bummed-out brewery turned off its tap and left town.
What to do?
Get the Winter Olympics, someone suggested.
After all, Lillehammer is the only city in the world with a skier in its coat of arms.
The Olympics would attract lots of tourists, give the locals something to look forward to and save the region from arctic oblivion.
So get the Winter Olympics they did.
And the Gudbrandsdalen valley, host to the Games and the world beginning Feb. 12, hasn't been the same since.
"It's been a cultural revolution," says Torill Broch Seeberg, director of public relations for the Lillehammer Olympic Organizing Committee, or LOOC.
A comical-looking gizmo -- a red plastic hook connected by a stretch of elastic to a blue hook -- dangles from her collar.
Ms. Seeberg wraps the string behind her head and places the hooks in the corners of her mouth, pulling her lips into a grin, the look LOOC wants the world to see.
"It's to teach us to smile," she says.
One day, the Olympics will face a truly colossal image-makeover challenge, like, say, China.
But for the moment, Norway and the Norwegians, particularly the dour denizens of the sleepy Gudbrandsdalen valley, are challenge enough.
"The Olympics are a contradiction for this region," says Hans Hagene, Olympic coordinator for the town of Gjovik, which will host some of the hockey games.
"We're not used to welcoming foreigners.
And now the world is coming."
The Olympics are such a jolt -- each day more than 100,000 tourists from around the world will flock to a region with a total population of 250,000 -- that the Eastern Norway Research Institute based here has assigned an anthropologist to study the reaction of the locals.
"Nothing ever happens here," says local poet Oyvind Berg.
He recalls moving to Lillehammer several years ago from the more cosmopolitan town of Bergen and heading out to the green market.
The vendors, he says, tried to talk him out of buying their fruit.
"They didn't even want to sell the apples.
`Are you sure?' they would ask.
`These apples?
Well, OK,'" the poet says.
"The people here are said to be the slowest in Norway.
That says a lot."
Prize Misfit It does.
This is a country, after all, that bestows the Peer Gynt prize as one of its highest national accolades, even though Peer Gynt, a character created by Norwegian playwright Henrik Ibsen, is one of the great misfits and liars in literary annals.
Norway is also the inspiration for humorist Garrison Keillor's Lake Wobegon, a dozy settlement where people pay homage to a Statue of the Unknown Norwegian.
"Norway needs the exposure," laments LOOC Chairman Gerhard Heiberg in grand Nordic understatement.
To be sure, Norway has been on a geopolitical roll of late, shaking off the anonymity that comes from being a country of only four million people on the northern rim of Europe where the winter sun sets on the capital city by midafternoon.
Norway has hosted the breakthrough peace talks between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
It is campaigning for membership in the European Union, formerly known as the European Community.
And its soccer team has made the finals of this summer's World Cup, the most-watched sporting event in the world.
Still, says Eini Duedahl Holmen of LOOC, "People overseas think of Norway as a place where reindeer run in the streets and people go fishing all the time."
Which is where the Olympics come in.
The Games, to be played out over 16 days in the Gudbrandsdalen valley 100 miles north of Oslo, are shoving the Norwegians squarely onto the world's center stage.
And there they stand, awed and squinting into the bright lights, like trolls emerging from their subterranean hideaways -- but determined to squeeze the Games for everything they are worth.
The Norwegians, who gave us the words ski and slalom, have always used the Winter Games to display their sporting skills; despite its tiny population, Norway has won more gold medals than any other nation except the former Soviet Union.
But the Lillehammer Olympics are designed to show off Norway's prowess in other disciplines, particularly manufacturing, tourism and technology.
The alpine events will unveil the hauntingly beautiful scenery on the rim of the Arctic Circle.
The hockey games will showcase a mind-boggling arena carved into a mountainside with the cutting edge of construction technology.
The speed skating races will spotlight a wood-domed stadium that pushes the envelope on the use of timber.
In turn, the parade of visitors from around the world will show the locals that, with a little initiative and a well-timed smile, there is a huge market ripe for the picking.
Ms. Holmen begins the harvest by cheerily leading a tour around Lillehammer's Olympic Business Center, where, for the first time ever, companies from the neighboring and bickering counties of Oppland and Hedmark (the only two Norwegian counties without a coastline) have come together under one roof to promote their welfare.
There is a company that makes 12,000 different kinds of fish hooks, and an ambitious snowplow maker whose blades are working as far away as the South Pole.
Ms. Holmen pauses in front of a miniature replica of one of the country's architectural wonders, an offshore oil platform, which towers over scale replicas of the Empire State Building, the Eiffel Tower and an Egyptian pyramid.
She flashes a truly genuine smile.
"It was built by Statoil, our national oil company," she says proudly.
In Lake Wobegon style, they named it the Troll Platform.
Not everyone, as could be expected, has jumped on the promotional bandwagon.
As the costs of staging the Olympics, supported by the state treasury, have risen from just under $200 million to just over $1 billion, some Norwegians have wondered what they have gotten themselves into.
"I'm happy Lillehammer didn't know all the Olympics involve or they would never have applied," says Mr. Heiberg, the chairman, who comes from Oslo.
"To spend all that money in this little district for that short of time is a waste of money," says Mr. Berg, the poet.
"I've written a poem where I've canceled the Olympics.
Just called the whole thing off.
Someone had to do it."
But mostly there is great expectation that all this will lead to future prosperity for Norway in general and the Lillehammer region in particular.
Even Mr. Berg is getting his share, gaining an assignment to cover the Games from an oddball perspective for a Norwegian paper.
The Olympics will bequeath a state-of-the-art television-broadcast center that Lillehammer will convert into a district college -- with room for 3,000 students -- specializing in film and communications technology.
The ulterior motive is to give the young people of the valley incentive to stay at home to study and work, especially the women.
In one area of Oppland County, which has the lowest birthrate in Norway, there are currently only 70 women to every 100 men in the 20 to 40 age range.
The Olympics as a marketing tool can't be beat.
Moelven Limtre AS could have built a conventional speed-skating arena in the town of Hamar.
Instead, it erected a 12,000-seat structure that looks like the upturned hull of a Viking ship or, viewed with the aid of a shot of Aquavit, an upside down taco shell.
Either way, the wondrous roof is supported by the longest wood span in the world, stretching nearly 100 yards, a technological milestone made possible by Moelven's laminated-glue process that makes the wood stronger and more fire resistant than steel.
"Moelven is ready to go around the world," says Odd Olav Solbakken, the company's export sales director.
He envisions constructing wooden indoor-soccer stadiums across the northern tundra, throughout the equatorial rain forests and in the deserts of the Middle East, where Norway already has a foot in the door with the peace talks.
"With the Olympics and the Middle East talks, eyes are on Norway.
We'd be very stupid if we wouldn't capitalize on this."
On the other side of Lake Mjosa, the town of Gjovik is already taking the notoriety of its Cavern Hall hockey arena to the bank.
Rather than build a normal rink, the town decided to put one with some 6,000 seats in the side of a mountain.
Now it has the largest underground space for public use in the world.
So far, more than two dozen delegations from Japan and Korea -- countries running out of flat land for housing and commercial developments -- have come to Gjovik to pore over, for a price, the high-tech research studies.
These technological achievements have given Norwegian manufacturing a selling point abroad, trumpeted by everyone from King Harald to snowplow king Overaasen AS.
"We know it is getting Norway a lot of attention," says Thor Overaasen.
In his case, all the way to China, which has just ordered a batch of plows.
The Olympics are also the world's best weapon for conquering the tourism market, which has Georg Kamford drooling in anticipation.
A visiting professor at the University of Massachusetts when Lillehammer was awarded the Olympics, Mr. Kamford returned home with Disneyesque plans to turn the region into a tourist mecca.
He is talking amusement parks, nature-based theme parks, eco-tourism.
And there is still the big troll.
In fact, the whole Olympic region is being packaged under the name Troll Park.
"The Olympics are glory.
It's large.
People are fighting for it," Mr. Kamford says.
"If it is something people are fighting for and we got it, well, you start thinking, `We can do it.'"
This attitude, if it sticks, may be the most valuable legacy of the Olympics.
"We're very old fashioned; we're taught to stand behind and not say things out front.
We're learning a new culture," says Anniki Ejindar, a tour guide in Hamar's Viking Ship Hall.
She is catching on fast.
"We're proud of our hall.
It has placed Hamar on the map of the whole world."
In Lillehammer, where the biggest risk most people take is strapping on skis, the residents are getting positively adventurous.
Owners of furniture stores and jeans shops are converting their establishments into bars and restaurants to capitalize on the wave of free-spending visitors.
"Even if they fail, they learn something," says Olav Spilling, research director at the Eastern Norway Research Institute.
"The Olympics is a process of learning competence.
People see new ways of thinking, new role models, new opportunities.
There must be something lasting from this."
Like Lillehammer's place in the 21st century.
"Norway isn't what it was 20 years ago.
We can sit up in the mountains and watch CNN and see what happens in Romania as it happens," says Randi Dey, Olympic hospitality coordinator for Oppland County.
"We have to make the people here aware that they are all hosts."
Which is what the smile-shaping gizmo was all about -- a light-hearted motivational message to remind the locals to be friendly to the visitors so that one day they will come back and spend more money.
But the Olympics can't change everything overnight.
When word leaked that LOOC planned to distribute 100,000 of the gizmos, the good but conservative folks of the valley reacted with a decided frown.
The project was put on ice.
"People here actually thought they would have to use them, maybe wear them to bed at night.
And they complained that we were spending tax money for such things," says Ms. Dey.
"They didn't get the joke."
