You're the corporate-travel manager of a major company, and you have a brainstorm that could cut expenses by 8%.
Employees wouldn't have to spend Saturday nights on the road, stay in threadbare motels or eat at Burger Doodle.
Sounds great, but the idea, called a reclaim program, probably won't fly.
It calls for the company to claim the frequent-flier miles that employees accumulate when traveling on business -- and then typically use for their own vacations.
In a reclaim program, all employees' frequent-flier miles are pooled like money in a bank.
These credits can then be used to pay for any employee's air travel, ideally for international or other high-fare trips.
With credit-card companies, hotels and car-rental firms all increasingly plying corporate customers with airline miles, these mileage accounts could get very large indeed.
The biggest obstacle, perhaps, is the employees themselves.
Most business travelers see their miles as an entitlement, like wages or vacation days.
Moreover, the top decision-makers in a company are often the most frequent travelers and biggest beneficiaries of the free miles.
"You're dealing with presidents and the like who've been going on vacations with the miles.
They'd have to give them up too, and they don't want to do that," says Ken Heldt, managing director of Ram Decisions, a consulting firm in Colorado Springs, Colo., that helps companies implement reclaim programs.
At least one reclaim program is working well.
Target Stores, a unit of Dayton Hudson Corp., began reclaiming frequent-flier miles six years ago, and says it saves $500,000 a year on its $8 million travel budget.
Steve Davis, the program's supervisor, says the key is in communicating with employees.
Tell them how and why it will benefit them and the company, he says.
Apply the policy to everybody.
And publicize the savings.
"Use the word `we' a lot, as in `We as a company saved so much money,'" Mr. Davis says.
Some employees have complained and a few have even tried to sidestep the policy and keep their miles, but the problems have been minor.
Miles are important, Mr. Davis concedes, "but they aren't worth risking your job for."
In reality, though, very few companies claim their employees' miles.
In a poll conducted last year by the Bureau of National Affairs Inc., a publishing concern, employees at only 9% of 617 companies had to surrender their travel awards.
Airlines aren't helping companies who want to change their ways.
Continental Airlines prohibits the pooling of miles, so companies that want those credits must ask employees to request an award certificate from Continental, which can be transferred to another employee.
Delta Air Lines and Trans World Airlines are even tougher: They prohibit transferring miles to nonfamily members; in reclaim programs for those airlines, an employee can only take free flights on his or her own miles.
In a variation of a reclaim program, IBM recently asked UAL Corp.'s United Airlines and AMR Corp.'s American Airlines to keep their frequent-flier miles in exchange for steeper corporate discounts.
United and American turned IBM down.
Industry observers say airlines balk at such deals because they fear employees will blame them for stopping the flow of their frequent-flier miles.
The federal government, which spends $1.8 billion a year on air travel, could also save money by claiming miles.
Arizona Sen. John McCain introduced a bill last year that called for publicly funded miles to be used only for government business, which he believes could result in a savings of $75 million a year.
"It's not taxpayers' expectation that when they send someone on a trip, they're giving them a free ticket for a future trip," a spokesman for the senator said.
There is no word, however, on the fate of the bill.
