Westwood One Inc. settled Securities and Exchange Commission charges that the radio program distributor and network operator fraudulantly misstated financial results in the company's fiscal 1987 and 1988.
The SEC alleged that Westwood One, former company President William J. Battison and current Senior Vice President Gary J. Yusko employed improper accounting and disclosure practices, leading to "material overstatements" of some quarterly operating results in the two periods.
The fraud and improper accounting practices together totaled $6.7 million in pretax operating profit in fiscal 1987, equal to 44% of the profit actually reported, and totaled $5.3 million in fiscal 1988, or nearly triple the reported profit, the SEC said.
The company's fiscal year ends Nov. 30.
Westwood One and Messrs. Battison and Yusko agreed to avoid further violations as part of the settlement.
The parties didn't admit or deny guilt in the SEC administrative action.
Mr. Battison, 44 years old, resigned from the company in 1992.
Mr. Yusko, 38, who was vice president for financial operations and chief accounting officer until December 1991, is now senior vice president for financial operations.
A Westwood One spokeswoman said the settlement "brings basically a very old matter to a conclusion" without any fine or financial penalty to the company, while relieving it of the "considerable financial burden of continued litigation."
Messrs. Battison and Yusko couldn't be reached for comment.
The SEC charged that, during the two years, Westwood One had engaged in improper revenue-recognition practices to avoid reporting its first quarterly operating loss since the company's 1984 initial public offering.
Among the SEC charges were that the company had failed to disclose material information about its operating results, financial statement and accounting policies.
Specifically, the agency said Westwood One had placed improper values on radio advertisements sold in noncash exchanges of advertising time, and had recorded some advertising-contract revenue prematurely.
Among other items the SEC listed as improperly accounted for were Westwood One executive cash bonuses in fiscal 1987, intangible assets related to the 1987 acquisition of the NBC Radio Network, and amounts involved with NBC's acquisition of rights to broadcast the 1988 Summer Olympics from Seoul, South Korea.
Westwood One, which operates the Mutual Broadcasting System, the NBC Radio Network and other radio networks, had disclosed that SEC settlement talks were under way in a filing connected with Westwood One's agreement to buy the radio network business of Infinity Broadcasting Corp.'s Unistar Radio Networks Inc. unit.
In Nasdaq Stock Market trading, Westwood One shares rose 12.5 cents apiece to $8.
