Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. has agreed to pay at least a $1.5 million fine in a settlement with Pennsylvania insurance regulators over allegations that some of its agents cheated customers.
The settlement, expected to be announced next month, would conclude a lengthy investigation by the state, people familiar with the negotiations said.
The inquiry centered on how some Met agents in the Pittsburgh area allegedly exploited customers by encouraging them to use the value accumulated in their old life insurance policies to buy new policies.
The practice, called "churning," produced commissions for the agents but hurt policyholders.
That's because commissions and other front-end fees make it uneconomical to trade in old policies for new ones.
An agent who sells a life insurance policy receives as a commission 55% of the first year of premiums.
The Pennsylvania investigation is separate from a 19-state inquiry, led by Florida, into how some Met agents allegedly tricked consumers into buying life insurance by calling it a savings vehicle and omitting mention of insurance.
"We've made significant headway" in the investigation, said Steve Parton, Florida assistant attorney general.
Met is currently negotiating with the states in hopes of reaching a "global" settlement that would keep it from having to craft separate agreements with each state.
Sticking points include how to determine which customers are eligible for refunds.
Met has offered to refund as much as $30 million to customers who believed that they were putting money into a savings account instead of buying life insurance.
Florida has yet to begin settlement talks, Mr. Parton said, but a spokeswoman for the state insurance department said the investigation is likely to be completed "soon."
She said any settlement with Met is likely to include a fine and a demand that victims be reimbursed.
The state also wants evidence that Met has beefed up its regulatory-compliance program.
The Pennsylvania fine would be one of the largest in the history of the state's insurance department.
Met also would reimburse customers whose policies were churned, people familiar with the talks said.
Officials in Pennsylvania and at MetLife declined to comment yesterday.
In the last year, Met has let go 16 agents and sales managers in the Pittsburgh area and demoted three other managers because of the investigation.
As a condition of settling charges, insurance departments often demand that insurance companies dismiss employees tied to wrongdoing.
Met's troubles with state regulators have begun to land the company in court.
Several lawsuits have been filed by Met policyholders, who claim the alleged fraud committed by the company and its agents have come at their expense.
Met is a mutual insurance company, meaning that it is owned by policyholders.
Profits, in theory at least, belong to policyholders.
Met also has been sued by one of its former executives, Garry Voith, who alleges he was wrongly dismissed.
Mr. Voith was one of several high-level executives Met fired last year for what Met said was his role in the actions now being investigated by Florida and the other states.
Mr. Voith claims that he was fired to cover up for misconduct by other Met officials.
Met declined to comment on the pending litigation.
