Small-business borrowers are getting a break from a source they didn't expect: government pressure.
Tougher regulatory scrutiny of small-business lending has encouraged some banks to charge as little as two points below the prime rate for loans to small companies.
Authorities say big banks fear the persistent public perception that they have neglected small borrowers may increase political obstacles to their expansion plans.
The government pressure is paying off at a time when small businesses already benefit from other forces.
Of course, weak and very young companies still report frustration at the bank.
But the stronger small and mid-size firms found large lenders began wooing them a few years ago to offset sluggish demand among big corporate borrowers.
Big banks were searching for new markets "because traditional markets were drying up," says Joseph Norton, professor of banking law at Southern Methodist University in Dallas.
Such market forces remain a significant factor, Prof. Norton says.
But now, he adds, "a priority of most major banks committed to expansion and growth is to be more aggressive small-business lenders to curry favor with the government and be in compliance" under laws such as the Community Reinvestment Act.
At the same time, borrowers of all sorts are benefiting from declines in interest rates.
"This is the best time for smaller companies that have decent credit quality" to borrow, says Jim Collet, an Ernst & Young senior manager of corporate finance who specializes in smaller firms.
Competition for such borrowers is unprecedented, he says.
"I haven't seen anything like this in my career."
While Mr. Collet says regulatory pressure accounts for just part of big banks' new aggressiveness, he agrees that it is a new and growing influence on small-business lending practices.
When banks seek federal approval to expand, he adds, "they want to show their bank is a great user-friendly organization."
To woo Keys Fitness Products Inc., NationsBank Corp. last September agreed to increase the company's credit line to $3 million from $2 million and cut its variable interest rate by one percentage point to one point over prime, says Tim Chen, president and founder of the Dallas exercise-equipment distributor.
Company sales last year grew about 40% to $20 million.
Mr. Chen says NationsBank in Charlotte, N.C., was one of three large banks that solicited his business in 1993 -- more than courted him during the previous two years combined.
One unsuccessful suitor, a California bank, has since offered to increase Keys' credit line another $1 million, reduce its interest rate to the prime rate and waive certain closing fees.
Lately, banks seem "willing to do anything for our business," Mr. Chen adds.
Even tiny businesses are benefiting from the lending bonanza.
Family-owned Fontes Salon in Reading, Pa., whose annual sales grew 10% last year to $200,000, switched bankers last May when Pennsylvania National Bank & Trust Co. agreed to cut the interest rate on its $110,000 debt nearly two percentage points to 7.25%, says Duane Cabrera, the beauty salon's manager.
The bank, a unit of Keystone Financial Inc., also extended an unsecured $10,000 revolving credit line -- "something no bank has ever offered us before," Mr. Cabrera continues.
He says the lower interest rate saves the business about $850 a month.
The salon used the new credit line to meet payroll taxes and will also tap it to purchase computer equipment, he says.
"The bank was very willing to accommodate us in almost every way," Mr. Cabrera says.
Some big-bank officers say their stepped-up marketing reflects their success at resolving recession-related problem loans, as well as the improving economy.
Some of their stated reasoning also seems intended to appeal to politicians' sympathetic view of small businesses and their role in the recovery.
"Small business is an important engine of economic growth and job creation," says Alan McNally, chief executive officer of Harris Bankcorp, a Bank of Montreal unit in Chicago that last month began offering small-business loans at a half-point below the prime rate.
"This rate is good for small business and good for the economy."
But other bankers concede that they are responding to rising regulatory pressures.
Much of that pressure comes from the Community Reinvestment Act, which governs lending to low-income borrowers and affects banks when they seek federal approval.
Small-business lending advocates have used hearings related to the act to spotlight the scarcity of small-business lending among big banks.
In addition, the Clinton administration wants to expand the act to require more detailed reporting of banks' small-business lending activity.
"People in community-reinvestment advocacy feel jobs and economic development are just as essential as home loans to revitalizing a community," says Woody Widrow, vice president of the National Community Reinvestment Coalition in Washington.
In 1992 the Federal Reserve Board held public hearings about BankAmerica Corp.'s proposed acquisition of Security Pacific Corp.
At the hearings, "a recurring theme was that it's very difficult for small businesses to get conventional financing of $50,000 or below," says a BankAmerica spokesman.
As a result, the San Francisco bank created a special program and made $191 million of such loans in 1993, the spokesman says.
In early 1993, BankAmerica pledged to lend $1.8 billion to small businesss over three years.
Of course, for plenty of small-business owners, the shortage of financing seems as acute as ever.
Baby Cottage Inc., a daycare center in Stamford, Conn., recently learned that its bank loan wouldn't be renewed because the building securing the debt had lost about 30% of its value since the late 1980s, says owner Nick Snow.
"Banks only want to make loans to companies that don't need them," Mr. Snow says.
He claims that the lender's refusal to extend his loan threatens "to put us out of business."
