A new chink has appeared in the battered armor of IBM.
The AS/400, the midrange computer acclaimed as a sign of strength at International Business Machines Corp. when it was introduced in 1988, is now in trouble.
Like IBM's bigger mainframes, the AS/400 is getting undercut by cheaper and ever more powerful desktop machines.
For the first time since the product was unveiled, IBM also lost market share last year in the midrange segment as rivals moved more quickly to make their midrange computers more "open," letting customers mix and match various computers and software programs.
The steepness of the slide, first disclosed in IBM's year-end results last week, caught some analysts by surprise.
Sales of the AS/400, which has been IBM's most profitable hardware product in these twilight years of the mainframe, declined about 10% in 1993 to $3.3 billion from $3.7 billion in 1992.
Analysts figure profits were down even more sharply, plummeting to only $85 million last year from $780 million in 1992.
They are revising their 1994 AS/400 estimates downward as well.
"It's just one more piece of the pie.
This whole company faces tremendous secular changes in the world, and it is making money on the old stuff," says Curt Rohrman, an analyst who follows IBM for First Boston Corp.
"For the last two years, people have said the AS/400 would roll over, and now it is."
IBM isn't the only computer maker to face difficulties in the midrange line.
Originally conceived as a smaller, less expensive mainframe for small and medium-sized businesses, such "minicomputers" were actually the first to feel the squeeze from linked-up networks of personal computers.
Midrange maker Digital Equipment Corp. recently surprised Wall Street with a new round of difficulties.
Digital and Hewlett-Packard Co. are working on transitions to more open systems to compete more effectively against the lower-end entries.
But for IBM, the problems it must overcome to revive the AS/400 line may be more intractable.
As with IBM's mainframe line, the slippage of the AS/400 has created a window of opportunity for competitors.
IBM will need some time before it can make the transition to a more open software system for the midrange series, letting rivals cast it as a "closed" product that is hard to install in a multibrand environment.
In addition, IBM's efforts are hurt by the recession in Europe, where IBM gets half of all AS/400 sales.
Only 35% of sales occur in the U.S., where the economy is rebounding; the rest are generated in Asia.
Even if sales in Europe are revived, the question remains whether customers will come back to IBM or shop elsewhere.
"The perception is that the AS/400 isn't a very open system, and Europe is really into openness," says James Cassell of Gartner Group, a Stamford, Conn., consulting firm.
IBM isn't sitting still.
Yesterday, it announced a new, high-power model in the AS/400 series that delivers 20% more performance at only a slight price increase and no change at all in cost for the accompanying software.
That move is expected to prompt IBM to impose price cuts in other models in the same product line.
Big Blue also will introduce by the end of the year a new pricing approach that amounts to another reduction in software charges.
The new "usage-based" method will let customers pay according to the number of users, rather than a rigid, one-time charge.
But IBM has vowed to impose the most marked change next year, when it plans to introduce an AS/400 model running on the new PowerPC chip.
The new chip, designed by a joint venture of IBM, Motorola Inc. and Apple Computer Inc., will push the AS/400 into a more open RISC design, which stands for reduced-instruction-set computing.
That will make it faster, cheaper and able to interact with more applications.
IBM is still planning to keep the AS/400's operating system.
"Our job is to increase market share in the coming year," says David Thomas, vice president and general manager of the AS/400 division.
"I do think the AS/400 has a chance to sell."
Others also believe IBM can solve the AS/400's problems.
The customer base itself is a valuable franchise of more than 400,000 installed machines.
It has proved itself loyal in the past, boosting the AS/400 to the highest market share in the business after it replaced an earlier model.
"This isn't a serious problem for IBM," maintains Daniel Mandresh, who follows IBM for Merrill Lynch & Co.
Mr. Mandresh adds that the high profit margins IBM has enjoyed in the AS/400 business leave it ample room to further cut prices.
Indeed, the AS/400 has been admired for its relatively low cost and ease of use.
Because IBM preloads the operating system, it is considered a "plug-and-play" machine that can perform complex accounting and data-sorting tasks.
It has been popular in small businesses and branch offices that don't need to link up with centralized mainframe computers.
Product transitions, however, always pose risk.
Customers tend to wait for the latest wares instead of buying the older ones.
In the meantime, they shop around to see what else is on the market.
Digital, Maynard, Mass., has seen its total sales slip 12% to $3.25 billion in the latest quarter as its midrange series made the switch to a new chip, the Alpha.
Now, however, Digital claims it is poised to strike at IBM's customer base, because it's ahead of IBM in making the transition.
"We're two years ahead of competition," says Stephen Koenig, a group marketing manager at Digital.
"The AS/400 proprietary operating system is the No. 1 criticism among IBM's customers, and we don't have that problem anymore," he says.
Peter Burris, an analyst at International Data Corp. in Boston, adds: "In a product transition, you're perceived to be out of step with the groovy, open stuff.
I'd expect IBM will lose share as customers kick the tires."
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, IBM shares closed at $56.50, unchanged.
