"It's not that we discriminate against any body or group, but we are very partial to our own."
-- Kennedy J. Gilly, a vice president of the Boston Club, explaining in a 1993 deposition why the club has admitted neither women nor blacks.
NEW ORLEANS -- Henry Mentz may have to choose between his seat in a private club and his seat on the federal bench.
A legal challenge that seeks to force such a choice places the courtly, sociable judge at the center of the long-running controversy over the influence of private clubs.
Are they merely harmless social affiliations of like-minded individuals?
Or are they bastions of discrimination and power used by their members to further business and political interests to the disadvantage of others?
Immediately at issue is Judge Mentz's membership in the 153-year-old Boston Club, an all-white, all-male "luncheon club."
The Boston Club is one of four clubs here that the New Orleans Human Relations Commission wants to probe for possible violations of a city antidiscrimination ordinance following complaints last year by a black businessman that the clubs had snubbed him.
The judge's affiliation came to light when the Boston Club's secret membership roster was introduced in the pretrial phase of a lawsuit by the clubs challenging the Human Relations Commission's authority.
Also on the list, which was leaked to lawyers around the city, were numerous senior partners in two law firms representing Travelers Insurance Co.
The disclosures proved especially unsettling to two New Orleans brothers, John and Robert Liljeberg, wealthy, combative owners of a local pharmacy empire who had been locked in long, costly federal litigation with Travelers in Judge Mentz's court.
The Liljebergs seized on the Boston Club connections to help explain what they considered a string of unfavorable, and seemingly punitive, rulings by Judge Mentz that awarded an estimated $4 million in interest and penalties to Travelers after a jury found that the Liljebergs had reneged on longstanding lease obligations.
Through their lawyer, Kenneth Fonte, they promptly filed motions in the case asking that the judgments be set aside and that Judge Mentz be disqualified from rehearing the case.
To top it off, the Liljebergs' lawyer, Mr. Fonte, also filed a formal complaint to Judge Mentz's court superiors in the Eastern District of Louisiana here alleging that the judge's Boston Club membership violates a provision of a strict, two-year-old federal ethics law that bans jurists from belonging to clubs that practice "invidious discrimination."
Judge Mentz, in rulings handed down last month, declined either to step aside or vacate the rulings.
Instead, in a reflection of how nasty the fight has become, he fined Mr. Fonte about $20,000, accusing him of untruths and "contradictory" statements in his efforts to get Judge Mentz disqualified and the verdicts overturned.
The Liljebergs have appealed the rulings; though the Boston Club memberships are the heart of their case, the Liljebergs, in court papers, make other assertions.
Among them: that Judge Mentz had personal or political relationships or contact with other lawyers directly or obliquely connected to Travelers.
Mr. Fonte says Judge Mentz, stung by the Liljebergs' challenges, now is bent on conducting a "judicial inquisition" against him and his clients.
Says John Liljeberg of Judge Mentz's conduct in the case: "We are not getting justice here.
The whole thing stinks."
Judge Mentz, citing the ongoing litigation, declines comment on other particulars of the case.
But, in rulings denying the Liljebergs' motions, he rejects allegations of impropriety on any front.
And he states, adamantly, that club affiliations are a non-issue.
"If every judge recused himself from every case because of club affiliations, you would never have cases heard," Judge Mentz says.
In court papers, Travelers and its two law firms have labeled the Liljebergs' assertions "despicable" and "offensive."
The donnybrook over private clubs is the second to rock this historic, rambunctious city in the past three years -- a reflection, largely, of New Orleans's ever-evolving politics in which blacks and women are playing an increasingly important role.
Thus it was in 1991 that the New Orleans City Council, spurred by a 1988 Supreme Court decision, adopted the ordinance that barred private clubs, including the city's generations-old Mardi Gras parade clubs, from excluding members based on race or sex.
The law, modeled on a New York City law upheld by the U.S. high court, applies to clubs with more than 75 members that use public streets or facilities or that allow premises to be used for business purposes.
The law does contain a provision that some call the Mardi Gras loophole; it allows private clubs to swear out an oath that their membership policies are nondiscriminatory without having to reveal whether they have segregated memberships.
Thus, absent an actual bias complaint, clubs are allowed to conduct business as usual without city interference.
The provision was a last-minute sop to the influential clubs that stage the parades, which are the chief entertainment during the commercially vital Mardi Gras season here.
Though a few formerly white clubs accepted black members in deference to the ordinance, many clubs had threatened to boycott the parade season if required to recast their memberships.
The issue is a little more complicated than white backlash.
The carnival clubs, some of which predate the Civil War, long ago split along gender and racial lines, and some black and women's clubs also complained they would be adversely affected by the ordinance.
And the law has proved widely unpopular among working-class New Orleanians of all races who view Mardi Gras as a vast, multicultural street party that had been largely free of racial politics until the city moved against the carnival clubs.
The amendment defused some of the controversy, though two of the city's largest clubs, both of them white, have declined to take the oath and no longer parade.
They have been replaced by other clubs, and the 1994 parade season, which starts Sunday, will have a full complement of parading clubs.
Absent a complaint, luncheon clubs like the Boston Club, which doesn't sponsor Mardi Gras activities, had escaped city scrutiny -- until last year.
That's when Clarence Hunt, a black California businessman moving to New Orleans, wrote to the Human Relations Commission that he had been turned down for memberships in four clubs after identifying himself as black.
When the city demanded membership rosters -- and tax records to determine whether the clubs serve a business purpose -- the clubs sued pre-emptively.
Kevin O'Bryon, a Boston Club lawyer, declines comment on the case.
But the clubs, in court papers, argue that the New Orleans law is an unconstitutional impingement on citizens' rights of free association, and furthermore doesn't apply to the clubs because they neither use public amenities nor allow business to be conducted on their premises.
City officials dispute the latter contention.
They cite testimony by some club members during depositions last summer that their club dues had been paid by their companies; such payments, in the city's eyes, impute a business function that brings the clubs under the antidiscrimination law.
The current federal-court case -- which isn't being presided over by Judge Mentz -- will ultimately decide the issue, though lawyers on both sides say they do not expect a quick ruling.
As to Mr. Hunt's snubbing, a Boston Club insider says the California man, his race aside, was treated like anyone else who might seek membership.
"The Boston Club doesn't, in fact, accept `applications' from anyone," he says.
Prospective members, instead, are "put up" for membership by other members -- and can be rejected if five of the club's roughly 575 or so members vote to keep them out.
Legal scholars are watching the Liljeberg case with some interest: Ironically, a 1988 case that the Liljebergs lost set the current Supreme Court standard for determining whether a judge's personal connections with lawyers or litigants are grounds for disqualification.
As for Judge Mentz's membership in the Boston Club, some legal-ethics experts think he is on shaky legal ground if he insists in staying both in the club and on the federal bench.
Under Canon 2 (c) of the Judicial Code of Conduct, federal judges may not belong to any club that practices "invidious discrimination," defined broadly as one that "arbitrarily excludes from membership on the basis of race, religion, sex or national origin persons who would otherwise be admitted."
An exception, says Stephen Gillers, a law professor at New York University's law school, might be a judge who belongs to a community beach club that, though it has an open-admission policy, happens to be all white because no blacks live there.
But if a club "isn't geographically sequestered, and has exclusionary membership policies," a judge's membership is forbidden, he adds.
No statistics are available on how many federal judges belong to private clubs, though legal groups that track ethical issues believe the numbers, given the constraints of Canon 2 (c) and the controversy that such memberships engender, are small.
Here, of the handful of judges thought to belong to such clubs, most are in organizations that have recently integrated their memberships in line with the city ordinance, lawyers say.
"It's generally accepted as a necessary form of reassurance today to members of minority groups that judges have disengaged themselves from the old white-male fraternal approach of thinking about the world," says Geoffrey Hazard Jr., professor of legal ethics at the University of Pennsylvania.
The matter of Judge Mentz's Boston Club membership, based on Mr. Fonte's complaint, is now in secret, complex proceedings before the chief judge of the Eastern District Court here.
But should the court find that the Boston Club indeed practices "invidious" discrimination, Judge Mentz could be asked to choose between his job and his club.
Technically, federal judges are appointed for life and can be removed only by impeachment.
But Judge Mentz's senior status on the bench, which he voluntarily took some time ago, means he can automatically be retired should his caseload fall below one-fourth of the caseload of a full-time judge.
Cases are assigned at the discretion of the chief judge; thus, should Judge Mentz's superior advise him to step down from the Boston Club -- and should he decline -- he could be eased into retirement.
Some lawyers who know the 73-year-old Judge Mentz and have practiced before him say he isn't generally considered the kind of jurist who would let social connections interfere with his impartiality.
But they also say that he is fond of his social standing among New Orleans's old guard and might be loath to relinquish his membership in the Boston Club and a handful of other private clubs, given that he is semiretired and sits on the bench only part time.
Judge Mentz lives with his wife in a lovely old house in this city's garden district; in 1990, he served as a chairman of the Social Directory of New Orleans, a publication that styles itself a chronicler of the city's "aristocracy of merit."
The directory listed Judge Mentz as one of the "active and distinguished members of the social scene and/or members of old-line families."
The judge welcomed a reporter to his office recently and proudly showed off a wall of pictures of his family, including years-old photographs of two debutante daughters "coming out" in New Orleans society.
Judge Mentz also casually noted his membership in a local Masonic lodge, relating the story of his support some time ago of a Muslim lawyer who wished to join and who took his oath of membership on the Koran instead of the Bible.
Whether or not Judge Mentz gives up his clubs for the bench, it seems clear that the clubs involved in the suit against the city -- the Boston Club, the Louisiana Club, the Pickwick Club and the Stratford Club -- want to preserve control over their membership policies.
In a sometimes testy exchange with a city lawyer, Eleanor Graham, the Boston Club's Kennedy Gilly maintained that club-membership rules are written in such a way as "to preserve the ambience of the club, the way it was handed down to us."
Mr. Gilly is also a past president of the Louisiana Club.
Ms. Graham asked Mr. Gilly if "there are any members of the Louisiana Club who are of African descent?"
"I don't know of any members of the Louisiana Club who are of African descent," Mr. Gilly replied.
But he noted that, under a Louisiana law left over from the state's segregationist past, any "traceable mixture of Negro blood would make someone in law a Negro or colored, whatever the term is in the Louisiana Civil Code.
But I certainly haven't traced anybody's genealogy back to Adam and Eve to determine whether there's any traceable admixture."
In a separate deposition, George Mayer, the Boston Club's president, took a similar tack in response to questions about whether the club has ever admitted a black member.
"There is no way I can answer that," Mr. Mayer replied.
"Can you tell me why?" a city attorney asked.
"Because unless you have the genealogy going back many, many years, there just isn't any way."
Later, the attorney asks whether Mr. Mayer had ever made judgments about the race of a person without examining a genealogy.
"No," he replied.
"Well, I'm momentarily at a loss because I find that extremely unusual . . . .
Are there any black employees in the Boston Club?"
"Yes," Mr. Mayer said.
"How do you know?"
"They are colored," he replied.
