A $130 million WMX Technologies Inc. trash incinerator, already under construction, came under renewed attack by some Connecticut state officials, who want to re-open the debate on whether the facility is needed.
The battle over the project reflects changes in the trash business: When initially planned, the 500-ton-a-day Lisbon, Conn., incinerator was seen as helping ease a shortage of disposal capacity; instead, a glut of dump and incineration space has developed, undermining the economics of such costly plants.
Connecticut Attorney General Richard Blumenthal said yesterday he would push for hearings on whether the Lisbon plant, to be operated by a unit of WMX, is still needed.
Officials at the state's Resources Recovery Authority, which oversees much of the trash-burning capacity in Connecticut, are opposed to the plant and assert it would add to a glut of capacity that has already cost the state millions of dollars.
To fill up its incinerators, the authority takes New York City trash at prices as low as $32 a ton, says William Darcy, the authority's president, while Connecticut trash costs between $51 and $98 a ton.
"This facility should not be built," Mr. Darcy said.
Connecticut officials have been haggling over the plant's permit for two-and-a-half years.
The project got a green light from the state, but last week a state court judge ordered the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection to reconsider a provision in the permit that limited out-of-state waste going to be plant; the judge denied other appeals by opponents of the project.
In lawsuits in federal courts elsewhere, bans on the interstate transport of waste have been struck down as illegally interfering with interstate commerce.
While carrying out the judge's order to consider that narrow question, a hearing officer will also be asked by the attorney general -- but can decline -- to reconsider the need for the plant.
"The issue of need ought to be revisited," said Richard Blumenthal, attorney general.
He agrees with the state Resources Recovery Authority that the capacity glut in Connecticut has only worsened in recent months.
Oak Brook, Ill.-based WMX said it has contracts for waste to easily fill the plant.
The waste company said the judge's denial of all other appeals was a victory and that it expects to continue building the plant, which is less than 10% completed.
The company hasn't decided yet whether to oppose efforts to re-open the debate on the need for the plant.
