Copley Pharmaceutical Inc.'s once-popular asthma medication, Albuterol, has been linked to health problems in lawsuits and complaints to the Food and Drug Administration.
As previously reported, Copley recalled Albuterol earlier this month after discovering samples contaminated with bacteria.
At the time, the company said it was unaware of any reports linking the drug to illness.
The company, a major generic-drug maker, continues to maintain that it knows of no confirmed cases of health problems caused by the drug.
But the company now faces two separate lawsuits filed in state court in Chicago, alleging that a 17-month-old boy and a 10-month-old girl contracted life-threatening pneumonia after taking the drug.
The FDA also says it has received complaints about Albuterol, including some alleging a link between the product and health problems.
The recall, and Copley's handling of it, has also led some to question whether generic-drug makers, who seek to keep costs and prices low, are as reliable or responsive as major pharmaceutical companies.
Dr. John Strimas, a Nashville, Tenn., asthma specialist and pediatrician, said the recall casts a broad cloud over generic drugs -- and that he will no longer prescribe Copley's Albuterol.
"I have put a lot of faith in generics.
But I'm afraid this will have a bad impression on a lot of us who have trusted generics," said Dr. Strimas, a member of the board of regents of the American College of Allergy and Immunology.
Nancy Sander, president of Allergy and Asthma Network/Mothers of Asthmatics, a consumer-health organization in Fairfax, Va., contended that Copley wasn't as prepared to deal with a recall as a name-brand drug company would have been.
"We received hundreds of calls about this," she said.
"People were angry.
They found it difficult to get through to Copley.
And when they did get through, they felt they were treated rudely and their questions weren't answered."
Janet Tobias, a Saint Joseph, Mich., housewife whose seven-year-old son has asthma and was using Copley's Albuterol, said, "I tried for four days to get through to Copley and couldn't.
The line was always busy."
The company, based in Canton, Mass., says it has tried to accommodate concerned Albuterol users, with as many as 15 phone lines at a time devoted to the recall.
It denies that its staff has been rude to callers.
"We have not been through a recall before.
It's a challenging situation," said Steven Tannenbaum, Copley's chief financial officer.
"You're going to have a lot of public reaction.
But I don't get the sense this wasn't handled properly or that the situation is out of control.
It's totally in control."
Copley, which is 51% owned by the Hoechst Celanese Corp. unit of Germany's Hoechst AG, announced the recall on Jan. 6 after it discovered the bacteria pseudomonas fluorescens in some 20-milliliter vials of Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution with a 0.5% concentration.
The bacteria can cause serious infections, particularly in people with cystic fibrosis, chronic obstructive lung disease or compromised immune systems.
Albuterol 0.5% is an inhalation solution used to treat a variety of breathing disorders.
The drug is sold under Copley's name and the private labels Aligen, Astra, Geneva, Goldine, Harbor, Major, Moore, H.L. Moore, Qualitest, Rugby and Schein.
Copley's Albuterol Sulfate 0.083% solution wasn't affected by the recall.
"There's been a lot of consumer response and a lot of people claiming things but certainly nothing that's been confirmed," Mr. Tannenbaum said.
But the lawsuits in Chicago, which seek unspecified damages, allege otherwise.
The suits were filed in the Circuit Court of Cook County.
Brian Murphy, a lawyer representing the families of the children, said: "The infections that were causing the pneumonias matched the contaminants that were found in the Copley product -- namely pseudomonas."
The two children, from separate families, "were both in very bad shape and continue to be so," Mr. Murphy said Friday.
He asked that their names not be disclosed.
Copley's Mr. Tannenbaum said he couldn't comment on the litigation.
The FDA, which says it received a number of Albuterol complaints, is "evaluating any information that comes in to see if we have a cause-and-effect complaint," said Richard Swanson, director of emergency and epidemiological operations for the agency.
"At this particular moment, we know of no contaminated product that got out of the control of the manufacturer."
He added that the FDA didn't receive any complaints until after the recall was announced.
But Dr. Strimas, the Nashville asthma specialist, noted that, before the recall, "We weren't looking for it.
We know 5,000 people die from asthma a year and we have not been looking for this.
When my patients come in coughing and wheezing, I'll be more careful.
"Pseudomonas scares me," he says.
"Would you like to breathe it?
I wouldn't do it for a million dollars.
I would rather walk past a rattlesnake than breathe a vial of that stuff."
