HISTORY TOURISM comes of age as more vacationers explore the past.
"More consumers have been walking through the doors and saying `I want this,'" says a spokesman for the American Society of Travel Agents in Arlington, Va.
A variety of trips -- from digging dinosaur eggs to historian-escorted tours of the Wild West -- are being offered by travel agents.
The tours tend to draw older, better-educated Americans, but more parents will be bringing their children along this year, the travel agents' spokesman says.
"Families see this as an excellent way to combine fun and education for their children," he says.
The National Trust for Historic Preservation says more than 600,000 people visited its 17 properties last year and projects a 9% increase this year.
Two popular spots are Filoli in Woodside, Calif., a historic estate, and the Frank Lloyd Wright Home and Studio in Oak Park, Ill.
Pete Brown, owner of History America Tours, a division of Tailored Tours, says his Crazy Horse and Custer tour, which costs up to $999 a person, and Gettysburg tours, for up to $1,049 a head, are among 1994's favorites.
Among the tours offered by Smithsonian Institution's Study Tours and Seminars program is Digging for Dinosaurs.
For $1,350, a traveler can spend about a week in Montana scooping up dinosaur eggs under the supervision of geologists and paleontologists.
A big draw overseas this year is the 50th anniversary of the D-Day landing in France by Allied troops on June 6.
Between 20,000 and 30,000 Americans are expected to travel to the Normandy region in June, and many of the packages offered in the U.S. -- ranging from around $1,000 to $3,000 -- have been sold out, warns Claire Bigelow, the U.S. director of the Normandy Tourist Board.
TRAVELERS WILL be able to ride beneath the English Channel via the Eurotunnel this year, but some experts expect a rocky start for tunnel operators.
Travelers world-wide have eagerly awaited the revolutionary tunnel between England and France since 1981, when former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and French President Francois Mitterrand announced studies for a fixed link across the English Channel.
But last month, Eurotunnel, the Anglo-French consortium building the tunnel, said there's another delay in the start-up of Le Shuttle, rail cars that will transport travelers inside their vehicles through the tunnel.
Le Shuttle was originally scheduled to begin service May 8.
Crossing time on Le Shuttle would be about 35 minutes with standard round-trip prices ranging from $330 to $465 a car, depending on departure dates.
A spokeswoman for BritRail Travel International, which sells tickets for ferry services, says crossing time on the ferries is about one hour and 45 minutes.
A round-trip ferry ride across the channel ranges from $124 to $300 a car, according to the BritRail spokeswoman.
A second service scheduled to start up this summer is the Eurostar passenger-train service, which takes travelers through the tunnel into London, Brussels or Paris in about three hours.
Eurostar, which says it will compete with airlines for business travelers, hasn't disclosed fares.
But it has hinted that they would be cheaper than current discount air fares.
The flight between London and Paris takes about an hour.
Still, several analysts predict that there won't be any rush to the Chunnel.
At the outset, they say, business travelers will be put off by the tunnel's longer crossing time.
"People are interested and curious but not quite ready to purchase a ticket yet," says Alexis Cole of Thomas Cook, the big London-based travel agency.
TRAVEL IN STYLE and save money.
That's the tack of some travel agencies touting high-class vacations as excellent values.
The pricier trips, the agents say, can add up to a better value than planning a trip yourself or going on low-budget deals because they are comprehensive: more meals, longer hotel stays and smaller tour groups, plus they include tipping and other fees.
Bookings for high-end travel packages -- about $325 a day and up -- have risen in 1994.
Alistair Ballantine, president of Abercrombie & Kent International in Oak Brook, Ill., says there has been a 28% rise in bookings of high-end packages in 1994 compared with the year before.
"We saw a definite dip in 1991 and 1992 -- some of it, in part, because of the Gulf War.
Now we are seeing bookings pick back up to the levels seen in 1988," he says.
"In the '90s, people are looking at value, whereas in the '80s, people were more frivolous and looking at the more glitzy things in a package rather than its overall value."
Travel Smart editor Nancy Dunnan calls luxury travel a "viable category" in the 1990s.
"You have to feel your way through each package deal to see what exactly is included in the prices, but one can find it's a much better value than prerecession."
Travel to the Orient, Europe and Africa, Ms. Dunnan says, are the hot spots for luxe travelers in 1994.
EXECUTIVES KEEP hitting the road, but the increase is tapering off.
The U.S. Travel Data Center reports that although U.S. resident business travel rose 19% in 1992 to 210.8 million trips, it's projected to rise a meager 3% in 1993.
A slim 3% increase is expected in 1994. . . .
The No. 1 pay-per-view film favorite among hotel guests in 1993 was "The Bodyguard."
Following closely were "Indecent Proposal," "Under Siege" and "A Few Good Men," according to the American Hotel and Motel Association. . . .
Stouffer Hotels & Resorts, a unit of Renaissance Hotels International, is offering a $50 U.S. savings bond to guests who stay one night at Stouffer and Renaissance hotels in Chicago, St. Louis and other cities.
It plans to expand the program in April.
