So far, the Federal Reserve's move to boost short-term interest rates and reduce inflationary pressures has been bitter medicine for U.S. bond markets.
It's too early to tell if it's working, but nervous investors and money managers who must make decisions now on where to put their money are selling bonds, pushing prices lower.
Lackluster demand at yesterday's $17 billion auction of three-year notes by the Treasury, the first of three auctions that comprise its quarterly refunding, was one sign of how distasteful the medicine has been.
Another sign was the drop in bond prices.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond fell more than 3/4 point, or more than $7.50 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 97 10/32.
Since Thursday, when speculation about a rate increase roiled the market, the price of the 30-year bond has fallen more than two points.
Its yield, which moves inversely to its price, rose to 6.45%, the highest since August of last year.
Assessing the Move Bond investors are still trying to determine if the Fed acted too early, too late, or just in time to keep inflation from rising and gouging the value of their fixed-income holdings.
For clues, they are looking to the January producer-price index, an inflation measure, which is scheduled to be released on Friday.
Some analysts fear sentiment could worsen as the Treasury sells another $33 billion of 10-year notes today and 30-year bonds tomorrow.
"The psychological condition of the market continues to be absolutely abysmal," says F. Ward McCarthy, managing director at Stone & McCarthy Research Associates of Princeton, N.J.
"Disorientation is a good way to describe" market sentiment, says Matthew Alexy, a government-trading strategist at CS First Boston.
Investors "don't know if the Fed is ahead of the curve or just struggling to keep up" in its battle against inflation.
"People are recuperating from the first Fed tightening since February 1989 and they're trying to recover from the dreadful price action of the past week," says Mr. McCarthy.
"There is also some concern that the market has to absorb all this supply," he adds.
Many investors were looking to the three-year note auction for evidence that the market was regaining strength, says Mr. McCarthy.
But that didn't happen.
Although, on the surface, the auction appeared to draw decent demand, traders said much of the buying was to close out "short" positions.
Those positions involve traders who sold borrowed three-year notes in hopes that prices would drop, allowing them to replace their borrowings with cheaper notes bought at the auction, and pocket the difference.
Ominously, there was little interest in the three-year notes from banks and other traditional Treasury buyers, says Mr. McCarthy.
The Treasury Department awarded its $17 billion offering of three-year notes at an average yield of 4.83%, compared with an average yield of 4.44% at the last three-year note auction in November.
But in trading after the auction, the so-called when-issued yield of the three-year note rose to 4.84%, a sign of weakening demand.
The bid-cover ratio, which compares the number of bids submitted with the number of bids accepted, was about average at 2.66-to-1.
Noncompetitive bids, which typically reflect interest from buyers outside the dealer community, were also near the recent average, at $846 million.
"The auction was sort of neutral at best," said Mr. Alexy of CS First Boston.
With most of the $17 billion three-year offering still sloshing around in the hands of Wall Street dealers, the bond market was unable to shake its recent sour tone.
"The market was weak because people figured that if the Treasury had trouble with the three-year note auction, the 10-year note auction would go the same way," said Mr. McCarthy.
"Investors are going to demand a greater premium," pushing up yields for the 10-year note at today's auction and the 30-year bond at tomorrow's auction, says Mr. Alexy.
A rise in yields to 6% for the 10-year note and 6.5% for the 30-year bond by week's end "would not surprise me," he adds.
Late yesterday, the when-issued 10-year note yielded 5.95%, up from 5.90% on Monday.
Meanwhile, the when-issued 30-year bond, which is a re-opening of the 6.25% 30-year bond, was changing hands at 6.45%.
Once the bond market weathers the deluge of supply, it will have to deal with the producer-price index on Friday.
According to Mr. Alexy, if the "core" index -- which excludes the volatile food and energy sectors -- shows a 0.3% increase in January over the previous month, that would be neutral to positive for the bond market.
However, "if it's bigger than that, you're going to be left to sweat it out and there will be questions about when the next Fed tightening is coming," he says.
Mr. McCarthy says investors ought to be prepared for bad news on Friday.
"We're probably going to get the worst inflation numbers we've seen in a number of months," he predicts.
He's looking for an increase of 0.4% in the core PPI.
"That's not an earth-shattering number but it's disconcerting and people will be on guard for the next move" by the Fed to raise rates, he says.
Last Friday, the Fed pushed up the target for the federal-funds rate, the rate at which banks lend each other money, to 3.25% from 3%.
Some economists say the funds rate will be 3.5% before too long, possibly by the end of March.
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The notes are dated Feb. 15, 1994, and mature Feb. 15, 1997.
Bonds of cellular-communication companies dropped in anticipation of Nextel Communications Inc.'s jumbo junk-bond offering, which is scheduled to be sold today.
Nextel is expected to increase the size of its 10-year senior discount note to between $600 million and $700 million, from $400 million.
However, Nextel also raised the expected yield on the notes to compensate for the deal's large size and in reaction to rising interest rates in the Treasury market.
Originally the paper was marketed at 9.375%, but it will probably be priced around 9.75%, syndicate officials said.
The bonds of Cencall Communications Corp. and the Nextel bonds outstanding traded lower.
Most traders say prices will rise again after Nextel's new deal is priced and absorbed into the market.
Cencall's zero-coupon bonds due 2004 dropped by one point, or $10 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 63.
The yield rose to 9.79% from 9.58%.
Zero-coupon bonds pay no interest and are sold at a deep discount to face value.
Nextel's zero-coupon bonds maturing in 2003 dropped 3/4 point, or $7.50 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 68.
The yield rose to 9.7% from 9.52%.
Upcoming Treasury auctions combined with bad weather to put a damper on the corporate new issue market and only $675 million of debt was priced.
Trading in the investment-grade market was moderate with most of the attention centered on Treasury auctions.
Prices followed Treasurys lower, leaving spreads mostly unchanged.
Yield spreads of triple-B rated corporate securities over Treasurys tightened by about 0.02 percentage point, one trader said.
Tapping the long-end of the yield curve, PaineWebber Group sold $200 million of 20-year debt while Consolidated Edison Co. of New York Inc. issued $150 million of 35-year paper, the longest debt sold this year.
In the junk-bond market, Chiquita Brands International Inc. sold $175 million of 10-year senior notes only a day after its outstanding debt was downgraded by Standard & Poor's.
The notes were priced with a higher yield than expected after the rating on senior notes was downgraded to double-B-minus from double-B.
Price talk was originally 8.75% to 9% and the paper was priced at par to yield 9.125%.
The bonds traded up, however, by 0.50 point, or $5.00 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 100.50.
The yield dropped to 9.05%.
Rated single-B1 by Moody's and double-B-minus by S&P, the noncallable notes were sold through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
Municipal bonds weakened for the fourth-straight session and finished 1/4 to 3/4 point lower.
Sales of Treasurys, munis and other U.S. bonds were set in motion late last week by the Federal Reserve's tightening of its monetary policy.
In late trading, the New York Triborough Bridge & Tunnel Authority's 5.00% bonds due 2024 were 5/8 lower at 94, yielding 5.37%.
The Reedy Creek Improvement District (Florida) 5.00% bonds due 2019 were down 3/4 at 94 1/4 , yielding 5.38%.
The New York and Florida bonds were priced to yield 5.35% late Monday, but the price decline nudged the yields up.
Although last week's Fed tightening was rather modest, the action continues to take a toll on munis, traders say.
"Friday really represented a psychological change in the marketplace," said Gregory Gizzi, a trader at Dillon, Read.
There is "very, very little customer interest" in munis following the central bank's shift to a tightening mode, he said, noting that the market's current condition is "in a word, ugly."
Mortgages lost ground, but not nearly as much as Treasurys.
As a result, yields on current coupon mortgages narrowed by about three basis points to the yield on the Treasury's 10-year note, a pricing benchmark for current coupons.
The tightening of mortgage spreads reflects several factors that continue to buoy the mortgage market, among them, light selling of new securities by mortgage bankers.
Another reason is that buyers are still looking for high-quality securities that have more yield than is available in Treasurys or even corporates.
In secondary trading, Ginnie Mae 6.5s were off 4/32 at 98 21/32, Freddie Mac 6.5s were off 4/32 at 98 27/32 and Fannie Mae 6.5s were off 4/32 at 98 20/32.
The Treasury sell-off has also given a boost to mortgages by eliminating any lingering fears of a mini-refinancing wave.
Participants have been worried that mortgage rates were still low enough to trigger prepayments in outstanding mortgage securities.
January prepayment data released by the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Government National Mortgage Association on Monday quelled some of those concerns.
The figures showed prepayment speeds dropping across the board.
According to PaineWebber, prepayment speeds of Fannie Mae and Ginnie Mae securities under the Public Securities Association model fell 30% to 40%.
The prepayment news helped prices of most interest-only securities, or bonds created solely from the interest of an underlying pool of mortgage loans.
Thomas D. Lauricella contributed to this report.
