There's more good news on health costs.
Both private and public medical spending appears to be moderating.
Federal officials now calculate that the government's two big budget-busting health programs, Medicare and Medicaid, will cost about $45 billion less over the next five fiscal years than they projected in the fall.
And the Bureau of Labor Statistics says medical-care prices rose just 5.4% last year, the smallest increase since 1973 (though still twice the overall inflation rate).
While the tempering of heath spending is welcome, some people in the Clinton administration and on Capitol Hill worry that it could take away some of the political momentum for overhauling the U.S. health system.
Already, some Republicans are arguing that there isn't a "health crisis" in the U.S. -- a view echoed last weekend by Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who heads the Senate Finance Committee.
The government now expects to spend about $20 billion less on Medicare between fiscal 1995 and 2000, according to an administration official.
Spending for Medicare, the federal health insurance program for elderly and disabled Americans, currently totals about $150 billion a year.
The reduction is largely due to lower-than-expected payments to physicians.
Two years ago, when Medicare started setting fees for doctors, federal health officials projected many physicians would increase their volume of services in order to make up for lower reimbursement rates.
But Medicare officials now say volume hasn't increased nearly as much as they anticipated.
Administration officials also project that federal spending on Medicaid, the federal-state health insurance program for the poor, will be about $25 billion lower than projected for the period.
The federal government spends about $90 billion on Medicaid each year.
Officials attribute the savings largely to state efforts to rein in Medicaid costs, and also to a leveling of Medicaid enrollment due to a pickup in the economy.
The new cost projections will be contained in the fiscal 1995 budget President Clinton plans to submit to Congress in early February.
The Labor Department said medical-care prices rose at a 4.4% annual pace in the fourth quarter.
Medical-care price inflation, as measured by the government, has fallen from 9.6% in 1990 to 7.9% in 1991 to 6.6% in 1992.
Although some economists say the bureau's measure of health prices is flawed, corporate health-care officials and analysts agree that price increases have slowed.
By focusing attention on health-care costs, analysts say, President and Mrs. Clinton may be discouraging the industry from pushing up prices.
At the same time, corporate and government efforts to restrain health-care cost increases finally may be bearing fruit.
The government's index of medical-care commodities, which includes prescription drugs and supplies, rose 3.1% in 1993, compared with 5.2% in 1992.
Charges for doctors' and other professional services were up 4.5%, compared with 5.7% in 1992, and hospital charges were up 7.6%, compared with 8.8% in 1992.
