Boeing Co., in a concession aimed at keeping aloft its development work for a superjumbo jet, yesterday agreed to let rival Airbus Industrie participate in a pivotal phase of international study for the airliner.
Until now, the Seattle-based jet maker had insisted that the four European partners of Airbus proceed with Boeing on the project without the Airbus consortium's involvement.
The companies -- Deutsche Aerospace AG, a unit of German industrial giant Daimler-Benz AG; British Aerospace PLC; Aerospatiale SA of France, and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA of Spain -- control Airbus, which is Boeing's primary competitor in selling planes to the world's airlines.
But at a top-level meeting yesterday in London hosted by Boeing Chairman Frank Shrontz, Boeing agreed to let Airbus managers join in a limited "advisory role."
The studies are aimed at developing a new size of plane with 500 to 800 seats.
Airbus still wouldn't be a partner in the project, and wouldn't be a signatory to agreements for the joint study.
Boeing officials wouldn't comment on the concession.
A company spokesman said only that Airbus will be filling the advisory role for the Europeans.
An Airbus spokeswoman declined to comment on any aspect of the study.
Since January, the pressure had been intense on the project leader, Boeing, to allow Airbus's involvement, as a first phase of the study wound down.
The companies have joined together to develop the huge jet by the year 2000, because demand for such an aircraft is limited and projected development costs are an extraordinary $15 billion or more.
The new phase of the studies will run through mid-1995 and will explore whether the project makes economic sense.
The project is unusually complex, involving new designs and tooling, and an intercontinental design and production scheme is likely to be resolved only through hard bargaining.
The project also will have to clear antitrust reviews.
A showdown over the consortium's involvement erupted less than two months ago, when officials of Aerospatiale demanded that Airbus be allowed to represent the European companies in the project.
Boeing managers rejected that demand, but later expressed a willingness to allow the advisory role, partly because the European companies rely largely on the Airbus organization for marketing expertise, people familiar with the developments said.
The standoff was exacerbated by a recent Saudi decision, after intense lobbying by the Clinton administration, to give a $6 billion aircraft order to U.S. manufacturers.
People familiar with the superjumbo planning process said that Aerospatiale Chairman Louis Gallois proposed full Airbus involvment during talks yesterday.
But Deutsche Aerospace Chairman Juergen Schrempp, who initially joined with Boeing to bring the project together in late 1992, proposed Airbus be given advisory status -- a compromise accepted by all sides.
"Decisions will rest with the companies themselves," said Juergen Thomas, a Deutsche Aerospace official acting as European project director for the study.
He said the companies would "make use of Airbus expertise in certain disciplines."
