Silver futures prices continued their upward march, driven by strong demand for the metal among big investors, but other precious metals prices were lackluster.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, silver for May delivery was up 3.7 cents to $5.652 an ounce.
Earlier in yesterday's session, the May silver contract price had reached a four-year high of $5.72 an ounce before tapering off.
The price of gold for April delivery, meanwhile, fell $2.30 to $387.40 an ounce.
The ratio of gold's price to silver's has been falling rapidly over the past few months, as silver's price has risen about 40%.
The ratio, which was about 88 to 1 in September, has now slipped to 69.1 to 1, said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
"The recent advance has been mostly related to strong options buying and managed fund buying," Mr. O'Neill said.
"We have also seen good fund demand from India, from Middle Eastern syndicates and European merchants.
The gold market has not experienced a similar physical demand, which is why its price is lagging."
The relative weakness of gold was underscored yesterday by its decline on a day that the Knight Ridder-Commodity Research Bureau index of commodity prices reached 230.46, its highest level since November 1990.
The index tends to move in tandem with gold prices, because both gold and the CRB are seen as being sensitive to inflation.
Lately, however, the CRB has risen, driven by strength in agricultural commodities such as cocoa, sugar and grains, while gold's performance has been weak.
Another cautionary sign is the fact that of the major precious metals futures contracts, only silver's price has consistently been moving higher.
"As far as precious metals are concerned, they only have one strong link and that's silver," said Bernard Savaiko, senior analyst for PaineWebber Inc.
"Platinum is acting weakest, which suggests the rally we're seeing in silver is mainly a technical rally, and makes silver's gains suspect.
If we had a truly inflationary climate, gold and platinum should be moving up as well."
Mr. O'Neill concurred, saying "Gold is definitely not impressed by the threat of inflation."
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Soybean futures prices rose after a monthly "crush" report showed stronger-than-expected U.S. demand for soybean by-products.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, soybeans for July delivery were up 7.75 cents to $6.9450 a bushel.
Soybeans are crushed to produce two main by-products, soybean meal and oil.
According to the report released yesterday, soybean crush during February was a record 102.8 million bushels, surpassing the previous February record of 102.1 million bushels last year, when soybean prices were about $1 a bushel lower than they are now, said Daniel W. Basse, market research director for AgResource Co., Chicago.
The high crush level is an indication that demand for soybean by-products is strong, Mr. Basse said.
Another such indication was the crush report's estimate of domestic demand for soybean oil, placed at 1.05 billion pounds, up from 985 million pounds a year ago.
ENERGY: Crude oil and product futures prices ended lower yesterday, mainly in response to a surprisingly large increase in U.S. crude oil inventories.
Trading was relatively quiet and cautious, as players awaited news from Geneva, where oil ministers began to arrive for tomorrow's meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
Prices fell just after the opening bell, when players sold crude futures contracts in reaction to news that U.S. crude supplies last week grew by more than 12 million barrels.
The increase, reported by the American Petroleum Institute late Tuesday, was unexpected.
Traders were reluctant to place too much significance on the day's trading action, however, noting that the market's direction in coming days is likely to be solely determined by events in Geneva.
Market participants are waiting to see whether OPEC will make any reduction in its production ceiling for the second quarter to try to mop up an expected oversupply of crude.
