Time to reach for the painkillers.
Although the April 15 income-tax deadline is still two months away, getting a head start on your returns is especially advisable this year.
The reason is the 1993 Tax Act.
That law, signed in October by President Clinton, raised taxes retroactively to the start of last year on many upper-income taxpayers and hits them with some fiendishly complicated new provisions.
But at the same time, a few other provisions could help many less highly paid Americans save significant amounts of money, says Clint Stretch, director of tax legislative affairs at the accounting firm of Deloitte & Touche.
The only solution is to start pulling your records together early.
That's apt to be especially important for people planning to rely on an accountant or other professional tax preparer.
You don't want to be stuck trying to get an appointment at the last minute of what is certain to be a hectic season for tax professionals.
Moreover, people who start getting ready now may be surprised to find that there are some bright spots in the new tax law.
Many high-income taxpayers, for instance, will qualify for a provision allowing them to defer paying part of their higher taxes for another two years without interest or penalties.
Be sure to take advantage of this offer because "it amounts to an interest-free loan from the government, and that doesn't come along too often in our lifetime," says Richard M. Cummins, a tax partner and national director of financial-planning services at Coopers & Lybrand in New York.
Many people with roughly the same income and filing status as the prior year will discover their tax bill is little changed.
Indeed, the Treasury estimates fewer than 2% of the nation's 115 million or so taxpayers will feel the sting of the new law's higher rates.
Some people may even owe slightly less because of inflation adjustments to several items, including tax-bracket levels, the personal exemption and standard deduction.
A few changes are especially important because they restore old tax laws that should lead to big savings for many people.
GETTING ORGANIZED: Be sure to double-check information on your W-2 form, as well as any interest, dividend and mortgage data on other tax forms you received from banks, brokerage firms and mutual-fund companies.
Remember that the IRS receives copies of these forms and will want to know the reason for any discrepancies between those forms and what is on your return.
Pay special attention to Form 1098, showing mortgage interest.
Accountants say mortgage lenders often make mistakes that, if left uncorrected, can lead to unpleasant correspondence with the IRS.
FILING STATUS: Most married couples will benefit from filing jointly, rather than separately, because the tax rates are lower.
But there are some major exceptions.
Filing separately might enable a couple to claim bigger deductions if one spouse has large amounts of medical bills, casualty losses or miscellaneous expenses.
Such items may be deducted only to the extent they exceed a certain percentage of adjusted gross income.
Reaching those thresholds may be easier if the deductions count against only one income instead of two, says Sidney Kess, a New York tax lawyer and certified public accountant as well as a consulting editor for CCH Inc., the big tax publisher.
The thresholds are 7.5% for medical, 2% for miscellaneous and 10% for casualty losses (after subtracting insurance reimbursements and $100).
But filing a separate return also has some drawbacks.
When in doubt, figure your taxes both ways.
UPPER-INCOME CHANGES: New rates of 36% and 39.6% are retroactive to Jan. 1, 1993.
The new 36% rate hits singles with taxable income of $115,000, a head of household with $127,500, a married couple filing jointly with $140,000, and a married person filing separately with $70,000.
The 39.6% rate applies to anyone with taxable income over $250,000, except for someone married and filing a separate return; there, the threshold is $125,000.
The new law allows taxpayers who owe more because of these two new rates to defer part of their 1993 taxes through 1996, but don't assume this offer applies to your entire 1993 tax bill.
The new law allows you to defer only two-thirds of the increase in taxes caused by the higher new rates.
To calculate the deferral, use new Form 8841.
Alas, this means going through the mind-numbing exercise of figuring out the alternative minimum tax, a complex provision designed to make sure everyone pays taxes.
"Some people may be able to defer much less than they think," warns Rick J. Taylor, senior tax manager at KPMG Peat Marwick in Washington.
OTHER CHANGES: As many as three million self-employed workers will benefit from a provision restoring a deduction of 25% of their health-insurance premiums.
Premiums paid for the taxpayer, spouse and dependents all count.
The new law includes premiums paid from mid-1992 through the end of 1993.
Thus, consider filing an amended 1992 return if you qualify.
Many taxpayers who get educational assistance from their employers stand to benefit from a provision restoring the ability to exclude from their income as much as $5,250 of such aid.
That also is retroactive to mid-1992, allowing many people to file amended 1992 returns.
The law greatly encourages many people to donate stocks, bonds, art, real estate and other property that has risen in value to their favorite charity.
That's because the new law allows taxpayers to deduct a gift's full market value, not just cost or other basis, without having to worry about that item triggering the alternative minimum tax.
This provision is retroactive to mid-1992 for gifts of "tangible personal property," such as art and collectibles.
Museums and art galleries say this change already has produced a torrent of new gifts.
Many married couples may be able to use an easier tax form.
About 2.5 million couples with taxable incomes under $50,000 and with no dependents may use Form 1040EZ.
In the past, only singles could use it.
MUTUAL-FUND INVESTING: It's easy for mutual-fund investors to make big mistakes that lead to overpayment of taxes.
Suppose you invested $2,000 in a mutual fund several years ago and told the fund to reinvest all your dividends, which totaled $500.
Last year, you sold all your shares for $5,000.
How much of a capital gain should you report?
Many people may assume they have a $3,000 capital gain ($5,000 minus $2,000).
But the right answer is $2,500 ($5,000 minus the $2,000 investment and the $500 in dividends received and previously taxed).
Figuring capital gains and losses can also be tricky.
The IRS allows several different methods.
For many people, the easiest may be the "average basis" method, based on the average cost of all shares purchased.
Many funds now provide this information to holders.
But that method may not be as advantageous as the "specific share identification" method, in which investors identify which shares they sold, typically those at the highest cost, and reduce their tax bite.
The IRS, however, says that in order to pick this method, you must have specified which shares you sold in writing to your fund or broker at the time you sold them, and you should get back a confirmation of this.
Many funds say they aren't equipped to do this.
The other method is known as "first-in, first-out," or FIFO, which simply means assuming that the shares sold were the first ones you purchased.
During rising stock and bond markets, this method often leads to the highest tax tab.
But it can be advantageous for investors in down markets.
WHEN TO HIRE A PRO: Don't even try doing your own taxes if you are subject to the alternative minimum tax, accountants warn.
It's not worth it in time or aggravation.
Here are a few other areas where it may be wise to spend a little extra money to get expert advice:
-- Bond sales.
What may look like a simple capital gain may actually be ordinary income, or part capital gain and part ordinary income.
The rules are especially complex for "original-issue discount bonds," including zero-coupon bonds.
Also, the new tax law includes complex changes affecting "market discount" municipal bonds, those purchased in the secondary market at a discount from face value.
That rule applies only to market-discount bonds purchased after April 30, 1993.
-- Investors with extensive "passive" income, such as rental income.
Real-estate income can also be extremely tricky.
If you need help, don't feel bad.
About half of the 114.9 million individual tax returns the IRS received last year were done by paid preparers.
MICROPROSE Inc., Alameda, Calif., said it registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission to offer two million common shares at as much as $8 a share.
Managers of the offering will be Robertson, Stephens & Co. and Piper Jaffray Inc.
