After years of opposing proposals to let banks operate nationwide branch networks, Kenneth Guenther, a feisty representative of community banks, is resigned to seeing Congress approve such a plan this year.
"The world has changed" since 1991, when a nationwide banking bill failed in Congress, explains Mr. Guenther, the executive vice president of the Independent Bankers Association of America.
Then, a combination of insurance agents, consumer groups and many small-town bankers, all fearing a concentration of financial power, helped stall nationwide banking.
Three years later, they don't seem to have as much clout.
Earlier this week, the Senate Banking Committee unanimously cleared a nationwide banking bill.
Senators from Texas, Connecticut and Massachusetts -- states that were devastated in the last recession by bank failures and reduced lending -- said that a stronger, more geographically diverse banking system could have better withstood the collapse of local real-estate markets and softened the impact of the credit crunch.
One of these senators, Christopher Dodd (D., Conn.), removed a perennial obstacle to nationwide banking earlier this month.
He announced that he no longer would insist that any plan to let banks set up nationwide branch networks also restrict their ability to sell insurance.
"Once Dodd dropped his insurance amendment, this thing just came on us like a truck," said Deepak Bhargava, the legislative director of the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now.
Major banks had opposed giving up insurance sales as the price of winning nationwide banking.
Many states already have voted to allow out-of-state and foreign banks to enter their markets; in fact, only 14 states still limit entry into their markets.
But the 1927 McFadden Act requires that banks in different states be operated separately, rather than as part of a coherent branch network.
Bankers now are more confident than ever that Congress finally will pass a law that removes the remaining restrictions on their ability to form unified branch networks across state lines.
Earlier this month, a key panel of the House Banking Committee unanimously passed an interstate banking plan that is very similar to the Senate Banking Committee bill.
The differences between the two bills are largely technical and will be easy to resolve, says Edward Yingling, chief lobbyist for the American Bankers Association.
Passage of the plan would transform the American banking industry.
Several large banks would span the country with branches in major cities.
BankAmerica Corp. and NationsBank Corp. are among those that have been working for years to lay the foundation for such a move.
Since the bills require banks to move into new states through acquisition -- a provision designed to appeal to small bankers by enhancing the value of their franchises -- full interstate banking would spur a wave of acquisitions.
"We expect that a lot of well-capitalized organizations will begin to notice the benefits of consolidation, resulting in a higher level of merger and acquisition activity," said a recent analysis by First Boston Corp.
The firm expects the prices of attractive merger candidates to continue to rise.
NationsBank, which has led an extensive lobbying crusade for interstate banking, has emphasized the economies of allowing banks to consolidate units that currently must operate separately in each state.
The Charlotte, N.C., banking company says it could save $50 million a year simply by eliminating administrative overlap and regulatory duplication.
But Edward Furash, the managing director of the Washington consulting firm of Furash & Co., says the biggest benefit for banks may come from the ability to provide a full range of banking, investment and business services in metropolitan markets that cross state lines.
"The revenue-increasing opportunities have been underestimated," he says.
But he anticipates that winning customers through interstate networks won't always be easy.
Large banks will have to compete both with local banks that have long traditions of personal service and stronger links to local business and with boutique banks that focus on small lucrative markets, such as trust services.
Banks with extensive regional or national branch networks "are going to face the problem of `how can I be big and act small?'" he says.
The next test for the House bill is the full House Banking Committee, which plans to consider it on March 9.
Consumer groups hope that the committee will add some consumer protections.
The Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now, the Consumer Federation of America and the American Association of Retired Persons are talking about trying to add provisions that require banks to provide low-cost, basic banking services for poor people and to cash welfare, Social Security and other checks issued by the government.
"The American Bankers Association has been promoting this line that any amendments will be bill-killers," says Mr. Bhargava.
But even he says that the chances of getting such amendments into the bill are only about 40%.
