Ziff Communications Co.'s computer-publishing unit, Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., plans to introduce an on-line information service targeted toward avid computer users.
The latest entry into the crowded information marketplace, carrying the working name Interchange Online Network, is expected to be announced today.
It will offer the usual on-line fare -- electronic mail, discussion groups, games and access to news and periodicals.
But it also will provide specialized articles gleaned from Ziff's computer-oriented magazines, including PC Magazine and MacUser, as well as from other special-interest publishers with which Ziff expects to collaborate.
"This is the reinvention of a market from a broadcast medium to networks of tightly affiliated, special-interest services," said Michael Kolowich, who heads Ziff Davis Interactive, the Cambridge, Mass., unit that will run the new service.
The unit also operates ZiffNet, another on-line service that offers Ziff's publications as plain text.
By contrast, the new Interchange network includes much more visually oriented material that uses "plaques" and "buttons."
It will provide considerable versatility, permitting users, for instance, to locate similar articles and information from a wide variety of sources and databases, and to call them up in a package.
Or users can "subscribe" to particular features from the various magazines and view them later without incurring additional hourly on-line charges.
Moreover, the package will be able to perform several tasks at once while organizing information graphically.
"The big transition here is from the on-line world as a text database to the on-line world as rich collections of multimedia documents," said Mr. Kolowich.
Currently, many popular on-line services can perform only one function at a time.
Interchange is the latest entry in an increasingly crowded marketplace.
Ziff's archrival computer publisher, International Data Group, plans to roll out its own computer-specialized, on-line service this summer.
Prodigy Services Co., a partnership between International Business Machines Corp. and Sears, Roebuck & Co., claims two million members, while H&R Block Co.'s CompuService Information Services Inc., the oldest on-line service, reports almost 1.7 million members.
And America Online Inc. says it recently surpassed 550,000 subscribers, more than doubling its base during the past year.
Mr. Kolowich said Ziff plans to spend tens of millions of dollars in starting up the new venture, and aims to test it with 30,000 users initially, starting in February.
He said it will be priced at $10 to $15 a month, with hourly usage fees lower than ZiffNet's $12.80-an-hour charge for slower access speeds.
He declined to discuss the company's subscriber target for the new service, though analysts say they would expect the figure to reach around 200,000 by the end of the first year of service.
"The market is growing really rapidly," said Link Resources analyst Steve Sieck, who estimates the market will grow by more than a million users a year.
"It's no wonder a lot of people are getting into it."
Interchange presents particular competitive pressure for CompuServe, which carries ZiffNet and which has drawn computer fanatics for 15 years.
"CompuServe can't drop ZiffNet," said analyst Gary Arlen of Arlen Communications.
The new service, he said, gives Ziff "a way to stay where they are and still siphon off some of CompuServe's best customers."
Barry Berkov, executive vice president of information services for CompuServe, said he isn't worried about the new competition.
"Ultimately, it's going to expand the marketplace," he said.
Several industry officials said customers will subscribe to more than one service in the fast-growing on-line industry.
Ziff also plans to advertise on the new service, testing feedback the first few months.
Its magazine portfolio ran more than $700 million in advertising in 1993, and officials expect to garner ad revenue on Interchange.
Mary Modahl, an analyst for Forrester Research Inc., said that "the potential for advertising on-line is large" when it is aimed at special-interest markets.
The company doesn't see the service cutting into print-magazine sales.
Mr. Kolowich said electronic and print are "companion media . . . feeding off each other."
