Federal regulators are raising another issue for franchise marketers to worry about.
They are turning a critical eye to franchise fees that are adjusted according to the amount of business franchisees are expected to handle.
For the first time, the Federal Trade Commission has maintained in an enforcement action that a franchiser charging such adjustable fees was implicitly making a formal claim about franchisee earnings.
Such claims are subject to substantiation under federal disclosure rules.
To avoid running afoul of the FTC, franchisers that link fees to promised revenue now may have to disclose much more information to prospective franchisees, says Mark Forseth, a Dallas franchising lawyer.
If they wish to avoid disclosures, he adds, these franchisers may have to stop basing fees on promised revenue.
The FTC action also could have broader significance because growing numbers of franchisers are making claims to prospective franchisees about how much money they can earn.
The case suggests that the FTC plans to monitor these claims carefully.
The adjustable-fees issue was raised last month in federal court in Chicago, when the FTC filed a lawsuit against Coverall North America Inc., a San Diego franchiser of a janitorial service.
Last week, the FTC said Coverall has agreed to settle the action by paying a $100,000 civil penalty.
As a franchiser, Coverall lines up customers, such as commercial buildings, for long-term cleaning services.
Coverall franchisees, who service the customers, pay initial franchise fees based on the gross yearly income that the accounts are supposed to provide.
According to the FTC, for example, Coverall promised $12,000 a year in revenue for franchisees who paid $6,200, $14,000 in revenue for franchisees who invested $7,000, and so forth.
The FTC charged that Coverall had failed to provide required documentation and "failed to state a reasonable basis for such claims at the times they were made."
The proposed settlement, which the court is expected to approve Friday, doesn't constitute any admission of a law violation by Coverall.
But the company would be prohibited from "engaging in any future violations" of franchise-disclosure rules, the FTC says.
In San Diego, Alex Roudi, president of Coverall, says the company agreed to the settlement to avoid the costs of fighting the FTC.
He says the company has already changed its documents for prospective franchisees -- to disclose, among other things, that some franchisees fail to achieve the promised levels of business.
One reason, he explains, is that some customers, dissatisfied with initial service, don't stay a full year.
Nobody seems to know exactly how many franchisers link their fees to promised levels of business.
But the practice appears to be common in certain fields, such as janitorial services.
Mr. Roudi says he expects the FTC to treat the Coverall case as a precedent for dealing with at least 15 other janitorial-service franchisers with similar fee schedules.
Efforts to enforce disclose rules are aimed at increasing franchisee protection.
Andrew C. Selden, a franchising lawyer in Minneapolis, says the FTC stance on adjustable fees "is good for investors because it reinforces the integrity of the idea of presale disclosure."
But franchisers' attorneys see the FTC's move as needless meddling into the contractual relationship between franchiser and franchisee.
David J. Kaufmann, a New York attorney for franchisers, says, "the earnings-claim rule exists to block phony promises of future revenues, not to bar legitimate contractual obligations to allocate business revenues to franchisees."
Controversy over disclosure is just one sign of growing criticism of janitorial-services franchisers.
Critics say many of these franchisers lure franchisees with low fees and promises of specific income, but base projected income on contracts that can be canceled on 30 days' notice.
Moreover, critics say some franchisers bid too low for business to attract customers; then the hapless franchisees are stuck trying to turn a profit on the low bids.
As critics see it, some franchisers don't care if the franchisees fail because the same businesses can be resold to other franchisees.
Susan P. Kezios, president of the American Franchisee Association, an advocacy group based in Chicago, says she has learned of those problems at several janitorial chains.
Meanwhile, the FTC, which has been criticized as slow to police franchising generally, says it has been intensifying its effort.
It is focusing part of this effort on claims that franchisers are increasingly making about the revenue or earnings that franchisees can expect.
Five years ago, fewer than 10% of franchisers made any formal claims, but about 20% do so now, says Mr. Selden, whose clients include both franchisers and franchisees.
"The first thing we look at in any investigation is whether earnings claims are being made, either written or oral," says Eileen Harrington, associate director for marketing practices at the FTC.
"Earnings information is most important to investors.
If it's false, it creates the largest potential for economic injury and ruin."
Under current law, franchisers needn't make any earnings claims, but any voluntary claims need supporting documentation to show how numbers were determined and how existing franchisees have fared.
Franchisers are generally reluctant to put much in writing about franchisee earnings, for fear of being sued later if franchisees earn less than promised.
Critics of franchisers say this fear hasn't stopped many franchise marketers from whispering undocumented claims.
