Procter & Gamble Co. gave up on its unprofitable Clarion cosmetics brand and announced plans to eliminate it.
The move marks the demise of a mass-marketed brand that has been floundering for most of its seven-year existence because of its owners' difficulties finding a consumer base.
"Clarion was originally aimed at an older consumer with sensitive skin.
But it never reached that market and has gone through half a dozen positionings," said Robert Hiatt, chief executive officer of rival Maybelline Inc.
Clarion has annual U.S. sales of about $70 million, or less than 10% of P&G's domestic cosmetics sales.
Clarion is the latest P&G brand to be pulled from stores, and the move is part of a trend in the food and consumer goods industries to slash costs by cutting poorly performing products.
P&G gained Clarion as part of its 1989 acquisition of Noxell Corp., which also included the Cover Girl cosmetics brand.
Noxell introduced Clarion in late 1986 as a product for mature women with sensitive skin.
It had wide distribution but sales were disappointing and subsequent attempts to reposition it didn't boost sales sufficiently, according to analysts.
"By the time P&G bought Clarion, it was already a somewhat troubled product line," said Bonita Austin, an analyst with Lehman Brothers Inc.
Clarion struggled for a few years as P&G focused on Cover Girl, which is geared toward younger women, and on Max Factor International, which it acquired from Revlon in 1991.
Earlier this year, P&G launched a new advertising campaign for Clarion, positioning it as a product for older women "with changing skin needs."
In that niche, it competed with Maybelline's year-old Revitalizing line, which also targets women in their 30s and up with special skin needs.
In September, Maybelline told retailers it would add to the Revitalizing lineup and asked for additional shelf space, which may have cut into Clarion's availability.
According to a P&G spokeswoman, the new Clarion campaign "stabilized the brand, but it still would have taken us a significant amount of time to grow the brand to a level we found satisfactory."
