Over the next few months most publicly held American companies will perform, as they do every spring, one of the least useful rituals of U.S. business life -- the annual shareholders meeting.
There are, of course, decisions shareholders need to make and, after reading a company's proxy statement, they typically make them by signing proxy cards.
But a distinction needs to be made at the outset: Voting by proxy -- a necessity in every public company -- is very different from the annual meeting of shareholders, which has, in most cases, become a monumental waste of time and money.
There was a time when it made sense to have an actual meeting of all the shareholders of a company once a year.
In the 19th century, the relatively few individuals who constituted most companies' shareholders usually lived near the company's offices or factory.
In those days, the annual meeting provided an opportunity for individual shareholders to exchange views about the business and reach a collective judgment about the company's performance, before voting on the election of directors and other significant company matters.
By the turn of the century, two developments -- the rise of corporations whose shareholders were scattered across the country, and the spread of modern communications -- were starting to undermine the usefulness of the annual shareholders meeting.
By definition, a national corporation couldn't ever hope to gather all its owners under one roof.
Even if all the shareholders could be brought together, a meeting of several hundred, or several thousand people, wasn't a very practical device for getting things done.
Nor did a company really need to gather all its shareholders together to communicate with them, since they could be informed through mailings and the annual report.
The Securities and Exchange Commission also helped to decrease meetings' importance.
Securities laws do not permit the disclosure of key developments to just the few shareholders who attend an annual meeting; disclosure must be made to the world at large.
Disclosure laws also mandate that companies send their annual reports and proxy statements to all shareholders, whether or not they attend the annual meeting.
As a result, there is really no need for a shareholder to attend.
More recent changes have made shareholders meetings almost entirely irrelevant.
First, shareholders are now scattered not just across the country but around the globe.
And, second, more of the stock of public companies is held by pension funds, mutual funds, banks and other institutions.
Big institutional investors that want to hear about what a company is doing can simply pick up the phone and ask.
There is no requirement that they wait for an annual meeting, which, in any event, hardly provides a setting conducive to a serious discussion of a company's prospects or management.
Furthermore, most important corporate actions are now reported virtually instantaneously on financial wire services, business-oriented cable television channels and the daily business press.
They are then analyzed in brokerage firm reports, newsletters, business publications, the trade press, and the like.
Yet the annual meetings drone on, thanks to stock exchange regulations that require companies to hold them.
These meaningless meetings have come to resemble a play in four acts, with the actors playing carefully scripted roles:
Act One.
The chief executive gives a speech telling those present little they don't already know if they've read the company's annual report, proxy statement and other communiques.
Act Two.
Directors are re-elected and auditors reappointed in uncontested elections on the basis of proxies voted and mailed in by the shareholders, the vast majority of whom don't bother to attend the annual meeting.
The results are known in advance and nothing that happens at tbe meeting can easily change the outcome.
Act Three.
The CEO demonstrates his or her ability to memorize briefing books prepared by company staffers so that whatever questions are asked at the meeting can be answered.
Often, the questions asked by shareholders are either irrelevant or not very profound.
Act Four.
If shareholder proposals are on the agenda, the positions for and against are set out in the proxy statement.
Nevertheless, much time is spent repeating the pros and cons.
Staging these corporate Kabuki plays isn't cheap.
Companies frequently spend thousands of dollars to rent hotel ballrooms; more thousands to provide security, transportation and communications; more thousands for lawyers, accountants and p.r. people; and still more thousands for coffee, donuts and "goodie bags."
For some companies, these costs can run into seven figures.
Ultimately, the shareholders pay for it all.
The greatest cost by far of the annual meeting, however, is in the time typically consumed by the CEO and senior management in preparing for it.
Days and days are used up in planning, in rehearsals, in preparing lists of possible questions and answers, in drafting speeches, and in arranging logistics.
All this is time not spent in thinking about the business, solving its problems and addressing its future.
Who goes to these meetings?
Analysts and the business press attend only out of a sense of duty; sophisticated shareholders don't go at all.
The audience is likely to be company employees and retirees looking to fill an otherwise quiet afternoon.
At some annual meetings, the audience is made up almost exclusively of corporate executives, lawyers, p.r. people, auditors and the like.
In effect, the stagehands have become the audience.
Two defenses are commonly made for shareholders meetings.
One is that they enable ordinary shareholders to ask questions and see the CEO perform spontaneously in public.
But a CEO's performance rarely discloses anything very meaningful about his management skills, intelligence or effectiveness.
There are better alternatives for shareholders who want to have their questions answered.
Some companies have periodic regional shareholder forums; a few have ombudsmen to respond to shareholder complaints; and virtually all have shareholder relations departments to respond to letters and other inquiries.
The second and more substantial defense of the annual meeting is that for the company in trouble or facing critical decisions, such as a merger, it is a crucial piece of corporate democracy.
This defense applies, however, to only a small fraction of the 12,000 or so public companies in the U.S.
It seems odd to require all public companies to go through an annual meeting when it may be critical for only a few.
What is to be done?
Two possibilities come to mind:
-- Treat the annual meeting as the empty ritual it has become, and get it over with as quickly and inexpensively as possible.
There is, after all, no legal requirement that the CEO give a speech or answer questions -- or even that he attend.
Companies could call their meetings to order, and quickly go through the required legal mumbo-jumbo.
Then everyone could go home.
-- Change the stock exchange rules so the typical annual meeting agenda could be voted on by mail.
The proxy card could even give shareholders the opportunity to vote on whether to bother with an annual meeting.
Only if some relatively significant minority of shareholders -- say 10% or 20% -- votes to have a meeting, or if a shareholders vote were needed for something other than the typical agenda, would a meeting be called.
Otherwise, the shareholder meeting could be relegated to the history books.
Mr. Lochner is a senior vice president of Time Warner Inc. and a former SEC commissioner.
Mr. Koppes is general counsel of the California Public Employees Retirement System.
