BARGAIN-BASEMENT air fares are appearing with fewer strings attached.
Untangling a several-year buildup of restrictions on super-saver fares, a few major airlines are dropping some of the most irritating: Saturday-night stayovers, lengthy advance-purchase periods and nonrefundable tickets.
"This is the best news the business-travel market has had in a long time," says James Cammisa Jr., who publishes Travel Industry Indicators, a Miami-based newsletter.
"Once you begin to see an unraveling of fare restrictions, it just continues."
The trend began in February with Southwest Airlines' cheapest tickets, called Fun Fares.
The no-frills carrier reduced a 21-day advance-purchase requirement to 14 days and made the tickets refundable.
It also eliminated the dreaded Saturday stayover.
Within days, United Airlines, a UAL unit, dropped similar restrictions in markets where it competes with Southwest, primarily in Western cities.
Other major airlines are expected to join in.
But so far, says Keith Taylor, Southwest's director of revenue management, "it appears competitors have been somewhat reluctant to follow."
Mr. Taylor wouldn't give specifics on passengers' reaction, but he says "the numbers I have seen have been very encouraging."
USAir Group last month launched a similar program.
It advertises the new low fares, offered in many East Coast cities, as having "No Strings Attached."
Alaska Airlines also will refund tickets.
In some respects, the airlines are simply shifting hassles from passengers to travel agents.
"Refundable tickets are going to make a lot more work for us," says Scott Pinheiro, a vice president of Santa Cruz Travel in California, noting that he expects a flurry of late changes and cancellations.
"But if it drives people in the door, it's got to be beneficial."
TRAVEL MARKETERS are becoming campus recruiters -- trying to nab student fliers and even their parents.
Worldtek Travel, based in New Haven, Conn., started the National Collegiate Travel Club in January.
For $50 a year, the club offers college students and their parents discount coupons for last-minute American Airlines flights and car rentals.
After his daughter enrolled at Vanderbilt University recently, Topper Luciani, Worldtek's chairman, discovered the vast transportation demand created by going away to college: homesick freshmen who need a weekend respite, parents who want to pop in for a recital or play, students who must attend funerals or visit ill relatives back home.
"This is a market that travel agents haven't been serving well," says Shelly Spiegel, co-president of Campus Connections, a Cherry Hill, N.J., travel service that sorts through computer reservations systems to help students find little-known youth fares.
One example: a $118 roundtrip ticket between Atlanta and Philadelphia.
Some airlines are upgrading their deals.
The three-year-old Student Privileges program offered by American Express and Continental Airlines this year began allowing students to bring a companion on discounted flights.
Both companies view the program as a way to get a first crack at young consumers.
"We get a very good targeted list for our frequent-flier programs, people who haven't established loyalty yet," says Earl Quenzel, Continental's staff vice president, marketing programs.
And with such restrictions as 14-day advance-purchasing, he adds, "We are pushing students into seats that we are confident would otherwise have gone empty."
AN UNUSUAL TRAVEL hybrid proves more powerful than a speeding locomotive.
A joint program from Amtrak and United Airlines allows passengers to take the first leg of a journey by train, then fly back -- or vice versa.
The trip typically is cheaper than flying both ways.
An air/rail trip between Chicago and San Francisco, for example, costs $488 during the peak summer season, compared with United's lowest roundtrip fare of $569.
Passengers can tailor their itinerary to include several-day stopovers.
Begun three years ago, Amtrak's Air-Rail Travel Plan has grown faster than conventional modes of transportation, with double-digit passenger increases in 1992 and 1993 and a projected 10% rise this year.
"It's taken off with relatively little advertising and promotion," says Frank Laurie, a national account manager for United.
The most popular routes are from the Midwest to the West, but nearly one-third of the 22,660 passengers last year traveled from coast to coast.
The typical trip is 10 to 12 days.
About three-quarters of people pay extra for sleeping accommodations on the train, and most take a rail trip first, then fly back.
For a two-week vacation last fall, Kay Haley, a semiretired office administrator, flew United from Dallas to Seattle.
She then traveled by Amtrak throughout the Western U.S., riding down the coast to Oakland, then to Reno, Nev., then to Denver and on home.
"It's the first time I've been on a train in 40 years," she says.
"I saw a lot of the country I've always flown over."
TO PROMOTE ITS NEW lowfare Peanuts Flights in Chicago, Continental Airlines rounded up Chicago-area residents with the surname Nutt.
Earlier this month, the 30-odd Nutts cut a 25-foot ceremonial ribbon made of peanuts. . . .
Nearly 51,000 fliers were bumped by U.S. airlines last year.
That works out to about 1.13 bumpees per 10,000 passengers, slightly higher than the 1.03 in 1992, reports the Transportation Department.
With a few exceptions, a bumped flier is entitled to collect up to $400 if the airline doesn't arrange alternate transportation to the destination within an hour of the original arrival time.
