Concerns about fraud are surfacing in another major Small Business Administration loan program.
Federal criminal investigators have begun sifting through several dozen suspicious disaster-loan applications arising out of a string of disasters, ranging from riots to earthquakes, that have hit the Los Angeles area, according to people familiar with the probes.
Some of the suspect loan packages have already been approved and several million dollars disbursed, these people say.
One businessman was criminally charged earlier this month.
Though the probe is focusing on the Los Angeles area, the potential vulnerabilities to fraud of the disaster-loan are national, some SBA officials say.
That is because the agency has traditionally done only limited checking of loan applications.
For instance, the agency doesn't cross-check with the Internal Revenue Service concerning the accuracy of the tax returns filed with a disaster-loan application.
One major area of inquiry in the present investigation is the possible use of bogus tax returns, SBA officials say.
In that sense, the disaster-loan program is open to the same kind of fraud problem that has hit the SBA's huge small-business loan program in recent years.
As previously reported, the business-loan program, which disbursed about $6.4 billion nationally in fiscal 1993, has seen a wave of bogus applications in recent years, which has prompted continuing criminal probes.
Many of these business-loan applications contained tax returns that greatly overstated the applicant's income, according to people familiar with the matter.
These suspect applications were often prepared by so-called "packagers," independent consultants who specialize in putting together SBA loan applications.
Computer software aided the suspected fraud by making it easy to prepare different versions of a firm's tax returns, investigators say.
Packagers are also involved in some of the suspect disaster-aid loan applications, SBA officials say.
The recent disaster-loan criminal complaint allegedly involves both a loan preparer and false tax returns.
The U.S. Attorney's office filed a criminal complaint in federal court here earlier this month charging Siamak Kohanoff with attempting to defraud the SBA out of $1.5 million on an application for two disaster loans.
Among other things, the complaint charges that Mr. Kohanoff filed financial documents with the SBA that showed the income from his gas station and market was $7 million a year when it actually was less than $50,000 a year.
According to an affidavit filed by SBA special agent Teresa L. Price in connection with the criminal complaint, the SBA received an anonymous telephone tip from someone who claimed to have overheard Mr. Kohanoff "bragging" about using false tax returns to apply for SBA disaster assistance.
Mr. Kohanoff also allegedly told of having a loan-application preparer who, for a fee, would help prepare bogus documentation for other business owners, according to Ms. Price's affidavit.
Brian Hennigan, Mr. Kohanoff's attorney, declined to comment on the charges.
Investigators say Los Angeles has become a focal point of concerns over possible disaster-loan fraud in part because the area has had so many disasters.
The 1992 riots left hundreds of businesses damaged or destroyed.
More recently, brush fires swept through large parts of Los Angeles followed by rain-induced mudslides.
These events generated thousands of applications for disaster relief.
Then in January, came the Los Angeles earthquake, which is shaping up as the costliest natural disaster in U.S. history.
In the eight weeks since the quake, SBA officials say they have received over 100,000 applications for disaster assistancesome 20,000 of them from businesses.
(The agency also handles disaster loans to individuals.)
That total is over five times the numbers of applications received stemming from any previous natural disaster and thousands of new quake-related applications are pouring in daily, says Bernard Kulik, the SBA's assistant administrator for disaster assistance.
"We are overwhelmed," he says.
Concern about potential fraud after the quake was so great that several government agencies -- including the SBA, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the U.S. Attorney's office -- formed a fraud task force.
Mr. Kohanoff's alleged fraud was one of the task force's first cases.
However, SBA investigators have barely begun investigating possible quake-related fraud.
They are still getting large numbers of suspect loan packages out of the Los Angeles riot.
Agency investigators have been asked to look at "literally dozens" of riot loans in which the borrowers have defaulted and in many cases apparently disappeared with the money, says one person familiar with the matter.
Stephen Marica, the SBA's assistant inspector general for investigations says his office has 11 different disaster-fraud investigations under way in the Los Angeles area involving prequake applications, most of them stemming from the riot.
He says the potential government loss from those cases alone is over $5 million.
And "we are looking at a significant number of other applications to see if they warrant further investigation," says Mr. Marica.
The SBA is taking steps to cut down its risk of receiving false financial information on loan applications.
In the businessloan program, the agency has begun crosschecking tax returns filed with some applications against the returns filed with the IRS.
Agency officials say that safeguard could eventually be applied to all business-loan applications.
In the disaster loan program, the SBA is giving earthquake victims the option of allowing the agency to obtain copies of tax returns directly from the IRS.
So far, more than 90% of applicants are taking that option -- though that still leaves thousands of individuals sending in their own returns, some of which could be fraudulent.
If the process of getting returns directly from the IRS works well, the SBA will consider making that the standard method of obtaining tax information in future disasters, says the agency's Mr. Kulik.
