In an appearance before the National Press Club last year, Michael Crichton announced that the American news media were probably doomed by their incompetence, which caused many a hack to look forward to the publication of the mega-author's next book.
Mr. Crichton may be a giant in modern literary circles (6 feet 9 inches tall with writing skills to rival Barbara Cartland's), but he could still be fed through the old tree chipper easily enough.
The expected book has arrived: "Disclosure" (Knopf, 397 pages, $24), but alas, a merciful mood prevails.
This has less to do with the book's literary qualities (it will be the very rare person who re-reads "Disclosure") than with Mr. Crichton's guts, which heave and growl throughout this fictional treatment of an authentic sexual harassment case, whose principles were interviewed by the author.
Having earlier unleashed dinosaurs in Jurassic Park, Mr. Crichton now may have unleashed a skunk at the PC garden party.
In an age when Catharine MacKinnon warns that all but 8% or so of American females suffer some form of harassment (the untouched elite presumably die early or spend their adulthoods in the burn unit), Mr. Crichton offers a different scenario.
Meredith Johnson, a woman executive brought in to diversify upper management at DigiCom, makes the lunge for Tom Sanders, an underling male, and former lover whose promotion she got.
After nearly succumbing to the she-beast's come-on (performed with the same subtlety seen at mating time in the monkey cage), Tom Sanders zips up, which unleashes a pre-emptive charge of sexual harassment by the scorned exec -- and much preaching on the part of the author.
In fact, "Disclosure" is not so much a novel as a long sermon with sex scenes, treachery and brief periods of suspense, most of which take place in drizzly Seattle.
Readers may note the stunning contrast between the sophisticated gizmos made and marketed by DigiCom and the somewhat crude cast of characters (with a few exceptions) who work there, which may not have been one of the author's intended subtexts.
But there is no mistaking the purposefully evangelistic nature of "Disclosure."
"The women on the production line are demanding that we clean out the pinups in the men's locker room.
They say it's offensive to them.
You ask me, I think it's bull," Larson said.
"Because women never go into the men's locker room."
"We don't need any complaints about being unresponsive on sex issues.
Get the pinups out."
"Even if the women have pinups in their locker room?"
"Just do it, Eddie."
This brief passage shows that Mr. Crichton will require his characters to take reasonable steps to accommodate current standards of hypersensitivity and unfairness and some readers may initially worry that the author isn't up to fighting the good fight.
These worries don't last long.
After the scorned boss files her vengeful charge, Mr. Crichton supplies Tom with the perfect lawyer: Louise Fernandez, who covers all the bases plus home plate.
Along with her impeccable gender and ethnic credentials, Louise detests harassers male and female.
Louise is a girl after our own heart and, of course, Meredith's scalp, as the tall blonde and her corporate protectors soon discover.
Along the way, we hear plenty of virtuous sermonettes, but perhaps the most magisterial message is delivered by Mr. Crichton himself, who is never far in the background but who leaps into the fray to discuss the steps men now take to dodge the false accusation bullet:
"Don't smile at a child on the street, unless you're with your wife.
Don't ever touch a strange child.
Don't ever be alone with someone else's child, even for a moment.
If a child invites you into his or her room, don't go unless another adult, preferably a woman, is also present.
At a party, don't let a little girl sit on your lap.
If she tries, gently press her aside.
If you ever have occasion to see a naked girl or boy, look quickly away.
Better yet, leave.
"And it was prudent to be careful around your own children, too, because if your marriage went sour, your wife might accuse you."
If these words were delivered before a stadium audience, tens of thousands would come forward to touch the hem of Mr. Crichton's robe.
The author has, reports say, been heavily compensated for "Disclosure" -- $3.5 million or so -- which did not compel him to end on a happy note, though he does put the she-beast out to pasture.
Louise Fernandez sums up the larger predicament:
"A harassment claim is a weapon, Bob, and there are no good defenses against it.
Anybody can use the weapon -- and lots of people have.
It's going to continue for a while, I think."
Yet Mr. Crichton has done his part to fight the madness, proving once again that every so often, a tall white guy does something right, at least if you pay him enough.
Mr. Shiflett is deputy editorial editor of the Rocky Mountain News.
