Continental Cablevision Inc. and Performance Systems International Inc. today are expected to introduce the first cable service to link home computers to the Internet.
But that connection to the global computer network will carry a steep price.
Cable subscribers will have to pay a hefty $125 a month to enjoy the speedy link-up and snazzy graphics that the new Continental offering will provide.
"At that price, it isn't a mass-market" service, says Daniel Dern, author of "The Internet New User's Guide."
"Fifteen hundred bucks a year -- that's the price of car insurance!"
Nor will the new cable link be available on a massive scale anytime soon.
Continental Cablevision, the nation's third-largest cable operator, is starting the Internet offering in Cambridge, Mass., where it serves 20,000 homes.
It will expand it to other Boston suburbs later this year and hopes ultimately to make Internet access available to all of its 2.9 million cable homes in New England, the Midwest, California, and Florida.
But only one million homes in Continental's systems have home computers capable of tapping Internet services, the company says.
Nationwide, some 32 million households have PCs, while 60 million homes get cable.
Other cable companies, such as Jones Intercable Co., are testing high-speed access to the Internet.
And on-line services such as Prodigy Services Co. and H&R Block Co.'s CompuServe Information Services are working on cable delivery of their services.
Continental cable subscribers will be able to attach their personal computers to special modem boxes linked to the household cable line.
Cable "broad band" allows for far faster transfer of large amounts of data than the phone-line access most Internet users must endure.
Such higher capacity will allow homes with cable access to portions of the Internet that utilize memory-hogging video and sound, such as radio programs from Voice of America and electronic mail with a person's picture and voice.
"It would be like adding a CD-ROM to your computer.
Now you've got networked multimedia" says Martin Schoffstall, chief technical officer of Performance Systems International, a Herndon, Va., provider of Internet access.
Over time, Continental and Performance Systems International say the price of access is likely to come down.
Internet users, who search databases, take part in electronic bulletin boards and access remote computers world-wide, are often restricted to viewing the network in text format because phone lines often transmit at only 2,400 bits per second.
Continental and Performance Systems International are offering access at speeds more than 200 times faster.
Even if cable subscribers could pay cheaper rates for Internet access, some observers doubt the service will catch on because the network is so difficult to navigate.
And businesses, which make more use of the Internet than TV viewers, will have to pay even more dearly for the new linkup -- $2,000 to $2,750 a month, depending on the speed of access.
