After a tense and uncertain nine days of talks, UAL Corp. and its unions have negotiated an agreement on a proposed $5 billion buyout by employees, according to individuals familiar with the deal.
The parties are set to sign a definitive accord, perhaps in a matter of days, the individuals added.
The unions and UAL declined to comment.
Given the historical volatility of the buyout, the definitive agreement isn't a certainty until formally signed.
However, once that happens, the buyout transaction, which would create the nation's largest company majority-owned by employees, will go before the Securities and Exchange Commission.
After the agency approves the prospectus for the transaction, UAL, the parent of United Airlines, will put the matter to a shareholder vote.
Until two weeks ago, finalizing the details of December's agreement in principle had been expected to be a routine step.
But the buyout hit a snag when the company and two major unions failed to meet a March 15 deadline on the concession-for-equity transaction.
The machinists union balked at the 11th hour, claiming that United Airlines' management and noncontract employees weren't equitably contributing concessions.
The latest accord isn't substantially different from the agreement in principle, according to union negotiators.
UAL's non-contract employees, along with its machinists and pilots union members, will still exchange wage reductions and workrule concessions for a stake of at least 53% in UAL.
They also agree to form a short-flight, low-cost carrier.
The unions have valued their offer, which consists of stock and securities, at $173 a share.
UAL closed yesterday at $123.75, down $1.75, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
In the past few days, United and its machinists union have been negotiating intensely to iron out their differences.
The machinists, United's largest union, wanted United's current employees to take bigger paycuts, and to rely less on a new program that pays new hires lower wages and benefits.
Under one change in the new agreement, noncontract employees are expected to take pay reductions of about 8%, compared with a previous plan to offer about 5%, according to union sources.
That change alters the mixture of the wage concessions, but doesn't change the nonunion employees' pledge to provide $509 million in concessions in the buyout.
In the past few days, UAL Chairman Stephen M. Wolf has personally taken a hand in negotiations, trying to conclude the deal.
Union negotiators were pleased with the resolution of issues, with one noting that there was a "handshake on terms."
However, as another union official said, "Until the papers are signed, no one is taking a victory lap."
