Jacques Calvet, chairman of PSA Peugeot Citroen SA says he is confident the French auto group will be able to increase its market share to 13% in 1994 from just 12.2% last year.
Mr. Calvet said those predictions were based on his belief that the French and U.K. markets, where Peugeot Citroen is well represented, will perform better than the European average.
In addition, new models will help the group attract consumer interest, he said.
According to Mr. Calvet, the Western European car market will increase 3% in 1994 after last year's disastrous 15% crash.
Although many of Europe's main markets will remain stagnant, and Germany -- Europe's largest market -- will fall between 2% to 3%, France will rise 7% and the U.K. by 5%, Mr. Calvet predicted.
His estimates differ significantly from those of the European Automobile Manufacturers' Association, which has forecast only a 1% to 2% increase in the overall European market and which predicts that the U.K. will be the only market to show growth this year.
Peugeot Citroen, however, is virtually the only major car maker that isn't a member of the European association.
Mr. Calvet said that beyond the good fortune of having its sales heavily weighted in the markets with brighter outlooks, new models introduced by the group would play a key role in the advance.
The recently released Xantia will continue to be successful, he predicted.
Meanwhile, Citroen this year will bring out a five-door hatchback version of its ZX model.
In addition, the group will bring its Monospace van onto the market before either VW or Ford can get competing models on showroom floors, Mr. Calvet said.
Although predicting a positive year for Peugeot Citroen next year, Mr. Calvet warned that the European market as a whole is showing only the slightest upward tilt, and that it will be the end of 1994 before the industry starts seeing a more fundamental improvement.
Separately, Mr. Calvet on Wednesday urged European politicians to put increased pressure on Japanese car makers to limit their imports into the European market.
Beyond just calling for a freeze on Japanese imports, Mr. Calvet said that the Japanese ought to actually reduce their imports in 1994 because in 1993 they unfairly increased their market share of the Eurpean market despite the 15% collapse in the market.
