After four months of negotiations with 18 health-maintenance organizations, one of the nation's largest group purchasers of health insurance has secured an average 1.1% premium reduction for 920,000 public employees and family members.
The California Public Employees Retirement System (Calpers) won the one-year contracts yesterday.
The process and its result may be seen as a model for Clinton health-care reform: A large public health-care purchasing agent squeezing even low-cost providers, like HMOs, into making extra savings.
But Calpers's success may also show that an elaborate government bureaucracy isn't needed to lower health-care costs.
The reduction "shows managed competition can bring down the cost of health care," particularly in areas like California where HMOs are well-developed, said Alain C. Enthoven, a professor at Stanford University's Graduate School of Business and a Calpers advisory committee member.
"Competition works, not compulsion," he said.
Calpers said it has kept premium increases over the past three years to 6.4%, compared to the national average of 30.1%.
For the 1994-95 contract year, when the rate reduction takes effect, Calpers said its savings will be about $321 million.
While not all the contracts met its demand for a 5% rate cut, Calpers said it hopes to achieve that goal in the next several years.
Calpers -- once known as a languid and not particularly choosy buyer of health care -- has recast itself as a tiger in recent years.
In 1991, after California's budget crises, Calpers froze its contributions to health care, making its HMOs responsible for cost variations.
Last October, Calpers demanded that its 18 HMOs cut health-care premiums 5% effective Aug. 1, the start of the 1994-95 contract year.
It called the demand "modest," given California's stagnant economy.
But that demand followed two years of strict cost containment.
So Calpers's demand left some HMOs a little testy.
"They're a 900-pound gorilla, and they know it," grumbled one HMO negotiator who asked not to be identified.
"They don't have to be real sophisticated.
They know the volume they represent.
Bottom line is, they are holding most of the cards."
About a third of the HMOs doing business with Calpers offered premium reductions, said Tom Elkin, the agency's assistant executive officer.
Others -- with lower base rates or older, sicker patient populations -- asked for "modest, single-digit" premium rises, while a few argued for double-digit increases, he said.
The latter group got little sympathy.
"We're out of cash," Mr. Elkin said he told them.
"And we can't entertain increases of that magnitude.
We'd like some sign that you can, in fact, manage care."
Among the key issues, Mr. Elkin said, were the price of prescription drugs, surgeries and administrative expenses -- including profit margins and consultants' fees.
As an example, he noted, "There's a 30% difference between what one plan is paying for drugs and another."
Mr. Elkin told the HMOs this can be corrected by buying in bulk and changing vendors, then passing on the savings.
"If they'd succeeded in pushing us to the absolute wall, we'd have said no.
We're not in the business of charity.
We'd have gone without their business," said one health-care officer.
"But the ultimatum never occurred."
Mr. Elkin conceded that negotiations "can get a little lively.
If the expectation is much higher than we can pay, it gets a little tense.
On average, though, we get good cooperation."
And in the end, Calpers relented on the 5% rollback demand, as many had predicted.
Mr. Elkin said Calpers was impressed by the efforts of Kaiser Permanente, the Oakland, Calif., HMO that cares for 320,000 Calpers subscribers.
A year ago, Kaiser's northern California region considered increasing its premiums 6% for all its customers, including Calpers.
Instead, it looked hard at results of its cost-cutting programs and raised premiums an average of 2%.
Kaiser spokesman Jerry Fleming said it wasn't simply prodding by Calpers that led to Kaiser's change of heart.
"We're doing better with our cost targets than we'd budgeted for," he said.
Kaiser's most potent cost controls are simple things: lowering hospital inpatient rates, substituting outpatient surgeries when possible and aggressively keeping Kaiser members out of more expensive, non-Kaiser institutions.
"At the same time, the satisfaction of our members was going up, so we knew these savings weren't because we were skimping on care," he added.
Other HMOs said they cracked down on high diagnostic test prices charged by certain hospitals trying to offset losses on inpatient business.
HMOs said they're also trying to limit the budget havoc wrought when hospitals buy costly new psychiatric drugs.
"They're a significant piece of the total pharmaceutical cost, and the trend has been very steep," said one HMO officer, adding that his group plans more seminars on cost-effective alternative drugs.
