Do you enjoy eating pizza while you drive to work but cringe when the boss notices the pepperoni on your lapel?
Do you reach in your pocket for a pen and pull out a french fry instead?
Are you a mess at 55 miles an hour?
Worry no more: American inventors may have solved your problem.
A recent article in this newspaper about eating in the car inspired several would-be entrepreneurs to share their ideas for products.
Most of these inventions are likely to fail.
Merely obtaining a patent costs at least $5,000, and developing product prototypes and crafting manufacturing tools can easily push up the investment to $50,000.
Even for the rare inventor who succeeds in bringing a product to market, success is far from certain.
Many home inventors simply don't realize that a novel idea doesn't necessarily translate into a business opportunity, says Wendell E. Dunn, associate director of the Sol C. Snider Entrepreneurial Center at the Wharton School.
Mr. Dunn agreed to talk only if The Wall Street Journal asked inventors not to call him.
(Please don't call Mr. Dunn.)
"The biggest problem with amateur inventors is that they fall in love with their inventions," he says.
"Everyone knows love is blind."
Judge for yourself.
Picture a soft vinyl lap cover, and you've got the invention of Edwins Arthurs Spulgis, a 33-year-old former construction superintendent.
An advantage of his product -- the Original CatchMaster, he calls it -- is that it is small, soft and won't cause a problem in case of a crash.
More important, unlike a bib, it can't be easily seen by people in other vehicles.
Mr. Spulgis disdains bibs.
You're driving a $40,000 car and you're going to look over at a girl in the next car and say, `Hey, I've got a bib on.'"
He adds scornfully: "You could also cut a hole in a garbage bag and pop it over your head."
As for the Original CatchMaster, it works like a charm, at least according to Mr. Spulgis.
"I've poured really hot coffee in my lap while wearing shorts, and the vinyl kept me insulated," he says.
"You'll feel a little warm but you won't jump up and scream in traffic."
Still, the CatchMaster, which Mr. Spulgis hopes to sell for $10, takes some getting used to.
It features a trough-like spillway complete with a large plastic clip meant to hold beverages securely between a wearer's thighs.
Consumers who don't like the clip, Mr. Spulgis says, may simply remove it and use the spillway to hold french fries instead.
"There is a drawback for ladies in tight skirts," he concedes.
Mr. Spulgis estimates that he has already spent at least $15,000 developing prototypes of the CatchMaster but has yet to manufacture the product in quantity.
Nor is he certain about how his company, EAS Associates, will market the item.
He remains optimistic, though, devoting himself to the project full time.
"I've given up dating," he says.
It came to Sandy Flick after an evening shopping trip in early 1990.
She picked up a burger and fries at a fast-food drive-through window and headed for home.
But thanks to a manual transmission and a sharp turn, she ruined a new pair of pants before she even hit the street.
Less than a year later, the former flight attendant had developed a model of a tray that clips to seat belts, inspired by the design of childrens' car seats.
She crafted the first prototype from cardboard drink holders, then moved on to papier-mache.
Soon, she had a plastic version.
"I'm just a mom," she says modestly, "and moms have to be inventive."
The prototype worked beautifully, she says.
So Ms. Flick loaded her two children into her car and drove from Middletown, Calif., to Chicago -- the first leg of a 10,000-mile marketing trip.
She visited the purchasing office of nearly every major fastfood chain and invited managers out to lunch.
The lunch consisted of drive-through fare, which she coaxed her guests to eat in the car.
As they tested her tray, Ms. Flick drove around, making sharp turns and slamming on the brakes.
Although she says she doesn't encourage eating and driving, Ms. Flick adds that the Lap-Top Commuter tray will "easily fit between you and the steering wheel, unless you're real fat."
A divorce and a shortage of funds have slowed her down, but Ms. Flick vows her Larakell Tray Co., named after her two children, will begin selling the trays through fast-food restaurants and retail stores later this year.
Ms. Flick, who has yet to sign a deal with a single big customer, knows that only about 3% of new products make it.
She fervently believes hers will be one of them.
Edwins Arthurs Spulgis's opinion of bibs notwithstanding, Howard Zack thinks they are the perfect accessory for those who ingest on the interstate.
Mr. Zack, 37, crafted his Commuter CoverUp from black neoprene, a synthetic rubber.
A one-time brand manager for Procter & Gamble and a former commercial real-estate developer, Mr. Zack says his product protects wearers against scalding coffee, as well as more temperate spills.
And for the truly messy, the Commuter CoverUp has a shallow pocket at the bottom to catch really big spills.
"It will probably outlast the car you're driving," he says.
That kind of protection doesn't come cheap.
Marketed by S.A.M.I. Inc. in Tiburon, Calif.
(S.A.M.II is an acronym created from family names), the Commuter CoverUp sells for $17.95, plus shipping.
Mr. Zack concedes sales so far have been "modest."
But he remains undaunted.
People may feel funny wearing a bib in the car, he says, "but not as funny as they would with stains on their clothes."
Some car-meal entrepreneurs are aiming not at drivers but at passengers.
Gail Frankel, 40, created a meal tray that clips on car windows -- as well as stroller arms -- with kids in mind.
The idea was honed after hauling her two children through fast-food restaurants in Dallas's malls.
"I don't look over the market carefully," she says.
"I just try to think of things I would like to have myself."
Intuition has paid off for Ms. Frankel in the past.
Her Dallas company, Kel-Gar Inc., currently sells seven products.
Kel-Gar is an amalgamation of her husband's surname and her maiden name.
Also in the product line: Tubbly-Bubbly, a rubber bathtub faucet protector shaped like an elephant, and a matching bathtub mat called Tub-Rug that changes color if the water is too hot.
But the Snak-Rak, which costs about $10 and was launched last August, is off to a "good," but not great, start.
Forget clips and pockets and exotic materials.
BigBIB is a jumbo bib for adults that functions exactly like infant versions and sells for $12.
Joan C. Reed, 57, has envisioned bigBIB since the 1960s.
Back then, her job in advertising required a lot of driving, and her love for hot dogs resulted in frequent messes.
A stint as a graphic designer at a factory that made baby bibs later fueled her dream.
Ms. Reed says her company, Krissie Products Inc., in Portsmouth, R.I., sold 25,000 bigBIBS last year through specialty stores and to companies who gave the bibs to their sales forces.
The company, named after Ms. Reed's daughter, hopes to sell as many as 100,000 in 1994.
To boost sales, the company has recently begun marketing the bibs to hospitals and nursing homes and has created a version designed specifically for eating lobster.
She may have no choice.
Even the buoyant Ms. Reed concedes some adults would feel too silly to drive around in a bib.
To increase their comfort level, she recently added dark colors to her originally all-white line.
"Men like navy and green," she says.
