In response to your Dec. 16 Advertising column "Critics Cry Foul at Nike Spots With Actor": As the mother of a wonderful young man with schizophrenia, I agree with Shadrach Stanleigh of the National Stigma Clearinghouse; what is the point of Nike's ad campaign showing a sleepless, tic-ridden, sneaker-whiffing mentally ill ex-referee?
I fail to see how this ad "concept" helps sell shoes.
The ads are not funny to those of us who know the torments of sleepless nights.
"I am afraid to close my eyes," my son has told me.
"What monsters are going to be my companions?"
I lie awake at night keeping my own monsters at bay; who will watch over my only son after I, a widow, am gone?
Watching the ads, an inexpressible sorrow comes over us.
My son was stricken at age 17.
He could have been anything -- but Nike dreams are only dreams now, and he doesn't buy Nikes any more.
Jackson Heights, N.Y.
(Mrs. Villamil was chosen to be one of 50 "Faces of Hope" by President Clinton for her advocacy on behalf of people with mental illness.)
Nike is indeed stretching the envelope of advertising creativity, and doing so with the ideals of humor and ingenuity at the expense of no special interest groups.
The National Stigma Clearinghouse and other grim-faced, politically correct watchdog groups, seem intent on imposing their narrow-minded interpretations on the majority of our society.
Uptight special interest organizations that effectively bully corporate America into acquiescence serve to limit freedom of expression, and more importantly, the freedom to achieve.
Mediocrity is synonymous with the politically correct crowd.
It also seems rather clear to me why Steven Levitt, president of Marketing Evaluations, and cited in your article, was not consulted by Nike for this ad campaign.
I'm an Ivy League graduate with a family and successful business.
All of my friends, on the political right and left, know Dennis Hopper and thoroughly enjoy the campaign.
Don't hamstring creative agencies like Weiden & Kennedy with abstract interpretations by joyless groups with giant chips on their politically correct shoulders.
Paso Robles, Calif.
