From the reaction to Yegor Gaidar's resignation Sunday, it's easy to believe that Russia's reform process will now evaporate into the frigid Moscow ether.
The ruble sank 3.6% Monday and reform obituaries are already appearing in Western and Russian papers.
But news reports of the death of reform in Russia are much exaggerated and overlook the thriving business activity taking place outside the confines of government.
There's no denying that Mr. Gaidar's resignation is a setback to the reform program Boris Yeltsin promised Bill Clinton last week.
Indeed, it would appear that Mr. Yeltsin is giving in to the "gradualists" who lately have been drowning out reformers like Mr. Gaidar, Finance Minister Boris Fyodorov and Privatization Minister Anatoly Chubais.
Yet the outward signs of retrogression may be misleading.
Here are a few things to bear in mind.
Mr. Gaidar is a reformer, but he is not the reform.
A brilliant economist with dubious political skills, Mr. Gaidar has advocated bold strokes to stabilize and restructure the economy but has often been stymied in his plans.
Messrs. Gaidar and Fyodorov started out on the right foot.
When prices were liberalized, privatization soared ahead, putting some 82,000 enterprises into private hands in 1992-93 alone.
But Russia's industrial dinosaurs made no attempt to adapt to the new price signals or to the increasing influx of Western goods, and they soon demanded to be fed by the state.
The central bank was given license to keep them afloat by putting the printing presses on overtime.
Now Mr. Yeltsin may have in Mr. Gaidar the sort of loyal opposition Russia's political system has lacked.
If Mr. Gaidar can use his forum in Russia's Duma to consolidate some of the democratic, reformist forces -- which have so far been unable to unite even over issues they agree on -- then he will perform a powerful role as Mr. Yeltsin's critic and conscience.
Real reform in Russia has happened more despite the government than because of it.
The state of Russia's government -- devoid of focus, full of factions -- is disheartening.
But reforming Russia's institutions -- building viable democratic structures and real political parties -- is going to take longer than a few years.
The real progress has been made outside the government's realm.
A visit to a Moscow metro station is telling.
Here tables displaying books such as "The Russian-English Foreign Trade Dictionary" and other business tomes reflect an explosion of private-sector activity not shown in the official statistics.
Above ground, Russians sporting fur coats and carting $2,000 TV sets in boxes bearing the names Sony and Panasonic are not uncommon.
Hard-currency shops, now accepting rubles and credit cards, are full.
Increasingly, average Russians are buying.
Of course, most Russians aren't rich, and the displays of even modest wealth that one sees in Moscow and St. Petersburg are less evident in the countryside.
Still, there is clearly a growing class of Russians able to afford items that were previously beyond their reach.
And not only the economy has improved.
The new political order is better than the old.
For one, it is legitimate.
Russia now has a constitution and a democratically elected Parliament that, however unpredictable, is representative.
Operating last year in something of a legal and constitutional vacuum, the president had great difficulty preventing the old Parliament from thwarting even the most obvious reforms.
To his credit, Mr. Yeltsin pushed through privatization even while giving in to pressure to keep the monetary faucet open full blast, and he has promised to keep Mr. Chubais on as privatization minister.
The makeup of the new legislature means that executive-legislative conflict and gridlock will continue in this Parliament, perhaps as viciously as in the old Supreme Soviet, dissolved last year.
The forces in the Duma will need to forge coalitions, and because so many members are newcomers, their alliances are likely to be volatile.
This will give Mr. Yeltsin, with his strong constitutional powers, an advantage over Parliament in pressing his programs, an advantage not available to him last year.
Meanwhile, the existence of a loyal opposition in the Duma, made up of Mr. Gaidar, Grigory Yavlinsky, Sergei Shakhrai and other reformers, will serve as a powerful camp of pro-reform critics, provided they can find some way to unite.
Though many in the West have complained that the new constitution grants the president too much power, this Gaullist model is just what Russia needs right now.
Boris Yeltsin's strength lies not so much in his ability to create a new economic order (that will largely be left to his successors) but in his power to destroy the noxious remnants of the old system.
Pristine Western democrats may find him heavy-handed, but a leader with a softer touch wouldn't last a nanosecond in the Kremlin.
His job now is to pave the way for the already emerging post-Yeltsin era and the new class of politicians.
Alexander Vladimirov, a retired major general who has advocated reform in the military for more than a decade says: "Russia is a poor and crazy country, but put in context there has been progress."
Attached to his lapel, Gen. Vladimirov wears a small pin given to him by former U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, bearing the words "there's hope."
"We have only one real enemy now and that is our psychology," he says.
"Only Yeltsin has the power to get rid of the old players and make reform a reality."
The general is right, though few are listening.
Mr. Gaidar's departure will not, by any means, be the end of reform.
Mr. Yeltsin, for all his mistakes, has unleashed a process that will continue long after he, and Mr. Gaidar, have left the Kremlin.
Ms. Raphael is editorial features editor of The Wall Street Journal Europe.
