Speculation about Germany's skyrocketing money-supply wiped out any possible benefits from yesterday's easing in German money-market rates, sending the dollar skidding against the mark.
The German central bank allocated its 14-day security-repurchase agreements, or repos, at 5.80% -- a shaving of eight basis points from the week before.
Repos are the Bundesbank's main instrument for influencing money markets.
But a Bundesbank statement preceding the rate cut quashed any optimism that the pace of German rate cuts will quicken.
Bank officials said that Germany's M3 money-supply growth for February probably would come in above 15%.
Rumors circulated in the market that the number, due for release later this week, might show growth of almost twice that.
The M3 money-supply growth -- essentially, the total of cash in circulation and short-term accounts -- is the Bundesbank's favorite indicator of inflationary pressures.
January's M3 expansion shocked markets earlier this month, when it came in at 21.2%, sharply higher than the German central bank's corridor of 4%-6% growth.
The dollar also retreated against sterling as U.K. inflation figures that were above expectations quashed expectations of a Bank of England rate-cut this week.
However, in an otherwise bleak landscape for the dollar, the U.S. currency did manage a small climb against the yen, which has suffered in the escalating war of words over North Korea's bid for a nuclear program.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at an intraday low of 1.6802 marks, down from 1.6885 marks late Tuesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 106.25 yen, up from 106 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4984, up from $1.4880.
About noon Thursday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 106.38 yen and at 1.6817 marks.
The yen weakened on news that South Korea put its 650,000 troops on special alert yesterday, the latest escalation of tensions on the Korean peninsula since the U.S. announced Monday it would dispatch Patriot missiles in South Korea.
And a weak yen combined with continued strength in the mark pushed the mark-yen cross rate into new territory.
The mark punched through a critical resistance point of 63 yen during midmorning New York trading; traders said that accelerated the dollar's decline against the mark.
The German currency then climbed sharply to around 63.30 yen before retreating slightly to 63.22 in late trading, still well above 62.80 yen late Tuesday.
"The mark-yen was the big trade of the day," said Paul Farrell, vice president at Chase Manhattan, adding that he expects the mark will climb toward 63.80 yen.
"The M3 rumors helped get it started," he added.
"With the Bundesbank saying 15% is optimistic, you've got to figure it will be 20% to 25% growth."
But Mr. Farrell said the Bundesbank may continue to move repo rates gradually lower, despite high money-supply growth.
He noted that the German central bank has continued to lower repo rates, despite recent news that the M3 surged 21.2% in January.
Traders said the worries about Germany's M3 overshadowed the Bundesbank repo easing yesterday as well as Tuesday's rate increase by the U.S. Federal Reserve, which pushed up short-term U.S. rates to 3.50% from 3.25%.
Another factor seen pressuring the dollar lower is a sense in the market that Europe may be the next place to invest, said Bruce Campbell, chief dealer for First Fidelity Bank Corp. in Newark, N.J.
"European economies look like they have bottomed out, and all the really good news is out of the dollar," he said, adding: "There's a sense that it can only get better in Europe."
