With all the criticism the state's trial lawyers have suffered lately, the last thing they need is a scandal.
They may get one anyway.
The State Bar of Texas is looking into loans by a group of 10 well-known East Texas attorneys to Michael Brumley, a former workers' compensation hearing officer who was convicted last month on federal fraud and money-laundering charges.
If the preliminary inquiry turns up evidence of misconduct, the state bar would begin a formal investigation that could result in reprimands or suspensions of the lawyers.
So far, there's no evidence of wrongdoing.
All 10 lawyers testified about the loans in the trial of the hearing officer, and the assistant U.S. attorney in charge of the case says the loans didn't violate federal laws.
The district attorney in Beaumont doesn't plan to file charges.
"The federal government fully investigated it and found no wrongdoing on any lawyer's part," says Jeffrey Badders, a Nacogdoches attorney who testified that he co-signed a small loan for Mr. Brumley's ailing parking-lot sweeping business.
Mr. Badders was the only one of the 10 lawyers who would comment; most didn't return phone calls.
Still, the inquiry is likely to tarnish the image of the state's trial lawyers, mainly because it involves prominent members of the plaintiffs bar -- including two past presidents of the Texas Trial Lawyers Association and a big contributor to Democratic Party candidates.
And it hands a weapon to their political enemies.
Members of the plaintiffs bar concede that the inquiry feeds the public's already jaundiced view of trial lawyers.
Beaumont lawyer Thomas Roebuck, a partner of one of the attorneys and a member of the local bar grievance committee, doesn't believe the lawyers violated any rules of professional conduct.
But he agrees the public will be hard to convince.
There's a perception "that we're not a very moral, ethical bunch," Mr. Roebuck says.
"So when something like this comes forward -- even though it has absolutely no merit -- it's like a skunk in a jury box: It's there, and you can't get the stink out."
The inquiry began after the lawyers testified they had lent money or guaranteed or arranged bank loans to Mr. Brumley, at the time a hearing officer for the Texas Industrial Accidents Board and later regional associate director of the Texas Workers' Compensation Commission, successor to the accidents board.
Mr. Brumley took more than $86,000 from John M. Cely, a Lufkin attorney with a large workers' compensation practice.
In return, prosecutors charged, Mr. Brumley provided certain favors, such as trying to direct a commission lease to a building owned by Mr. Cely and interfering with a board investigation into complaints against the attorney.
Mr. Cely pleaded guilty to wire and tax fraud last August and was sentenced to five years in prison; Mr. Brumley was convicted last month and is awaiting sentencing.
At the trial, the lawyers said they had arranged the loans out of friendship for Mr. Brumley.
The loans weren't repaid.
There wasn't any evidence that any of the attorneys -- most of whom had large workers' compensation practices -- received special treatment from Mr. Brumley, who as hearing officer had a great deal of discretion in recommending awards.
