Janet Reno, the ostensible attorney general, has had the most dramatic political fall since King Lear.
In less than a year she's gone from a Time magazine heroine to Webster Hubbell's de facto deputy.
But with President Clinton's golfing partner now departing, Ms. Reno has a chance to rebuild the reputation she had as a Florida prosecutor.
The root of her problems in Washington isn't even her fault, after all.
In hiring her though they'd never met, Mr. Clinton broke a cardinal rule of the presidency: Name someone to the sensitive attorney generalship whom you trust implicitly.
JFK had brother Bobby, Jimmy Carter chose Griffin Bell, while Ronald Reagan named William French Smith and Ed Meese.
Instead Mr. Clinton wanted a woman in the job to satisfy his pledge of "diversity."
Yet he still needed a Justice Department he could trust, so he installed his pal, Mr. Hubbell, in the number three job as his eyes and ears.
That undercut both Ms. Reno's authority inside Justice and her credibility outside it.
But with Whitewater seeping into the ship of state, Ms. Reno suddenly has a chance to reclaim her clout.
Let's look at three ways she could now send a signal that she's become more than a nominal attorney general:
-- No more Clincest.
Ms. Reno's authority has suffered because Justice has been overstuffed with Friends of Bill.
One joke has it that the department has joined MCI's Friends and Family plan, since everyone's so close.
Anne Bingaman, the antitrust chief, is married to New Mexico Sen. Jeff Bingaman and is part of Hillary Rodham Clinton's legal network.
Eleanor Acheson, head of policy, was the first lady's Wellesley classmate.
Al Gore's brother-in-law, Frank Hunger, runs the civil section.
And Sheila Foster Anthony, the lead liaison with Congress, is the sister of the late Vincent Foster and is married to former Arkansas Rep. Beryl Anthony.
No wonder Phil Heymann, an outsider, didn't feel he could make a difference as deputy attorney general and quit.
In selecting a replacement for Mr. Hubbell, Ms. Reno would reassure everyone if she chose someone from beyond the Beltway and Little Rock.
Jamie Gorelick, soon-to-be deputy attorney general, is a referral from elsewhere in the administration and won't fill that bill.
Ms. Reno needs her own "Lloyd Cutler-type," as they like to say in the White House.
-- Nominate Gary Gaertner.
Mr. Clinton says he's open to judges of all political views.
But when Rep. Dick Gephardt recommended the conservative St. Louis judge for the federal bench, liberal interests commenced a local Borking.
His nomination now lies in limbo, as the White House ducks the pressure.
Is Ms. Reno out of the judge-picking loop?
-- Stand up to John Dingell.
When Webb Hubbell was accused of overbilling his expenses by partners in the Rose Law Firm, Ms. Reno jumped to his defense.
But when career prosecutors at Justice came under assault by Democrats on Capitol Hill, she dove for the tall grass.
Mr. Dingell is on one of his periodic jihads, this time against prosecutors in the environmental crimes section.
He thinks they should be throwing more Americans in jail.
General Reno turned the dispute over to Mr. Hubbell, who was only too happy to oblige a Congressional baron (especially one vital to passing a health care bill) by letting the Dingell staff interrogate career prosecutors about their cases.
I haven't yet found a lawyer who doesn't think this is an outrage.
The Founders separated the power to prosecute from the power to legislate precisely to avoid political prosecutions.
If career prosecutors know they'll be publicly keelhauled by John Dingell for refusing to indict, they'll indict in every close call.
"Prosecutorial discretion," which is at the heart of any Justice Department, goes out the window.
Yet sources inside Justice say the department has now decided to cave on a new Dingell subpoena to turn over all internal memoranda -- even those discussing how to respond to the Dingell inquiries.
One lawyer in the office calls it a "complete breach of trust" with career attorneys who wrote the memos in confidence.
Ms. Reno will also have to decide whether to make a sacrifice of Neil Cartusciello, the ranking career lawyer in the environmental section.
Mr. Dingell wants his head, even though a report by four career attorneys at Justice exonerated him this week.
The Dingell accusations "stand as examples of how misleading or incomplete testimony" can "wrongly impugn the professional judgment and conduct" of prosecutors, the report said.
This dispute isn't about ideology, because Mr. Cartusciello is no Reaganite.
He pioneered the use of the RICO statutes in financial cases during the 1980s, notably the Princeton-Newport case.
So why won't Ms. Reno defend an able, nonpartisan career prosecutor?
At her confirmation last year, Ms. Reno snapped at one questioner, saying, "I keep politics out of what I do, Senator."
Freed from the interference of the White House Hubbell Telescope, she now has a chance to prove it.
