Last year, the yen rose sharply against the dollar after President Clinton and Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said publicly that they thought the yen should be stronger.
The Japanese currency nearly reached parity with the penny in August before weakening somewhat in the succeeding months.
Now at about 111 yen to the dollar, the Japanese unit is still 12% stronger than it was at the beginning of 1993.
And the effect, as the administration hoped, is telling: U.S. goods are now less expensive in terms of yen, and that has set off a surge in business for U.S. companies selling in Japan -- half the battle in the effort to shrink the huge trade deficit with Japan.
Sales of U.S. goods from pharmaceuticals to semiconductors are up in Japan.
In October, the currency shift allowed H.J. Heinz Co. of Pittsburgh to slash the price of a bottle of ketchup sold in Japan by 20%, to 250 yen ($2.25).
By November, the company says, its share of Japan's ketchup market leaped three percentage points from September levels, to nearly 10%.
Japanese trade data show that U.S. exports to Japan grew nearly 9% in dollar terms in the six months through last September, after falling more than 2% in the previous 12 months.
The trend continued in succeeding months, although at a slower clip: U.S. exports to Japan inched up 0.2% in October and grew 4% in November.
Now the bad news: Even though U.S. exports to Japan are up, Japan's trade surplus with the U.S. -- estimated at about $50 billion in 1993 -- is essentially as big as ever.
Indeed, U.S. Treasury officials are concerned that Tokyo lately has allowed the yen to weaken in an effort to boost Japan's exports and thus help lift the nation out of recession.
"Allowing the yen to slide is not an acceptable way out of recession for Japan," Mr. Bentsen said earlier this month.
The Treasury prefers that Japan instead cut taxes to spur its economy.
Many economists worry that the surplus with the U.S. may not decline for some time to come.
The reason, in large part, is America's undying love affair with Japanese products.
The U.S. economic recovery has sucked in billions of dollars of Japanese goods -- even though, when compared with early 1992, those products are now more expensive in dollar terms because of the currency shift.
In many cases, Japan is a major -- or exclusive -- source of goods.
Exports to the U.S. of Japanese video cameras in November, for example, surged 37%.
Partly as a result of the U.S. economy's expansion, Japan's exports to the U.S. rose 8.3% in dollar terms in November.
And because trade statistics are reported in dollars, the yen-dollar currency shift also worked to boost the overall dollar value of Japan's surplus with the U.S. -- the so-called J-curve effect.
(Notably, though, Japan's global surplus declined in November for the first time in three years, because the country's overall imports grew faster than its exports.)
So it's no surprise that U.S. trade negotiators were back in Tokyo earlier this month, pressing the Japanese to buy more.
And it's likely that the tensions will continue to rise ahead of next month's summit in Washington between the leaders of both countries.
At the very least, though, President Clinton can pretty much count on a further increase in U.S. exports to Japan during 1994, regardless of what happens to the overall trade balance.
Toshiyuki Imai, economist at the Japan Center for Economic Research, forecasts a 3.6% rise in U.S. shipments to Japan, to $58.17 billion.
The chief reason exports to Japan are expected to increase is that analysts expect the yen to stay relatively strong during the year, even though it might slip further against the dollar in the short term.
A firm yen will protect much of the beneficial currency effect that U.S. exporters are enjoying, particularly the new phenomenon of "import substitution" in Japan.
Consumers are getting hooked on import bargains, and manufacturers are bringing in cheaper parts and raw materials.
"It just makes sense to bring in goods from overseas," says Baring Securities economist Geoffrey Barker.
"The yen was a catalyst for that process."
Mr. Barker thinks the import trend is probably here to stay.
Robert Feldman, economist at Salomon Brothers in Tokyo, thinks the Japanese currency will in fact soften to 117 yen to the dollar in the next few months, then rebound toward 110 yen in the second half of the year.
His reasoning: Many investors expect Japan to cut interest rates further to spur its weak economy, and the booming U.S. to do the opposite.
So money is flowing into higher-yielding dollars, undermining the yen.
But Mr. Feldman thinks that trend will reverse after midyear, when Japan enters a modest recovery and the U.S. expansion fails to live up to expectations.
If he's right, Tokyo T-shirt printer Art Village Inc. will likely keep on buying American.
Managing director Akio Suzuki says his company has switched from mostly Japanese suppliers to Fruit of the Loom Inc. of Chicago.
The strong yen made the U.S. shirts 25% to 35% cheaper than Japanese products.
"Now we buy about 70% of our screen-printed T-shirts from them," Mr. Suzuki says.
And the bilateral balance of trade?
Economists are split on the outlook.
Shinya Nemoto, economist at Nomura Research Institute, thinks the U.S. export wave will help reduce Japan's trade surplus in the coming year.
But more analysts side with the Japan Center's Mr. Imai: He estimates that Japan's surplus with the U.S. actually will expand 4% in 1994, to $51.62 billionnearly matching the record $52.09 billion set in 1987.
Kenneth H. Bacon contributed to this article.
