Labor unions are debating over how fast to spend funds set aside to push for health-care reform and how tough to make the campaign.
A group of unions is pressing AFL-CIO President Lane Kirkland to release funds earmarked for an advertising campaign in support of health-care reform, and a release of $750,000 could come as early as today.
But so far, only about $500,000 of the roughly $3 million in advertising funds collected by the AFL-CIO has been spent.
"I think the next month or so is exceptionally important," said Jack Sheinkman, president of the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union.
The union, along with the American Federation ofState, County and Municipal Employees, the United Auto Workers and the machinists and communications workers' unions, are pressing for a speed-up of spending.
The debate comes at a time when the unions are trying to step up their lobbying within the districts of about 25 "swing" members of three House committees set to begin debating the Clinton health-care plan in early March.
That process is expected to last about six weeks, and is seen as critical to the shaping of any reform package.
In addition, some of the unions favoring a more pointed campaign want to run ads citing the high levels of benefits that members of Congress receive, and challenging viewers and listeners to demand the same of health-care reform.
The ads would name the local lawmaker and urge voters to call him or her.
But after complaints from some members of Congress, House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) has asked the labor group to tone down the ads, making them less critical of Congress.
"I never believe you sell a positive with a negative," Mr. Gephardt said in an interview yesterday.
"You sell a positive with a positive."
As a result of the congressional complaints, top officals of the labor federation favor making the ads less pointed.
Among the districts in which ads are slated to run are those of Republicans Marge Roukema of New Jersey and Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania, and Democrats Mike Kopetski and Ron Wyden of Oregon and Jim Cooper of Tennessee, author of a plan that competes with the Clinton administration's.
Regardless of the current debate over how to spend the funds, organized labor is showing no signs of backing off its commitment to support the administration's proposal.
The Clinton plan is "our only real hope of solving the health-care crisis," Mr. Kirkland declared, and Jerry Shea, the AFL-CIO's head of employee benefits, said the labor movement has spent or pledged more than $10 million in cash and services to push for health-care reform.
In addition, despite lingering unhappiness with the administration and many Democratic lawmakers over passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement, union officials said they expect that after the meeting here, which lasts through the week, labor money will begin flowing again to the Democratic National Committee and to individual candidates.
Union officials still plan to withhold funds from the congressional campaign committees to express their disapproval of Nafta.
But on health care, at least, the unions and the administration clearly realize that they need each other -- a point underscored by Vice President Al Gore in an appearance at the meeting here.
The unions are "essential" for their manpower and political machinery, he said.
The unions are "key allies in this fight and we're counting on them," he said.
