In the latest high-level departure from beleaguered Apple Computer Inc., the company said an executive instrumental in the success of Apple's new line of portable computers is quitting for another job at Motorola Inc.
The Cupertino, Calif., computer maker said Randy Battat, vice president of Apple's Macintosh desktop and PowerBook division, is leaving Jan. 31 to become vice president and general manager of Motorola's wireless data group, which is developing products based on the emerging technology for wireless communications.
Mr. Battat said "it was a very tough decision" to switch to Motorola because he had worked at Apple in various positions since 1981.
An Apple spokesman said Mr. Battat left because he found "a job incredibly attractive."
Until a successor is appointed, Apple said Ian Diery, executive vice president and general manager of the company's personal computer division, would assume Mr. Battat's responsibilities.
The departure of Mr. Battat, 34 years old, is a blow to Apple as he is widely lauded for having helped build the company's PowerBook portable computer into a $1 billion-a-year business.
Mr. Battat was also a part of Apple's initial huge success in introducing the Macintosh computer.
"I always felt he was a real visionary," said Tim Bajarin, president of Creative Strategies, a San Jose, Calif., industry consulting firm.
"It's a real loss for Apple, but a real win for Motorola."
Apple lately has fallen on some hard times, because its market-share growth has lagged behind big competitors like International Business Machines Corp. and Compaq Computer Corp., and it has stumbled in introducing new products like the hand-held Newton MessagePad.
Apple has been frantically chopping Macintosh prices to boost sales, and in March will launch a new line of Macintoshes based on a powerful new microprocessor called PowerPC.
Other recent departures from Apple include: Michael Puette, who some said was forced out of his job as president of Apple's U.S. marketing arm; Albert A. Eisenstat, Apple's former executive vice president and an inside director since 1985 who claims he was forced out last year by Michael Spindler, the new chief executive officer; and John Sculley, the former CEO who Mr. Eisenstat has contended was forced out by the board last year.
