For all the fumbled initiatives and half measures that China has taken to reform its money-losing state enterprises, the second life of Shanghai Petrochemical Co. offers a ray of hope.
Few old factories anywhere in the Communist or formerly Communist world can boast the kind of turnaround that China's largest petrochemical company -- and its ninth-largest state-run enterprise -- experienced last year.
While two-thirds of China's 13,000 industrial behemoths saw a deficit or struggled to break even, Shanghai Petrochemical spent most of the year trying to keep track of its bulging bank balance and soaring market value.
"We're the Dow Chemical of China," said Wang Jiming, Shanghai Petrochemical's effusive chairman, in a recent interview.
"I love my job.
Everyone is paying attention to us."
The company, revamped under the supervision of Merrill Lynch & Co., last year joined a Chinese steelmaker, auto maker and brewery in issuing stock abroad.
The companies blazed a reform trail for China's ailing state sector, and as many as 20 other state companies will follow suit this year.
In the U.S., Shanghai Petrochemical is traded in the form of American depositary shares on the New York Stock Exchange.
The stock's value has more than doubled since its offering in July; the ADRs were quoted at $41.875, up 25 cents, Tuesday.
Even after its restructuring, however, Shanghai Petrochemical must balance demands of its new investors with those of Beijing's bureaucrats.
The company's reform is a test of whether China can overcome the legacy of central planning before it scraps the central plan.
Major business decisions, including the company's product lineup, staffing levels and possible joint ventures with foreign concerns, depend on China National Petroleum Corp., or Sinopec, the company's majority shareholder and parent.
For Shanghai Petrochemical, ministry-level Sinopec is the ghost of central planning in the garb of a modern investor.
Sinopec and the central government still control about 40% of Shanghai Petrochemical's output and provide almost 100% of its primary raw material, crude oil, at 60% of world-market prices.
Those percentages will inevitably change, company officials said, but decisions about how and when are in the hands of bureaucrats.
In an attempt to ensure steady profit growth amid an uncertain environment, the company has decided to move away from its historical specialty, intermediate petrochemical and petroleum products, and increase production of downstream and higher-value-added products, such as polypropylene fiber, polyester staples, synthetic fibers, plastics and resins.
(Downstream refers to the refinement of oil into various products.)
As long as a substantial proportion of the company's product remains controlled by the state, the strategy seems to have promise.
Sinopec, on the whole, controls fewer downstream products, which allows profit margins of 25% or more in China's heavily protected market.
In 1993, a sharp reduction in state control of output prices contributed heavily to Shanghai Petrochemical's profit growth.
First-half sales jumped to $435.4 million and profits more than doubled from the comparable 1992 period to $53.7 million.
Company officials hope the continued shift toward downstream products will boost profits even more.
The company has started construction on an 800,000-ton residual oil processing plant that will allow it to produce higher-grade petroleum products.
It recently announced a joint venture with a local company to produce and sell a range of other plastics products.
About two weeks ago, the company invested $6 million to take control of two local companies involved in such businesses as gas stations and real estate.
Many analysts see rapid diversification as the best way to adjust to unpredictable state controls and potential price rises of raw materials.
"This kind of problem is unavoidable for any state firm in China.
Shanghai Petrochemical, at least, has a plan to deal with it," said Stanley Ng, an analyst with Standard Chartered Securities in Hong Kong.
John Crossman, manager of Jardine Fleming's Shanghai office, said the move to downstream products will help absorb excess labor as well.
But some foreign petrochemical company executives remain skeptical.
They said foreign companies salivate at the prospect of greater access to China's downstream petrochemical market as the country seeks to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade by the end of this year, a goal that would require deep tariff reductions.
Tariffs on petrochemical imports now average about 30%.
Foreigners point to their experience in China's southern special economic zones, where low tariff levels have allowed foreign concerns to take dominant positions in some product areas.
One American company executive said Shanghai Petrochemical will never become a world competitor unless it solidifies its core operations instead of investing in unproven areas.
He put the blame, however, on Sinopec rather than on the company itself, which he said has unusually competent managers.
"They've got their feet stuck in the state plan in a number of ways," said the American company executive.
"Petrochemicals are a low-priced commodity item.
You have to be lean to survive."
Shanghai Petrochemical would like to trim its staff (it employs about 40,000), a move that would allow it to draw more profits from its less labor-intensive upstream business.
Mr. Wang, the company's chairman, described overstaffing as his "No. 1 problem."
Still, one Shanghai Petrochemical official said Sinopec would not tolerate layoffs from one of its profitable subsidiaries, especially when layoffs would increase the welfare burden of Sinopec itself.
"If we catch someone stealing, then maybe we can fire him," the executive said.
Sinopec intervenes in basic strategy decisions as well.
When French petrochemical concern Societe Nationale Elf Aquitaine sought a joint venture partner in China, Sinopec assigned Shanghai Petrochemical to pursue the $1 billion-plus transaction, which is currently in the final stages of a feasibility study.
Mr. Wang said only that he had "no opinion" about the proposed alliance.
An Elf Aquitaine executive based in China said the real player is Sinopec.
"SPC is mandated to study the project with us," the official said.
"We don't have much direct contact."
Merrill Lynch, Shanghai Petrochemical's underwriter, cited Sinopec's majority control and the uncertainties of state planning as two of the risk factors for investors.
Merrill Lynch analysts said they remain optimistic about the company's prospects in the long term, but they have questions about Sinopec.
"Sinopec has just become a huge welfare state in and of itself . . .," said Pamela Cheng, an analyst for Merrill Lynch in Hong Kong.
"If it Sinopec is not efficient, it may be cause for concern down the road."
