Shortly after midnight, 70-year-old Absalon Castellanos had just finished milking the cows on his sprawling Rancho San Joaquin when his wife answered a knock on the door.
"Don't be afraid," the visitor said.
"We don't come to kill."
The intruder and his comrades in the Emiliano Zapata National Liberation Army then whisked away Mr. Castellanos -- and two of his cows.
It appears that the rebels in the state of Chiapas plan to use the wealthy former governor in their effort to win concessions from the Mexican government.
Scores of people, from Indians to academics to priests, refer to Mr. Castellanos as a leading symbol of the repression of Indians in Chiapas.
Mr. Castellanos, who served as governor from 1982 until 1988 and was an army general in one of the state's two military zones, was born into a family with huge land holdings.
He made his mark in the military, becoming a top official in the Military College and a Chiapas zone commander, which gave him the rank of general.
Because of his military bearing, Mr. Castellanos is still referred to as "the general" by most people in Chiapas.
In 1982, he became governor of Chiapas, a state of 3.2 million people that has much more in common with neighboring Guatemala than it does with Mexico.
Soon, Mr. Castellanos was being called "El Bikini" by the news magazine Proceso.
Like a bikini, Proceso said, no one could quite understand how he was supported, and everyone hoped he would fall.
Araceli Burguete, a human-rights worker, says that during Mr. Castellanos's governorship, on average, there was one suspicious killing of a Chiapan Indian each month.
She thinks she was a victim, too.
In December 1986, while she was eight months pregnant, she says someone shot at her and wounded her in the hand.
Believing the governor's police forces were behind the shooting, Ms. Burguete fled to Mexico City, where she now fights for Indian causes.
Ms. Burguete says that while Mr. Castellanos held office, police and military forces killed nearly a dozen Indians involved in pressing for legal land rights near his estate.
Indian leaders claim that the Castellanos cattle ranch belongs to them.
They are particularly angry that it includes a spring, which they say in many Mayan cultures is a sacred gift from the lords of the earth.
During Mr. Castellanos's gubernatorial tenure, Amnesty International issued several condemnations about the murder, torture and arrests of peasant farmers and Indian leaders.
In one Amnesty case, an organizer of the National Front Against Repression was invited to a meeting between his group and the governor -- then was arrested while waiting for the meeting to begin.
The Mexican Academy of Human Rights released a report during that time raising questions about nearly two dozen deaths of peasant and Indian leaders.
At a news conference after his Jan. 2 abduction, Mr. Castellanos's wife, Elsy, and his two sons said that during his tenure as governor, no peasant or indigenous person was "the victim of any form of repression."
Until this weekend, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and his staff generally had kept quiet about Mr. Castellanos.
Last Friday, Mr. Salinas asked the head of the National Human Rights Commission to intervene on behalf of the five hostages held by the guerrillas.
Up to that point, one of the few to come to Mr. Castellanos' defense was Human Rights Watch/Americas, which called specifically for the release of the former governor.
Hostage-taking is a violation of internationally recognized rules of warfare, the group says.
"Castellanos belongs to a political class that has been condemned by Salinas," says Federico Reyes Heroles, the editor of a magazine on Mexican politics.
Gabriel Guerra Castellanos, President Salinas's press spokesman for foreign media, is a cousin of the kidnapped former governor.
Of his relative he offers only that "he was very controversial."
