Mervyn's has discovered that the only thing worse than being a giant retailer during this state's protracted recession is being a retailer that made giant mistakes during the downturn.
"It's a drag.
It's no fun," says Mervyn's Chairman Joseph C. Vesce of the poor performance of the 276-store chain.
The Dayton Hudson Corp. unit derives about half of its $4.44 billion annual sales from its 125 California stores and has hurt the parent company's overall performance.
At the heart of Mervyn's troubles are a number of marketing and merchandising miscues, like dropping women's dresses, that yielded sales results more tepid even than California's faltering economy.
Two major executive-suite changes in two years also have taken a toll while failing to jump-start sales.
Indeed, Mervyn's faces big hurdles in its quest for better results.
It has revamped its merchandise selection and its pricing policy in an effort to discontinue its practice of sharply cutting prices to sell slow moving goods.
Still, some industry observers are skeptical that Mervyn's can pull off a turnaround this year.
"I'm not optimistic" says Karen Sack, Standard & Poor's Corp. retail analyst.
"There's a lot of competition out there."
Last year, Mervyn's sales fell 2% and its operating profit slid 37% to $179 million.
Those declines reduced Mervyn's contribution to its parent's 1993 results to 23% of revenue -- from 25% the previous year -- and to 16% of operating profit from 26%.
"Mervyn's was our major disappointment," in 1993, the fourth-largest U.S. retailer noted in its year-end earnings report.
Things haven't improved so far in 1994.
Sales in Mervyn's stores open at least a year declined 8% in February, following a 5% decline for all of last year.
"We are running a year behind where we thought we would be in getting Mervyn's going, and that is disappointing," says Dayton Hudson Chairman Kenneth A. Macke.
Considering California's troubled economy, Mervyn's decline is even more foreboding because such difficult periods should spark purchases of the moderately priced apparel and home furnishings that Mervyn's offers.
Mervyn's difficulties have kept the parent company's stock price hovering in the mid-$70 range notwithstanding strong performances over the past six months from its Target discount stores and its department-store division.
In late New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, Dayton Hudson fell 75 cents to close at $73.50 a share.
Mr. Macke, who also oversees the company's 553 Target stores and 63 department stores operating as Dayton's, Hudson's and Marshall Fields, is spending most of his time working on correcting Mervyn's problems.
He is on the phone with Mr. Vesce several times a day and travels from Dayton Hudson's Minneapolis headquarters to visit Hayward-based Mervyn's nearly every week.
Retailer Mervin Morris started the chain back in 1949 with the objective of mirroring J.C. Penney Co. stores except for stocking national brands and offering credit to customers.
At the time Penney's offered primarily private-label goods and customers had to pay in cash, says Robert Kahn, a former Mervyn's director and consultant.
Mervyn's, which also stumbled during the 1980s, still views its typical 70,000-square foot stores as smaller versions of J.C. Penney and Sears, Roebuck & Co. stores without the hardware and appliance departments.
And it isn't lost on Dayton Hudson executives that Sears and Penney have made sales strides in the moderate-priced-goods areas that Mervyn's targets.
Indeed, Mervyn's current restructuring has borrowed from Sears's turnaround strategy.
Like Sears, Dayton Hudson has hired several new executives for key posts from outside the company, and it has injected into Mervyn's some highly regarded executives from its growing Target discount stores unit.
Mervyn's has hired or created new positions for five of its top nine executives over the last nine months.
The new executives include President Paul Sauser, who had been a Target senior vice president, and three senior vice presidents placed at the top of Mervyn's women's, men's, and marketing departments.
Their recovery plan includes a new pricing strategy, shrinking inventory, sprucing up their stores, and polishing Mervyn's image among consumers.
The key element involves a return of women's career apparel and dresses, which Mervyn's dropped in 1991.
With that move, "we lost touch with our core customer," says Mr. Vesce.
That customer is a 29-year-old to 45-year-old woman with a median household income of $40,000.
Mervyn's officials discontinued the women's apparel lines so they could use the additional floor space to emphasize casual and basic apparel, a move to duplicate Gap Inc.'s success in selling basics.
Mervyn's new pricing plan replaces one that created huge price differentials on many items when they were sale-priced one week of each month.
Mr. Sauser offers the example of a cotton blanket whose regular price was $35 but which carried a $17.50 tag one week of each month.
Consequently, virtually all purchases of the blanket occured when it was on sale.
Under the new pricing strategy, the blanket's promotional price is $17.99 and $25 when it isn't on sale.
Now Mervyn's sells about half of the blankets at the higher price.
Mervyn's cleared out some $650 million of slow-moving merchandise, reducing stock by 30% and giving the stores a less-cluttered look.
To accompany that look, Mervyn's is preparing a new advertising campaign, set to debut this year, backed by an 18% increase in its ad budget.
Even with its makeover maneuvers, Mervyn's has a way to go to catch up to arch-competitor Penney.
A comparison of a Mervyn's and a Penney store that are neighbors in the South Shore Center mall in Alameda, Calif., illustrates that.
The Penney store has more than three times the selection of women's dresses, including those in petite and larger-size sections.
Mervyn's got its first order of petite-size dresses in the last week of February.
So far, Mervyn's officials are satisfied with the changes they've made, even if consumers haven't yet responded.
"We feel we're well on our way," says Mr. Vesce.
He cites the $100 million in sales that the return of the women's dress business brought in last year.
That was the best year ever for Mervyn's in that line of business.
Dayton Hudson officials won't say how much longer they will allow Mervyn's to underperform.
But, says Chairman Macke, "The time fuse is not an eternally burning candle.
We would look to turn it around this year."
Mervyn's will add only eight stores this year, down from 12 last year and 22 in 1992, the last year Mervyn's achieved a sales gain.
