Wall Street brokerage firms are finally shedding some light on the shadowy and lucrative world of derivatives.
Merrill Lynch & Co., the nation's biggest brokerage firm, disclosed that its 1993 revenue from trading swaps and derivatives swelled to $761 million, a 57% jump from 1992 levels.
It also marks the first time that Merrill's annual revenue from derivatives exceeded that from stocks.
The derivative revenue represented 26% of Merrill's $2.92 billion in 1993 principal transactions, or trading using the firm's own cash.
That's up from 22% in 1992 and 15% in 1991.
The disclosure, made in Merrill's recently issued annual report, underscores how quickly derivatives are growing, and how profitable they can be for Wall Street investment banks.
This is the first year that Merrill and other financial firms have provided such information to shareholders.
Derivatives are financial arrangements between dealers and institutional investors whose values are linked to -- or derived from -- fluctuations in the prices of stocks, bonds, currencies or other assets.
These include futures, forward contracts, options and swaps on interest rates, currencies and stocks.
Data on these products typically hasn't been included in the firms' balance sheets.
Merrill's report comes amid pressure from regulators for more disclosure by banks and other financial firms on their profits from derivatives.
Federal banking regulators, for instance, plan to force banks to disclose more data about their dealings in derivatives, as part of an effort to more closely monitor banks' activities in the booming $7 trillion derivatives market.
Earlier this week, the Securities and Exchange Commission proposed a new formula for brokerage firms to calculate the size of charges they must take to offset the risk of their positions in listed options and related securities positions.
The majority of Merrill's off-balance sheet derivatives trades are "short-term in duration," with a weighted average maturity of 2.62 years as of Dec. 31, 1993, according to the report.
That's up from 2.21 years a year earlier, Merrill said.
Merrill said the notional, or underlying, value of its swaps and derivatives surged 28% in 1993, to $891 million.
The boom in derivatives has been fueled by, among other things, low interest rates.
This has triggered strong demand for companies with floating-rate debt to swap into low fixed-rate instruments.
Merrill says it takes pains to offset the risks associated with these off-balance sheet trades.
The firm "seeks to control market risk by developing and refining hedging strategies that correlate price and currency movements of trading inventories and related hedges," the report said.
Merrill was among the first Wall Street investment banks to set up a separate unit just to trade interest-rate swaps, currency swaps and other derivative products.
Merrill received a triple-A-1 rating for the unit from Moody's Investors Service Inc.
That's important because swap dealers with triple-A ratings have an advantage over other dealers in trading with multinational companies, many of which won't deal with Wall Street firms with below a double-A rating.
