Quebec separatist leader Lucien Bouchard goes to Washington tomorrow to tell Americans not to worry about his campaign to break up Canada.
It will be Mr. Bouchard's first visit to the U.S. since his Bloc Quebecois party recharged the Quebec independence movement last October by capturing 72% of Quebec's seats in the national Parliament.
The result vaulted Mr. Bouchard into the post of official opposition leader in the federal Parliament, a position that gives him daily television exposure for his separatist campaign.
He is expected to tell members of congress and diplomats that both Quebec and the rest of Canada will be better off if Quebec finally separates and ends generations of on-again-off-again political crises.
"The political problem with Canada is Quebec, and the problem of Quebec is Canada," he says.
And he will tell his audiences that Quebec will be a "free trader" that welcomes its U.S. ties at least as much as Canada does.
The thing Mr. Bouchard most wants from the U.S. is automatic membership for an independent Quebec in the North American Free Trade Agreement that links Canada, Mexico and the U.S. "Quebec was instrumental in convincing the rest of Canada to sign the free trade treaty," he notes.
An independent Quebec would be a largely French-speaking nation bordering on New York, Vermont, New Hampshire and Maine.
It would be twice the size of Texas with an economic output about equal to that of Massachusetts.
If the separatists win Quebec's provincial election this year, as many analysts expect, they are contemplating a quick referendum on independence, with the aim of pulling the province out of Canada by June 1995.
Mr. Bouchard was invited to Washington by the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Joseph Jockel, a Canadian specialist at the think tank, said the invitation was extended to get better acquainted with Mr. Bouchard, in case Quebec really does become independent.
The Clinton administration isn't rolling out the carpet for the visiting separatist.
During his two days in Washington, Mr. Bouchard is scheduled to meet for about 30 minutes with the third-ranking official at the State Department, Peter Tarnoff, undersecretary for political affairs.
In recent years, leaders of the main Canadian opposition party have usually seen the president when they made a U.S. visit.
Mr. Bouchard's itinerary also includes a meeting with several members of congress who follow Canadian affairs, and an address at the Center for Strategic and International Studies tomorrow morning.
The U.S. government has studiously avoided getting involved in the Quebec issue.
U.S. officials have a "mantra" that has been highly successful in dealing with questions on Quebec, says Mr. Jockel.
"It goes like this: The U.S. hopes that Canada remains united.
However, this is a matter to be decided by Canadians without any further comment or interference on the part of the U.S."
Mr. Bouchard is a 55-year-old former lawyer, diplomat and Canadian cabinet minister.
He has a solemn speaking style, dresses conservatively and rarely cracks a joke.
He quit the government of former Prime Minister Brian Mulroney in 1990 when it became apparent that Quebec wouldn't win more constitutional autonomy from Canada's dominant English-speaking provinces.
Mr. Bouchard has tried to demonstrate that an independent Quebec wouldn't be a "Cuba of the North."
His party recently voted to allow a continuation of U.S. cruise-missile tests over northern Canada, a decision that was opposed by many Canadians.
But the key effort of the Bloc Quebecois has been to use its parliamentary platform to remind Quebecers of the supposed penalties they pay for being part of Canada.
Almost every day the party finds some such issue to raise in Parliament.
