The early "consensus" emerging from the earthquake's aftermath would have us believe that California is now going to a) repair its elaborate infrastructure, b) keep its supercharged social services in place, and c) continue to indulge its environmental ambitions.
It will do all this, the state's conventional thinkers were saying late last week, by increasing taxes -- presumably on the state's declining incomes.
Siegfried and Roy had better come over from Vegas to help out.
California is already among the top third in state tax burdens.
Whether it's the gasoline tax, or a more general sales tax (can that really be Tom Hayden proposing such a regressive measure?), or the Pete Wilson preference of a big bond issue (a delayed tax increase), most of the vocal politicians seem to want to hike something to put California back together again.
Wait a minute.
California shows the way in so many things.
At this low stage in its troubles, we think it's time for California to go back to the drawing board.
These earliest reports suggest that California's worn-out establishment thinkers are quite prepared to push down the same old road -- the one that only the occasional tremor of a tax revolt seems capable of buckling.
We know, though, that California's famous for having smart people who think in unconventional ways.
Until the recent natural and fiscal catastrophes, it was the land that bred entrepreneurs.
As the state emerges from the rubble, why not open the public debate to include some radical notions about the state's future?
These ideas would be built around the notion that an emergency is a good time for reconsidering assumptions and perhaps actually lowering your ongoing expenses.
We suggested here the other day, for example, that the unions' "prevailing wage" and apprenticeship grip on public works be loosened to lower reconstruction costs by perhaps 20%.
But don't stop there.
Los Angeles schools face an overwhelming bill to shore up damaged buildings.
But commercial space is going begging for lessees all around Southern California.
How about immediately increasing the allowance for innovative "charter"-type schools that could be set up in some of these locations to get the learning restarted?
If this is more than the giant, bureaucratic Los Angeles Unified School District can handle, all the more reason to break the district up right now into smaller, parent- and principal-directed units.
Some sympathy from the courts would be required to suspend some terms of employee union contracts.
California has been paring back its welfare benefits in recent years (and Governor Wilson had proposed another slice before the quake) but its Medicaid bill keeps shooting up.
Congressman Henry Waxman should be asked to consider some local waivers from the added mandates he's shepherded through at the federal level.
But that was then, this is now.
Same solution.
California was already breaking beneath the Clean Air and Clean Water requirements issuing from Washington and Sacramento.
Again, Rep. Waxman's office is the place to call.
Either this is an emergency, or someone in public life isn't serious.
Congress continues to pour millions of dollars into a central-city subway in Los Angeles, while California directs huge sums of its own to other such transit projects.
While up-and-running commuter rail can be a help in the current crisis, the money for the longer-run and more dubious projects could be diverted to shuttle services run by entrepreneurs.
Making more such services legal in the private sector could result in short-term help.
Crime and incarceration costs mount faster in California than in most other places.
Sending juvenile felons to boot camps far from their terrorized neighborhoods could bring both immediate and long-term relief.
That will require action by the legislature and the judges.
Surely, countless other savings could be had from rethinking the strictures that California and other states have placed on themselves (or had placed upon them).
The point is that instead of thinking new taxes first, policymakers -- especially those of the conservative-opportunity society stripe -- should be talking aggressively now about making a break from past practice that could change permanently the dimensions of California's quandary.
If no one raises a shout and the status quo remains untouchable, we may be looking at a fiscal and social mess in California with a few resemblances to post-Soviet Russia.
At some point, even illusionists run out of tricks.
