Yield-hungry investors seem to love some of these "closed end" bond funds, bidding them up to absurd levels.
Meanwhile, they hate others, driving them down to dirt-cheap prices.
"It's ridiculous," argues Ron Olin, president of Deep Discount Advisors, an Asheville, N.C., money manager.
"You've got some of these funds trading at premiums, while you've got others at 12% discounts."
Mr. Olin is referring to the way publicly traded funds trade for more or less than the value of their underlying portfolios.
In essence, closed-end funds have two values.
There's the price of the fund's publicly traded stock.
And then there's the per-share value of the fund's bond-portfolio holdings, also known as the fund's net asset value.
As bond prices dropped and yields surged in recent months, some closed-end bond funds have taken it on the chin.
Their shares have tumbled so that they trade at a sharp discount to their per-share portfolio value.
"A highly discounted taxable-bond fund is probably the best contrarian play among closed-end funds right now," Mr. Olin says.
Among his favorite bond funds is Fort Dearborn Income Securities, which closed yesterday at 15, or 7% below its $16.18 per-share portfolio value as of Friday.
According to Lipper Analytical Services, Fort Dearborn ranks as the second-best-performing investment-grade bond fund during the past 10 years, out of 17 closed-end funds.
Historically, the fund's shares have tended to trade in line with its per-share portfolio value.
But the discount opened up when the fund recently sold more shares through a rights offering.
"It's one of the best bond funds over the last eight or 10 years," Mr. Olin says.
"I think that it will go back to net asset value."
Mr. Olin also owns Bunker Hill Income Securities.
The fund closed yesterday at 15 1/2, just 5% less than Friday's $16.38 portfolio value.
But the fund's shareholders will vote April 4 on whether to merge Bunker Hill with a regular open-end mutual fund, which would have the effect of eliminating the fund's discount.
"If everything goes according to plan, it will be open-ended within the next few months," Mr. Olin says.
Mr. Olin says he also likes AIM Strategic Income Fund, First Boston Income Fund, First Boston Strategic Income Fund and Independence Square Income Securities.
These funds trade at discounts of more than 10%.
That means that today's buyer is getting these funds for less than 90 cents on the dollar.
If interest rates continue to rise, that discount may help to cushion the blow.
David Tepper, a San Francisco investment adviser, is also finding bargains among beaten-up bond funds.
He owns MFS Intermediate Income Trust and Putnam Intermediate Government Income Trust, which trade at discounts of 12% and 11%, respectively.
By sticking with intermediate-term bond funds, "I'm trying to shelter myself, just in case I'm wrong and rates go higher than I think," Mr. Tepper says.
"I don't think the long bond will go above 7% or 7 1/4%.
But I just hope that's not wishful thinking on my part."
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond yield lately has been zigzagging around 6.9%.
But while Mr. Tepper is finding bargains, he's also astonished at the lofty prices paid for some bond funds.
"Anybody owning bond funds should double-check their holdings and think about moving from a fund with a 10% premium to one with a 10% discount," he says.
Funds at rich premiums "will be especially vulnerable if they have to cut their dividend."
First Australia Prime Income Fund, for instance, said Friday it was cutting its monthly dividend to 8.25 cents a share from 9 cents.
The fund's shares recently traded at a 9% premium, but the news sent the stock tumbling 6% on Friday.
Other bond funds with seductive dividends continue to trade at hefty premiums, including high-yield junk-bond funds such as Cigna High-Income Shares, Van Kampen Merritt Intermediate-Term HighIncome Trust and Van Kampen Merritt Limited-Term High-Income Trust.
These funds boast double-digit yields -- but their shares trade at double-digit premiums.
Consider, for instance, Cigna High-Income Shares, which flaunts a 10.1% yield and trades at a 17% premium.
The fund is run by Alan Petersen, who also co-manages AIM High-Yield Fund, a regular open-end mutual fund.
The AIM fund has a better five-year record, and it's also a lot cheaper to buy.
To purchase the AIM fund, you pay only a 4.75% sales commission.
"I don't think there's much that's rational about that premium" on Cigna High-Income Shares, says Catherine Gillis, editor of Morningstar Closed-End Funds, a Chicago newsletter.
It isn't worth paying a 17% premium, "especially when you can get the open-end fund so much more cheaply."
Mr. Petersen couldn't be reached for comment.
Phillip Goldstein, manager of Opportunity Partners, a New York limited partnership, says investors should avoid buying funds based on their yield.
Instead, he advises focusing on a fund's premium or discount.
"I don't think you can go too far wrong with a fund at a double-digit discount," he says.
"And stay away from those at premiums.
It's just asking for trouble.
Any disappointment could hammer those funds that are at premiums."
