Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen suggested the Clinton administration is willing to modify its healthcare plan to make it easier for companies to insure workers themselves instead of being forced into regional insurance pools.
The pools, called health alliances, would bring businesses and individuals together to buy health coverage.
The alliances, which would be designed to spread insurance risk and increase consumer bargaining power, have become one of the most controversial parts of the president's health-care proposal.
Under the president's plan, any employer with fewer than 5,000 workers would be required to join an alliance and pay it on behalf of each worker.
"You think the 5,000-employee threshold for joining regional alliances is too high.
You want it reduced to 500," Mr. Bensten told a convention of the National Manufacturers Association.
"We hear you.
We're willing to discuss this and other details of our plan."
The White House later cautioned against reading too much into Mr. Bentsen's remarks, but officials privately expect that they will have to give up something on alliances.
Mr. Bentsen's conciliatory tone dovetails with efforts by senior Democrats to narrow differences with industry and build support in Congress for the core of the president's plan.
"Alliances are one of the areas where there is a fair amount of room for movement," said House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman John Dingell.
"Let's put it this way," added the Michigan Democrat.
"I don't believe in alliances like I do the Holy Trinity."
The administration sought to devise alliances that would be large enough both to share community risks and to bargain effectively with providers for lower-cost care.
Many of the adjustments under consideration seek to achieve the same result.
One option, for example, would permit several companies that together have more than the threshold number of employees to form their own self-insurance schemes like larger corporations.
Mr. Bentsen's comments came as congressional bargaining over the health plan began in earnest.
In his State of the Union address Tuesday night, Mr. Clinton warned that he would veto health legislation that fails to guarantee medical coverage for all Americans.
Democrats argued this should be seen not so much as a threat as an invitation to seek accommodations on other aspects of the plan.
"I think everything else is on the table, if you concede that the ultimate core bill must include guaranteed health insurance for all Americans," said House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.).
He suggested, for instance, that as long as universal coverage is assured, some alternative approach might be found to the administration's recommendation that the plan be financed by requiring all employers to buy health insurance for their workers.
The coming health fight will be played out first in Mr. Dingell's Energy and Commerce Committee.
The panel's 27-17 split between Democrats and Republicans makes it a better measure of the House than the Ways and Means Committee, which is more stacked to the Democrats' advantage.
And Mr. Dingell, whose father championed health insurance as a congressman, brings both a deep commitment to the issue and personal roots in the industrial Midwest, the home of a number of Republicans whose votes he'll need.
The president and his health advisers met yesterday morning with the House Democratic leadership to discuss strategy.
Among those who attended were Mr. Dingell, House Labor and Education Committee Chairman William Ford (D., Mich.), and House Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.).
Although the immediate White House focus yesterday was on Democrats, Republicans hold immense power, particularly in the Senate.
Mindful of this, Senate Finance Committee Chairman Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D., N.Y.), held a meeting for members of his panel from both parties to discuss procedures for handling the legislation.
The tentative schedule set out at the meeting anticipates weeks of hearings running until late April.
That means legislation won't actually be drafted until May.
In the Senate at least, there is a sense the alliances can survive only if they are established on a voluntary basis.
But more broadly, a core group of Republican moderates remain committed to more-substantial reforms than the incremental approach favored by many conservatives in the House.
"I think there's a real financial problem out there for individuals, for the companies, for the nation," said Sen. John Chafee (R., R.I.).
Rep. Steve Gunderson, the type of Republican Midwesterner whose vote the president's team needs, described a meeting with farmers in his Wisconsin district who face a major increase in medical insurance premiums.
"Guys like Steve Gunderson can't stand up and say there's not a problem," said the Republican.
"You tell my constituents that."
