By naming Boston lawyer Deval Patrick the nation's top civil-rights-law enforcement official, Bill Clinton confirmed a fear harbored by many who hoped he would live up to his New Democrat billing: that the president has wedded himself to a hard-left civil-rights agenda.
Though chastened by public repudiation of the radical views espoused by Lani Guinier, his first nominee for assistant attorney general for civil rights, Mr. Clinton has dipped into the same philosophical well for all his other nominees for key civil-rights positions.
He nearly diverged from this path by choosing John Payton for the top post, but retreated when the Congressional Black Caucus questioned Mr. Payton's ideological bona fides.
In Mr. Patrick, Mr. Clinton has selected a stealth Guinier: a similar activist pedigree, but without damaging law-review articles.
During the early 1980s, both Mr. Patrick and Ms. Guinier litigated with the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund (LDF), which has relentlessly pressed for race quotas, busing and minority contract set-asides.
Mr. Patrick now chairs the group's New England Steering Committee.
Though Ms. Guinier focused on voting-rights cases while Mr. Patrick attacked the death penalty and represented criminal defendants, a consistent thread runs through their efforts and the entire LDF program: the belief that unconscious racism permeates American society and can be removed only through race-conscious social engineering.
One Patrick case in particular exemplifies this.
In McClesky v.
Kemp, a 1987 Supreme Court case, Mr. Patrick represented Warren McClesky, a black man accused of murder for allegedly shooting a policeman in the face during the robbery of a furniture store in Fulton County, Ga.
A mixed-race jury sentenced Mr. McClesky to death.
The McClesky case was part of LDF's effort to eliminate capital punishment, a goal its 1987-88 annual report described as "for more than two decades, LDF's priority in the area of criminal justice."
But LDF presented no evidence that discrimination infected Mr. McClesky's trial or sentence in any way.
Rather, it relied solely on statistical studies showing that murderers of white victims were more likely to receive capital punishment than murderers whose victims were black.
(The statistics also showed, curiously, that a higher percentage of whites than blacks were given capital punishment when the victims were black.)
This study was enough, Mr. Patrick asserted, to strike down the death sentence as a violation of the Eighth Amendment's ban on cruel and unusual punishment and the 14th Amendment's equal-protection guarantee.
Mr. Patrick's argument would have forced the Supreme Court to abandon its rule that violations of equal protection require proof of discriminatory intent, not just unequal outcomes.
The court declined.
Given the myriad protections attending the death penalty, and absent evidence that discrimination affected a particular sentence, the court ruled that statistics alone were not enough to condemn the whole system as discriminatory.
Regardless of one's opinion on capital punishment generally, Mr. Patrick's argument is disturbing on multiple levels.
Grafting an equality-of-results standard onto the 14th Amendment would render unconstitutional any government policy that affects racial groups differently, leading inevitably to the type of racial gerrymandering that characterizes the Voting Rights Act, which uses a results standard.
President Clinton rejected this approach during his campaign when he endorsed equal opportunity rather than equality of results as his civil-rights touchstone.
The Patrick nomination also reflects a troubling tendency by Mr. Clinton to appoint judges and law enforcement officials who exalt sociology and psychology over law.
Like Ms. Guinier's contention that "unconscious racism" produces unequal electoral results, Mr. Patrick's argument in McClesky rests on the premise that fair procedures are racist if they produce unequal outcomes.
This premise animated LDF's litigation agenda during Mr. Patrick's tenure, in which it successfully sought massive judicially imposed tax increases to fund a gold-plated desegregation plan in Kansas City, Mo.; argued in favor of racial quotas for public employees in the District of Columbia, New Orleans and elsewhere; defended minority contract set-asides; and pressed for continuation of forced busing decades after segregation had ceased.
Though Mr. Clinton professed he wouldn't have nominated Lani Guinier if he had known her views, Mr. Patrick's is the latest in an unbroken line of appointments from the ranks of the same liberal civil-rights establishment that produced Ms. Guinier.
For head of the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, Mr. Clinton elevated Mary Frances Berry, who in 1985 opined that "civil-rights laws were not passed to give civil rights to all Americans" but only to "disfavored groups," including "blacks, Hispanics and women."
Ms. Berry is so strident that her appointment virtually ensures this moribund agency continued irrelevancy.
Meanwhile, Norma Cantu, assistant secretary for civil rights in the Education Department, litigated busing cases for the Mexican-American Legal Defense and Education Fund; and Shirley Wilcher, who Mr. Clinton tapped to head the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs at the Labor Department, toiled in the early '80s for the Women's Legal Defense Fund.
Ms. Cantu has already taken steps to reverse previous policies restricting racial considerations in college scholarships.
Since Mr. Patrick has no published writings, the Senate Judiciary Committee should closely question his positions on key civil-rights issues.
For instance, does Mr. Patrick support key Supreme Court precedents that 1) require a showing of discriminatory intent to establish constitutional violations; 2) limit race-conscious remedies to extreme cases of identified past discrimination that cannot be redressed in any other manner; and 3) let school districts free themselves from busing orders and return to local control after desegregation orders have been fulfilled?
LDF, for which Mr. Patrick served as an attorney and of which he is now a director, took the opposite position in all these cases.
Either Mr. Patrick doesn't share LDF's philosophy, which would seem strange, or his views are at odds with the moderate stance Mr. Clinton took during the campaign.
In either case, a bigger question persists: Why does Mr. Clinton return to the same ideological retreads for his civil-rights nominations?
In the New York Times earlier this week, columnist Anthony Lewis attacks me and this newspaper, arguing that Ms. Guinier was mischaracterized in these pages as a "quota queen."
The larger issue though is not one simply of quotas -- although I was correct -- but the president's habit of choosing nominees who view the world through a racial prism.
This time, the president could have struck a positive course by selecting liberals who have written thoughtfully about these issues, such as Stephen Carter of Yale or Randall Kennedy of Harvard.
But Mr. Clinton unfailingly takes his cues from a civil-rights establishment that for 25 years has held sway inside the Washington Beltway, even as its influence in the real world has rapidly diminished.
As groups like LDF have moved left, they've distanced themselves from their purported constituents -- which surveys of mainstream black Americans demonstrate consistently.
If Mr. Clinton persists in looking left for civil-rights solutions, he'll keep his party shackled to failed, racially divisive policies.
But more important, he will have missed a golden opportunity to heal our nation's racial wounds.
Mr. Bolick is litigation director at the Institute for Justice in Washington.
