Thorn EMI PLC said an independent investigation it commissioned found that key allegations made in a Page One article in The Wall Street Journal concerning its Rent-A-Center unit were "either incorrect or misleading."
Thorn EMI, based in London, didn't release a copy of the report but provided what it described as a summary of the findings about the policies and practices of Rent-A-Center, which is based in Wichita, Kan.
The investigation, conducted for Thorn by former U.S. Sen. Warren Rudman, found that Rent-A-Center charges a reasonable price for its rent-to-own service based on the costs of providing the service, Thorn said.
The company also said the report found that most Rent-A-Center customers understand the rent-to-own transaction and are satisfied with their treatment by company employees.
Paul Steiger, the managing editor of the Journal, responded: "Today's release from Thorn EMI does not contradict any specific facts reported in the Journal article of last September.
We continue to stand by our story.
We will, of course, examine the full Rudman report when it is made available to us."
In an interview, Sir Colin Southgate, chairman of Thorn EMI, said Rent-A-Center was "vindicated on every single point" by the investigation.
The Rudman probe followed a Sept. 22 Journal article that described high-pressure sales tactics and abusive collections procedures at Rent-A-Center, the nation's largest rent-to-own company.
The company rents appliances, furniture, electronics and other household products.
The industry is known as rent-to-own because renters who make every weekly payment, usually over 78 weeks, become owners.
The article asserted that some employees encouraged unsophisticated customers to rent more merchandise than they could afford.
The article also reported that repossession tactics used by some Rent-A-Center employees included accepting sexual favors in exchange for not repossessing furniture -- so-called couch payments -- and in specific instances enlisting the help of a Hell's Angels gang and picking an apartment lock with a credit card to gain access to a late payer's goods.
The summary of the Thorn report said that Rent-A-Center employees "generally follow" company policies and procedures that pertain to the "fair and honest treatment" of customers.
Evidence that employees violate internal operating procedures have "in the main been isolated or sporadic occurrences" and are "uncharacteristic" of Rent-A-Center's usual practices, Thorn said the report concluded.
In an interview, Mr. Rudman, a partner in the Washington office of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, said that in the final report, he suggests some changes in certain Rent-A-Center operating procedures.
Among the areas that may need improvement, he said, are distinguishing between new and used merchandise; training employees further in explaining the rights of customers under a liability-protection plan the company offers; and emphasizing that employees may not enter customers' homes to repossess merchandise when the customers aren't present.
"We found a very small amount of evidence of that entry into homes, and we felt that none was acceptable," Mr. Rudman said.
Mr. Rudman said his team was unable to verify specific incidents of couch payments.
"There is a lot of rich folklore," he said, adding, that "in a company of 7,000 employees, whether it be a Rent-A-Center, a newspaper or a law firm, I suspect those things happen.
The question is, do they happen in a pervasive way."
