Yes, we know, the Clinton Administration is pro-business, made up of market savvy pros like Robert Rubin and Roger Altman, tekkies like Al Gore and global-market gurus like Robert Reich.
It's been a tempting and alluring scenario.
On days when it has been possible to put this administration in the best light, one has wanted to believe.
But the collapse last week of the Bell Atlantic-TCI merger in the wake of some throwback rate regulation by the FCC punches a big hole (well, another big hole) in the facade.
The Clintonites like markets, but in about the same way that French bureaucrats have always liked markets -- in a strong embrace.
Only people with the mind of a French bureaucrat would, as Al Gore's FCC did, mandate a 7% reduction in cable rates smack in the middle of Bell Atlantic's offer of some $16 billion for the country's largest cable system operator.
As the Journal reported, Bell Atlantic CEO Ray Smith took one look at the rate-cut announcement as it was broadcast on C-SPAN and knew the deal was in trouble.
Now we suppose that Reed Hundt -- the former St. Alban's classmate that Mr. Gore recruited from a Beltway law firm to be FCC Chairman -- would argue that the fate of two media Megatrons maneuvering around the price of a stock deal can't be the immediate concern of an "independent" regulatory body.
Indeed, Mr. Gore came to his protege's defense amid the rubble: "As everyone knows very well, they were on the rocks and looking for a reason to call it off."
That's a pretty weak defense.
It is probable, if not certain, that Ray Smith and TCI's John Malone would have found a way to complete the merger, despite declines in their companies' share prices, had not the FCC run up to hit the cable industry's cash flow in the knees with a club.
We fear the Clintonites just don't get it.
In fact, we have FCC Chairman Hundt's word for it that he truly doesn't get it.
In an interview published in yesterday's Journal, Mr. Hundt said: "We understand the industry and don't want to hurt it.
But we don't want cable companies to use their current consumers to invest in tomorrow's services."
Fortunately, the Hundt-Gore view of how capitalism works is limited so far to regulating the telecommunications industry (health and medicine are on the drawing board).
Unfortunately, it's one of the most important pieces of the modern American economy.
Though in many ways arcane, the telecommunications industry mesmerizes the popular mind because it is so quintessentially modern: Its success depends crucially on being fast, flexible and smart -- both technologically and corporately.
The Clintonites purport to understand the rhythms of the modern economy, but we doubt you can ever get the rumba out of born regulators.
The Gores and Hundts may feel they're only being cautious about great, unpredictable change, but compare their kind of caution with that of Gateway 2000 CEO Ted Waitt.
Mr. Waitt was quoted in Monday's Journal as being among those computer manufacturers who doubt that the information highway will run via home TV sets.
But he's got one wall of his office covered with a matrix of the endless industry alliances taking shape along the highway.
When reality or economics demands a shift, Ted Waitt will likely make the right turn, and fast.
By comparison, the Clinton FCC, faced with a similar decisive moment, lurches to dilute an entire industry's cash flow.
Former Carter Administration regulator Alfred Kahn wrote here Tuesday that it should be possible to regulate the Baby Bells forward to an era of full competition.
Be that as it may, we don't see any Alfred Kahns at the regulatory switches in Washington now, which is to say, people who in fact understand how modern corporations actually function in the marketplace.
Instead, we hear theories, we hear speeches and we hear promises of market-oriented policymaking.
In the real world, the day after the Bell Atlantic-TCI merger collapsed, we watched a nervous market go off nearly 52 points.
Whatever the Clinton regulatory philosophy actually is, it doesn't inspire confidence.
