Roger Johnson, the head of the General Services Administration and a key player in the Clinton administration's plan to "reinvent government," has asked the agency's inspector general to investigate his own possible misuse of taxpayer-paid travel.
Mr. Johnson, the former chief executive of Western Digital Corp., asked for the probe after The Wall Street Journal obtained his travel vouchers through a Freedom of Information Act request.
The vouchers show that Mr. Johnson visited his residence in California, where his wife was living, during five of the nine official trips he took in his first seven months on the job.
In an interview Friday, Mr. Johnson said he intends to refund to the federal government at least some of the $38-a-day expenses he received during the four weekends he spent at his home in Laguna Beach, Calif.
Aides also said he would refund some of the $30-a-day expenses he received during the two weekends he visited his other home in Utah in the midst of the official travel.
On top of that, Mr. Johnson said he would reimburse the government for any other expenses that the inspector general determines were personal rather than business related.
The cost of the trips was at least $7,000, documents show.
Mr. Johnson maintained that he didn't do anything wrong, that his trips were filled with official business and that he personally paid for some, small parts of the trips, including one airline ticket to Utah.
He also contended that he isn't legally obligated to refund any of the per diems, which cover meals and incidental expenses.
He said he was willing to make reimbursements, however, for the sake of appearances.
"I have not ever contrived or structured trips to go through Orange County," he asserted.
Yet, he added, "Did I take every opportunity to get home?
I certainly did."
He began one taxpayer-paid trip the moment he learned that his wife, Janice Johnson, was about to evacuate their home during the recent fires.
"I'm taking the cat and leaving," Mr. Johnson said she told him over the phone.
Almost instantly, he said, "I ran out to get a plane."
(Mrs. Johnson moved to Washington in mid-January.)
The 59-year-old Mr. Johnson has spent most of his time in Washington developing plans for -- and promoting -- President Clinton's effort to make the federal government more efficient.
Vice President Al Gore once introduced him as "a tremendous champion of reform and progress in this area."
In addition, he is the administration's highest-ranking Republican and its only former chief executive of a major industrial U.S. corporation.
Before joining the GSA, a 20,000-person agency that oversees the government's real estate and does much of its purchasing, Mr. Johnson was chief executive of Western Digital, an Irvine, Calif., disk-drive maker.
Had the government not paid for Mr. Johnson's trips, he certainly could have afforded to.
Under an agreement with Western Digital, Mr. Johnson was owed as much as two years' salary, or about $1.07 million, based on his 1992 cash compensation of $537,203, plus a potential management bonus.
In addition, the company agreed to forgive an outstanding loan to Mr. Johnson, which was listed as $335,613 in corporate documents, aides said.
Mr. Johnson's actions stand in sharp contrast to his agency's own deputy administrator, Julia Stasch.
Ms. Stasch is a frequent flier to Chicago, where her husband, marketing professor Stanley Stasch, still lives.
But she pays for her twice-monthly trips to Chicago out of her own pocket.
Of the dozen trips she took anywhere in the country at taxpayer expense, only five were to Chicago, and only one of those involved a weekend stay.
And unlike Mr. Johnson, she refused to take any per diem payments for the time she stayed at her Chicago home.
"I know what one must do and must not do," Ms. Stasch said.
"I want to make no mistakes."
