Sen. Bob Packwood visited his home state of Oregon recently, and returned to Washington, D.C., jubilant that his trip did not generate as much furor as it has every other time for the past year.
The reason?
Everyone was fixated on Tonya Harding, the figure skating star who is the latest Oregon embarrassment.
A new joke making the rounds asks, "What do Bob Packwood and Tonya Harding have in common?"
The reply: "They're both on thin ice and they both hit on women."
The state's main daily newspaper, The Oregonian, in an editorial titled "Oregon: Things Look Weirder Here," speculated that the National Enquirer might open a Portland bureau and that Michael Jackson and Lorena Bobbitt might as well move here, too.
The Packwood and Harding scandals the world sees, unfortunately, are just frosting on the cake.
Oregon has embarrassments the outside world has barely heard of.
The real problem is that Oregon has fallen so far so fast -- from paradise to just about like anywhere else, in the span of a decade or so.
It was little more than that when Portland was ranked as the most polite city in the country.
Today, handgun registrations are spiraling.
A decade and a half ago, Portland was ranked as America's most livable city.
Today, national magazines call it "tax hell."
Oregonians used to look in horror on senseless crimes, like drive-by shootings and freeway murders, that happened to the south of us.
Those things simply did not take place here.
This was a nice, safe, quiet place and that's the way we liked it.
Ever since the first drive-by shooting in 1988, however, it has been a different story.
Oregon has been beset with a series of horrible, shocking crimes.
First there was the Ethiopian who was beaten to death with baseball bats by White Supremacists.
And just in the past year there was the white couple that was swarmed by a mob of up to 150 black teenagers, with three of them tried for beating and kicking the male into brain damage.
Now, Oregon is setting new records.
There is the 103-year-old man who was bludgeoned to death, with five white teenage boys held as suspects.
He was the oldest person ever bludgeoned to death here.
And one Portland suburb recently set a record with its first triple murder.
High curving fences are being installed on major freeway overpasses, because recently some teenagers hurled a chunk of concrete through the windshield of a car below, smashing a woman's face.
And let's not forget Elizabeth Diane Downs, the woman who shot her own children, or Katherine Ann Power, the fugitive from the 1970 robbery/murder who holed up in Oregon for 20 years.
Oregon also gained notoriety as the home of Ballot Measure 9, which supporters said aimed to prevent homosexuals from gaining special rights and opponents maintained was actually aimed at stripping them of civil-rights protection.
Tonya Harding is not our first sports scandal.
It was but a year ago or so that some of our Portland Trailblazers got into hot water for fornicating with runaway teenage girls they had picked up in a Salt Lake City mall.
It would be easy to blame all the craziness on the influx of Californians.
After all, about a third of the state's population wasn't here a decade ago.
But our most notorious residents, Sen. Packwood and Ms. Harding, are locals.
In addition to the bad press from our flock of unsavory people, Oregonians face a growing hostility between citizens and government.
So high is the heat that some public figures are getting out of the kitchen.
For example, Rep. Mike Kopetski, a relatively new congressman with a promising career, decided not to run for re-election, in part because of the public climate.
He had been convicted of drunken driving and may not have wanted to walk in fire, as had Mr. Packwood.
There is little question that conditions have deteriorated.
But it is also true that for many years problems were underreported.
When media people move here, many want to stay so badly that they pull punches in order to fit into the community.
After all, it took the Washington Post to break the story about Sen. Packwood's sexual escapades.
To regain the adversarial relationship with government, at least one major newspaper is reportedly hiring mostly "outsiders," people who have not yet been co-opted.
The chasm between the governed and government is evident in the conflict over taxes.
Oregonians voted in a property tax limitation measure -- Ballot Measure Five.
Rather than slash expenditures, Gov. Barbara Roberts responded by asking voters to approve a sales tax -- after one had been defeated here eight times in the past.
Not only did it not pass, but it so turned voters against her that on Friday she announced that she won't be running for re-election.
One of the latest Packwood jokes has taken on a new twist: "Have you heard that Packwood is resigning from the Senate?
He's running for governor instead, because Roberts's seat is up for grabs."
Oregon still has a relatively hot economy and double the national population growth rate.
It boasts a rugged coastline, lush forest and farmland, towering mountains, and a moist, moderate climate.
But the clouds overhead are not from the winter rains -- they are from a sense of paradise lost.
Mr. Eisler is a free-lance writer in Portland.
