The U.S. should expect to contribute about half the 50,000 troops that probably would be needed to monitor a peace agreement in Bosnia, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff said.
More immediately, the U.S. is contemplating nearly doubling the number of American troops already deployed in Macedonia, raising the U.S. commitment there to some 500 peacekeepers, administration officials said.
Joint Chiefs Chairman John Shalikashvili's comments are significant because they contradict recent assertions by State Department and White House officials that far fewer than 50,000 troops would be needed to enforce a peace settlement.
Those officials have also suggested that the U.S. would contribute only about one-third of the troops for the peacekeeping force, which will be drawn from North Atlantic Treaty Organization members.
Gen. Shalikashvili's remarks effectively took public the Clinton administration's internal debate over the potential U.S. peacekeeping effort.
While the political side of the administration is hoping to win congressional approval by emphasizing the comparatively small size of the commitment, military planners are more concerned about sending a force large enough to deter potential challengers as well as to ensure U.S. command of the multinational effort.
"We must guard against sending less because we think that's politically more salable," Gen. Shalikashvili said at a breakfast with defense reporters.
But, he added, "I think we have an awful lot of explaining to do" to make the case to the American public about why U.S. troops should be involved in keeping a Bosnian peace.
A senior White House official expressed puzzlement why Gen. Shalikashvili "was still using the 50,000 figure," which was first proposed last year when peace negotiations were focused on dividing Bosnia into 10 separate ethnic enclaves.
The current peace plan, championed by the administration, would divide Bosnia into two republics -- one composed of Muslims and Croats and another of Bosnian Serbs.
"It is a hell of a lot simpler map we are looking at now than last September," the aide said, "and I can't imagine it would require the same degree of commitment.
It almost sounds like a time-warp answer."
With the U.S. now deeply engaged in diplomatic negotiations to end the Bosnian war, the debate over U.S. peacekeepers has taken on a new urgency, at least within the administration.
Charles Redman, the special U.S. envoy to the former Yugoslavia who has been shuttling between Bosnia, Croatia and Serbia, said yesterday, "We have made an enormous amount of progress" toward peace over the last month, according to wire reports.
As a further sign of U.S. commitment, the administration has dispatched retired U.S. Army Gen. John Galvin, a former commander of NATO, to observe the peace talks and help shape an agreement that is militarily enforceable.
Gen. Shalikashvili said that earlier peace plans contained elements that could have hampered peacekeepers, such as a requirement that troop movements be negotiated in advance with the parties on the ground.
Gen. Shalikashvili said such a requirement is "absolute nonsense."
Preliminary contacts with Bosnia's Serbs, who control 70% of the territory of Bosnia and are the main aggressors in the war, haven't been successful.
"They're listening, that's all we can say," said the senior White House official.
U.S. officials are hoping that with time, and pressure from Russia, the Serbs will come around.
Bosnia's Prime Minister Haris Silajdizic discussed the peace plan yesterday in Moscow with Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev.
With a peace settlement in Bosnia, at best, still several months away, the United Nations is appealing for more troops to help extend a current ceasefire around Sarajevo to other "safe areas."
The Clinton administration has refused to send any U.S. ground troops to Bosnia until a peace agreement is signed.
Its expected offer of about 200 additional peacekeepers for Macedonia is clearly intended to take some of the sting out of that refusal.
The U.S. troops would replace Nordic peacekeepers, who would then be available for service in Bosnia.
Britain's U.N. Ambassador Sir David Hannay yesterday hosted an informal "troop pledging meeting" in New York and got some positive responses.
France said that it would "temporarily" send an additional 800 troops to Bosnia, Britain is expected to pledge a similar number, while Russia, Spain and Ukraine all indicated their intention to send a small number of additional troops.
There are currently a total of about 1,000 peacekeepers in Macedonia.
Turkey has also offered to send 1,000 peacekeepers.
The offer may or may not be accepted by U.N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who until now has insisted on excluding any country with a "historical interest" in the Balkans.
Bosnia's U.N. ambassador, Mohamed Sacirbey, said that such a rule was already violated by the recent placement of Russian troops in Bosnia and expressed hope that the Turkish offer would be accepted.
