Micrografx Inc., in a major shift in strategy for the business-software company, is joining with the maker of Crayola crayons to develop a line of computer programs for kids.
The alliance, expected to be announced today, is a first for both companies and places them at the center of what has become a booming market for software aimed at the home.
Both Micrografx and Binney & Smith Inc., the unit of closely held Hallmark Cards Inc. that sells Crayola products, say they expect their first children's drawing programs to be released in the spring.
Under their agreement, Micrografx will write the software for the new titles, while Binney & Smith will help plan the content, design the packaging and distribute the final product.
Micrografx, for instance, is expected to tap Binney & Smith's vast mass-market distribution system, including retailers such as Toys R Us and Wal-Mart Stores Inc., which is far broader than Micrografx's traditional base of computer superstores and dealers.
Mr. Tucker said the first two products will be priced at less than $50 and will carry both the Micrografx and Crayola names.
The software, aimed at children as young as three years old, includes drawing and painting programs, as well as an art "studio" that will help kids create fliers and posters.
"This is not just a licensing deal," said Gordon M. Tucker, the longtime consumer marketer who took over as Micrografx's chief executive officer September.
"This is a full-fledged partnership."
For Micrografx, the partnership couldn't have come soon enough.
The onetime highflier, one of the first developers of business programs for Microsoft Corp.'s popular Windows software, has suffered a slowdown in sales growth along with delays in introducing key products.
For its fiscal third quarter ended Dec. 31, the company reported a net loss of $1.1 million, or 13 cents a share, after restructuring its European operations.
Revenue was basically flat, at about $17.9 million.
Mr. Tucker said he was attracted to the home market by its potential for rapid growth, even as the market for many traditional software titles has begun to plateau.
The executive predicts sales from Micrografx's new At-Home division could account for as much as half of the company's revenue within three to five years.
"This is a market that is growing just explosively," said Jeffrey Tarter, publisher of Softletter, an industry newsletter in Watertown, Mass.
"Most of the business categories are saturated."
Mr. Tarter notes, though, that tapping into the home market means taking on heavyweights like Microsoft and Broderbund Software Inc.
Microsoft, for instance, last month announced its first writing and art program for children, along with plans to sell the software through television home-shopping networks.
While Mr. Tarter notes that Micrografx has no name identification among consumer software buyers, he said the Crayola name should give the new products instant credibility.
"Whenever you can borrow a wellknown brand, it helps," he said.
"Crayola, in this market, is a much stronger brand name than even Microsoft or Lotus Development Corp."
Fred Geyer, director of business development at Binney & Smith, based in Easton, Pa., said the Micrografx software titles will be the first of many for the company.
"We think this will be a core business for Binney & Smith," he said.
"We think there's an awful lot of potential here."
In Nasdaq Stock Market trading, Micrografx shares were unchanged at $11 each.
