A robot controlled by surgeons from a remote location successfully performed gall bladder operations on three patients in Canada, presaging an era of long-distance surgery.
The patients suffered no complications during or after the robotic surgery, according to a report in this week's issue of the British medical journal Lancet.
Canadian surgeons at the Hotel-Dieu de Montreal Hospital in Quebec said the robot's precision surgery showed that certain operations can be done without a surgeon present at the operating table.
They said the technique could be especially useful in remote hospitals that lack surgeons skilled in certain procedures.
The skill of a surgeon in a distant medical center could be provided electronically via a robot, the Canadians suggested.
To perform the gall bladder removal by an operation called a laparoscopy, the Montreal surgeons attached a tiny camera and a laparoscope to a robotic arm in the operating room.
The laparoscope is a flexible optical tube inserted into the abdomen through a small incision.
The laparoscope allows instruments to be passed through it into the abdominal cavity and, at the same time, allows the surgeon to see into the cavity.
While the robotic arm stood by the patient, the camera provided a video image on a television screen in a separate room.
The robotic arm was controlled from the remote location through electronic-mechanical devices, which included a Nintendo-style "joystick" and a series of push buttons for in-out and rotational movements.
While viewing the image on the screen, the surgeons used the joystick and other controls to manipulate the laparoscope in each of three patients, who ranged in age from 33 to 53.
The robotic surgery -- conducted without even a surgical assistant at the operating table -- took 30 minutes in two cases, and 50 minutes in the other.
"The blood loss was negligible," the surgeons said in the Lancet report, noting, too, that the patients experienced "negligible" abdominal pain.
Hospital stays were less than 24 hours for two patients and under 48 hours for the third.
"The whole setup was not unlike the Nintendo gameboard," said Alfons Pomp, assistant professor of surgery.
Dr. Pomp said that as far as he knew, this marked the first time that a robot was manipulated from a remote location to operate on a human.
He said similar procedures have been performed on animals in the U.S. and Italy.
He added that while robots have been used in orthopedic surgery on humans in the U.S., the robots were not controlled remotely.
Dr. Pomp said that laparoscopy, a relatively new procedure, has opened up a new field known as minimally invasive surgery, where robots might be successfully used.
Dr. Pomp said that to advance this technology, researchers are working on a voice-command system to replace the joystick.
A voice-command system, he said, would improve precision with which the robot maneuvers instruments and would also free the surgeon's hands.
A ROBOTIC ARM, manipulated by a surgical assistant from a remote location, controlled a miniature video camera inside a patient's abdominal cavity during a laparoscopic gall bladder operation at the Hotel-Dieu de Montreal Hospital in Canada.
The robotic arm replaced the surgical assistant in the operating room rather than the surgeon as stated in an article Friday.
