Photography companies are focusing on the consumers who really control household purse strings -- kids.
From offering giveaways to neighborhood soccer clubs to promoting the use of cameras in classrooms, the big names in the business are doing their best to entice a once-overlooked group of consumers -- with good cause.
"Growth rates in the industry are not what they used to be," says Eastman Kodak Co.'s Bob LaPerle, general manager of single-use cameras -- a popular item among younger crowds.
"But we know from research that kids still think photography is cool.
If we can develop these unique programs for them, we can accelerate the market."
The companies have little choice.
More than 25% of households decreased their picture taking between 1987 and 1992, according to the Photo Marketing Association's 1993 consumer survey.
Blame video.
Parents aged 18 to 34 -- traditionally the biggest film buyers -- are turning on video cameras to record baby's first meal, first step and first birthday.
In fact, in households with children aged two and under, 70% said they plan to buy a video camera on their next purchase of photographic equipment, compared with the 18% who would choose a 35mm camera, according to the PMA survey.
But children are a different story.
Having grown up in a video generation, they regard still photography as something of a novelty, says George Rosenbaum, chief executive of Leo J. Shapiro & Associates, retail consultants.
What's more, parents support picture taking as an activity because it's considered more artistic than video, he says.
And it's not that expensive: Children can chip in their allowance to buy and process film.
"I cannot think of another product that has more going for it to be marketed to children," Mr. Rosenbaum says.
"I wonder what took the photography companies so long to realize children are the buyers?"
Making up for lost time, Fuji Photo Film Co. now directs more than $1 million of its advertising and marketing budget toward kids, says Rod King, Fuji's director of U.S. consumer marketing.
Latching onto fervor about soccer's World Cup 1994, which will take place this year in the U.S. for the first time, Fuji sent direct mail to 15,000 soccer coaches for a "Kids in Gear" program, which gives equipment ranging from shinguards to a team van for proofs of purchase.
Fuji is also going to schools.
In exchange for participating in the company's PhotoPals program, Wisconsin fifth-grade teacher William Williams receives one single-use camera and some coupons for film and for more single-use cameras.
Using the equipment, his students correspond photographically with Fuji-selected students in Hawaii.
It's a good deal, Mr. Williams figures.
"There are no photography classes here," he says.
"If Fuji makes some money off this, then fine."
Not necessarily, says Jean Schmidt, a New Jersey school principal and former director of the national Head Start education program for underprivileged children.
"It's something that has to be watched very carefully," she says of in-school corporate activities.
"If companies want to help fund schools, fine.
Let us choose the programs.
But to use us for advertising is immoral."
Fuji is well aware of educators' concerns.
"We want to be careful not to overcommercialize this," says Mr. King, adding that the program offers opportunities to both the schools and students that they would otherwise miss.
Equally sensitive to the commercialization concern, Kodak not only donates cameras and film to schools as part of its "Using Cameras in the Curriculum" program (for kids in kindergarten through grade six) but also lines up photofinishers to pay the developing bill for a portion of the program.
The company weaves environmental themes into its program and gives teachers a 35mm camera that can be used more than once.
Kodak hopes to draw the six-to-11-year-old crowd with the school program, as it did with its single-use camera decorated with characters from the hit movie "Aladdin."
Then, for kids "too old" for such things, there was the Photo fX 35mm camera launched last year for $39.95 -- a "real" camera that "looks like Mom and Dad's," Mr. LaPerle says.
Such a gradual training process is "very, very smart," says Leo Shapiro's Mr. Rosenbaum.
In fact, although nearly 60% of all customers plan to buy a camcorder vs. a traditional camera on their next purchase, those under 25 are still more likely than any other age group (except those 75 and older) to choose the standard 35mm camera, according to the Photo Marketing Association's survey.
That is why Konica USA Inc., a unit of Konica Corp., shifted more than $1.5 million for a promotion appearing during ABC Network's prime daytime drama hours, when teenagers and college students tune in or tape their favorite soap-opera segments.
Konica even sponsored a contest for consumers, with the winner offered a chance to appear on "All My Children."
"A new group of people is becoming savvy about photography, and that's why as marketers, we're going after them," says Paul Gordon, Konica's marketing/advertising director.
In its bid for the youth market, Polaroid Corp. staged extensive "back-to-school" promotions, complete with stock-car racer Shauna Robinson signing autographs.
Meanwhile, Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co. is targeting price-conscious families.
With its lower-priced private-label and Scotch brand films, 3M uses graphics of moms and kids in its point-of-sale advertising; it thus hopes to attract parents who want their little Susie to experiment with picture taking but who don't want to spend a fortune on wasted pictures of the dog and Susie's favorite stuffed animals.
And 3M will give about $250,000 to its retailers to promote its Kit for Kids -- a $10 package with a single-use camera, project book and photo album with glue stick (which 3M also makes).
"Other leisure activities have taken the lead, and kids have not been as exposed to photography," says 3M's John Gregerson, market development manager.
"We've got to convince them that there are still a lot of fun memories to be made here."
