Value Line Inc. may be the most famous name in stock-rating services.
But when it comes to mutual-fund analysis, you may have read it in Morningstar first.
That's because Value Line's new mutual-fund survey repeats, in astonishing detail, some of the analysis published months earlier by rival Morningstar Inc., which is smaller, younger and a pioneer in the fund-analysis field.
"In many instances these echoes may occur legitimately," says John Rekenthaler, editor of Morningstar Mutual Funds in Chicago.
"But in other cases," he contends, "they're clearly not accidental echoes, but are in fact plagiarism."
Value Line firmly denies that it has ever copied Morningstar.
It says similarities probably arise from fund managers' tendency to repeat themselves.
"It would be a great injustice against Value Line to have our impeccable name tarnished with this innuendo," said Steve Savage, the head of Value Line's mutual-fund effort.
"This really is unfounded."
Value Line adds that in most cases its analysts can document their sources.
Value Line has been advertising that its new product is better, cheaper (at $295 a year vs. Morningstar's $395) and bigger (covering 2,000 funds while Morningstar covers 1,240.)
But a close look at Value Line's mutual-fund publication does raise questions of originality.
Consider the two rivals' writeups on the Merrill Lynch Short-Term Global Income Fund:
Morningstar (Sept. 17): "Earlier this year, the fund featured a 20% stake in the United States, a position that has now been reduced to 10% of assets."
Value Line (Dec. 14): "Early in 1993, the fund featured a 20% stake in the United States, a position that has now been reduced to 10%."
A fluke?
Consider how the two companies portrayed the strategy of IDS Managed Retirement Fund manager Richard Lazarchic:
Morningstar (June 25): "Lazarchic describes himself as more opportunistic. . . .
He sold some retail and consumer-staples stocks, such as Wal-Mart and Pepsi, because he doesn't think their growth rates are sustainable."
Value Line (Nov. 16): "New manager Richard Lazarchic describes his style as opportunistic. . . .
He sold some consumer staples and retail stocks such as Pepsi and Wal-Mart because he questions the sustainability of their growth rates."
"I never talked to Value Line," Mr. Lazarchic says, although he says he did talk to Morningstar.
IDS public relations says it wasn't the source, either.
IDS says the fund's May 31 semiannual report uses the word "opportunistic," but doesn't mention the sales of Pepsi or Wal-Mart.
Value Line's use of statistics raises eyebrows.
Take the rundown on United Municipal High-Income Fund.
Morningstar said Oct. 1 that the fund had "a full 73% of bonds unrated by Standard & Poor's."
Nearly three months later on Dec. 28, Value Line appeared to use the same statistic as Morningstar: "Currently, the fund has almost three-quarters of its assets invested in nonrated municipal bonds."
Value Line's own statistics, published on the same page, show holdings of unrated bonds had dropped to 59%, not "almost three-quarters."
John Holliday, the fund's manager, says, "I don't think that I was ever called by Value Line."
Morningstar's Mr. Rekenthaler says that after going through about 800 fund analyses by Value Line, Morningstar has found more than three dozen instances where wording and detail are so similar that "it is difficult to imagine these events occurring accidentally."
In many other reports, he says, there are some similarities in analysis but "the echoes are less powerful."
One competing newsletter editor, who asked not to be named, speculated that some of the two publications' similarities might be the fault of a slothful analyst or two.
This argument was dismissed by Value Line.
"Anybody who's covering any of these funds is in large measure working from the same source materials, manager interviews, annual reports, often literature that comes from the marketing department," says Value Line's Mr. Savage.
Fund managers "have a story to tell. . . .
Sometimes they sound like a broken record."
Mr. Savage and other Value Line executives say that the company's analysts provided documentation of sources on all but one of the fund reviews -- United Municipal High-Income -- cited in this article.
As investors have poured billions of dollars into mutual funds, the fund-analysis business boomed.
And on the strength of its decades-old stock survey, Value Line would seem a natural provider of information on mutual funds.
Value Line was founded in 1931 by Arnold Bernhard.
Mr. Bernhard was succeeded as chairman and chief executive officer in 1988 by Jean Bernhard Buttner, his daughter.
Value Line was incensed by Morningstar's entrance in 1986 into the mutual-fund information business, in a format that visually resembled Value Line's stock sheets.
Morningstar's profile gets a boost from its frequent use by the news media, including The Wall Street Journal, as a source of data and commentary on funds.
Dow Jones & Co., publisher of this newspaper, also is associated with Morningstar in products derived from the Dow Jones World Stock Index.
The first product, a directory describing companies in the world index entitled "The Dow Jones Guide to the World Stock Market," was published this month by Prentice Hall.
Closely held Morningstar says it had revenue of $21.2 million in 1993.
It won't disclose profit, but says it breaks even, as profits from older businesses are reinvested in new publications and software.
Value Line, which is publicly traded but 80%-owned by the family of the founder, had profit of $27.7 million, or $2.78 a share, on revenue of $78 million in its fiscal year through April 1993.
Value Line stock closed at $36.50 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading yesterday.
Of course, some similarities between the two newsletters are likely to occur if both hear the same rundown from a fund manager, as they did with Oppenheimer Global Bio-Tech Fund.
But it is unusual for two publications to contradict themselves on the same point.
Morningstar on July 23 wrote that Oppenheimer Global Bio-Tech "is the only mutual fund that focuses exclusively on volatile biotechnology stocks."
A few paragraphs later, Morningstar seemed to contradict itself: "Manager Sandra Panem has added some large pharmaceuticals" to the portfolio.
Along came Value Line on Sept. 28 with the same apparent self-contradiction: "Oppenheimer Global Bio-Tech focuses exclusively on biotechnology stocks. . . .
Panem routinely invests in large pharmaceutical companies."
Oppenheimer says that its fund's manager talked to both publications, and doesn't consider the two statements contradictory.
Then there's the case of the Fidelity Select Food & Agriculture fund.
Morningstar (July 23): "The fund's new top holding, for example, is John Deere, the world's largest manufacturer of farm implements. . . .
Manager William Mankivsky says he prefers to buy at below-market multiples."
Value Line (Nov. 28): "Mankivsky likes to purchase stocks that are trading at below market-multiples.
He has purchased John Deere the world's largest manufacturer of farm implements . . ."
Fidelity says Mr. Mankivsky didn't speak to Value Line.
But Value Line says it got the information in written form from Fidelity.
The elbows have been flying between Value Line and Morningstar.
A recent direct-mail ad from Value Line declares, "After years of waiting for someone to create a Mutual Fund rating service as complete and reliable as the Value Line Investment Survey, we had to do it ourselves."
But suggestions of copying by Value Line could give a piquant meaning to another statement in the same advertisement, where Value Line boasts it is "the model for imitators all over the world."
Two rival newsletters' comments on Franklin U.S. Government Securities Fund
The fund's `size helps keep it simple. . . .
The fund's prodigious asset base is one of the reasons it has taken a straightforward approach to the GNMA market.' -- Morningstar Sept. 17, 1993
The fund `likes to keep things simple. . . .
Its large size is one of the reasons management has taken a straight-forward approach to investing.' -- Value Line, Dec. 14, 1993
