BOSNIA'S GOVERNMENT APPROVED creation of a Muslim-Croat federation.
The cabinet also recommended adoption of the U.S.-brokered accord by the Muslim-dominated parliament today.
On Saturday, President Izetbegovic reassumed leadership of Bosnia's main Muslim party, a move Bosnian radio said could lead to his being replaced, possibly by a Croat, as head of state.
Meanwhile, Bosnian Serb leader Karadzic accused the Bosnian government of launching a military offensive, but U.N. officials cast doubt on the claim.
The U.S. ambassador to Croatia said the Zagreb government and rebel Serb leaders are close to agreeing on a cease-fire in the breakaway Krajina region.
Armed Inkatha supporters occupied a Natal stadium to block an African National Congress rally.
The action took place a day after de Klerk met with the head of Inkatha to step up pressure on the Zulu leadership to end violence and allow campaigning in the Zulu heartland in advance of next month's first all-race elections in South Africa.
Israeli settlers said they would defy a government ban and hold a rally this week in Hebron, site of a massacre of Palestinians by a settler last month.
Foreign Minister Peres indicated, meanwhile, that the government is considering removing settlers from Hebron, a PLO demand at negotiations aimed at reviving stalled peace talks.
A church roof collapsed during a tornado in Alabama, killing 17 people and injuring at least 90.
Police in Piedmont, about 72 miles west of Atlanta, said the building collapsed with about 140 Palm Sunday worshipers inside.
The storm, part of a series that killed 18 others in the region, knocked out power, further hampering rescue efforts.
The Clintons may owe back taxes despite White House efforts to dispel the controversy over their Whitewater losses and tax deductions, some accountants contend.
Meanwhile, the Whitewater counsel is investigating whether two Clinton aides improperly sought to remove a foe from an RTC inquiry.
Mexican officials averted a possible panic in its markets following the assassination of the ruling party's presidential candidate last week through a once-secret agreement with the U.S. Treasury and a complex mix of moral suasion and vague threats.
Meanwhile, a fuller portrait of the confessed assassin emerged.
Federal investigators focused on the building of a nearby asphalt plant in their hunt for the cause of the rupture of a gas pipeline that touched off a massive explosion and fire in central New Jersey last week.
Investigators said construction equipment may have gouged the pipe.
One woman died of a heart attack as a result of the blast.
Italians began two days of voting in national elections, but turnout was light.
With the centrist coalition that ruled since 1948 discredited by a corruption scandal, the main contenders are a conservative group headed by one of Italy's richest men and a leftist coalition led by former Communists.
Final returns aren't due until tomorrow.
South Korea's president arrived in Beijing for talks with Chinese leaders that are expected to focus on tensions caused by North Korea's refusal to allow inspections of suspected nuclear weapons sites.
But Chinese leaders fear sanctions could drive Pyongyang to take desperate action or its leadership to fall.
A big turnout in Ukraine ensured that the results of the first parliamentary elections since independence from the former Soviet Union would meet requirements to be declared valid.
An emerging conflict between the executive and legislative branches, however, could further destabilize a tense political situation.
The administration will press House Democratic leaders to water down spending cuts totaling $26 billion over five years that were approved by the Senate last week.
The Senate Friday passed Clinton's $1.5 trillion budget for fiscal 1995, but cut more spending than the White House wanted.
The 57-40 vote was almost strictly along party lines.
Yeltsin returned to Moscow after a two-week Black Sea vacation that set off a rash of speculation about coup plots and failing health.
The Russian president, in an interview in Izvestia, condemned the rumors as "a rich brew of lies, meanness and greed."
