Rohr Inc. signed an $11.7 million agreement settling criminal and civil charges of defrauding the government by falsifying tests of military aircraft equipment.
The settlement, which had been expected, ends a nearly four-year criminal probe by the Justice Department, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Defense Department.
Admitting that employees falsified tests on parts for the Air Force's C-5 transport planes and the Navy's F-14 fighter jets, Rohr agreed to plead guilty to felony charges of submitting false statements and pay $3.7 million in criminal fines.
The move also resolves civil claims by the government against Rohr, allowing the Chula Vista, Calif., manufacturer of aircraft and rocket parts to remain eligible for new Pentagon contracts.
The company will pay $4 million to settle a pending civil suit and provide at least another $4 million worth of spare parts and extended warranties to the Air Force as part of a separate administrative settlement.
The civil settlement doesn't require Rohr to admit wrongdoing.
But federal prosecutors continue to investigate individuals who knew about or participated in the illegal activities during the late 1980s.
"No individuals are getting a pass," said prosecutor Dan Goodman, declining to comment further.
The plea agreement specifically says that a guilty plea by Rohr won't block the government from prosecuting individuals for the same offenses.
The company also pledged to cooperate with the investigation by helping prosecutors identify and locate individuals who may have information about testing violations.
Court documents filed by prosecutors indicate that employees at the firm's Riverside, Calif., plant, among other things, failed to properly test certain parts that attach the engines to the wings of C-5 aircraft.
As part of its agreement to plead guilty, the company also admitted hiding the fact that certain F-14 parts failed high-temperature strength tests by falsifying test results.
The agreement is subject to approval by the federal district court here, though a hearing scheduled for Monday is expected to be largely a formality.
Chief Executive Officer Robert Rau said the company wouldn't have any comment until the agreement goes into effect.
Rohr previously said that it put aside reserves for both criminal and civil investigations.
