Dow Jones & Co. and Hubbard Broadcasting Inc. said Dow Jones has acquired a minority interest in and will provide programming to Hubbard's new U.S. Satellite Broadcasting venture, a national direct-broadcast satellite service.
U.S. Satellite Broadcasting Inc., St. Paul, Minn., plans to deliver more than 150 channels of entertainment and information to viewers who will receive the signals on 18-inch dish antennas linked to special home receivers.
Peter Skinner, senior vice president of Dow Jones, which publishes The Wall Street Journal, said Dow Jones will be the exclusive provider of business and financial news to the new service.
He declined to specify the size of the investment, but said it was "multimillion dollar" in size.
He said the Dow Jones programming will range from daily news reports on the U.S. Satellite news channel to informational and instructional broadcasts, including pay-per-view programming.
"The programs will parallel what you see in The Wall Street Journal, such as Your Money Matters, or the investment round tables in Barron's magazine," he said.
U.S. Satellite Broadcasting plans to begin operating a digital direct-broadcast satellite service in April, providing a wide variety of entertainment and information television programming.
U.S. Satellite already has reached distribution agreements with Viacom Inc. channels Nickelodeon, MTV and VH-1, as well as Viacom pay channels Showtime, Movie Channel and Flix, and Time Warner Inc.'s Home Box Office and Cinemax.
The broadcasts will be delivered from the first of two satellites recently launched by U.S. Satellite and its partner Hughes Communications Inc., a subsidiary of General Motors Corp.
The second satellite will be launched late this year.
U.S. Satellite's programming will be broadcast separately from programming planned by Hughes.
The venture is expected to be the first real threat to cable TV companies, by providing customers an alternative method of receiving TV programming.
However, users will have to make an upfront investment in hardware -- the satellite dish initially has been estimated to cost $700 -- as well as pay monthly service costs.
Thomson Consumer Electronics Inc. will begin distributing the home receiving equipment under the RCA brand through retail outlets beginning in April.
Hubbard Broadcasting owns nine TV stations, two radio stations, two TV production companies and a satellite newsgathering service.
Dow Jones also publishes Barron's magazine and other periodicals, electronic business information services, including Dow Jones Telerate, and the Ottaway group of community newspapers.
Dow Jones shares closed yesterday at $38, off 50 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
The news was announced after the close of trading.
