QVC Network Inc. ruled out changing its $10 billion offer for Paramount Communications Inc., boosting the odds that Paramount shareholders will choose a rival offer from Viacom Inc. by the deadline of midnight tonight.
The decision by QVC Chairman Barry Diller puts Viacom Chairman Sumner Redstone on the brink of winning the epic five-month-old struggle.
Cable and entertainment giant Viacom thus would gain control of one of the six major Hollywood studios and a leading publisher -- but at a cost nearly $2 billion higher than Mr. Redstone originally intended to pay.
QVC, the home-shopping company that surfaced last September with an offer to thwart the lower-priced friendly deal between Viacom and Paramount, continued to appeal to Paramount shareholders to embrace the proposed QVC-Paramount combination as offering the most long-term value.
"We are eager to begin the process of creating shareholder value," QVC said in a statement.
Attacking Viacom plans for Paramount as "nebulous talk about synergies and unspecified cutbacks," it declared that "the only good argument is one that contains concrete plans for rebuilding of current assets and creation of new ones."
QVC maintained that its offer is "superior," with "no games, no bells, no whistles and is easily understood."
Yet despite the appeal, people in the QVC camp in private virtually conceded the contest.
"The game has run out of gas," said one.
Added another, "Odds are, we lose."
In a statement, Viacom, which has also agreed to merge with Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., said that the three companies combined would represent "the first stage of creating a global media powerhouse of unparalleled proportions in the industry."
QVC has tried to argue that it had the superior bid based on Mr. Diller's track record in managing entertainment assets and has cited uncertainties in Viacom's pending $8.4 billion acquisition of Blockbuster.
Takeover stock traders said the QVC statement boosted the odds that Viacom will be able to win the contest tonight by garnering 50.1% of Paramount shares under its bid of $107 a share in cash for 50.1% of Paramount stock, and securities for the remaining shares.
QVC has offered $104 a share for 50.1% of Paramount plus securities for the remaining shares.
"There's a pretty strong chance that it's over tomorrow night," said one trader, Richard H. Schneider.
Another trader estimated the chances of a Viacom victory tonight at 80%-85%.
The chances of QVC itself gaining a 50.1% stake were regarded as close to zero.
Paramount shares were unchanged at $76.875 in composite New York Stock Exchange trading Friday.
Recently QVC's odyssey, in which it won two legal victories to overcome stiff opposition from Paramount and Viacom and seize a commanding lead in the battle, lost steam in recent weeks as the company balked at guaranteeing the value of QVC securities in the second step of its two-step tender offer.
Most of the shares of Paramount are now owned by arbitragers, takeover stock speculators.
And although QVC's current offer is valued higher than Viacom's, the arbs favor the Viacom offer because it includes just such a guarantee, a so-called collar that involves issuing more Viacom stock to Paramount shareholders in the future if the price of their holdings doesn't appreciate.
Both bids are valued at more than $10 billion; but traders regard their daily price changes as meaningless because the leading bidder's stock trades at a discount to the trailing bidder's.
The decision by QVC to forgo a collar, despite arbs' request for one, was made by Mr. Diller, who argued that such a move possibly would expose QVC shareholders to severe dilution of their holdings.
QVC also has maintained that the collar offered by Viacom ultimately could hurt that company's shareholders.
If Viacom's stock fails to gain ground over the next one to three years, the company would have to issue extra payments to current Paramount shareholders.
In refusing to provide a collar, Mr. Diller decided not to heed the advice of two investment bankers who said such a measure was needed to win: his own advisers at Allen & Co., and Bruce Wasserstein, who was advising one of QVC's major investors in the Paramount offer, BellSouth Corp.
In the end, Mr. Diller's advisers and investors deferred to his wishes.
In recent weeks, people in the QVC camp said there had been internal stress among its investors BellSouth, Advance Publications Inc., and Cox Communications Inc. over issues relating to increased financial support.
Mr. Diller yesterday acknowledged that "any alliance by a disparate group is extraordinarily hard to maintain."
But he quickly added: "The fact this one has been maintained is a real compliment to each of the investor parties."
QVC's only hope now appears to be that neither side gains 50.1% and the contest continues without any set rules.
Paramount has asked both bidders to agree that whichever side gets more stock tendered to it be declared the winner.
QVC has balked at that, but Paramount's directors may attempt to award the contest to Viacom anyway if Viacom obtains a large plurality of stock.
Analysts said they didn't understand what QVC had to gain by putting out such a clear statement that it didn't plan to raise its bid, because it removed any lingering doubt.
Some traders said they believed the statement was aimed at improving QVC's litigation posture in case Viacom doesn't gain 50.1%.
Viacom has threatened to sue QVC if it doesn't gain the 50.1%, on the grounds that Mr. Diller dropped hints last week at meetings with analysts and investors that QVC's investors might put together a plan to buy QVC stock in the future, boosting its perceived value.
Viacom has charged that Mr. Diller's statements were a "backdoor" way of raising its bid that violated the rules that bids weren't supposed to be changed after Feb. 1.
QVC has responded that Mr. Diller didn't make or hint at any promises.
But Paramount Friday said it has "grave concerns regarding QVC's compliance with the bidding procedures."
QVC's statement that it "will make no change in its bid" seemed to rule out QVC's altering its bid after today if Viacom falls short of the 50.1% target.
Viacom has argued that QVC can't change its bid after today even if Viacom doesn't prevail -- a contention that QVC's lawyer Martin Lipton disputed on Friday.
If Viacom gains 50.1% of Paramount's stock by midnight tonight, the bidding rules require QVC to withdraw its bid, and Viacom must give Paramount shareholders who tendered their stock to QVC another 10 business days to switch to Viacom.
Then Viacom would be free to acquire 50.1% of Paramount shares on March 1, completing the acquisition some weeks later by issuing securities for the remaining shares.
On Friday, Viacom's Class A stock ended 25 cents higher at $36.50 a share in composite American Stock Exchange trading; QVC rose $1.25 to $46.875 a share in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
