In a late-night news conference, Mr. Hosokawa indicated he regretted the reversal, which followed several days of internal discord that had threatened his seven-party government.
But after failing to quell the coalition infighting, Mr. Hosokawa said he has "given up" any plans for a shuffle at the moment, preferring instead to try to unite more strongly the team he already leads.
The decision, coming after several recent problems, adds to questions about Mr. Hosokawa's leadership and the viability of Japan's experiment with multiparty coalition government.
It also raises the prospect of further delay to Japan's efforts to head off a trade clash with the U.S.
In his seven months in office, Mr. Hosokawa frequently has faced opposition from within his own cabinet over policies ranging from political and tax reform to opening the Japanese market to rice imports.
Earlier this year, Mr. Hosokawa had to back down from plans for aggressive tax changes after his announcement prompted threats from several coalition members to withdraw from the government.
One of the reasons Mr. Hosokawa was pushing for a shuffle was to overcome the bickering and to strengthen his cabinet team, particularly to face economic issues.
But in the end, he was unable to secure support from several key coalition parties, including the Socialists, among the largest voting blocs.
One of the key targets of the planned shuffle was Masayoshi Takemura, chief cabinet secretary and top government spokesman.
In recent times Mr. Hosokawa and Mr. Takemura, formerly a close colleague, have clashed over tax issues and opening the rice market.
In contrast, more-conservative coalition leaders, led by longtime parliamentary power broker Ichiro Ozawa, had pushed Mr. Hosokawa to put greater emphasis on economics and trade.
The decision to abandon plans for a shuffle leaves Mr. Hosokawa saddled with his recalcitrant cabinet, at a time when he needs to confront such tough issues as the looming trade clash with the U.S.
The irony is that Mr. Hosokawa came to office last summer promising a new style of politics that would end the similar factional infighting of the scandal-tainted Liberal Democratic Party that had ruled for 38 years.
The turmoil has hurt the coalition's standings in the polls, although Mr. Hosokawa and his government still remain more popular than recent LDP governments.
Two newspaper polls this week showed approval ratings have fallen below 60% for the first time.
The Yomiuri, Japan's largest newspaper, said support fell 14.4 percentage points to 58% last month.
An Asahi newspaper poll said support is down to 57% from 60% in a previous survey.
