Bitter, snowy weather in the Midwest and Northeast failed to lift petroleum-futures prices on the New York Mercantile Exchange as traders stayed focused on bearish crude inventory reports.
The result: a 61-cent-a-barrel plunge in March crude oil futures prices, which also pushed March heating-oil prices lower by a penny a gallon.
Both the weekly statistics released late Tuesday by the American Petroleum Institute and yesterday's report from the Department of Energy showed significant, bearish increases in the level of U.S. oil stocks for the week ended Feb. 4.
The API numbers put the increase at 4.98 million barrels; the DOE said the buildup was 3.7 million barrels.
Meanwhile, adding to the bearishness on crude, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries continues to be seen as unlikely to cut output at its March 25 meeting.
Even though a couple of smaller OPEC members have indicated a willingness to cut, some traders say crude prices have apparently recovered enough in recent weeks that Saudi Arabia, the group's linchpin, could decide to maintain output at current levels.
Crude also took a hit yesterday from a weakness in the market for North Sea Brent in Europe.
Refineries there have reportedly started shutting down for scheduled maintenance.
Still, it was tough for traders and analysts watching weather reports in much of the U.S. to figure out why petroleum prices were so weak.
Especially given that the same industry and government reports that showed a buildup in crude inventories showed dramatic decreases in the nation's distillate -- heating oil and diesel fuel -- supplies.
The API numbers put distillate stocks 4.21 million barrels lower, while the DOE report said distillate stocks fell a whopping 8.4 million barrels nationwide.
Given those statistics and the weather, "It's a bafflement how heating oil can be so weak," said Andrew Dickson with GSC Energy Corp. in Atlanta.
"Crude is really weighing on the market."
March crude settled at $14.60 a barrel, well below the psychologically important $15 level.
"Once it went below $15, crude just sent a chill over products," Mr. Dickson said.
March heating oil fell to 49.40 cents a gallon, down 1.17 cents.
March gasoline was off even more, 1.32 cents, to 43.35 cents a gallon.
Even natural-gas, which has been somewhat immune to crude's price slides, lost 5.3 cents on the March contracts to close at $2.358 per million British thermal units.
In fact, some market observers are worried that the true weakness in crude is being masked somewhat by the weatherrelated demand for heating oil.
Mr. Dickson said some U.S. refiners "are trying to postpone maintenance because heating oil is very profitable" right now.
The API and DOE reports bear that out -- both showed increases in refinery operating rates, even though many expected rates to already be declining for seasonal maintenance.
Mr. Dickson and other market participants say that once those refineries do start taking care of maintenance requirements, crude inventories will build more, putting more pressure on prices.
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Prices rose in a day of technically-inspired buying anticipating a period of seasonal strength for U.S. grain markets.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, wheat for March delivery was up 6.50 cents to $3.7575 a bushel; March corn rose four cents to $2.9550 a bushel; and March soybeans were up four cents to $6.7850 a bushel.
Mid-February is traditionally a period of rising prices at the CBOT's grain market, and traders may have been anticipating the period by bidding prices higher, said Daniel W. Basse, market-research director for AgResource Co., Chicago.
Moreover, Mr. Basse said, "People are concerned a bit about the heavy snows we've received and flooding that could result with soil moisture already saturated."
PRECIOUS METALS: Precious-metals prices continued to work their way higher after last week's sharp sell-off.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery was up $1.60 to $385.70 an ounce, while the price of the actively traded silver-futures contract rose seven cents to $5.34 an ounce.
At the New York Mercantile Exchange, the April platinum-futures contract climbed $2.10 to $393.70 an ounce.
Analysts said gold remains locked in a tight trading range of about $380 an ounce to $390 an ounce, supported on the low end of the range by physical demand from jewelry makers and others, but abandoned by these same buyers when prices rise above $390 an ounce.
