The specter of a nuclear-armed North Korea is pushing Japan to consider adjusting its defense posture.
The rising tensions on the Korean peninsula spotlight Japan's surprisingly extensive contacts with North Korea.
Roughly 250,000 North Koreans live, work and study in Japan.
There is annual bilateral trade and a flow of repatriated funds totaling hundreds of millions of dollars.
Japanese authorities have recently investigated allegedly illegal exports to North Korea of sophisticated technology from Japanese trading companies.
Now, many people here are considering how Japan itself should react as the prospect of a United Nations review of potential sanctions rises.
"If managed well, the North Korean standoff is a wonderful opportunity," says Minister of Defense Kazuo Aichi.
"It could be used as an opportunity to expand Japan's role" by building a public consensus for a more active Japanese defense policy, he says.
Forging a new consensus, however, is likely to be a long and agonizing process.
For decades, Japan's military role has been one of the most contentious issues in Japanese society.
But with the end of the Cold War and now that North Korea is Japan's most direct security threat, Japanese arguments over defense are likely to grow ever more heated and could even become a defining issue of Japanese politics for years to come, analysts say.
"There's an internal contradiction between a sense that Japan has to do more in the area of international contributions and the idea that they don't want to do anything that's going to increase risks," says Gerald Curtis, a Japan expert at Columbia University.
"Squaring that circle is going to be very difficult."
The regional response to the North Korean issue is likely to figure prominently this week, as South Korean President Kim Young Sam arrives in Tokyo for a three-day summit starting tomorrow.
After his meetings with Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, President Kim then travels to China -- often viewed as the country with the greatest influence on the Pyongyang leadership.
Any move toward a more assertive military posture would be deeply unpopular among many Japanese and would likely alarm Japan's Asian neighbors, many of whom carry scars from Japanese invasions during World War II.
While Japan has a sizable military, it is constitutionally prohibited from operating abroad except in limited noncombat support of U.N. peacekeeping operations.
Few Japanese openly advocate abandoning that constitutional restriction, but critics argue that the North Korean situation has highlighted numerous weaknesses in Japan's defense policy.
"In this country, there's no crisis-management system," Ichiro Ozawa, a powerful lawmaker in the ruling coalition government, said in a recent television interview.
"There's no system with which to prepare for what happens" if a sudden military emergency arises, he said.
"Japan has a strong enough military capability -- the question is whether we have the guts to use it," says Masashi Nishihara, a research director at Japan's National Institute for Defense Studies.
He thinks Japan must resolve its own ambivalence about the use of force abroad before it can obtain a permanent seat on the U.N. Security Council.
Ordinary Japanese are even ambivalent about the strong U.S. presence in Japan, as the many citizen-led protests against U.S. military bases show.
Though the bases would be central in any military conflict on the Korean peninsula, groups here are angry about the noise caused by their normal operations.
They have recently won several court judgments requiring the Japanese government to compensate them.
For instance, homemaker Sanae Miura, who lives near the Yokota air base west of Tokyo, says she is less concerned about the threat the U.S. is deterring than about the disturbance caused by U.S. transport aircraft.
Because of its complex and delicate relationship with North Korea, Japan has agonized over how it would react if the U.N. calls for an economic embargo of North Korea.
"If we stop trade and the flow of money from Japan to North Korea, it will become a big problem between countries and also a major upheaval in Japan," Mr. Ozawa says.
Some officials suggest Japan might find it difficult to actually stop the flow, which they say is largely in cash and can be taken to North Korea easily via third countries.
Many analysts, in fact, charge that Japan's sensitivity over its former colonization of Korea has led it to overlook a massive flow of money from North Korean residents back to their home country, at times probably in violation of Japan's currency-control rules.
Katsumi Sato, director of the Modern Korea Institute in Tokyo, estimates that these residents send as much as 200 billion yen ($1.9 billion) to North Korea each year -- an amount Mr. Sato says is equal to 40% of North Korea's gross domestic product.
Nonsense, says Choe Kwan-Ik, a representative of Chosensoren, the association of North Korean residents in Japan.
Inside Chosensoren's gleaming Tokyo headquarters building, which is surrounded by a heavy wall topped with cameras and tripwires, Mr. Choe dismisses Mr. Sato's claim and explains that the only money flowing to North Korea is from people traveling to visit their families.
"The total is just 400 million yen every year," Mr. Choe says.
"This money cannot be used for nuclear weapons, even if North Korea had the intention to develop nuclear weapons."
Even as trade between the two countries has remained roughly constant, the number of Japanese visitors to North Korea has increased steadily.
