Edward Russell, who made spectacular allegations that General Electric Co. was conspiring to fix prices world-wide for industrial diamonds, dropped his lawsuit against GE and retracted all of his allegations against the company.
The surprise move came just days before the suit was to go to trial in federal district court in Cincinnati.
Mr. Russell's case, filed two years ago, alleged he had been fired in 1991 as vice president of GE's Superabrasives division because he had blown the whistle on price-fixing activities.
He had alleged that GE was fixing prices in the world-wide market with DeBeers Consolidated Mines Co., the other major producer of industrial diamonds.
GE and DeBeers have denied any collusion.
In a sworn statement, filed late yesterday in a Cincinnati court, Mr. Russell, 56 years old, retracted all of his allegations.
The former GE executive stated that during "my entire employment at GE, I never had any personal knowledge of any antitrust wrongdoing."
He added: "I never had any personal knowledge of any other illegal conduct by GE personnel."
Mr. Russell also stated that he had concluded that "GE removed me based on its view of my performance, and not because I was a whistle-blower."
The Russell allegations had touched off a furor.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation began an inquiry, at one point placing a recording device on Mr. Russell's home telephone while he talked to other GE executives.
The Justice Department, which is nearing the end of its investigation, is still studying whether to file any charges against GE.
Efforts to obtain comment last night were unavailing.
Mr. Russell's dispute with GE was the subject of a page one article in The Wall Street Journal last November.
Mr. Russell also had implicated Glen Hiner, then a senior vice president of GE's Plastics Group which included Mr. Russell's Superabrasive's unit.
Mr. Hiner, the Russell lawsuit alleged, had traveled to London to arrange the alleged price-fixing scheme with top DeBeers officials.
Mr. Hiner, now chairman and chief executive officer of Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp., Toledo, Ohio, had strenuously denied the allegations, saying he had talked to DeBeers only about a possible technology-licensing agreement.
In his sworn statement, Mr. Russell said that "I don't believe I was a poor performer" at GE.
But he added that having reviewed all the evidence gathered for his trial, including the deposition of GE Chairman Jack Welch, "I am now aware that GE removed me based on its view of my performance."
Mr. Welch had stated in a deposition that he had fired Mr. Russell because the executive hadn't kept on top of problems in the industrial diamond unit.
GE said in a statement that, in recognition of Mr. Russell's 18 years' service and his inability to obtain a job since the firing, GE would provide medical and insurance benefits to Mr. Russell and his dependents on the same basis as any other retired GE officer.
GE also said that it would pay directly to Mr. Russell's lawyer a portion of his legal fees.
At one point in the proceedings Mr. Russell's lawyer, James Helmer, told the court that the legal fees had exceeded $1 million.
A GE spokeswoman declined to disclosed the amount paid to Mr. Helmer.
Asked whether GE had agreed to pay anything else to either Mr. Russell or Mr. Helmer, she said "no."
Messrs. Russell and Helmer couldn't be reached for comment.
Mr. Helmer also filed a statement with the court yesterday.
He said: "I have carefully reviewed all the evidence obtained in this suit and it does not show that GE personnel have violated the antitrust laws."
GE, in its statement, said the outcome vindicates its position that Mr. Russell's charges were baseless.
