In regard to your Jan. 5 page-one article "Motley's Crew -- A Fervent Lobbyist Rallies Small Business to Battle Health Plan": In this story of the National Federation of Independent Business, you left the impression of a fat-cat organization whose lobbyist uses it to push his personal extreme-right positions, manipulating the opinions and responses of NFIB members.
Our business of 65 staffers (85 before the Bush/Clinton recession hit us) has been a member of NFIB for almost 20 years.
Always, the NFIB approach has been to solicit our views through the NFIB Mandate, report back to us Mandate results, and ask us to respond to Washington on various issues.
The positions NFIB takes come from our expressed opinions, which develop from our close personal involvement in our businesses, with our staffers, with our oppressive, bureaucratic government, with reality.
You also imply that NFIB has misled us members on the health plan issue by failing to fully inform us of available government subsidies.
John Motley, the NFIB lobbyist who is the subject of the article, said correctly that the issue is not one of money, although that is extremely important.
The issue is one of principle -- the government, especially the Clinton government, wants the power of more control over our lives and our businesses.
We want government out of our lives and our business.
Lucerne Valley, Calif.
In this era of political correctness, what on earth is wrong with socialized medicine?
Why does the cry "socialism" evoke such an hysterical reaction to any health care program?
In the U.K., the socialist government after World War II introduced National Health between 1947 and 1949.
It was a fantastic boon, providing the entire population with health care from cradle to the grave.
The cost was the purchase of a National Health Stamp by the employer, with the employee paying 40% of the cost (tax deductible).
Any government that attempted to revoke the National Health Service Act, whether Labor or Conservative, would have been doomed to political oblivion.
My father, a chronic asthmatic, survived during the '40s on sulfa drugs, until an English scientist discovered penicillin, which gave him a new lease on life.
Every year he had flu or pneumonia, later a colostomy, and various other medical problems -- the treatment, operation, etc., cost nothing.
I raised five children with the usual medical problems without cost to me.
As a self-employed person with a staff of five, I too paid my employees' health insurance stamps.
Small businesses should embrace "socialized medicine" as a protection for themselves and their workers.
Those who want insurance protection, and can afford to pay for it, are free to do so, but most of us wish to be free of the financial penalty that is such a crushing burden.
Selma, Ore.
