The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether people or companies who sign contracts committing them to settle disputes by arbitration, may instead sue in court.
The justices will review a decision by Alabama's top court that made it relatively easy for consumers to sue companies, even if they previously had agreed to resolve disagreements by arbitration.
Companies in many industries, particularly the securities industry, increasingly include arbitration agreements in employment and service contracts.
A federal statute requires enforcement of arbitration provisions in contracts involving interstate commerce.
In light of this statute, the U.S. Supreme Court repeatedly has endorsed this mechanism for resolving disputes without going to court.
Most lower courts, following the Supreme Court's lead, have read the federal arbitration law broadly.
But some state courts, including those in Alabama, North Carolina and Indiana, have interpreted the federal statute narrowly, making it easier for parties to escape from arbitration agreements.
The Alabama Supreme Court has said that arbitration agreements aren't binding unless the parties "contemplated" that they would be engaged in "substantial interstate activity," regardless of whether they in fact did business that crossed state lines.
In the case the justices agreed to hear, an Alabama couple sued an Arkansas-based pest-control company, alleging that the firm had been negligent in not detecting a termite infestation in their home.
The firm, Allied-Bruce Terminix Cos., had an arbitration clause in its service contract, but the Alabama Supreme Court declined to enforce it.
The Alabama court said the consumers hadn't expected to be involved in interstate commerce.
Allied-Bruce Terminix appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
The company noted that Alabama disfavors pretrial arbitration as a matter of state policy.
The company asserted that such a state preference shouldn't be allowed to trump the clear federal policy favoring arbitration.
(Allied-Bruce Terminix Cos. vs. Dobson)
Separately, major title-insurance companies again failed to get the Supreme Court to shield aspects of their business from federal antitrust scrutiny.
Without comment, the justices refused to disturb a lower-court ruling that said research and analysis of title documents isn't covered by an exception to federal antitrust laws that protects the insurance business.
Property owners buy title insurance to guard against losses from competing claims to their property or other defects in title papers.
Title insurers also research and analyze such papers.
The Federal Trade Commission has contended that title insurers violated federal antitrust rules by setting uniform rates in some states for research and analysis services.
The FTC had won a Supreme Court victory in an earlier round of the protracted legal fight.
In a 1992 decision, the high court rejected the title insurers' argument that their research services should be shielded from federal antitrust liability if state agencies certify uniform pricing by means of "rating bureaus."
(Ticor Title Insurance Co. vs. FTC)
