British supermarket chain J. Sainsbury PLC was late getting into the discounting game, and that's what led to the disappointing sales figures the company reported Friday, industry analysts said.
Sainsbury stock sank 9.6%, to finish at 395 pence ($5.96), in London trading following its report that sales in stores open at least one year fell 1% in the 16-week period ended Jan. 15.
Sainsbury, the United Kingdom's biggest grocer, was slow to realize that quality alone no longer creates loyal customers in the food business, analysts said.
The company made a crucial error in belatedly accepting that lower food prices are a permanent phenomenon rather than a quirk of economic recession.
"Everyone is aware now that if they shop around, they can find cheap food," said Nigel Davies, analyst at Robert Fleming Securities Ltd.
"That's fashionable now.
It didn't used to be."
Higher sales -- some analysts had expected about a 3% gain -- had been expected to make up for the lower gross profit margins resulting from Sainsbury's "Essential for Essentials" campaign.
Sainsbury launched the permanent price cuts on a wide variety of basic foods after its market share came under attack from a string of competitors already engrossed in a price war.
Instead, gross margin fell along with sales.
Sainsbury doesn't divulge exact profit margins, but said its gross margin declined 0.4%.
The company said it doesn't expect margins to decline further.
Analysts who follow Sainsbury were cutting profit forecasts for the current fiscal year and for fiscal 1995 to include accounting changes, depreciation costs and current trading conditions disclosed in Friday's report.
Sainsbury said it will take #365 million ($550 million) off its profit for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1994 to reflect excess property costs and the reduction in the value of surplus and non-trading properties.
Analysts are revising their current-year forecasts for ongoing pretax profit to about #740 million from #800 million.
The forecasts don't include the one-time, #365-million write-off.
The decline reflects an expected #40 million cut for depreciation costs and additional downgrading to show lower sales and gross profit margin expectations.
For the following year, analysts expect #45 million in depreciation costs.
They're also cutting an additional #100 million to #135 million off the ongoing pretax profit to account for weaker trading.
The consensus had been around #850 million.
