For small businesses, planning for the security of retired workers is becoming an increasing source of risk.
Employers are getting hit with a triple threat.
Lawsuits over retirement benefits are rising.
An influential U.S. senator is pushing for a law to let retired workers sue for even more money.
And finally, the Internal Revenue Service has just issued tough new standards to ensure that pension plans are fair to low-paid workers -- heightening the risk of stiff penalties.
The message to small businesses is blunt.
"This is the year to find your pension plan problems," says an IRS attorney.
Failure to fix them "may be painful and expensive," adds Tom Schlossberg, president of Diversified Investment Advisors Inc., a Purchase, N.Y., firm that helps set up and run plans for small and medium-size companies.
Specialists say small firms are especially prone to running afoul of regulators and pensioners.
For one thing, they are more likely than executives at big corporations to use the plans as tax havens.
And, because they lack the staff and expertise of their corporate counterparts, they are more likely to make mistakes that will lead to litigation, these specialists say.
In fact, nearly half of the small employers that check for errors find they must adjust their plans to comply with the law, according to a 1992 survey of small companies by A. Foster Higgins, a New York unit of Johnson & Higgins.
And the law is getting tougher.
The IRS this year lowered the ceiling on an employee's annual compensation that can be included in a plan's formula to $150,000 from $235,840.
The reduction forces employers to adjust the amounts they contribute to the plan.
Failure to comply with such changes can force a company to remove some of the money it has put into the plan and pay it to the beneficiaries as taxable income.
If the past is any guide, companies that get the figures wrong stand a strong chance of getting caught.
The IRS says it audited 30,000, or 2.6%, of the 1.1 million returns filed by retirement plans in fiscal 1992.
That audit rate nearly triples the rate for individual tax returns, the agency says, warning that uncorrected problems can lead to a plan's disqualification.
The agency has designed a model plan that guarantees compliance for companies that adopt it.
"But there are thousands of employers who don't use these options," the IRS attorney says.
Even those that do can run into problems.
Science & Technology Corp., Hampton, Va., implemented the model plan for its 175 employees.
Even so, says Wayne Ewing, manager of human resources at the environmental-science research and development concern, complying with IRS regulations "is a major burden."
Among other things, he says, he has to do annual reviews of the plan.
The formula is so complicated, he says, that he paid an outside expert $13,000 last year to make sure he understood all of the nuances.
"I just don't have the time to spend understanding every legislative change that comes down from Washington, and they seem to come down so often," he says.
The chance a small employer will end up in court with its own retirees also is greater today.
The growing litigation threat partly results from the rising popularity of so-called defined-contribution plans, which, paradoxically, were supposed to reduce an employer's liability.
While defined-benefit plans guarantee that a certain sum will be paid to workers when they retire, the payout of a defined-contribution plan depends largely on participants' own investment decisions.
Under a federal regulation that took effect last year, employers are encouraged to provide workers with a sufficient range of investment options, fair access to them, and adequate information about their risks, says Manuel Soares, a Foster Higgins employee-benefits consultant.
As the account balances of such plans grow, disputes over whether employers fulfilled that obligation are likely to increase, too, he says, especially at smaller concerns that lack the expertise of larger companies.
"We're hearing more people complain about" their pension-plan investment returns, he adds.
"People are beginning to feel like they should be getting more."
The pensioner-rights movement also is making legal conflicts more likely.
The U.S. Administration on Aging late last year funded seven pension hotlines throughout the country.
The hotlines advise retirees with pension and other fringe-benefit problems and refer them to attorneys and other experts.
"Many people are unfairly and improperly denied benefits or are getting smaller pension benefits than they should be getting," says Edgar Pauk, the New York hotline's director and a lawyer at the nonprofit Legal Services for the Elderly in New York.
"I expect there will be more claims as more people are educated."
Retirement-related lawsuits already are on the rise: The number of federal suits filed under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act grew 35% from 1989 through 1993, to 10,536, according to the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts.
Despite the increase, pensioner advocates say U.S. Supreme Court rulings in recent years have severely limited the chance that plan participants will win in court.
But that may soon change.
Within a month, Sen. Howard Metzenbaum (D., Ohio) plans to introduce legislation that an aide calls "the pension bill of rights."
The 10-point proposal will improve pensioners' legal standing, the aide says.
Among other things, it will permit plan participants to sue for more than only back benefits.
Current law makes it difficult to seek punitive damages, she says.
Mr. Metzenbaum, she adds, "wants to take the pension system we have and eliminate the worst abuses and loopholes that make the system unfair to workers."
