The dollar drifted lower against European currencies yesterday, as fresh U.S. inflation data quashed earlier market speculation of an imminent credit tightening move by the Federal Reserve.
The dollar's retreat against the mark was pushed further by widespread expectations that the Bundesbank won't significantly cut key interest rates when its policy-making central bank council meets today.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.6885 marks, down from 1.6965 marks late Tuesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 106.07 yen, up a bit from 106 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4944, up from $1.4905.
About noon Thursday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 105.65 yen and at 1.6863 marks.
The dollar's slip began with the release of February's U.S. consumer price index, or CPI, which showed a seasonally adjusted 0.3% rise -- a number the market regarded as a sign that U.S. inflation pressures remain subdued.
The relatively tame CPI, which was in line with market expectations, caused participants to reconsider an earlier widespread view that the Fed's Federal Open Markets Committee will order another short-term rate increase when it meets next Tuesday.
The bond market also saw the CPI as pointing to subdued inflation, and prices for U.S. Treasurys moved higher yesterday.
On Tuesday, recent speculation about a forthcoming Fed rate increase was boosted by industrial capacity data that showed U.S. factories operating in February at their highest level in more than four years.
Still, the dollar remained in a fairly tight range throughout yesterday, as dealers sorted through the contradictory signals in this week's U.S. data.
"It's now 50-50" that the Federal Open Markets Committee will do something, said Jack Griffin, vice president and manager at Fuji Bank Ltd. in New York.
He noted that with the recent calming of the bond market "the Fed might see this as a time to make a minor tightening of 25 basis points."
But other traders saw great reluctance by the Fed to trigger a second increase in rates.
"The good data on inflation doesn't warrant a further nudging by the FOMC at this time," said Charles Spence, foreign-exchange manager at Standard Chartered Bank in Los Angeles.
He noted the turmoil caused in world financial markets following the quarter-point rate increase by the Fed on Feb. 4.
"The aftershock of the last little nudge was so great that people believe it's too soon for the Fed to act again," Mr. Spence added.
Meanwhile, another slight shaving of the Bundesbank's rate for securities repurchase agreements, or repos, left traders with the impression that the Germans aren't in any rush to ease rates, and that the convergence of U.S. and German rates is a long way off.
The Bundesbank accepted bids for its 14-day repos -- its favored instrument for influencing money markets -- at 5.88%, a mere six basis points less than the previous week.
Despite the mark's recent strength -- which could offer the Bundesbank a window of opportunity for a rate cut -- few traders expect a significant easing this week by the Bundesbank.
Traders said the Bundesbank may execute a symbolic cut in its Lombard rate, its ceiling rate, though they added that only a cut in the floor discount rate would be meaningful because that is the rate that is closely watched during times of easing.
"They're doing dribs here and drabs there," said Mr. Griffin, adding: "Nobody is factoring a significant cut into their calculations."
