Lone Star Industries Inc., once the nation's largest cement maker, thinks it may be poised for a comeback after struggling for more than three years under bankruptcy-law protection.
Less than a decade ago, Lone Star boasted plants coast-to-coast, shipped 10.8 million tons of cement, and reported $1 billion in annual revenue.
But internal problems, foreign competition and the alleged free-spending ways of former chief executive James Stewart damaged the company and destroyed a good deal of its credibility.
"The bankruptcy caused a great metamorphosis and changed our way of thinking," concedes David Wallace, the current chief executive of Stamford, Conn.-based Lone Star, which expects to emerge from bankruptcy-law protection March 31.
"But we're going to be viable," he adds.
"We're going to survive."
Mr. Wallace, a former outside director largely responsible for the company's turnaround and expected emergence from Chapter 11, says "restoring morale among the company's employees and customers kept me up nights."
A host of forces conspired to knock Lone Star off its once-lofty perch.
The company, built on a series of rapid-fire and expensive acquisitions in the 1970s, later found its prices sharply undercut by foreign competitors.
The company was also hurt by a construction slowdown in the late 1980s.
Facing a $390 million debt load and high overhead, Lone Star was staggered when banks in late 1990 refused to renew its credit lines.
At the same time, other problems began to bubble to the surface.
In 1990, several U.S. railroads sued Lone Star for more than $200 million, alleging that cement crossties acquired from the company were defective.
Lone Star also faced environmental cleanup costs of about $200 million at several production facilities.
And the company owed about $100 million to its underfunded pension plan and to cover certain retiree medical benefits.
All told, Lone Star faced potential liabilities of over half a billion dollars.
In perhaps the final blow, a law firm hired by the company alleged in a report that Mr. Stewart, the then-chief executive, improperly charged Lone Star $1.1 million for personal expenses.
The report said they included having the company pay $73,000 in design fees for Mr. Stewart's $2 million cement house, pay for West Coast junkets with actress Elizabeth Taylor, and pay a music professor $135,000 to play the piano.
The serenades were accounted for as "consulting services," the report said.
On Dec. 10, 1990, a bruised Lone Star filed for bankruptcy-law protection in White Plains, N.Y. Two days later, Mr. Stewart took a leave of absence, and eventually resigned.
At the time, he denied the allegations.
Mr. Stewart, who is drawing a pension of $345,000 a year, couldn't be reached for comment on this article.
Shareholders were angered by the law firm's report and were particularly irked that Lone Star had passed up two acquisition proposals.
Lone Star shares tumbled 45% in a single day in 1990 after the company said it would file for Chapter 11 protection.
Although Lone Star's core cement business was fairly healthy, the company clearly suffered from a leadership crisis.
"We had to dust off the tarnish from the Lone Star name," Mr. Wallace says.
"We had to show we were masters of our own fate."
Mr. Wallace's strategy has been to make Lone Star a nimbler company by disposing of large non-U.S. assets and making painful cutbacks at home.
The company sold all of its overseas operations (except operations in Cuba, which have been nationalized).
Lone Star has also cut back on staff, consolidated operations and reinstated long-delayed capital expenditures to update cement facilities.
Salespeople are urged to be more aggressive in collecting on receivables.
The free-spending ways are gone, too.
Mr. Wallace and everybody else at Lone Star flies tourist class and stays at Holiday Inns instead of ritzy hotels.
There are no lavish corporate parties and no executive washrooms.
The three corporate aircraft that ferried Mr. Stewart and others have long been sold.
"Very quickly, Mr. Stewart faded into the twilight," says Mr. Wallace.
And nobody appears to question Lone Star's austerity measures today.
Indeed, William Troutman, president and chief operating officer, has been told, "You're so tight, you squeak."
Lone Star still faces numerous hurdles.
The company, which had to contend with the environmental cleanup headache, has spent between $70 million and $80 million in legal settlements and remediation so far and hasn't yet resolved the entire liability.
It has also paid about $35 million in claims relating to its pension and medical benefits dues, which represents only part of the overall liability.
Lone Star settled the $200 million-plus in claims for faulty railroad crossties for about $67 million.
But an $80 million lawsuit it brought against Lafarge Corp., which it claimed supplied faulty cement for the ties, resulted in a mere $1.3 million judgment.
Lone Star is appealing that award in the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Delaware.
Lone Star had revenue last year of only $240 million and a loss of $35 million before certain accounting changes.
But it hopes the nation's improving economy, and in particular prospects for a robust construction sector, will provide a boost.
The company's bankruptcy-law reorganization plan projects that revenue could rise to $304 million next year and to $340 million by 1997.
It projects a modest $8.7 million profit this year, rising to $25 million three years later.
"We expect two very good years for the cement industry," said William Toal, chief economist of the Portland Cement Association, Skokie, Ill.
He expects demand for cement to increase 7% in 1994 to record levels, thanks to a boost in public works, residential and commercial construction.
The new Lone Star will be primarily Midwest-based, Mr. Wallace says, with most of its revenue coming from cement.
Aggregates and ready-mix concrete products will contribute a smaller portion.
Lone Star's long-suffering common stockholders, whose shares have been trading in the $2 to $3 range recently, will hold only a 4.5% interest in the new company once it emerges from Chapter 11 proceedings.
Lone Star's stock traded as high as $37 in 1989.
But the reorganized company's shares appear to have appeal to some investors.
Post-reorganization Lone Star shares, trading on a when-issued basis, were quoted yesterday at about $19.50 each.
The company has projected a book value of $149 million to $204 million following reorganization, which is equal to $12.50 to $17 a share.
"Everybody loves the cement industry," says John Bell, an analyst at Dabney/Resnick Inc., Beverly Hills, Calif.
