After a year in the trenches at International Business Machines Corp., Chairman Louis V. Gerstner Jr. surfaced to offer Wall Street a remarkably sober assessment of IBM's future.
Mr. Gerstner, speaking in terms that ranged from bluntly realistic to almost pessimistic, painted IBM as a profitable supplier of technology rather than as a company that would return to the glory days of fat margins and market dominance.
"I don't think we should plan on returning to the old IBM," he told journalists shortly before delivering his first major Wall Street address since becoming the first outsider to run IBM a year ago.
"I don't think we should plan on owning huge segments of the economic value in the industry.
We're going to try, but we're not going to set our mental attitude or economic structure on the assumption we're going to do it."
Instead, Mr. Gerstner has developed a multifront plan to capitalize on IBM technology, develop it faster, and market it better.
He de-emphasized IBM's ailing mainframe business, noting a "massive redeployment" of research funds away from the big machines to work on the fast-growing "client/server" market of linked-up PCs.
The company's failure in the past to capitalize on this sea change, he said, was "the single most important mistake IBM has made in the last decade."
In addition, IBM will remove the taint of being a maker of "closed" or proprietary gear that works only with other IBM products by becoming an "open" manufacturer that licenses its technologies and designs to rivals.
IBM also wants to make computer chips and other equipment for other computer makers.
"We've drawn up a blueprint so we know where we're going," Mr. Gerstner told Wall Street analysts, who have questioned his previous reticence in articulating a strategic vision.
The candidness of Mr. Gerstner's assessment caused IBM's stock to drop 87.5 cents to close at $56.375 cents in New York Stock Exchange composite trading as word of the speech, delivered after the markets closed yesterday, leaked out early.
Indeed, Mr. Gerstner's answers to analysts' questions were even bleaker than his prepared remarks.
Queried about IBM's long-term operating profit margins, the CEO said he simply couldn't tell them.
"We're draining a swamp, and we're not focused on the picnic grounds across the way," Mr. Gerstner told his audience.
"I don't know what our operating margins are going to be."
Some observers found Mr. Gerstner's bluntness a departure from the past.
"He understands the challenge he's got and it's not trivial," said James Cassell of the Gartner Group consulting firm.
"He's painting a much more realistic picture than his predecessor."
Sam Albert, a Scarsdale, N.Y.-based consultant and former IBMer, said Mr. Gerstner's outlook was "mature" because, "Clearly, a pat answer doesn't exist."
But while most analysts seemed to appreciate the frank tone, Mr. Gerstner disappointed some by failing to provide a financial framework for his strategic goals.
"His tone was right because the worst thing he could do would be to set expectations too high," said Don Young of Lehman Bros., who has strongly recommended IBM shares.
"But a strategy without financial goals is deficient."
Another analyst said later that he wasn't looking for hard predictions from Mr. Gerstner, just some yardstick for measuring Mr. Gerstner's progress -- or lack of it -- a year from now.
The absence of even that kind of vague guidance was disappointing, the analyst said.
When still another analyst questioned the lack of financial projections, Mr. Gerstner countered that "we're working on it" but that he wasn't ready to talk about the topic yet.
The IBM chairman responded to other criticism essentially by conceding there have been mistakes.
Daniel Mandresh of Merrill Lynch & Co. cited shortcomings in IBM's disk-drive business -- and Mr. Gerstner candidly agreed, noting the segment now has a new chief and is working on its weaknesses.
If anything, Mr. Mandresh said later, the new CEO seemed more in command of his job and the challenge ahead than he did last July, when he discussed IBM's big charge.
On the side of good news, Mr. Gerstner said he believes financial trends and the cost-cutting program are on track.
Having forced himself to take a "pessimistic view" for IBM back in July, when the company took a $8.9 billion restructuring charge, Mr. Gerstner said that assessment is "holding up" so far.
Further restructuring charges won't be necessary as long as that outlook holds up.
But Mr. Gerstner said numerous areas will take a lot of time to change.
A big problem, he noted, is IBM's culture, which had a reputation for being slow to respond and "arrogant."
Mr. Gerstner said he's gone through old IBM strategy plans dating back to 1980 in which company officials clearly saw the market's shift away from costly mainframe computers -- but they failed to "execute."
Mr. Gerstner said he hasn't figured out why they failed.
Yet later he told analysts that "I'm not telling you its [culture] is going to change in a year," he said.
Another challenge is the organization of IBM.
While he doesn't want to centralize IBM, he also wants to avoid "anarchy," the CEO said.
A major effort is under way to stop duplication of development efforts, aiming to cut costs and develop more of a team spirit within the company, he said.
Mr. Gerstner also said he hopes to accelerate the IBM sales force's "evolution" away from its traditional approach of "one face to the customer."
Instead of relying mainly on "account reps," he hopes to move toward experts more specialized in industries and products.
The old concept of one person delivering IBM products to a big account "was dead and buried years ago," Mr. Gerstner said.
In another blunt assessment, Mr. Gerstner said the much-vaunted interactive age won't develop as a consumer market as fast as some experts believe.
IBM will explore smaller market opportunities, he added, and won't need a "megadeal with any one company" to succeed in becoming an infrastructure supplier of products.
