President Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers said the widening gap between rich and poor is "a threat to the social fabric," and blamed it on technology, the decline of unions, a lagging minimum wage and, to a lesser degree, immigration.
President Clinton decried growing income inequality during his campaign, and the issue has influenced administration policies affecting everything from taxes to welfare reform and job training.
"Raising the living standards of all Americans is the fundamental economic goal of my administration," Mr. Clinton said in the introduction of the 398-page report.
The wide-ranging report also describes the administration's philosophy that the government should play a big role in promoting economic expansion.
It specifically urges shrinking the deficit; investing in infrastructure, technology and job training; reducing trade barriers, and restructuring the health-care system.
The economic report represents a contrast from council reports for the previous 12 years, in which the Reagan and Bush councils warned of the dangers of high taxes and excessive government intervention in the economy.
From the post-war period until the early 1970s, the report says, income growth averaged between 2.5% and 3% a year and occurred more or less evenly among income groups.
But that changed in the 1970s and 1980s, when the wealthiest Americans saw their income increase about 0.9% annually, while the poorest saw their incomes drop an average of 0.7% annually.
That disparity, the report says, is "a threat to the social fabric that has long bound Americans together and made ours a society with minimal class distinctions."
Shrinking union membership over the past 20 years, particularly among low-wage workers, may be one factor behind the gap, says the council, which is headed by Laura D'Andrea Tyson.
In the early 1970s, 27% of the work force belonged to unions, but that rate fell to 16% by 1990.
Several studies have concluded that the membership decline accounts for about one-fifth of the spread of the income gap.
Meanwhile, during the same period, the minimum wage eroded after taking account for inflation.
The minimum wage represented about 50% of the average hourly wages of nonsupervisory workers in 1970.
By 1992, it had slipped to 40% of that measure.
The administration hasn't discussed seeking an increase in the minimum wage in the near term, Dr. Tyson said in an interview.
Other changes in the workplace also have contributed to the widening gap, according to the council report.
One study suggests that people who work with personal computers earn far more than those who don't, accounting for about half the increasing gap between the wages of high school and college graduates.
And immigration, which has expanded the pool of low-income workers in the U.S., may be responsible for about 1% of the disparity, the report says.
The report plays down the notion that more competition with low-wage workers abroad has accelerated the disparity between rich and poor.
It says that up to now, the availability of foreign low-wage workers hasn't reduced demand for those workers at home, but that may change.
"Trade could become a more important factor in bringing down the wages of less educated workers in the future," the report says.
The report also asserts that it's reasonable to expect long-term interest rates to continue to fall.
When adjusted for inflation, it says, the rates, now about 6%, still have room to decline, based on historic averages.
In addition, the report says the credit crunch faded last year -- particularly as banks freed up funds they had parked in government bonds, which had been yielding high rates.
Although most sections of the the report speculate about economic variables broadly, the chapter on the president's health-care-reform plan doesn't.
After lengthy discussions, the council decided not to risk giving critics of the plan any ammunition with which to attack it.
Separately, the White House turned up the heat in its battle to defeat a proposal on Capitol Hill to pass a constitutional amendment that would require a balanced federal budget.
White House aide Robert Rubin called the amendment "a truly horrible economic idea."
And Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman said, "We need to save the country from this disaster."
To prove its case, the Treasury released an analysis of how a balanced-budget amendment might affect individual states.
The analysis asserts that the amendment would cost Alaska $511 million to $820 million a year, for instance.
Administration officials said they believed they would be able to prevent the amendment from attracting the 67 votes needed for it to be approved by the Senate.
