The Resolution Trust Corp. is one landlord that needn't worry about rent control.
The federal appeals court in New York ruled that the RTC doesn't have to obey local rent-control regulations for properties it intends to sell in its role as conservator or receiver for insolvent savings-and-loans.
In keeping with a number of decisions that have affirmed the broad powers of the thrift-bailout agency, the appeals court said Congress specifically authorized the RTC to recover the maximum it can in selling the assets of failed thrifts.
The rent-control case involves nine rental apartments in a Manhattan condominium building on East 57th Street that had been owned by a failed savings-and-loan.
The nine renters challenged the RTC's attempt to terminate their tenancies and force them to purchase the units or move.
A lower court ruled that the RTC must comply with New York City's rent-control regulations, which entitled the tenants to remain.
But a three-judge panel of the Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the trial judge, finding that the rent-control regulations were pre-empted by the legislation creating the RTC.
RTC spokeswoman Anne Freeman said the rent-control issue is significant for the agency and also has arisen in Boston, Newport Beach, Calif., and Connecticut.
In New York City, the agency has as many as 1,200 apartments to sell, but not all would be subject to rent regulations.
It is reviewing its options regarding what steps to take next regarding the tenants who filed the suit.
"We aren't here to destroy rent control," said Ms. Freeman.
"We just want to get the best price for the taxpayer."
The RTC said that complying with the rent-control rules was costing it $19,000 a month on the nine apartments.
Don Buchwald, an attorney for one of the tenants, said he hadn't yet seen the decision, but described its result as a "windfall" for the RTC that wasn't intended by Congress.
"The RTC shouldn't be able to overcome state law any more than they can overcome local zoning regulations," he said.
A further appeal is possible, he added.
The New York state attorney general's office joined the appeal in support of the tenants.
(Resolution Trust Corp. vs. Diamond et al., Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, New York, 92-6244)
