Swiss bankers are battling a proposed tax they say could endanger Switzerland's private-banking business.
The bankers say non-Swiss customers should be exempt from the proposed 6.5% levy on private-banking services.
Otherwise, many foreign clients are likely to shift their investment funds to the world's other financial centers.
Switzerland has a lot to lose, its bankers say.
Hans J. Baer, chairman of Bank Julius Baer, estimates the value of assets managed by Switzerland's banks for non-Swiss private clients at 1.2 trillion Swiss francs ($811.7 billion), which is about a 35% to 40% share of the world's offshore private-banking business, he says.
"Such a percentage should not be jeopardized," Mr. Baer says.
Bankers say it would be Switzerland's standing as a financial center, and not the country's international banks themselves, that would suffer most from any flight of foreign capital that might result from the new tax.
For their part, Swiss banks could manage clients' assets through their foreign subsidiaries, bankers say.
The Swiss Bankers' Association has called for an exemption for portfolio-management services for clients residing outside Switzerland, saying a tax on such clients would have "fatal consequences."
In a national referendum Nov. 28, Swiss voters approved the introduction of a value-added-tax system, under which the nation will, for the first time, tax services.
The new structure is expected to go into effect Jan. 1, 1995, and is designed to create a fairer system that, by including services, is more compatible with tax policies elsewhere in Europe.
Nations in the European Union, of which Switzerland isn't a member, don't tax portfolio-management services for customers based outside the EU, the bankers' association says.
In short, there is no VAT in the EU on services to clients based in the Americas, Asia, Africa, the Middle East or European countries outside the trading bloc.
Seeking a similar arrangement, Switzerland's bankers -- while not challenging the proposed VAT levy on services to domestic customers -- strongly oppose the inclusion of clients based abroad.
If Switzerland imposes a tax on those clients, the association says, "it is to be expected that a considerable number of foreign private clients will not accept the new tax and will give their assets to a bank outside Switzerland to manage."
Francois Gendre, assistant director in the Federal Tax Department, says his agency is "well aware of the problem."
But, a decision on exempting services to foreign clients can be made only by the Federal Council, the group of seven ministers that governs Switzerland.
An answer can be expected before summer, he added.
Meanwhile, says Benedict Hentsch, partner at Genevan private banker Darier Hentsch & Cie., "we are doing our best to persuade the government that deciding our way would be in the best interests of Switzerland."
