Traders sent prices of many Treasury notes and bonds lower yesterday as they continued to worry about rising short-term interest rates and an upcoming flood of new issuances.
The losses built on those from late last week when the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates sooner than many had expected.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dropped more than 3/8 point, or more than $3.75 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 98 3/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, rose to 6.39% from 6.35% on Friday.
The yields of short-term securities rose slightly.
The bond-equivalent yield of the three-month bill, for example, rose to 3.23% from 3.22% on Friday.
Meanwhile, the prices of Venezuelan bonds, which are popular with American investors interested in developing-nation markets, dropped sharply in reaction to news that a major rating agency might soon downgrade the country's foreign-currency debt.
The bond market began the day on a decidedly sour tone, registering solid losses in early trading.
"There was some serious retail selling right out of the chute," said Daniel Callahan, manager of government securities trading at PaineWebber.
Behind the bearish tilt to the market was spillover from the Fed's decision Friday to nudge short-term interest rates slightly higher.
Mr. Callahan said the Fed tightening has caused some investors to reconsider their attitude toward the bond market.
"For the longest time, the market was able to shrug off bad news on the feeling the Fed wasn't going to raise rates," Mr. Callahan said.
"Now, bad news could bring a tightening."
In addition to the ripples spreading from the Fed tightening, traders have to confront fresh problems.
In particular, traders are concerned about the reception that this week's $40 billion quarterly refunding auctions will receive.
At the same time, economists are predicting that Friday's January producer-price index report could be trouble for the market.
The price index is a popular measure of inflationary pressures.
Bond investors fear inflation because it reduces the value of investments with a fixed rate of return.
The Treasury Department will be selling $17 billion of three-year notes today, $12 billion of 10-year notes tomorrow and $11 billion of 30-year bonds Thursday.
Then on Friday, the Labor Department will release the January producer-price index.
Forecasts center on an increase of about 0.4% for the overall PPI and a gain of about 0.3% excluding food and energy.
"The supply is on the forefront for the market," said Mr. Callahan of PaineWebber.
"The market has also got on its mind the possibility of a disappointing PPI number," he said.
The inflation numbers are an especially big problem for those who have to bid on the 30-year bond at Thursday's auction.
"The risks are for a higher number . . . and who wants to buy a 30-year bond in front of a potentially scary PPI number," said Steve Wood, director of economic research at BA Securities.
Some dealers said investors were viewing the Fed's tightening last week as a positive for longer maturities, arguing that the Fed had acted promptly to fight a flare-up in inflation expectations before it became a problem.
Bob McCorkle, a salesman at Seattle Northwest Securities, said the market is able to weather the three-part refunding auctions, but with the help of slightly lower prices.
"You'll probably go through the refunding with a little bit of a concession, but then you'll probably see a rally as the paper is distributed," he said.
But the market still must get through Tuesday's three-year note auction, traders remarked.
Because a Fed tightening has a greater impact on short-term securities, those issues are sometimes the hardest to auction in a period of rising interest rates.
In when-issued trading late yesterday, the three-year note yielded 4.81%.
The 10-year note to be auctioned tomorrow yielded 5.9% in when-issued trading while the 30-year bond to be sold Thursday yielded 6.4%.
Yesterday, the Treasury sold $25.44 billion of three-month and six-month bills at its regular weekly auction.
The three-month bill was sold at an average discount rate of 3.24% for a coupon-equivalent yield of 3.31%.
The six-month bill was sold at an average discount rate of 3.40% for a coupon-equivalent yield of 3.51%.
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year.
Both issues are dated Feb. 10.
The 13-week bills mature May 12, 1994, and the 26-week bills mature Aug. 11, 1994.
Venezuela's Brady bonds reached the mat yesterday and were pinned under the weight of rising interest rates and news that a major rating agency may soon downgrade the country's foreign-currency debt.
(Brady bonds are issued as part of a debt-restructuring program named after former U.S. Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady.)
Moody's Investors Service said that it had put Venezuela's $9.6 billion of par and discount Brady bonds and a class of floating-rate Brady notes under review for a possible downgrade.
(Par bonds are converted from restructured debt at face value while discounts are converted at a discount to face value).
Moody's cited "the steady deterioration of Venezuela's economic fundamentals, a worsening of its public finances, the crisis in the country's financial sector, and the increasing political instability and uncertainty."
That helped send Venezuela debt tumbling in heavy volume, with the par Brady bonds dropping 2.5 points to 68.125.
Anzelmo Chuecos, head of the government's Superintendency of Foreign Investment, called Moody's move "unfair."
He noted that the country's economy "has been greatly transformed recently," and that the new government of President Rafael Caldera would "continue the move toward a competitive economy."
Traders at several major dealers shrugged off the news, noting that Venezuelan debt has been under pressure for a while.
Joseph E. Hynes, a portfolio manager in New York Life Insurance Co.'s Emerging Markets Group, said he was not surprised by the Moody's announcement.
The major rating agencies have already put several international oil companies on review for possible downgrade, he noted.
"Given that Venezuela gains an overwhelming portion of government revenue from national oil company Petroleos de Venezuela, it shouldn't startle anyone," he said.
According to Bankers Trust analyst Carl W. Ross, for every $1 decline in the price of oil, Venezuela loses about $730 million annually, or about 1.2% of gross domestic product, in export revenue.
Just two issuers tapped the corporate-debt market yesterday.
Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. sold $220 million of debt in two parts, and the Federal Home Loan Bank System sold $100 million of floating-rate notes.
Volume of issuance isn't expected to pick up much this week because of volatility in bonds generally and because of this week's scheduled auctions of Treasury securities.
Trading in the investment-grade market was extremely quiet, as prices followed those of Treasurys lower.
Spreads, or the margin between yields in the two markets, narrowed by 0.01 to 0.02 percentage point across the board.
Trading in junk bonds also was light, with prices ending down about 1/4 to 1/2 point.
The change in the interest-rate environment has some guessing at how companies will respond.
Most expect short-term interest rates to rise further, while long-term rates may drop slightly.
"People are still thinking that 30-year Treasurys are going to rally after the Treasury supply is out of the way," said Bob Hugin, head of taxable fixed income at J.P. Morgan Securities.
However, if 30-year Treasurys climb to 6.5%, one syndicate official said issuers who were waiting for the market to rally might jump into the market.
Companies who have taken advantage of low short-term interest rates by using more than usual amount of commercial paper may decide to sell three- to five-year debt to pay down the commercial paper, one syndicate official said.
But in general, syndicate officials say that the level of issuance in the investment-grade market will drop this year.
Through Feb. 4, there were 212 investment-grade debt offerings totaling $36.79 billion, down from 292 totaling $42.85 billion in the comparable period of last year, according to Securities Data.
However, the number of junk-bond deals has increased.
So far, 41 deals totalling $8.87 billion in principal amount have been priced, up from 29 deals for $7.48 billion in the year-ago period.
Municipal bonds continue to weaken in the aftermath of the Federal Reserve's tightening, and they finished yesterday's nervous trading as much as 3/4 point lower.
Muni specialists said the market is jittery because concerns about the Fed's tightening are compounded by uncertainties about the Treasury's debt auctions in the next few days and the January producer-price index data that will be released Friday.
Harris County's (Texas) 5.00% bonds due 2016 finished 3/4 weaker at 94 3/4, yielding 5.37%.
Late Friday, those bonds were priced to yield 5.31%.
In futures dealings at the Chicago Board of Trade this session, March municipal bond futures settled 8/32 lower at 102-19 while March Treasury-bond futures finished 2/32 weaker at 114-26.
Issues totaling more than $900 million are scheduled to debut today.
Negotiated offerings scheduled for pricing include the Orange County Local Transportation Authority (California) $200 million bonds and the New York State Medical Care Facilities Finance Agency's $190 million of revenue bonds.
Lehman Brothers is the managing underwriter for the Orange County issue, and Lazard Freres is the lead underwriter for the New York offering.
By the end of yesterday's session, most mortgage securities weren't able to erase much of the nearly 1/2 point losses made in the morning.
But underwriters were able to get new bonds out the door.
They took advantage of a slight steepening in the Treasury yield curve.
Generally, as the curve steepens, the arbitrage involved in creating real estate investment conduits becomes more profitable.
One deal was offered by Utendahl Capital Partners, making it the first Federal National Mortgage Association Remic to be lead-managed by a minority/women-owned investment bank, according to a release from Fannie Mae.
The $250 million offering was backed by Fannie Mae's 7% mortgage securities and consisted of 25 classes, or tranches.
Remics are created by carving up existing mortgage securities into any number of tranches, each with their own investment characteristics and aimed at a variety of investors from the risk averse to the more speculative in nature.
Among prices of 6.5% securities for February delivery, Ginnie Maes were down 10/32 near the close to trade at 98 25/32.
Freddie Mac Golds and Fannie Maes were off 11/32 at 98 31/32 and 98 24/32, respectively.
