Major insurance companies are ending the use of unisex rates for individual disability-income policies, a decision that will sharply boost prices for women.
These policies replace lost income in the case of accidents or illness, paying fixed amounts for a fixed time period.
Typical buyers of disability-income policies are doctors, lawyers, accountants and small-business owners.
Some buy to supplement employer plans.
The vast majority of the buyers of these policies are men.
The return to sex-based premiums after nearly a decade of one-price-fits-all is a blow to women's groups and consumer advocates who fought to end sex discrimination in insurance pricing.
Some of the insurers had offered the unisex rates in response to the political pressure, but for many the primary motivation was to snare a bigger share of business from the growing ranks of professional women.
Now the insurers say that unisex pricing doesn't work for their bottom lines.
The problem, according to insurers, is that women on average are disabled for longer periods of time than their male counterparts, making them costlier customers.
Milliman & Robertson Inc., an actuarial consulting firm, says a 1985 report showed that 35-year-old men on average filed 10.71 claims per 1,000, compared with 30.96 for women of the same age.
The discrepancy in disability periods occurs even after taking pregnancy into account.
A number of insurers, queried about the discrepancy, declined to provide theories to explain it.
The return to the old system comes as the pressure for unisex rates has lessened.
"Sex-distinct rates are fairer because they more accurately reflect the risk involved," maintains Michael Schiffman, vice president of disability insurance at Guardian Life Insurance Co. of America, which is based in New York.
Guardian, a big seller of the disability insurance, announced last month that it was seeking state regulatory approval for sex-based rates.
Disability-income insurance represents a tiny sliver of the life-insurance and health-insurance world.
Industry experts say that in 1992, premiums for individual disability-income policies totaled about $3.1 billion.
A slightly larger amount is sold through group policies.
Insurers say they'll continue to offer unisex rates in that market because employers feel legally compelled to provide equal-priced benefits to employees.
For women buying policies individually, the new rates will sting.
Paul Revere Corp., Worcester, Mass., one of the nation's top sellers of individual disability policies, has filed for new rates that will raise a woman's premiums on a typical policy 5% to 35% depending on age.
For a similar male customer, rates will fall 2% to 10%.
Under Guardian's proposed rates, women will pay on average 20% more, while men will pay up to 15% less.
Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Co., of Milwaukee, one of the top four individual-disability insurers, introduced a sex-distinct policy series March 1.
Provident Life & Accident Insurance Co. of America, of Chattanooga, Tenn., another of the top sellers of individual disability insurance, began selling sex-based policies last August.
Ralph Christiana, Provident's vice president of marketing, said 42 states have so far approved the new rate structure.
Applications are pending in seven states, while Montana requires unisex rates in all insurance lines.
Unisex rates generally are based on an assumption about the percentage of males and females who will buy the policies.
Insurers say such blended rates pinch them when the assumption proves wrong.
Said Guardian's Mr. Schiffman: "We're trying to get on a more actuarially sound basis."
Sandra Ward contributed to this article.
