The currency markets' attention is expected to shift this week to developments in Germany and away from Japan.
The collapse of trade talks between the U.S. and Japan, and possible retaliatory measures, dominated market attention last week.
But Germany -- the heavyweight among European economies -- faces the prospect of the largest strike by industrial workers in a decade.
Market participants said the possibility of a walkout is viewed as a referendum on German economic health and, by extension, the interest-rate outlook for most of Europe.
Last week, the German central bank lowered its discount rate to 5.25% from 5.75%.
But it left the rate for bank overnight refinancing at 6%.
Late in New York Friday, the dollar was quoted at 1.7140 marks, down from 1.7233 marks late Thursday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 104.60 yen, up from 104.10 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4820, up from $1.4790.
About noon Tuesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 106.05 yen and at 1.7265 marks.
Yesterday in London, with trading thinned by a holiday in the U.S., the dollar was quoted at 1.7303 marks, up from 1.7140 marks in New York late Friday.
The yen, which strengthened significantly following the collapse of the bilateral trade talks, weakened against the dollar, which was quoted at 106.25 yen in London, up from 104.60 yen Friday.
Yesterday, Germany's huge IG Metall union decided to take a strike vote in early March in the Lower Saxony bargaining districts, which could be followed later by a vote in the Hamburg and Schleswig-Holstein region, people close to the union said.
It is typical for IG Metall to concentrate a strike on selected districts and not call a nationwide walkout.
The Lower Saxony region includes 90,000 employees at 230 companies.
In all, the union has 3.2 million western German members.
The preliminary date for a strike is March 7.
If approved, the walkout would start soon after cuts in German bank-reserve requirements go into effect March 1.
"It's only going to screw up their economy more" should a strike occur, one Philadelphia-based trader said.
"The dollar feels well-bid.
Tuesday morning the dollar/mark cross is going to open higher," said Margaret Kudarauskas, senior foreign exchange analyst at Technical Data.
"This strike is one aspect one would think the market has already discounted, but I'm not sure it has fully," she added.
"The German economy is just in sad shape.
The last thing the German economy needs right now is something to deflate it," said Sandy Batten, senior economist at Citibank.
"You never know how much this already has been priced in."
In the U.S., Alan Greenspan, Federal Reserve Board chairman, is slated to testify today before a House banking subcommittee.
"Everybody in the market will hang on to every word he says," said Jerry Cornille, trader at Carroll, McEntee & McGinley in Chicago.
"Greenspan is highly likely to mention the dollar becoming weaker against the yen, which may be seen as contributing to inflation concerns," said Eric Nickerson, foreign-exchange economist at BA Securities Inc.
The U.S. is widely expected to retaliate against the refusal of the Japanese to open more markets and reduce the trade imbalance between the two countries.
However, it will take several months before the effects of any trade sanctions are felt.
In the meantime, many participants say the U.S. can "talk up" the yen, resulting in higher prices for Japanese exports and making these products more costly for U.S. consumers -- Japan's largest market.
The Japanese economy is heavily dependent on exporting goods, so price increases tend to hurt it more than most other economies.
"The administration is flaunting the fact that it wants a weaker dollar against the yen," said Citibank's Mr. Batten.
This may make foreign investors more suspect about holding U.S. dollar-denominated bonds.
