The great danger for President Clinton on health-care these days isn't just that his plan has stalled in Congress but that none of the alternatives are moving either.
"Mother Teresa couldn't get a majority vote on a health plan right now," says health-care lobbyist Fred Graefe.
And unless the administration or its allies move to break the stalemate, they risk having lawmakers revert to the familiar Washington pose of no consensus, no action.
Still, lawmakers expect some kind of health bill to be enacted this year.
After deadlocking earlier this week, Democrats on the Ways and Means health subcommittee were more hopeful of agreement last night.
And ironically, the administration is looking to its sometime critic, California Democratic Rep. Fortney "Pete" Stark, to report a plan that will show some movement toward reform -- albeit with more of a government role than the president's proposal.
"Somebody has to move," says Democratic Rep. George Miller of California, one of about 10 liberals who participated in a sober meeting with the president at the White House late Wednesday.
"If there's no consensus, nobody has to do anything.
Then time becomes your enemy."
The White House's most urgent challenge is to keep up the pressure for action while preserving the basic elements of the Clinton plan in some recognizable form.
Yesterday, Mr. Clinton touted his plan among senior citizens in Connecticut, where he brushed aside recent setbacks in House subcommittees and pointedly praised Rep. Stark, the chairman of the Ways and Means health panel, as an ally committed to universal coverage.
For the moment at least, there is no broad White House strategy to jump-start the process.
With no other health-care proposal in a commanding position on Capitol Hill, there is no clear camp right now with which to bargain.
But with full committee action in the House and Senate not scheduled before mid-April in most cases, the next six weeks provide a window for all camps to re-evaluate and refine their positions.
For the administration, which lacks a clear path in the House, the most important task may be to fortify relations with Senate GOP moderates.
The moderates are under pressure from conservatives to resist any compromise, and partisan lines could harden after a Senate Republican retreat next week.
Mindful of this, Mr. Clinton struck a bipartisan note by hosting a White House dinner Tuesday for senators of both parties.
But the dinner's outward conviviality -- and wide expressions of support for the president's goal of universal coverage -- contrasts with the thicket of details ahead.
What makes the task so difficult isn't just the immensity of the legislation, but the fact that pulling at one thread can unravel the larger fabric.
Congress is accustomed to big budget bills that can involve many committees.
But the lines of authority are much clearer in those cases, and the pieces are interchangeable as long as the bottom line is met.
In the case of health-care, though, lawmakers must not only be cost-conscious but create a system that works.
The administration could win votes easily enough by abandoning controversial pieces of its plan, but it and Congress will still need to come up with solutions to replace jettisoned provisions.
The president's proposal to set up so-called "alliances" -- huge, powerful regional health-insurance-buying pools -- won't survive Congress.
But it is still likely that some type of purchasing pools will be enacted, since portions of the same idea are part of rival plans proposed by Democratic Rep. Jim Cooper of Tennessee and GOP Sen. John Chafee of Rhode Island.
The real debate over the purchasing pools is about how far to go and what to make mandatory.
Supporters of the Cooper bill believe that enrollment in the pools should be required of businesses with fewer than 100 workers.
But moderate Republicans like Rep. Alex McMillan of North Carolina would like to see a more voluntary approach akin to Sen. Chafee's, in which enrollment would be optional for all employers.
Fearing that the alliances could prove too big, like giant farm cooperatives, they also want more than one in a single region or state, to ensure competition.
While open to compromise, the administration worries that if it gives away too much, it will undermine its ability to enforce proposed caps on the allowable annual increase in health-insurance premiums.
"Frankly, I think the premium caps have very little chance of passing around here," says Democratic Sen. Kent Conrad of North Dakota, a member of the Finance Committee.
Yet, as with the buying pools, the cost controls have been embraced in concept by moderate Republicans like Missouri Sen. John Danforth, a Finance member, and Sen. Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas, the top GOP member of the Labor and Human Resources Committee.
The White House privately expects premium caps will be diluted to a ceiling that's higher than the general inflation rate, and one that's phased in over a longer time period.
Among the competing plans in the Ways and Means Committee, for example, is one to set a series of markers that would trigger cost controls if competition alone doesn't hold down expenditures in the future.
On a host of issues, the middle ground is occupied by young, ambitious political brokers who swear by the ideas of "managed competition," but have each made compromises to satisfy important constituencies.
Many of the experts and academics who helped shape the original managed-care debate are meeting this week at Jackson Hole, Wyo., to revisit the issue.
But in terms of practical politics, their ideas are fraught with contradictions.
On one hand, their faith in markets makes liberals uneasy; on the other, their willingness to use the tax code to influence individual health-care choices frightens conservatives.
This is clearest in the debate over the administration's proposal to require employers to contribute as much as 80% of the cost of premiums for their workers.
That burden has provoked anger among businesses; Mr. Clinton brought this on himself in part because he was reluctant to buck organized labor and embrace provisions on the taxation of benefits that were espoused by the Jackson Hole group.
Mr. Cooper has reshaped these tax provisions himself in a more regressive fashion, and his plan lacks any employer mandate such as the one proposed by the Jackson Hole group.
Mr. Chafee's plan is in fact the boldest on the tax side, but by rejecting any employer mandate, his plan, like Mr. Cooper's, comes up short in dollars to make health care truly affordable for working-class families.
This has encouraged interest in a hybrid scheme that would exempt small business from the employer mandate and instead combine elements of Mr. Clinton's plan and of Mr. Chafee's proposal that all workers be required to buy insurance.
Even some Senate conservatives speak of the need to require employers who now provide insurance to continue coverage whatever scheme is adopted.
But any such hybrid scheme could lead to market distortions because of necessarily arbitrary definitions such as what constitutes a small business.
However the congressional debate unfolds, it will be influenced by forthcoming estimates by the Congressional Budget Office, which is openly skeptical of much of what pure managed competition promises.
As a rule, CBO's score-keeping conventions tend to give less credit to new policy ideas.
And one of the risks now is that budget standards will discourage innovative thinking and lead lawmakers to make choices that could prove more costly in the long run.
"These are the opening moves in about three or four different chess games, and there are masters on all sides," says Iowa Democratic Sen. Tom Harkin.
"I never predict the outcome of a chess game after the opening moves."
-- MANDATORY ALLIANCES Clinton calls for large, regional insurance-buying pools; rivals want voluntary arrangements, or to permit more businesses to opt out.
-- PREMIUM CAPS By the year 2000, Clinton would cap the allowable annual increase in health-insurance premiums at the general inflation rate.
But conservatives fear price controls, while some Democrats would trigger controls only if competition first fails.
-- EMPLOYER MANDATE Clinton would require companies to pay 80% of premium costs for workers.
Rivals want no mandate, or want the burden placed on the individual.
Hybrid proposals could prove hard to administer.
-- TAXATION OF BENEFITS Clinton would impose a modest future cap on what health-care benefits could be excluded from income.
Proponents of a purer "managed competition" approach want tax changes but disagree over where to impose tax penalties and how to recycle revenues as tax breaks.
