The Senate's 44 Republicans blasted a part of a new world trading agreement that allows certain government subsidies, giving the Clinton administration its first big political test in its effort to push the pact through Congress.
The Senate Republican disapproval isn't likely to mean congressional defeat for the pact, which was negotiated under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and is aimed at liberalizing world trade.
But the opposition does create a pothole on what was supposed to be a smooth ride.
Administration officials insist that concerns can be dealt with in implementing legislation that details how the trade pact will take effect.
The Republicans are basically opposed to terms that allow subsidies for research and development, regional development and environmental compliance.
The senators, led by Missouri Sen. John Danforth, complained that the subsidies represent "a major shift in U.S. trade policy from one promoting free market competition to one promoting government subsidies and industrial policy."
The administration reacted somewhat unusually to the Republican complaints.
A senior U.S. trade official, who briefed reporters on the condition of anonymity, mockingly read parts of the lawmakers' protest and noted that Mr. Danforth should be asked "more penetrating questions" about "why he is raising this to this level of public confrontation."
The official wouldn't elaborate, but went on to suggest the senators were trying to turn ratification of the pact into a partisan battle.
The subsidy issue illustrates a change in trade position between the Clinton administration and its predecessor.
Under President Bush, the U.S. pressed to limit government subsidies of research and development.
In the world trade negotiations in Geneva in December, the Clinton administration overturned that position and persuaded other countries to accept provisions that allow governments to cover as much as 75% of research costs and 50% of development costs.
The Clinton administration considered such a position important because it has adopted a policy of promoting commercial research with government funds, unlike the Bush administration, which branded this as improper industrial policy.
The Clinton administration will support research and development that leads to a prototype.
For example, it plans to fund 50% of the cost of building a car that is three times as efficient as cars today.
In contrast, the Bush administration limited its support to laboratory research.
The senators said the subsidies would undermine U.S. industries' ability to charge foreign companies with receiving unfair subsidies and dumping goods in the U.S. at unfairly low prices.
The target of much criticism over government subsidies is Airbus Industrie, a European aircraft consortium that has emerged as a major rival to the U.S. aircraft makers such as Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp.
Mr. Danforth, whose state includes McDonnell Douglas's headquarters, said he won't support the trade pact if the subsidy arrangement isn't changed.
"I'd rather kill the GATT agreement than do this," he said in a briefing to reporters.
While all of the Republican senators aren't likely to oppose the pact because of this issue, Mr. Danforth's position could be troublesome because of his position on the Senate Finance Committee, which will be a main committee considering the agreement.
Moreover, the Republican position is important because the GOP has traditionally provided crucial votes for trade-liberalization measures such as the North American Free Trade Agreement.
