Following his recent, highly publicized visit to the U.S., Mr. Adams refused at Sinn Fein's annual conference in this Dublin suburb over the weekend to embrace a joint British-Irish peace plan for Northern Ireland.
Reiterating the party's hard-line position, he told cheering supporters that the plan -- while a step forward -- doesn't offer enough British concessions to get the IRA to lay down its arms so that Sinn Fein can enter negotiations on the future of the province.
The proposal, he declared, amounts to a demand for "an IRA surrender as a precondition to dialogue with Sinn Fein."
As a result, it increasingly appears that the two countries, which unveiled the plan with high expectations Dec. 15, may have to try to proceed without Sinn Fein to keep the initiative alive -- a strategy fraught with risks.
But, can that work?
No one knows for sure, of course, and opinions are divided.
Despite Sinn Fein's position -- and despite continued violence by Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland -- optimists say peace is still possible, even if many now are talking in terms of years and no longer in terms of weeks or months.
Mr. Adams and Sinn Fein may have a high profile, the optimists argue, but their refusal to renounce violence is drawing a chorus of criticism in Ireland.
Across the street from the drab, cramped community where Sein Finn met, for example, protestors marched carrying signs that demand, "Stop the Killing."
"They've got little support here," insisted Michael Nugent, chairman of New Consensus, a nonsectarian group opposed to violence.
"The ideal is that they would be involved in peace talks.
But having said that, we shouldn't wait."
A vast majority of Irish people believe the so-called joint declaration contains the basis for peace talks.
Britain agreed to eventually pull out of Northern Ireland and allow unification, but only with the consent of Ulster voters, a majority of whom are Protestant and don't now favor unification.
A survey published yesterday by the Sunday Independent newspaper in Dublin showed 94% in Ireland and 85% in Ulster think Sinn Fein should renounce violence and join negotiations.
"It is time to stop pandering to the whims of a tiny percentage of the population which supports violence. . . .
Do not be afraid of leaving Sinn Fein behind," the newspaper said.
Under the optimists' scenario, progress can be achieved by restarting stalled negotiations with moderate Catholic and Protestant parties along with the two governments.
Movement on such issues as allowing more self rule by Ulster -- now administered by London -- and ways for Dublin to participate in the province would marginalize Sinn Fein or force it to reject violence, they believe.
"Hopefully, as they see momentum for peace developing," explains an Irish government source, "they may at some point be tempted to join the bandwagon."
He adds, "I don't see a quick fix, but I am optimistic in the long term, five to 10 years."
But those who think progress can be made without Sinn Fein, and the IRA, may be underestimating its resilience.
Judging from its conference, Sinn Fein appears more confident than ever.
Basking in publicity -- some 250 journalists covered the meeting, vs. fewer than 50 last year -- speakers offered no apologies for their combative stance or the IRA's violence.
Hanging on the walls of the meeting hall were photos of dead IRA "volunteers" who had carried out attacks.
Indeed, far from being defensive, Sinn Fein views the peace initiative from the two governments as vindication for its refusal to budge on key issues.
Mitchel McLaughlin, the party's Northern Ireland chairman, dismissed the idea that progress can be made without Sinn Fein.
"They've tried that before.
If Sinn Fein is excluded, there can't be any peace," he said.
"They've experienced failure after failure."
As for speculation that hard-liners and moderates are divided over the initiative, Sinn Fein official Martin McGuinness won a rousing ovation when he declared defiantly, "There's not the slightest possibility of a split."
Mr. Adams similarly dismisses Sinn Fein's lack of popular support.
"Public-opinion polls aren't the basis on which to move forward," he said in an interview.
"Sinn Fein is a small party, but notwithstanding that . . . we are a significant force."
In his 93-minute speech, Mr. Adams offered a few conciliatory words, but little compromise.
"The British are in no doubt, I am sure, about the capacity and commitment of the IRA," he said pointedly.
Another obstacle to talks without Sinn Fein is that continued violence by the IRA, and Protestant terrorists who believe the British are selling them out, could undercut negotiations.
Hard-liners in the movement appear unwilling to compromise.
"The only British declaration that Gerry Adams should accept for us," said Patrick Treanor, a Sinn Fein delegate who spent four years in prison in Ulster after being convicted of membership in the IRA, "is the declaration from Westminster that says, `We're leaving.'"
