Precious-metals prices fell in a day of retrenchment for a market that some analysts said has overextended itself with two months of price gains.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for February delivery was down $4.80 to $387.90 an ounce, while the actively traded March silver-futures contract was down 7.2 cents to $5.275 an ounce.
British news reports yesterday asserted that 1,240 tons of gold stashed by former Philippine president Ferdinand Marcos had been found in a warehouse in Switzerland.
Discovery of a previously unknown hoard of gold of that size -- more than half the world's annual output of gold and worth about $12.5 billion at current prices -- could be expected to pressure prices lower, analysts said.
But the news reports weren't confirmed by official sources.
The rumor titillated traders, analysts said, but it wasn't the primary reason for yesterday's broad-based decline.
Rather, "the market seems to be in the throes of some kind of distribution now, thrashing about in an unorderly fashion," said Bernard Savaiko, senior analyst for PaineWebber Inc.
Mr. Savaiko said he believes the current choppiness of the market could be the preface to a sharp price drop that could see the price of gold fall "well below $380."
Others aren't so sure, however.
"I think the majority of yesterday's decline was technically inspired," said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
"I think there will be further consolidation.
How far it goes I'm not sure.
But I think this is just a temporary correction in an overall bull trend."
What is clear is that speculators of all sizes bailed out of "long" positions, or wagers that futures prices would rise, as prices fell yesterday through key levels.
These investors -- including big and influential commodity funds, which are managed pools of investor money -- helped to exacerbate the decline by selling futures contracts.
Gloomy traders shrugged off a seemingly positive housing-starts report, in which the Commerce Department reported higher-than-expected construction of new homes.
During its climb in recent months, the price of gold has received support from a series of similarly positive U.S. economic reports.
Also exerting downward pressure on gold-futures prices yesterday, Mr. Savaiko said, was a report in this newspaper that insiders at certain gold-mining companies had sold shares of their companies' stocks.
GRAINS & SOYBEANS: Prices of most crop-futures contracts skidded for the third consecutive day as commodity-fund managers continued to take profits on long-lasting rallies in the grain-futures pits.
Grain prices have climbed since the disappointing crops harvested last fall in the Midwest, which suffered from record rain and flooding.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the wheat contract for March delivery slipped 1.75 cents a bushel to settle at $3.72 a bushel.
Soybean prices fell.
Corn prices settled mixed.
Sparks Cos., a Memphis, Tenn.-based agricultural forecasting concern, told clients it expects U.S. corn farmers to plant 79.8 million acres this spring, up 8.3% from the 73.7 million acres planted last year.
ENERGY: Heating-oil prices fell sharply amid the belief supplies were adequate to meet heightened winter demand.
The drop in heating oil dragged down crude prices, too.
The decline came despite the latest oil-inventory data, which showed that heating-oil stocks fell by about 4.8 million barrels in the latest week.
Some market participants said a drawdown that size was expected and a larger one was needed to raise supply questions and boost prices.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, heating oil for February delivery fell 2.12 cents a gallon to 47.96 cents.
Weather forecasts that the record cold spell across much of the country was coming to an end also depressed prices.
February crude oil settled at $15.10 a barrel, down 12 cents.
