In "There Is No Health Care Crisis" (editorial page, Jan. 25), Irwin M. Stelzer misuses and misquotes my research on the durations of spells without health insurance.
He suggests I believe that "most are uninsured for only a short time."
That is not true.
My colleagues and I have found that during the mid-1980s, half of all uninsured spells ended within six months -- but that also means that half lasted longer than six months.
Specifically, 28% lasted more than one year and 18% lasted more than two years.
Mr. Stelzer then implies I estimate that 5.5 million persons are chronically uninsured.
That, too, is not true.
I estimate that in 1992, about 21 million Americans were uninsured for at least a year.
Finally, when Mr. Stelzer makes light of the "37 million people without health insurance," he misstates what the number means.
The figure of 37 million comes from point-in-time surveys and so includes only those people who were uninsured on the day the survey was conducted.
The number of people uninsured at some time during a year is significantly larger.
In 1992, for example, I estimate that while 21 million people were uninsured for the entire year, another 37 million were uninsured for spells of one to 11 months.
Thus, there were 58 million Americans at risk for medical care bills for at least part of 1992; 58 million Americans without health insurance for some portion of a year is a sign of a health care crisis in this country.
Mr. Stelzer makes some excellent points.
However, he does not mention the major reason health care costs have risen from 5% of GNP to 14%: Few consumers of health care now pay for their care directly, and no one spends someone else's money -- the employer's, the insurance company's, or the government's -- as carefully as he or she spends his or her own.
I predict that if Medisave accounts plus high-deductible catastrophic insurance policies replaced present employer, Medicare and Medicaid health coverage, health care costs would be more than cut in half as a fraction of GNP.
Stanford, Calif.
My recent research shows that 56% of the uninsured at a point in time will be uninsured for more than two years and 77% will be uninsured for more than one year.
This suggests that of the 37 million uninsured at a point in time, between 21 million and 29 million people are chronically uninsured.
These numbers are much higher than the estimates of five million to 11 million chronically uninsured often cited in the press.
Mr. Stelzer and others have also tried to dismiss the uninsured problem by claiming that the chronically uninsured have either high incomes or are young people who voluntarily decline health coverage.
My data suggest the problem cannot be dismissed so easily.
Only 14% of the chronically uninsured have incomes above three times the poverty line and only 16% of the uninsured fall into the 18-24 age group that might be declining coverage because it is not needed.
In fact, with only a few minor exceptions, the characteristics of the chronically uninsured are very similar to those of the uninsured who are uninsured for a shorter time.
A majority of the uninsured are working or in a family where someone is working and have incomes below 150% of the poverty line.
If there is any typical uninsured family, it is probably a "working poor" family whose breadwinner works for an employer who does not provide insurance.
And many of these people need health insurance because of mounting health bills.
Timothy D. McBride
University of Missouri-St.
St. Louis
