"There is still a presumption of innocence in this country," President Clinton said in defending his campaign jaunt for criminal investigation target Danny Rostenkowski.
The presumption of innocence certainly does pertain to criminal trials, when someone might go to jail.
But yesterday the President was stumping for Rep. Rostenkowski in an election; the issue in the March 15 Chicago primary is whether the Ways and Means chairman is fit to be among the dozen or so most powerful men in our government.
Voters are entitled to use whatever standard they want -- presumed innocence, Caesar's wife or something in between -- in deciding whether to throw the rascals out.
This confusion of the criminal process and the political process has become a bane of national life.
In part because Congressional Democrats, unable to beat the Reaganites at the polls, undertook to criminalize policy differences through Lawrence Walsh and other special prosecutors.
But perhaps in larger part because our Congresspersons have so managed to entrench themselves that the only way to turn them from office is to send them to jail.
By now the rascals have even learned to protect themselves from the judgment of the voters by invoking the criminal law.
The notion is: unless my skullduggery is serious enough to rate a jail sentence, and provable beyond a reasonable doubt, voters aren't entitled to hold it against me at the voting booth.
Indeed, if I'm clever and lucky enough to get everything subpoenaed, locked up in some prosecutor's file case and subject to investigations that reach beyond the next election, voters aren't even entitled to know the facts.
Rep. Rostenkowski is a certified pioneer of this ploy.
The House Post Office scandal erupted in January 1992, and it was apparent from the first that the Ways and Means chairman was a suspect.
Last year, Postmaster Robert Rota pleaded guilty to conspiring with "several" Members to embezzle money from the government, and court documents seem to implicate Rep. Rostenkowski.
The prosecutor investigating him, Jay Stevens, was swept way when Hubbell & Reno fired all U.S. attorneys.
With the switch, the grand jury conducting this investigation was allowed to expire.
But his successor, Eric Holder, has by now convened another grand jury, where one of Mr. Rostenkowski's employees recently took the Fifth Amendment.
Rep. Ernest Istook, a freshman Republican, thinks it inexcusable the House hasn't conducted its own probe into who took what from the Post Office till.
Last month, he and 54 co-sponsors demanded an investigation.
Hours before a scheduled vote, House leaders produced a letter from Mr. Holder saying that a House investigation to inform the voters "could significantly damage" his probe.
In other words, until we can determine if Danny is a thoroughgoing crook, voters being asked to perpetuate his extraordinary powers should be kept in the dark about his use of those powers.
In the Clinton Administration, this seems to have become the prevailing standard.
Commerce Secretary Ron Brown was "cleared" when a grand jury decided there wasn't enough evidence to indict him for taking a bribe from a Vietnamese businessman.
But why was Mr. Brown hanging around with the suspect businessman in the first place, and why did he lie about it?
Lacking an indictment, the criminal law does not and should not answer these questions.
But somehow or another, voters are entitled to an explanation.
Most spectacularly of all, of course, the President himself has Rosty-ployed his Whitewater vulnerability into the abyss of the Robert Fiske investigation.
Yesterday we received Justice's answer to our Freedom of Information request for a copy of the Park Service's report on the death of Vincent Foster: We can't have it because Independent Counsel Fiske "has determined that the public release of all or any part of the records at this time would be detrimental" to his investigation.
But voters are entitled to know right now what kind of corruption it is that seems to be metastasizing through the Justice Department, the Little Rock U.S. attorney's office, the FDIC, the Treasury and Resolution Trust Corp. -- where one after another Webster Hubbell, Paula Casey, Ricki Tigert and Roger Altman have grudgingly and belatedly recused themselves from important public business.
While we're glad to see Mr. Fiske starting to show some life, he has no mandate to answer this question.
The body directly responsible to the voters is of course the Congress, which should have the responsibility for making a record the electorate can judge.
But Congress has never met a responsibility it can't duck, and a Democratic majority is not about to investigate a Democratic presidency.
Instead, we are treated to the hilarious spectacle of Don Riegle (of the Keating Five) and John Kerry (buddy of CenTrust crook David Paul) piously explaining they do not want to impede Mr. Fiske.
As for Congress policing its own Post Office, or Danny Rostenkowski or even lesser Congresspersons, forget it.
Congress routinely and explicitly exempts itself from laws it applies to the rest of us, and its internal "ethic investigations" are neither ethical nor investigations.
The House will likely vote this Wednesday not to investigate the Post Office scandal, just as it voted last month to exempt itself from the special prosecutor it was applying to the executive branch (see below).
We're not keen on sending members of Congress to jail.
But so long as Congress puts itself above laws that apply to citizens and even Presidents, the presumption voters ought to apply in the voting booth is a presumption of rascality.
