Stephen Wright's "Going Native" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 305 pages, $22) is a road novel, a diabolic picaresque, a pilgrim's progress that becomes a dance of death, a voyage to the end of night, an executioner's song.
It exhibits an impressive sardonic grandiloquence and a ferocity that often approaches the anomie and skittering violence it condemns.
The genre is familiar: a satire of post-Vietnam America, a pumped-up paranoid tour of an apocalyptic wasteland, a grotesque carnival peopled with disaffected suburbanites, psychos, freaks, losers, crackheads, porn stars, serial killers -- the detritus of postindustrial capitalism, pop culture, sleaze and spiritual despair.
The usual suspects.
But Mr. Wright renovates these cultural cliches through his exceptionally precise descriptions of characters and scenes, through the particularizing dance of his language over the generally familiar plot and theme, and through a disquieting interplay of compassion, complicity and condemnation.
He is exploiting the possibilities of the genre rather than just going along for the ride.
In eight chapters he takes us from a leafy Chicago suburb to a rainswept interstate highway to a Colorado motel to a Las Vegas bridal shop to a California beach house.
Each chapter feels like a rich short story, a well-populated breathing world of its own, but he is also tracing the path of a disintegrating black hole of a character, one Wylie Jones, "a guy who looked like any other guy," like a golf pro or a shoe salesman at the mall, in a blue polo shirt and khaki trousers, driving a green 1969 Ford Galaxie, with a Glock 19 pistol under the front seat.
Mr. Wright is an unusually adroit narrator.
In his fine Vietnam novel, "Meditations in Green" (1983), he handled complex fragmented stories with dove-tailing multiple points of view.
He displayed equal skill in his impressive "M31; A Family Romance" (1988), about a disintegrating Midwest family of UFO freaks.
In "Going Native" he constructs a series of narrative and psychological microsystems and shoots his protagonist through them like a destabilizing particle in a cloud chamber.
Not that any of these systems is particularly stable before Wylie passes through.
The novel begins with a backyard barbecue -- Wylie and his wife and another couple: daiquiris, nachos, marital sniping, sexual tension, all the material of a wry suburban slice of life.
But the "snug solidity, charmed ease, tasteful harbor" of the house is just a decorator's trick, the charcoals glow like "poisonous pink eggs," the tv spews images of murder, child abuse, rabid dysfunction, and the lady of the house, whose hair has been "crudely chopped" into a style of "basic asymmetry," is startled when her husband, Wylie, late again, looms up like "this horrible shape."
And soon, without a word of warning, Wylie goes inside for something, looks in on his sleeping son, and simply disappears.
In the succeeding chapters he becomes a personification of "evil...a vacuum, the absence of connective tissue ...the power of blankness."
Only three blocks away live "Mr. CD" and "Latisha Charlemagne," two spectacularly sordid crackheads boiling away in a state of "mutual abrasion."
Wylie steals their green Ford Galaxie.
Out on the highway a psychotic drifter bums a ride with "Tommy," a guy in a green Ford Galaxie, who calmly tells him he's just out of jail for murder and is driving a stolen car.
In Colorado Tommy picks up a nerdy motel owner's rebellious daughter and turns the tables on the voyeuristic protege of a Denver porn film producer.
In Las Vegas Tommy hitches up with a roulette dealer in a white leather miniskirt who looks like a roller derby queen -- but the central focus of this conspicuously compassionate chapter is the life and loves of the girl behind the counter in the Bridal Shoppe of the Happy Chapel.
The book's tour de force is an 80-page novella within the novel, a journey up a jungle river in Borneo undertaken by a randy Hollywood man and wife (an actress in sci-fi horror flicks), a sumptuously described expedition to the heart of darkness, a village of former head-hunters, half-corrupted by the lure of "outboard engines and athletic shoes and television sets," but still enmeshed in ancient animistic practices and a belief in the world of spirits, of brutal harmonies, of ritualized (and thereby contained) anxieties.
The L.A. couple are, of course, transformed, but the chapter keeps moving toward the very different native brutality and darkness that await them back home when Tommy and his mate pay a call.
The book ends a few years later with someone who appears to be Wylie or Tommy, but is now called Will, coming apart at the seams, sitting in his rich wife's California beach house garage, in the wreck of a green Galaxie, with a gun, longing for everything to come to a stop.
In paraphrase, the novel may sound too full of familiar attitudes and effects.
At times, the baroque rhetoric can teeter toward a kind of sentimental, apocalyptic bombast quite beyond the controlling irony.
The strung-out picaresque is fueled too often by scenes of exultant nihilism, a gleeful, jacked-up devils' dance of sex and drugs.
But, page by page, "Going Native" is an impressive literary performance, and Mr. Wright has more than confirmed the sense that he is a most distinguished literary performer.
