AMERICA'S AGENDA for 1994 is crime, welfare and health care.
With economic concerns receding, a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll finds crime and drugs are now the No. 1 issue on Americans' minds.
Ninety-three percent say dealing with crime should be "an absolute priority" for Clinton and Congress this year; 83% cite welfare reform and 67% health care.
"The issue agenda is quite different than a year ago," say Democrat Peter Hart and Republican Robert Teeter, who conducted the Journal/NBC poll.
"A year ago, it was the economy and the economy."
Clinton plans to hit harder on crime in his State of the Union address.
He will plug the long-languishing crime bill, and also may devote more passion to a new call for a higher moral order in American society.
The administration begins mapping plans to pull top officials -- including Reno, Bentsen, Education's Riley and HUD's Cisneros -- into more high-profile roles in crime fighting.
GET-TOUGH POLICIES are favored over other crime nostrums.
Fifty-seven percent say crime is either a "critical" or "major" problem in their own communities.
When asked whether more emphasis should be placed on the causes of crime or on stricter punishment, Americans are closely divided.
But when the talk turns to specifics, punishment is on their minds.
In the poll, 76% say mandatory life-sentences for all three-time violent offenders would have a major impact on the problem.
Strong majorities say making more crimes subject to the death penalty and toughening punishment for juvenile offenders would make a big difference; 52% say putting 100,000 more cops on the street would be a big help.
But only 39% say building more prisons would be of much help, and fewer than one in five say higher fees on gun dealers or raising ammunition taxes would matter much.
ECONOMIC OPTIMISM SURGES, and Clinton seeks credit for it.
At 44%, the number of Americans saying the economy will improve over the next 12 months is the highest it has been since last January; concern over joblessness drops to its lowest level since Clinton took office.
Asked who deserves most credit for the economy's upswing, 49% say the normal business cycle, 23% say Clinton and 11% say Bush; only 4% credit the Fed.
The White House has been laboring to convince reporters that Clinton deserves credit, arguing that his deficit-reduction initiative brought down long-term interest rates.
Some economists say the government's estimate of fourth-quarter growth, which comes out next Friday, could be as high as 6%.
"The robust economy of the fourth-quarter should continue into the first," says Lehman Brothers' Allen Sinai.
THE URGE TO MERGE among cable-TV and telephone companies is viewed with suspicion.
In the poll, 55% believe such mergers will hurt consumers by concentrating too much power in the hands of a few companies, compared with 38% who believe such mergers will help consumers by making more options available.
HILLARY'S INVOLVEMENT in Whitewater seems to have done her little damage with the public.
Fifty-one percent have positive views of her, largely unchanged from December.
The finding suggests Democratic fears that her ability to sell health-care reform would be hurt are overblown.
HAVES AND HAVE-NOTS increasingly split over Clinton's health plan.
Opposition among those who currently are covered by health insurance rises to 42% from 33%; conversely, support among those who aren't covered by insurance rises to 60%.
Overall, Americans favor the plan by 42% to 39%, down from 47% to 32% a month ago.
DOLE PATROL: Hours before Inman's public withdrawal announcement, a White House official phoned to give the Senate GOP leader advance word -- without mentioning that Inman was attacking Dole as a principal reason for his decision.
In the poll, which was conducted before Inman's allegations, Dole was viewed positively by 42%, negatively by 23%.
MORE AID to Russia could come from international institutions.
Hoping that reforms remain on track, the administration talks with the IMF and World Bank about financing a "social safety net" for Russians to cushion the blow of factory closings and layoffs.
But with the exodus of Russian reformers, U.S. officials watch to see what Yeltsin and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin do, not what they say.
Bentsen's new slogan: "We want to make sure that support advances as fast as the reforms."
With the issue of North Korea's nuclear program receding from the headlines, Russia re-emerges as Americans' top foreign-policy priority in the poll.
Currently, 28% of Americans consider Russia an ally, 10% consider it an adversary, and 56% consider it neither.
MINOR MEMOS: Bring back gridlock?
By 56% to 33%, Americans would rather have Congress and the presidency controlled by different parties. . . .
Most people may not know exactly what the term "multimedia" means -- but by 54% to 21%, their initial reaction to the idea is positive.
