There's no question that the Buffalo Bills will be facing a daunting opponent when they meet the Dallas Cowboys in Super Bowl XVIII at 6:18 p.m. this Sunday in Atlanta.
But the Bills, who have lost three consecutive Super Bowls, may face an even tougher challenge when they sprint off the field after the final whistle and seek endorsement deals on Madison Avenue.
According to marketing experts, advertisers are becoming increasingly reluctant to sign up professional athletes as product spokesmen.
The primary reason: The off-field behavior of athletes is getting too unpredictable.
Some marketing officials say so-called moral clauses in endorsement contracts have grown "elaborate" and it is now easier for clients to bail out on a celebrity.
Another concern for advertisers is whether an athlete is perceived as a winner or a loser.
"Everyone is scared," says Nova Lanktree, president of Lanktree Sports, a Chicago company that pairs sports celebrities to commercials and television projects.
"There is trepidation in the ad industry."
Most recently, advertisers were shaken by the alleged involvement of people close to skater Tonya Harding in a brutal attack on rival Nancy Kerrigan.
Ms. Kerrigan continues to receive offers for product endorsements, but advertisers aren't interested in Ms. Harding, according to Ms. Lanktree.
So, the Bills and their most important player, quarterback Jim Kelly, face a skeptical advertising industry and would seem to have little chance of snaring lucrative contracts if they turn up as losers for the fourth straight year.
(Last year, the Cowboys trounced the Bills, 52-17.)
"The chances increase greatly if the Bills win," says Dan Kelly, younger brother and president of Jim Kelly Enterprises in Buffalo.
"I don't think it should matter whether the Bills win or lose, but it does when it comes to talking about endorsements.
I would think that he would get his share of product endorsements if they win."
Jim Kelly's ad for Nuprin from Bristol-Myers Squibb hasn't been used in about three years, according to Lisa Scherer, vice president of marketing at Jim Kelly Enterprises.
Nuprin, she says, opted to steer the campaign to older, professional tennis players, including Jimmy Connors.
Mr. Kelly endorses SkyBox International, a trading card company, and Apex One, an apparel company in Piscataway, N.J.
Other than Mr. Kelly, the Bills player with the greatest commercial potential is Bruce Smith, who is currently appearing in comical ads for Wavy Lay, a new product from PepsiCo's Frito-Lay division.
He is also in bizarre and controversial ads for Nike co-starring Dennis Hopper, who sniffs Mr. Smith's sneakers.
Bob Dorfman, a senior copywriter at Foote, Cone & Belding's San Francisco office, says Mr. Smith is one of the few Bills "who can rise above a fourth straight Super Bowl defeat."
Oddly, Mr. Dorfman says another possible contender for endorsements is Marv Levy, the Bills' coach.
Armed with a master's degree in English from Harvard, Mr. Dorfman says Mr. Levy has the potential to endorse high-brow products such as computers or encyclopedias.
Endorsements offer athletes a much greater financial return than simply winning the game.
For example, the Super Bowl winners each receive $38,000 (each losing player gets $23,500).
But marketing experts estimate that athletes can earn $50,000 by appearing in a single fast-food ad, and having their face on a box of Wheaties from General Mills could pay upward of $200,000.
The chances for endorsements are higher with the Cowboys, starting with its quarterback Troy Aikman, whose handsome looks remind some of Joe Montana, former quarterback for the San Francisco 49ers and now for the Kansas City Chiefs.
In fact, Mr. Dorfman says Mr. Aikman has the "looks, the talent and the dominant team to become the next Joe Montana of endorsements."
Mr. Dorfman's only recommendation: Give the lad some "charisma lessons."
Already, though, Mr. Aikman has worked for Nike and Wheaties, and last year he was the player who said he was "going to Disney World" post-Super Bowl.
Emmitt Smith, a Cowboys running back, could be headed for Disney World this year if the Cowboys pull off a second defeat of the Bills, predicts Mr. Dorfman.
He has appeared in ads for Reebok, Starter and Coca-Cola.
Another member of the Cowboys organization with enormous potential is flamboyant and boastful coach Jimmy Johnson.
With his perfectly white teeth, perfectly coiffed hair and perfectly round shape, Mr. Johnson could become a "larger-than-life character," says Mr. Dorfman, "not unlike former Chicago Bears coach Mike Ditka and former Oakland Raiders coach and CBS Sports commentator John Madden."
Mr. Johnson is currently seen in television ads for Apex One, and is quite amusing driving a large convertible and picking up Cowboys players who are hitchhiking.
Ms. Lanktree, for one, is less enthusiastic about the Cowboys, however.
"There is no real television superstar" on the team, she says.
Although some of the players may do well in regional advertising, she says it isn't likely they will reap big financial benefits from national ads.
Of course, sometimes it doesn't matter whether you're perceived as a winner or loser.
Take Chevy Chase, for instance.
Of course, he isn't an athlete, but he will make an appearance in this year's Super Bowl cluster of ads for Doritos Tortilla Thins from Frito-Lay.
In the middle of the spot, Mr. Chase is informed by a group of executives wearing sunglasses that he is canceled.
Audience research on Mr. Chase is lousy, he is told.
The ads are a clear reference to his short-lived late-night talk show on Fox last year.
One important difference between Mr. Chase and any member of the Buffalo Bills: Ms. Lanktree imagines the last thing the Bills would want is to be cast in a loser role similar to Mr. Chase's.
NEC Technologies, Boxboro, Mass., has put its estimated $35 million computer advertising account into review.
The incumbent, DDB Needham, New York, a unit of Omnicom Group, is competing to hold onto the business.
But the agency will find it has plenty of competition.
"We're inviting agencies from coast to coast to participate," an NEC spokesman said.
Consultant William Weilbacher of Dennis, Mass., is conducting the search.
NEC is looking around less than three months after one of its biggest rivals, International Business Machines Corp., hired Omnicom agencies to create its personal-computer advertising.
Merkley Newman Harty, the Omnicom start-up shop, won the U.S. portion of the IBM business, while DDB's Paris office won the European part.
Some executives said NEC, a unit of NEC Corp. of Japan, decided IBM's account was too close for comfort.
DDB declined to comment.
The NEC spokesman said the review's purpose was "to ensure the company is maximizing its advertising investment."
The NEC review comes just as another big computer firm, Digital Equipment Corp., of Maynard, Mass., is studying a possible consolidation, according to David Simler, Digital's acting corporate advertising manager.
Digital currently splits its estimated $30 million in U.S. advertising among six agencies, including Young & Rubicam, New York, which was hired in November to create personal-computer ads.
Consulting firm Morgan Anderson is expected to oversee the internal review.
Chrysler Corp. said it is hooking up with Interactive Network for a test during the Super Bowl of teaser ads for the Dodge and Plymouth Neon.
Chrysler plans to air three spots for the Neon during the NBC network's Super Bowl broadcast Sunday.
The company is hooking up with Interactive Network to find out whether viewers paid attention to them.
Interactive Network subscribers use wireless hand-held devices to play along with regular television broadcasts.
During the Super Bowl, they will be able to predict plays and compete with expert calls.
When the game is over, Chrysler will quiz the subscribers about features, price and dealer locations of the Neon-information contained in the preceding Neon ads.
Interactive Network is based in Sunnyvale, Calif.
It doesn't disclose the number of subscribers, but executives estimate them at about 5,000, located in San Francisco, Sacramento and Chicago.
