In a surprise setback for the White House and Democratic leaders, the Senate Budget Committee voted to require another $26 billion in spending cuts from President Clinton's five-year budget plan.
The additional cuts, adopted on a bipartisan 13-8 vote, would place severe pressure on the Clinton administration's "investment" spending initiatives if they survive when the full Senate considers the budget resolution next week.
Already, lawmakers face tough choices on spending merely to meet the targets set in last year's deficit-reduction program.
With deficits shrinking as a result of that program and the recovering economy, James Sasser (D., Tenn.), chairman of the Budget Committee, had argued against seeking any new cuts.
But Sen. Charles Grassley (R., Iowa), who proposed the additional but unspecified reductions along with Sen. James Exon (D., Neb.), said they were necessary in light of projections showing the deficit growing again due to spiraling health costs near the end of the decade.
"We ought to be tackling the out-year budget deficits now when we don't have pressure on us," Mr. Grassley said of future years.
In addition to all committee Republicans, that argument drew votes from Mr. Exon and three other Democrats, Kent Conrad of North Dakota, Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey and Paul Simon of Illinois.
Earlier, the committee rejected a series of amendments, including a Republican alternative budget offered by Sen. Pete Domenici of New Mexico.
The GOP plan would offer families a new $500-per-child tax credit while still calling for an additional $318 billion in deficit reduction over five years, largely through cuts in Medicare, Medicaid and welfare.
Mr. Grassley eventually joined committee Democrats in voting to send Mr. Clinton's $1.5 trillion spending plan for fiscal 1995 to the Senate floor.
The committee's version of the budget, which like the administration's doesn't call for any new taxes, envisions a 1995 deficit of $174 billion.
Stung by his own party's defections, Mr. Sasser said later that the additional spending reductions had a "50-50" chance of surviving on the floor when colleagues face the "tender mercies" of Robert Byrd (D., W.Va.), chairman of the Appropriations Committee.
Mr. Byrd, who would oversee the task of turning the general Exon-Grassley proposal into specific cuts, has warned that most of the burden would fall on the Pentagon.
He also has the power to punish senators by cutting their pet domestic programs.
The toughest choices wouldn't come immediately, because the Exon-Grassley proposal would cut spending by only $1.6 billion in fiscal 1995, which begins Oct 1.
But Robert Greenstein of the liberal Center on Budget and Policy Priorities predicted the proposal would "cripple" the administration's plans to strengthen long-term economic growth through expanded education, job-training, infrastructure, and research programs.
"We're very concerned" about the additional cuts, said Barry Toiv, a spokesman for the White House Office of Management and Budget.
Mr. Toiv cited the potential impact on the defense budget, but Mr. Grassley dismissed such warning as "scare tactics" to pressure Republicans and said White House investments would be scaled back.
The administration's proposed investments amount to about $8 billion in fiscal 1995 and roughly $90 billion over five years.
Cuts passed last year already have touched off intense jockeying for funds between administration proposals and existing programs favored by congressional Democrats.
For example, the administration's proposed boost in Head Start funding for preschool children is competing for money with low-income energy assistance, which Democratic liberals want to protect.
And financing for the Education Department's Goals 2000 program largely hinges on cuts in federal impact aid to districts with military bases, a program with powerful defenders.
The surprising Senate committee action came as the Clinton administration scored a victory in the House.
Reflecting a diminished sense of urgency about the deficit, House members echoed an earlier Senate vote in killing for this year a proposed constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget.
The amendment fell on 271-153 vote, 12 short of the two-thirds required to pass a constitutional amendment.
All Republicans but one supported the amendment, but a majority of Democrats, facing pressure from their party leaders and the White House, opposed the measure.
"Politics as usual are alive and well in this body," complained Rep. Bob Smith, (R., Ore.), who co-sponsored the amendment with Rep. Charles Stenholm (D., Texas).
