The nation's meat and poultry industry cautiously welcomed the new safe-handling labels unveiled by the Agriculture Department.
Unlike when the original labeling rule was put out last August, the department yesterday gave the industry 60 days to comply for ground-meat products, and until July 6 to attach labels on all other raw-meat products.
Under expedited procedures, the department originally wanted to require use of the labels by last Oct. 15.
But several industry groups sued on the ground that the department didn't have enough reason to speed up the regulatory process.
On Oct 14, a federal judge in Austin, Texas, sided with the industry.
The time given to the industry to implement the new rule "appears to be much more reasonable," said Bruce Gates, vice president of the National American Wholesale Grocers Association, one of the groups that brought the suit.
Mr. Gates added that his group couldn't comment on whether another suit will follow until it had reviewed the entire labeling proposal.
Jens Knutson, director of economic research at the American Meat Institute, said retailers would be the hardest hit financially.
He estimates the cost for retailers to buy and apply labels to be at least $500 million annually.
In addition, meat processors would have to apply labels for packages sold to restaurants.
In total, the meat industry will produce 70 billion pounds of meat this year.
The new labels carry essentially the same message, telling consumers that meat and poultry products may contain bacteria that could prove harmful if mishandled or cooked improperly.
Guidelines state that frozen products should be kept frozen and thawed in a microwave or refrigerator.
Meat and poultry products should be kept away from other foods, and working surfaces and utensils should be immediately washed after touching the raw meat, which should be cooked properly.
Finally, the guidelines say leftovers should be frozen or discarded.
One of the label's changes is a graphic showing a pair of hands washing beneath a faucet.
The original graphic, displaying a sudsy bar of soap, was decried as telling consumers to wash their meat and poultry with soap.
Labels will appear first on raw ground products because of the greater risk for pathogens to exist in them.
The urgency to label meat and poultry products began after several children in the Pacific Northwest either became ill or died from E. coli bacterium present in hamburger patties.
