DRUG TESTING gets a big boost from the California Supreme Court.
Last month, the court allowed the National Collegiate Athletic Association to conduct random drug testing of student athletes.
It said the private sector, like the government, must abide by the state constitution's right of privacy.
But while the government can only override the privacy right if it has a "compelling state interest," the private sector has more leeway; it can invade privacy for "legitimate" interests.
Although the court didn't rule on workplace drug testing specifically, the decision is "very good news for companies who want to test employees for drugs," said Victor Schachter, a San Francisco lawyer.
He said it will allow companies to test job applicants, as well as employees whom they reasonably suspect are taking drugs.
Whether companies can do random drug testing remains unclear.
Some 7% of American workers surveyed in 1990 used an illicit drug in the preceding month, down from 14% in 1979, according to the National Research Council.
SELF-DEFENSE CLASSES go to the workplace, as fear of violence increases.
More companies are offering courses in response to employee requests and increased criminal activity.
Stride Rite Corp., in Cambridge, Mass., began offering a personal-defense workshop last year after a woman (not an employee) was mugged in a nearby parking lot.
Most employees who sign up for the classes are women.
Some companies ask security guards to teach self-defense techniques, while others hire outside consultants to show how to handle dangerous situations or to sell employees pepper spray.
Commonwealth Edison Co. teaches repair crews what to do when confronted by gang members.
It also is developing a video to show line supervisors how to defuse potential outbursts among employees.
VALENTINES AT WORK: Employing workers' spouses gains acceptance.
Most companies employ married couples, and like the results, says the Society of Human Resources Management.
More than 80% of 432 companies surveyed hired spouses; some said relatives increase productivity through family competition, the Society says.
Canandaigua Wine Co., in Canandaigua, N.Y., says hiring relatives is a plus because families' success gets "bound with the company."
Employers generally prohibit couples from supervising one another, and some won't hire executives' spouses.
But Bank of Boston dropped a ban on employing senior officers' spouses, saying it was losing good employees.
Small-town companies like L.S. Starrett, a precision toolmaker in Athol, Mass., says it is hard to avoid hiring family members; it shuns the term "nepotism."
Extramarital office romances can lead to dismissal for irresponsibility, but some fired lovers sue for discrimination or invasion of privacy, says consultant Goodrich & Sherwood.
STRIKING OUT: The number of major strikes in the U.S. sank to another record low in 1993, the Bureau of Labor Statistics says.
Only 34 new strikes, involving 178,800 workers, began, down from 35 in 1992 and a high of 470 in 1952.
The number of new strikes started plummeting in 1981 after President Reagan fired striking air-traffic controllers.
COMPUTER ILLITERATES can do some high-tech job hunting starting today.
New York-based Self-Placement Network Inc. will send resumes out on seven major on-line networks used by 16 million people in 145 countries.
The computer will search weekly for job leads among 110,000 listings in electronic job banks and classified ads put on-line by 55 major newspapers.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT still employs a higher percentage of blacks and Asians than the private sector, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission reports.
Blacks accounted for 17.9% of federal workers in 1991, compared with 13.2% of private-sector employees.
Asians accounted for 3.8% of the federal work force, compared with 2.8% in the private sector.
UNEMPLOYMENT RISES around the world, and the outlook remains dim.
More people are out of work than ever before, according to the International Labor Organization.
Some 30% of the world's labor force is unemployed or underemployed; 120 million people are registered unemployed and another 700 million are underemployed, says Ali Taqi, the ILO's chief of staff.
Unemployment is forecast to reach 8.6% in industrialized nations by the end of 1994, the highest level since the Depression.
(The rate is projected to fall to 6.5% in the U.S.)
In the developing world, joblessness is worsening in all regions except Southeast and East Asia.
Youth unemployment continues to deepen; in Poland, a third of all the unemployed in 1992 were under age 24; most had completed high school.
Poverty has skyrocketed in Eastern Europe.
In Bulgaria 73% of all households were below the poverty line in 1992, up from 42% two years earlier.
THE CHECKOFF: "Oatmeal on My Blazer," recently published by Panache Publications in Appleton, Wis., describes preparing a business plan for motherhood as "The Bundle of Joy Launch Plan." . . .
Fourteen percent of all expatriate employees are female, twice as many as five years ago. . . .
Penny Pinching Alert: The IRS raised the standard mileage rate for business trips to 29 cents from 28 cents.
