Sex, drugs and . . . hard candy?
It's only rock-and-roll, but an up-and-coming rock band has put a small Chicago-based candy company in an awkward position.
The Lemonheads, a band enjoying its 15 minutes of fame, took its name from a small, yellow candy first launched by the Ferrara Pan Candy Co. 35 years ago.
Each box of the candy displays the face of a beaming, cherubic lemon.
Thanks largely to lead singer Evan Dando, a flaxen-haired, 26-year-old Adonis, the Lemonheads have a rabid following among teenagers, an age group that spends much of its disposable income on candy.
During concerts, in a ritualistic acknowledgement of the band's origins, maniacal fans pelt Mr. Dando with the lemon-shaped candies.
While it may seem like a match made in licensing heaven, one minor issue has made Ferrara leery of a public embrace.
Mr. Dando, a graduate of the Charles Barkley "I Am Not a Role Model" school of celebrity spokesmanship, acknowledged in interviews that he had had a fling with controlled substances.
Salvatore Ferrara, president of Ferrara Pan Candy, doesn't know whether to seek a promotional relationship with the band or ask the band to stop using the name Lemonhead, a registered trademark.
He worries that forbidding the Lemonheads from using the name "could get the wrong people upset at you.
They do have a following" -- which includes Mr. Ferrara's own teenage daughters.
"They think they are cool," he says.
The dilemma has prevented Mr. Ferrara, the image-conscious grandson of the company's founder, from even contacting the band.
Mr. Ferrara is far more comfortable with Lorrie Morgan, a country-music star with a predilection for Atomic Fire Balls, another Ferrara delicacy (which come in boxes adorned with mushroom clouds).
"She looks a little bit like Florence Henderson," says Mr. Ferrara.
Ms. Morgan recently agreed to appear at Ferrara's booth at a candy trade show, he says.
That has the Lemonheads feeling a bit left out.
Their manager, Janet Billig, concedes that Mr. Dando had a "limited" fling with drugs.
But "it's done," she says.
In fact, she adds, Mr. Dando has said he's open to endorsing the candy.
"He loves the little Lemonhead guy," she says.
