The Hubble Space Telescope's days as a national laughingstock are over.
The first pictures taken by the $1.6 billion telescope since space-walking astronauts repaired it last month offer proof the instrument is as good as new -- perhaps even better, scientists from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said yesterday.
The telescope has been the butt of jokes since it was launched in 1990 with a misshapen mirror that made it nearsighted.
"The Hubble is fixed," declared Ed Weiler, the Hubble program's top scientist.
"It's fixed beyond our wildest expectations, and it was done on time and within budget."
The telescope's vision is now so good it could read a newspaper's nameplate from 12 miles away and detect a glow no stronger than a firefly's from a distance of 8,500 miles, roughly Washington to Tokyo, according to James Crocker of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore.
Astronauts on the space shuttle Endeavour successfully installed prescription lenses on the orbiting telescope in December, but no one knew whether they would work until ground-based scientists could turn on and fine-tune the instrument's cameras over several weeks.
In the end, even less fine-tuning than expected was needed, and NASA released the Hubble's first pictures weeks ahead of schedule.
A batch of color and black-and-white pictures clearly show the before-and-after effects.
Fuzzy halos around a star in an image taken before the repair mission are gone, allowing astronomers not only to see a clearer point of light but also to measure the star's energy.
A view of a spiral galaxy tens of millions of light years away is not only clearer, but reveals previously unseen stars.
The first images were taken only to test the instrument.
Over the next 15 months, NASA scientists and astronomers around the world will begin making scientific observations that will allow them to see deeper into the universe than ever before.
Hubble is now expected to live up to its original goals to help astronomers find the edge of the universe, measure its size, refine estimates of its age and gain further evidence of black holes.
Despite the total loss of NASA's Mars Observer space probe last summer, the success of the Hubble repair mission is expected to help the space agency weather efforts in Congress to cut its budget.
