Recusal is suddenly much in the news, with the disclosure that Treasury official and part-time regulator Roger Altman gave White House Counsel Bernard Nussbaum a "heads-up" about the statute of limitations.
While Mr. Altman subsequently proferred a recusal in his post as head of the Resolution Trust Corp., some ask if the damage is already done.
So this is perhaps an apt moment to take a closer look at the recusal of Paula Casey, U.S. Attorney in Little Rock, from the case against David Hale.
Independent Counsel Robert Fiske Jr. is now supposed to determine whether the President and Mrs. Clinton did anything wrong in their involvement with Whitewater Development Corp., but as a result of Ms. Casey's handiwork and some decisions of his own, his first priority seems bizarre.
He and three assistants were in court this week to press the prosecution of the most threatening witness so far against the President.
To review the basics: Mr. Hale is a former municipal judge appointed by Governor Clinton, and also head of Capital Management Services Inc., a small-business investment company.
His SBIC failed, and he is now charged with fraud; search warrants in his case were issued the morning of Vincent Foster's suicide.
Among his bad loans was $300,000 to a company controlled by Susan McDougal, a White-water partner with her husband and the Clintons; some $110,000 of this loan ended up in the Whitewater account.
Mr. Hale has told reporters that the loan to Mrs. McDougal was made at Governor Clinton's behest.
Ms. Casey was appointed U.S. Attorney in Little Rock after the incoming Clinton Administration's unprecedented action of firing all sitting U.S. Attorneys at a swoop, without replacements ready for many.
She is a former campaign worker for and law student of the President.
Reprinted nearby is some pre-indictment correspondence between Ms. Casey and Mr. Hale's lawyer, Randy Coleman, concerning a possible plea bargain just prior to his indictment (see related article: "Bargaining in Little Rock" -- WSJ March 4, 1994).
We would not render any judgment on the substance of the correspondence, which must be read as the pushing and shoving typical of such negotiation.
Given the experience of the insider-trading prosecutions, the Wedtech case and the like, we'd be among the last to rely on uncorroborated plea-bargain testimony.
The evidence that Mr. Hale made fraudulent loans seems strong, and Mr. Coleman, clearly no fool, is trying to posture him in the best light.
Still, it could scarcely be clearer that Ms. Casey had no business in the middle of these negotiations.
Mr. Hale and Mr. Coleman were being asked to deliver their evidence to a longtime associate and appointee of someone it purported to implicate.
Ultimately, Ms. Casey, like Mr. Altman, found it necessary to recuse herself, as Mr. Coleman suggested early on.
But by then Mr. Hale had been publicly indicted, precluding the possibility of his being wired up in an undercover investigation into, as Mr. Coleman put it, "the banking and borrowing practices of some individuals in the elite political circles of the State of Arkansas."
When Mr. Fiske arrived on the scene, he had the Hale prosecution to deal with, and decided to press it as hard as possible, filing a superseding indictment.
In court arguments this week, he won a ruling that Ms. Casey's involvement with the grand jury did not automatically taint the indictment; there was no smoking gun, and she recused herself only because of appearances, etc., etc.
Also in these hearings, Mr. Hale's co-defendants won a separate trial; they will be tried in June while Mr. Hale's trial will start March 28.
"We consider Hale an essential witness, and the reason we asked for a prompt trial date is that it's necessary to resolve this pending indictment before he's available to us," Mr. Fiske says.
Mr. Hale has never told his Clinton story to law-enforcement officials; Mr. Fiske's court filings say it's necessary to conclude his "dual status -- as witness in the overall investigation and as defendant here."
Another law-enforcement official might see no reason why the trial could not be delayed while Mr. Hale's evidence was collected and tested.
His defenders of course contend he is being singled out for prosecution and punishment precisely because he threatens to implicate others, including Mr. Clinton.
The best result would be a plea bargain before the March 28 date, but Ms. Casey's pre-recusal maneuvering complicates the prospects.
There is now of course no possibility of using Mr. Hale to gather fresh evidence.
Also, he now has the conflict-of-interest grounds on which to base a set of appeals, at the very least delaying any sentence.
This of course would also delay the Whitewater investigation, probably beyond the next Presidential election.
With the trend of belated recusals undermining confidence in the regulators and the administration of justice, what's needed here is neither indictments nor yesterday's White House statement instructing officials to "bend over backward" to avoid White-water conflicts.
What's needed is some public accountability.
If Ms. Casey needed to recuse herself in November, why not September?
Whose idea was it to fire all U.S. Attorneys in the first place?
Our suspicion is that in the middle of it you will find Webster Hubbell, who could bend over backward by resigning.
Is there anyone in Congress responsible enough to get answers to these questions?
