If baby boomers want a safer and more stylish car than what their parents drove when middle-aged, General Motors hopes they will find it in the new Opel Omega.
In the past decade, General Motors Corp.'s Cadillac division has struggled to design a car that looks and feels like a European luxury model.
Now GM thinks it has the answer: the Omega, a luxury car built in Germany by GM's own Adam Opel AG subsidiary.
By 1996, GM plans to sell a version of the Omega in the U.S. under the Cadillac name, making it the latest example of the U.S. auto industry's new enthusiasm for designing so-called global cars, which can sell around the world.
GM's goals: Avoid redundant investment in similar models for Europe and North America and spread costs across bigger, international sales volumes.
The Cadillac version of the Omega will face tough competition in the stagnant U.S. luxury-car market, where GM wants it to be a lower-cost antidote to Cadillac's chrome-laden barge image.
Cadillac's last effort to produce a smaller car to compete with European models like the BMW 3 series resulted in the Cimarron, a dolled-up Chevrolet that was laughed off the market more than six years ago.
Determined not to repeat the Cimarron fiasco, Cadillac is taking pains to ensure that this addition to its line, currently known as the Cadillac LSE but soon to be renamed, is viewed as a credible alternative to European brands, says Cadillac division general manager John Grettenberger.
The division wants the Opel car to bring in "a new type of buyer" for Cadillac, he adds, particularly women in their mid-40s who want a car that is smaller than a traditional Cadillac DeVille and that offers a lively feel of the road.
"When people this age looking for a car this size think about where to shop, Cadillac doesn't even come to mind," says Janet Eckhoff, Cadillac's director of advertising and market planning.
Already, Cadillac is discovering that a new type of buyer can be hard to please.
People who saw the Cadillac LSE at auto shows earlier this year criticized the styling of the car's tail end.
Now GM designers have gone back to the drawing board to give the Opel car's rear end a look more like the current Seville model.
"We're not going to take any chances," says Ms. Eckhoff.
"We're not going to get a second chance at these buyers."
As if that weren't enough pressure for Cadillac, GM's president, John F. Smith Jr., has seized on the Omega/Cadillac program as a symbol of his plans to make GM's U.S. and German engineering and product-development organizations function like partners instead of rivals.
"This car has broad strategic significance for GM world-wide," Mr. Smith said in January when he unveiled a prototype of the Cadillac LSE at the Detroit Auto Show.
By designing cars like the Omega to sell in more than one world market, Mr. Smith says, GM can produce new products "at a fraction of the investment of a more traditional approach."
But global cars have flopped before.
During the late 1980s, Ford Motor Co. tried to sell its large, German-made Scorpio sedan through its U.S. Lincoln-Mercury luxury channels.
But the car, called the Merkur Scorpio in the U.S., didn't catch on, and Ford stopped importing it in 1989.
Cadillac is still formulating the marketing and pricing strategies it will use to avoid repeating the Merkur mistakes.
In Europe, meanwhile, Opel officials say the Omega will compete against the Mercedes C-Class and the BMW 5-series sedans, as well as Japanese models such as the Acura Legend, Lexus ES and GS300 sedans, and the Infiniti J30.
Ranging in price from $23,000 to $37,300 for a loaded-sedan model, the new European Omega's smooth lines and roomy interior mark an advance over the stodgy models it replaces.
The new Omega will offer a choice of five engines, and the car's amenities include driver and passenger air bags, antilock brakes and antitheft systems.
So far, European automotive critics appear to agree that while the Omega is a solid car, it's no BMW.
Even though the new Omega outscored a rival BMW in its road tests, the German motor magazine Mot praised the BMW as a car that offers the excitement of a "light-footed dynamo" rather than the "comfortable largess" of the Omega.
Even Opel executives harbor few hopes of winning over BMW or Mercedes loyalists in Europe, where Opel is a middlebrow brand.
"Some conquest sales would be nice," says Opel's chairman, David Herman, "but the most important thing is keeping our customers."
Thus price will be a key selling point, Opel officials say.
They expect a well-equipped Omega to cost about $5,800 less than a similiarly equipped BMW.
Still, BMW's willingness to supply the turbodiesel for the Omega underscores how unconcerned it is.
"The thing I like best about the Omega is that it has our engine," jokes Bayerische Motoren Werke AG's chairman, Bernd Pischetsrieder.
"But, seriously, I think it's pretty clear that for someone who buys an Opel a BMW is out of the question, and vice versa."
Opel plans to sell 135,000 Omegas in Europe this year and 180,000 in 1995.
To sustain profitable production and emploment at the German factory that will build Omegas, Opel will be counting on additional U.S. sales of some 30,000 to 40,000 units a year starting in 1996.
