Varian Associates Inc. said its fiscal first-quarter net income shot up 77% and new orders hit records, signaling that its turnaround strategy is paying off.
The company, which makes electronics equipment and devices used to make semiconductors, earned $11.7 million, or 65 cents per share, compared with $6.6 million, or 36 cents a share, in the year-earlier period.
In the latest quarter, ended Dec. 31, sales rose 11% to $323.8 million, from $291.3 million.
Moreover, Varian indicated that the rest of the year could be almost as strong, with earnings growth of as much as 50% and sales gains of as much as 10%.
In fiscal 1993, ended Oct. 2, 1993, Varian had net income of $45.8 million on sales of $1.3 billion.
"Our situation has brightened dramatically in the past three to four months," said Chairman and Chief Executive J. Tracy O'Rourke, who is credited with reviving the company.
He cited "the compounding effect" of double-digit sales growth in key businesses plus operating efficiencies that he has implemented over the past few years.
"It used to be a terrific technology company that couldn't make a buck," said Michael Lauer, an analyst with Kidder, Peabody & Co.
"Mr. O'Rourke transformed it into a terrific technology company that at same time can make a lot of dough.
The Street doesn't fully yet appreciate how much it can make."
Indeed, some analysts, including Mr. Lauer, raised their earnings estimates yesterday.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, the company's stock closed at $65.625, up $1.25.
This is the fourth turnaround assignment for Mr. O'Rourke, 58 years old, who was executive vice president and chief operating officer at Rockwell International Corp. before he took over Varian in early 1990.
Among other changes, he divested the company of underperforming operations, increased the market share of its higher-margin products, and slashed the work force to 7,800 people from 12,400.
"Very few companies would rival this turnaround in terms of operating performance and other improvements," Mr. Lauer said.
New orders rose 29% to $440 million, the highest of any quarter in the company's history.
Leading that surge were healthcare systems and semiconductor equipment.
Its order backlog was $738 million, an increase of more than $100 million from the previous quarter and the year-earlier period.
Mr. O'Rourke said he also expected sluggish sales in Europe and Japan to pick up in coming months.
"We still have a few more years where this is going to be very exciting.
Nothing's ever perfect, but it's going pretty good now," Mr. O'Rourke said.
