Who would have thought home-equity loans could be such an emotional issue?
But as a legislative panel traverses the state, holding hearings over whether Texas should join the rest of the nation and allow homeowners to borrow freely against the equity in their houses, you can almost hear the violins begin to swell.
Realtors and home builders warn that homeowners would quickly find themselves trapped by debt.
Advocacy groups tug at the heartstrings, darkly hinting that elderly or unsophisticated consumers might wind up homeless.
But now, like a brick through a window, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas has heaved something unusual into the debate: facts.
In a study published in the latest "Financial Industry Issues" report, former Fed economist Linda M. Hooks blows gaping holes in the argument that home-equity loans carry undue risk for borrowers or banks.
Indeed, her analysis of loan portfolios of banks outside of Texas suggests that home-equity lines have the lowest delinquency rate of all loan categories.
Overall, just 0.63% of home-equity lines of credit were classified as noncurrent in last year's third quarter, meaning they were at least 90 days past due or that banks had stopped accruing interest on them.
By contrast, the average noncurrent rate of all loans was 2.58%.
"That was a surprising result," says Dr. Hooks, who is currently a professor of money and banking at Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Va.
"We knew home-equity loans would be good, but these were quite good."
Even more surprising is how well home-equity loans performed in economically depressed regions of the country.
In the Pacific census region, which is dominated by California, just 0.59% of home-equity loans weren't current, compared with 3.29% for all loans.
Similar performance holds for the troubled Middle Atlantic and New England regions.
"I think the most important thing is that, even in economic downturns, consumers don't seem to be overburdened by home-equity loans," Dr. Hooks says.
The study also points out that, despite all the brouhaha in Texas, home-equity loans actually represent just 6% of banks' total loan portfolio -- hardly the kind of number that would roil the Texas financial system.
So, the downside of home-equity loans is limited.
But what are the benefits?
First, it helps to know that such loans come in two basic flavors.
One is a traditional second mortgage, a fixed-amount loan extended for a specified period that generally requires monthly payments.
(Texas law allows for this type of loan, but only if the proceeds are used for home improvements or to pay back taxes.)
The second version is the home-equity line of credit.
These are typically set up as revolving accounts that permit borrowing up to the amount of the credit line, with flexible repayment schedules and variable interest rates -- like a credit card backed by real estate.
The advantage of both types of loans is that they carry much lower interest rates than other typical consumer loans, because they are secured by collateral: a house.
For instance, while you might pay more than 15% interest on outstanding credit-card debt, home-equity lines run closer to 7%.
And those figures actually understate the advantages.
That's because the Tax Reform Act of 1986 phased out interest deductions for consumer loans -- but still allows a write-off for home mortgages.
Not surprisingly, one of the main uses for both types of home-equity loans is to pay off other debts.
According to a separate Fed study, 35% of second mortgages and 38% of credit lines went toward consolidating other debts.
The other major use was home improvement.
But that's economics.
Now for politics.
Opposition runs deep to any law that would make it easier for banks to sink their claws into borrowers' homes -- a sentiment that dates back to the early days of the Republic, when debtors fled here to escape financial woes.
Fanning the hostility: Builders -- who worry that banks would force them to pledge the equity in their own residences as additional collateral for development loans -- and real-estate agents, who fear home sales would be hampered if houses carry too many liens.
In response, the Texas Bankers Association has proposed reform language that would allow general home-equity lending, while leaving Texas law "the most restrictive in the country," says Robert Harris, president.
Among other things, the language would prevent cross-collateralization to assuage the home builders, would limit total indebtedness to 90% of a home's value, and would give homeowners 18 days to back out of a loan if they have second thoughts.
John Montford, the state senator who heads the panel conducting the hearings, says consumer protections will have to be even stricter before he will back a constitutional amendment expanding home-equity lending.
Yet despite his misgivings, he says, "I find some illogic in preventing the people of Texas from deciding this."
Cotton futures prices set contract highs for the 10th consecutive day as traders took stock of the dwindling global supply of cotton.
At New York's Cotton Exchange, cotton for March delivery was up 0.72 cent to 73.78 cents a pound.
Setting the tone for the U.S. futures market is the unexpected prospect of strong demand among overseas importers for U.S.-grown cotton.
That, analysts say, is because high-quality cotton is in short supply.
The U.S. Agriculture Department's estimate of world cotton production has fallen to 80.3 million bales from 85.4 million bales only six months ago.
"Originally, the U.S. was expected to have another poor season of shipments, with strong competition for a limited demand market," said Sandra Kaul, senior analyst for Smith Barney Shearson.
"But we are seeing a complete change in the outlook for U.S. exports in the second half of the cotton season."
Among other things, Pakistan, one of the major international competitors for the U.S. cotton-exporting business, has harvested a much smaller-than-expected crop this year.
Last August -- the beginning of the 1993-94 growing season -- Pakistani cotton production had been pegged at about 8.7 million bales; currently, however, the U.S. Agriculture Department is forecasting a much smaller Pakistani crop of about 6.5 million bales.
As a result, Pakistan will become a net importer of cotton this year and has cut back its export shipments, Ms. Kaul said.
Nor is Pakistan the only cotton-producing country experiencing supply problems.
China also has a smaller-than-expected crop.
The Agriculture Department, which originally estimated the 1993-94 Chinese cotton crop at 20.7 million bales, now forecasts the crop at 18.5 million bales.
Most analysts expect the Chinese crop to be even smaller than that; most estimates of China's production now range from 13.8 million to 15 million bales.
India, another cotton-producing country, also has suspended sales of its remaining exportable supply of cotton.
And farmers in Australia, which is the only major cotton producer besides the U.S. that still has large stocks of cotton, have had insufficient rain for the crop they are now cultivating.
Thus, the U.S. is the only major producer still well-positioned to accommodate the burgeoning demand for cotton, despite the fact that the U.S. crop was also smaller than expected this year.
In August, the Agriculture Department pegged U.S. production at 18.5 million bales; the department is now estimating the crop at 16.2 million bales.
Bad weather in the Mississippi Delta growing regions was largely to blame for the shortfall, Ms. Kaul said.
LUMBER: Futures prices fell as bad weather returned to forecasts for much of the nation.
At the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, lumber for March delivery was down the permissible daily limit of $10 to settle at $407.80 per thousand board feet.
The cold temperatures and precipitation now forecast for much of the Midwest and western U.S. are likely to hamper construction of new homes, analysts say.
That prospect is drawing down prices on the cash market for lumber, says William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch, adding that "the lumber market is very much under the influence of what cash is doing, in the short term."
ORANGE JUICE: Futures prices fell as the annual non-frost January sell-off continued.
At the Cotton Exchange, orange juice for March delivery was down 2.2 cents to $1.0445 a pound.
The peak period for a frost that could potentially damage Florida's orange crop is mid-December to mid-January.
Each year, prices tend to rise at the beginning of this period on the possibility that a freeze might occur.
If, as is the case this year, a frost fails to develop within this period, traders tend to liquidate their "long" positions, or bets that futures prices will rise.
The process of selling futures contracts to liquidate long positions exerts downward pressure on futures prices.
