In the short run, school choice in most of America is going to have to be limited to "charter" programs.
These allow individual public schools to be run with varying degrees of independence from boards of education.
This latitude extends from simple (and probably futile) site-based management of existing resources to genuine authority for principals or other managers in selecting staff, curriculum and modes of operation.
This degree of reform, especially if limited to a relative handful of campuses, seems to be all that the school establishment is willing to brook.
And because that establishment (the teacher unions, the PTAs, the administrative "blob") continues to wield effective political control in nearly all U.S. jurisdictions, more serious experiments with competition and parental choice are left for another day.
Just how powerful the public-school lobby can be, and how tenuous is the hope for charter schools, was demonstrated vividly at year's end in Michigan.
A dramatic opportunity for change presented itself there earlier in 1993, when the Democratic legislature repealed the property-tax funding base for the schools in a dare to reform-Governor John Engler.
The Governor tried to seize the chance to make meaningful changes in the schools as well as the tax burden.
But vouchers and the like were not to be.
In a scene reminiscent of what's happened in California and elsewhere, the Speaker of the state's House teamed with the Michigan Education Association (teacher union) to hold Democrats in line while pressuring a sufficient number of suburban Republicans not to try anything that would upset their local school constituencies.
As a result, Governor Engler got nothing except a big tax shift and a modest charter program that doesn't even exempt the schools involved from the union contracts in their home districts.
In some of the eight states that already have charter schools in the works, including California and Massachusetts, the prospects may be more encouraging.
A dozen other states are actively considering such campuses.
Recently, a bipartisan group of Indianapolis civic leaders formed a political action committee dedicated to electing reform candidates in the city's May elections for school board.
The group includes Republican Mayor Stephen Goldsmith and two prominent black Democrats: State Rep. William Crawford and Councilwoman Susan Williams.
One drawback to charter schools will always be the political control that hovers over any part of the public-school system.
Parent involvement, possibly as "directors" of a school, is key to success.
A charter arrangement can be suited to contracting out management of an institution to private firms such as Education Alternatives Inc.
In the best situations, the schools are given a few years to show results.
Even where charters have been established, tight limits have been established on their numbers -- 100 in California, 25 in Massachusetts, for example.
Reformers in California will be trying to boost the cap there to 1,000 during the current legislative session.
In that respect, it will interesting to watch the actions of Delaine Eastin, an Assembly Democrat favored to win the state school superintendency this fall.
She has been the education establishment's chief lieutenant in the statehouse.
The national teacher unions have danced around the charter idea, always seeking to impose conditions that limit the leeway of parents and principals.
On the ground, however, the resistance has been fiercer.
One reason that California still has fewer than half the allotted number of charters is that local unions (and sometimes school boards) have discouraged them.
This pressure can be personal as well as political, but its motivation is usually the same: protect the mediocre at the expense of the good.
The liberal Sacramento Bee was compelled to chastise the union in that city recently for blocking a charter program because it would permit teachers to be hired on merit, rather than seniority.
Nevertheless, a political consensus seems to have gelled around the concept.
The reason, as in California, may be a desire to head off more revolutionary changes, such as vouchers.
But the dynamics of the process are unpredictable.
It may turn out that charters, either through success or failure, will make full competition in schooling possible later on.
