The dollar was mixed late yesterday in a rumor-driven market nervous about the outcome of this weekend's meeting of finance ministers from the Group of Seven major industrialized countries and thinned by yet another New York winter storm.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7284 marks, up from 1.7235 marks late Tuesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 105.75 yen, up a bit from 105.65 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4785, down slightly from $1.4790.
About noon Thursday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 105.95 yen and at 1.7284 marks.
Rumors at midmorning in Europe that either the U.S. or Germany had reached an understanding with Japan that the dollar should trade at around 110 yen prompted a sharp if short-lived rally.
About the same time, traders said there was unfounded talk that the Bank of England had intervened to buy dollars on behalf of the Bank of Japan.
The rumors helped move the dollar to intraday highs of 106.55 yen and 1.7339 marks by late in the European morning, indicating that both the mark and yen are continuing to move in tandem against the U.S. currency.
But with both rumors quickly discounted, the market retreated and pushed the dollar toward the bottom of its recent narrow ranges.
Traders noted that the market continues to focus on U.S.-Japan trade fissures ahead of the G-7's weekend meeting near Frankfurt.
"There were a lot of rumors and suggestions that the Japanese will comply with a numerical trade target, and just as many rumors and suggestions that they won't," said Robert Ryan, manager of corporate foreign exchange for the Bank of New York.
"The fact of the matter is there are people with long dollar positions who are choking," Mr. Ryan said.
"The rumors are self-fulfilling because they allow traders to get out of their positions."
He added that with so many players burned last week on the collapse of the U.S.-Japan talks "everyone has pulled back."
Mr. Ryan also said that players are "too beat up" to stake large positions ahead of the G-7 talks, where two opposite but equally credible outcomes are possible.
The first scenario is that absolutely nothing will come out of the meeting on U.S.-Japan trade, which would pressure the dollar lower against the yen.
The second scenario is that Japan will offer to do something about its trade surplus, said Mr. Ryan, noting that would alleviate U.S. pressure for a strong yen.
John Beerling, chief dealer for Norwest Bank in Minneapolis, sees the first scenario as more likely.
"I just don't see an easy solution to the trade issue, and that will put pressure on the yen to strengthen," he said.
