Casino operators are rushing to Texas in anticipation of legalized riverboat gambling, but a legal opinion expected from Attorney General Dan Morales in the next few weeks could make their investments look like a sucker's bet.
People on both sides of the issue believe there's a good chance that Mr. Morales will rule that the Legislature doesn't have the legal authority to allow riverboat and dockside casinos to operate in the state; rather, he may say, the Texas Constitution must be amended before such gambling is allowed.
In a memo to other gaming companies, Michael Rose, chairman and chief executive of Promus Cos., the Memphis, Tenn., company that owns Harrah's casinos and has an option to buy a Houston-area marina, writes that "sources we consider extremely reliable" predict that Mr. Morales will soon find that a constitutional amendment is needed.
Such a ruling would raise a big obstacle for those who want to bring gambling to the state -- though how big an obstacle is disputed.
"I think it's going to make our job harder, but I don't think it means we can't carry the day," says Kent Caperton, a former state senator who has been hired by Station Casinos Inc. of Las Vegas to lobby for gaming.
But opponents disagree.
If Mr. Morales says a constitutional amendment is needed, "it's a backbreaker," says Robert Johnson Jr., an Austin lobbyist who is leading the anticasino forces on behalf of much of the parimutuel racing industry.
To be sure, an attorney general's opinion doesn't have the binding legal authority of a court decision.
But many lawmakers will be swayed by a ruling from the state's chief lawyer.
"Where it would have the most impact would be in influencing legislators," says Douglas Becker, an Austin attorney who filed a brief on behalf of the Texas Riverboat Association, arguing that a constitutional amendment is unnecessary.
If enough legislators believe they have to go the amendment route, the bar is raised considerably for the pro-casino forces.
A constitutional amendment requires a two-thirds majority in the Legislature, and approval by a majority of voters.
In contrast, changing the state's antigambling statutes takes only a majority of each house.
An unfavorable opinion from Mr. Morales would threaten what otherwise looked like an easy bet for the gaming industry.
National casino companies have hired a slew of lobbyists to press their case to the Legislature.
Many companies have been so confident of success that they have been feverishly securing options to buy potential casino locations, and drawing up grandiose plans.
Then in December, state Sen. John Montford, a Lubbock Democrat who opposes casino gambling, asked Mr. Morales whether the Texas constitutional prohibition against "lotteries" covers slot machines and other games of chance.
(In 1991, voters approved a constitutional amendment that permitted lotteries "operated by or on behalf of the state," clearing the way for the Texas Lottery.)
The question is limited to slot machines, but it goes to the heart of the economies of casino gaming.
Slots, which account for up to three-quarters of the revenue of some casinos, "are the bread and butter of any gaming operation," says Marc Grossman, a spokesman for Hilton Hotels Corp., Los Angeles.
Casino opponents and proponents have filed legal briefs arguing their positions.
At the request of gaming advocates, Rep. Senfronia Thompson of Houston has asked the attorney general whether the slot machines could be authorized without a constitutional amendment if they are controlled -- as with the lottery -- by the state.
The experiences of other states provide ammunition for both sides.
For instance, Louisiana and Mississippi share Texas' constitutional prohibition against lotteries.
But they legalized riverboat gambling simply by changing their statutes to exclude floating casinos from the definition of lottery.
In Florida, where the Legislature approved certain forms of bingo, the state Supreme Court upheld the action by recognizing the Legislature's broad authority to define constitutional terms.
Kentucky last year took the opposite tack.
Using arguments similar to those of Texas casino opponents, the Kentucky attorney general said that riverboat gambling fit the definition of a lottery, which the constitution prohibited.
The attorney general's opinion said an amendment to the Kentucky Constitution is required.
Then there's Missouri.
Voters there in 1992 approved riverboat gambling by a wide margin, but they only changed state law; they didn't amend the constitution.
In January, the state supreme court ruled that a constitutional amendment was needed as well.
Voters return to the polls April 5 to try again.
Casino opponents argue that differences in constitutional language and state laws make the examples of Louisiana and Mississippi inapplicable to Texas.
Proponents insist the same is true for Kentucky and Missouri.
Mr. Morales "doesn't have to rule on their constitutions, he has to rule on ours," says Lloyd Criss, chairman of the Texas Riverboat Association.
Meanwhile, the casino companies say an unfavorable ruling would cause them to change their lobbying tactics, not their overall plans.
"Texas is a very attractive market," says Hilton Hotels' Mr. Grossman.
"It's a place that if and when gaming comes, we plan to be there."
Aoyama Trading Co. said it has reached an agreement with J.C. Penney Co. of the U.S. to sell three J.C. Penney brands at Aoyama's discount men's apparel stores in Japan.
The pact gives Aoyama the right to sell J.C. Penney's Hunt Club, St. John's Bay and Arizona Jean Co. labels at its existing men's shops and new casual clothing outlets.
Aoyama said the agreement will help it expand into the casual clothing market.
It has been a pioneer in the retailing of low-priced men's suits in Japan.
