Southwestern Bell Corp. is renegotiating the financial terms of its $4.9 billion cable venture with Cox Enterprises Inc., making it the latest deal to be jolted by the new cable-rate rollbacks.
The Baby Bell and Cox have agreed to rework the financial terms to reflect the 7% rate cut imposed last month, probably reducing Southwestern Bell's planned $1.6 billion cash outlay -- the centerpiece of the deal.
"We both acknowledge that there has been some effect on value" of all cable properties since the Federal Communications Commission ordered the rate cuts, said James Kahan, a senior vice president at Southwestern Bell and a chief architect of the deal.
The FCC move may put pressure on all cable systems' cash flow, a key measure by which such systems are priced.
The FCC ruling was cited by Bell Atlantic Corp. and Tele-Communications Inc. in the collapse of their $16 billion-plus deal last month.
The rate cuts reduced TCI's expected annual cash flow by about $150 million, arguably reducing TCI's value by more than $1.7 billion, based on an original price of 11.75 times cash flow.
In the case of the San Antonio-based regional telephone company and Atlanta-based Cox, however, Mr. Kahan emphasized that their deal isn't in any danger of collapsing.
He added that the two sides continue to negotiate on good terms.
A spokeswoman at Cox wouldn't confirm the renegotiations and said the deal is "proceeding as we planned."
But she conceded that the cable-rate reduction "obviously adds a new wrinkle."
The Baby Bell's Mr. Kahan said a final agreement may be signed sometime next month -- a month later than originally planned -- but that the final deal should close on time by year end.
"They are the right partners," Mr. Kahan said of Cox.
"They are good, honest corporate citizens, the types we want to be partners with."
Among other pending cable deals, BellSouth Corp. is nearing completion of its deal with Prime Management Co. of Austin, Texas, to acquire a 22.5% stake.
Though the transaction hasn't closed, there aren't any plans to rework terms, a BellSouth spokesman said.
It was reported that BellSouth paid $100 million for its stake.
BCE Inc., a telecommunications giant that last year agreed to invest more than $400 million for a 30% stake in Jones Intercable Inc. -- with an option to eventually buy the whole company -- also anticipates "no renegotiations," a Jones spokesman said.
Southwestern Bell and Cox had announced plans last December to form a $4.9 billion partnership to pursue cable, telephone and interactive opportunities in each other's markets.
Cox, a media company, was to contribute 21 cable systems, valued at the time at $3.3 billion.
Southwestern was to have contributed $1.6 billion in cash.
At the time, the two companies valued Cox's cable systems at 11 times their approximate annual cash flow of $300 million.
The FCC ruling has the potential of cutting Cox's cash flow as much as 12%, or almost $40 million annually, people familiar with the deal said.
In addition to the valuation question, the two sides are continuing to hash over legislative, regulatory and financial issues that could affect the partnership.
Mr. Kahan, however, said he doesn't regret moving ahead before the outlook for cable reregulation was firm.
"If you waited until you had all the information you'd like to have every time you were doing a deal, you'd never do anything," he said.
