The Clinton administration altered its nearly complete Superfund-law revision to further reduce liability for individual insurance companies and polluting businesses.
Under the administration plan, property and casualty insurers would pay a new tax to help settle lawsuits brought against insurance companies by businesses that dumped hazardous wastes prior to 1986.
The administration previously favored using the funds to settle lawsuits over wastes dumped prior to 1980.
The change was made largely to accommodate the insurance industry.
Insurers argue it is difficult to assign blame for waste dumped before 1986 because the federal government didn't require companies to keep detailed records on hazardouswaste dumping until then.
They also prefer the later date because insurance companies in 1986 started writing business policies that explicitly omitted hazardous waste dumps.
The administration originally sought to raise $500 million with the new tax.
But the amount now is likelier to be somewhere between $500 million and $1 billion.
The administration expects to submit its Superfund proposal to Congress later this month.
Separately, the Rev. Ben Chavis, executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, said he has formed a coalition of businesses and other groups behind a plan to scrap the current Superfund-liability scheme.
His plan would pay for cleanups with as much as $1.8 billion in new broad-based business taxes, plus up to $170 million in extra spending from general revenues.
The plan would divert some Superfund money to promote economic development in communities abutting Superfund sites, which are often low-income and minority.
Among the backers for the alternate scheme are American International Group Inc., Texaco Inc., Shell Oil Co., Phillips Petroleum Co., and Olin Corp.
Officials from several environmental groups have criticized Mr. Chavis's plan as overly generous to polluters and unlikely to win congressional passage because of the sizable new taxes he proposes.
But Mr. Chavis contends the changes are necessary to speed Superfund cleanups, and his stature as a civil-rights leader is likely to lend weight to industry groups seeking to reduce the liability of polluters more than the administration proposes.
At a news conference, Mr. Chavis, who met with President Clinton on the matter last month, termed the current administration plan "inadequate."
He said he would meet with White House officials about the NAACP plan later this week.
The NAACP plan joins an ever-growing number of recent and often-conflicting "consensus" recommendations about the Superfund from private groups that represent both businesses and environmentalists.
Yet another such proposal from Clean Sites, a nonprofit company that provides various services to hazardous-waste sites -- and whose board includes former Environmental Protection Agency administrators William Reilly and Russell Train -- is expected to be released shortly.
The plan will call for allowing states to assume cleanup responsibility for individual Superfund sites.
