But 52% of the executives weren't familiar with the concept at all, the International Business Machines Corp. survey found.
The study is one of the most comprehensive to date of small business's attitude toward the idea of a communications network that electronically delivers a wide variety of services.
The survey was conducted in January and canvassed 514 executives of small businesses with annual revenue of $5 million to $99 million.
Of executives familiar with the superhighway concept, 74% saw it as a potential asset.
The survey reported that the most common uses small companies said they would find for the superhighway would be the ability to take or place business orders, conduct videoconferencing, check the market prices or availability of raw materials, and analyze cash flows.
Other favored potential uses included creating and sending manufacturing and design specifications to staff, vendors and customers, gaining access to immediate inventory management, making competitive bids, conducting banking and stock market transactions, paying taxes, and gaining access to image technology.
"One of the key things that differentiates the small business from the large business is accessibility to new customers," says Corey Smith, president of Creative Multimedia Corp., a small Portland, Ore., maker of CD-ROM software.
"The information superhighway allows us to have access to the kind of consumer base large companies can get to."
Some 70% of executives familiar with the information superhighway predicted that it would increase their profits.
About 55% said that the superhighway would "dramatically cut costs associated with doing business."
These respondents also said the superhighway would allow them to expand their markets.
Almost two-thirds of them said it would enhance their ability to expand globally and 62% said it would permit them to make "competitive bids" to which they normally don't have access.
Despite this enthusiasm, most respondents familiar with the superhighway said that it would take at least three to 10 years for it to "become a reality" for most small businesses.
Some 90% of those surveyed said they are taking a "wait-and-see" approach about taking their own business onto the superhighway.
Only 6% say they are taking immediate steps to make it easier for them to become hooked into a potential superhighway.
This hesitation about the highway may simply come from small bussiness' lack of familiarity with it.
"I don't think I know enough to comment about the information superhighway," said Ralph Murray, chief executive of IDL Inc., a Pittsburgh maker of store displays.
"My own idea of it is very vague."
