Under the glass dome of this city's Bolsa, and in other emerging markets around the world, investors are shifting their focus from large enterprises toward little companies with big stories.
For the past three years, emerging-market investors played it safe, sticking with the largest stocks.
And why not?
The giants did spectacularly well.
Telefonos de Mexico, for instance, climbed 22% in local-currency terms, and Cementos Mexicanos soared 91%.
Their stocks traded smoothly, analyst coverage was extensive, and it was easy to understand how Mexico's telephone and cement giants would benefit as the country modernized.
But this type of big-picture, macroeconomic stock picking is giving way to the "micro-bet."
When emerging economies begin to stabilize, "it is very important to look at what small companies are doing, because they can grow earnings faster than larger companies," says Soraya Betterton, manager of the G.T. Latin America Growth Fund.
Just last week, Telefonos de Mexico, or Telmex, posted a meager 4.5% gain in per share earnings for 1993 adjusted for inflation.
"Telmex can't grow at 20% per annum any more," Ms. Betterton says.
"But maybe smaller {Mexican} companies can -- bottlers, engineering and construction companies, banks and retailers."
So investors are now looking at small companies in Brazil, Chile, Argentina, Mexico, Turkey and in many other emerging markets around the world.
"Our clients want to move down in capitalization," says Richard Watkins, chief executive officer of Latin-Invest Securities Ltd. in London.
"They realize the {big} stocks are not the way to make money in 1994."
In small or volatile markets, such as those in Peru and Venezuela, investors are still sticking with the largest stocks, he says.
There has always been a cadre of small-foreign-stock specialists around.
But now, many traditional international-stock players are looking at smaller issues.
And new foreign-stock funds are being launched dedicated to small stocks.
Montgomery Asset Management launched its International Small Cap Fund in October.
In December, G.T. Capital Management opened its Emerging Markets Small Companies Fund, an offshore fund for large European investors that invests in companies with a capitalization no larger than $250 million.
There are two difficulties with this investment style.
First, many small companies in emerging markets are closely held by families, leaving little stock available in the public market.
Casa Autrey, a Mexican pharmaceuticals distributor, for example, has 106 million shares, but only 27.5 million shares trade in the public market.
The other 78.5 million shares are owned by the Autrey family.
The small number of shares available not only makes Autrey and other small stocks difficult to buy, but it also makes them even harder to sell if the market takes a dive.
Also, because it is difficult for many institutions to build big positions in small stocks, analyst coverage is likely to be thin.
John Boich, manager of the new Montgomery fund, says data bases, such as I/B/E/S and WorldScope, are diminishing the problem by contributing to "the decline of the information barrier," as he calls it.
Still, intensive legwork is required to keep contact with small companies.
New Territories Mr. Boich once traveled two hours to a small town outside Santiago, Chile, to visit Santa Isabel, a grocery-store chain, standing in line with food vendors and employees to see management.
"You can't approach these non-U.S. companies with the same attitude as you do in America, saying, 'I'm an analyst, give me the numbers' " Mr. Boich says.
"If you approach them like that, you get nothing."
Montgomery's fund managers, who speak a total of some seven languages, will visit 450 companies this year, he predicts.
Mr. Boich plans on being in airplanes or hotel rooms about three months out of the year.
"There isn't much research on these companies, and that's the exciting part of it," says Andrew Boczek, co-manager of the new G.T. Capital fund.
"In several cases, we were the first institutional investors managements had ever seen."
Mr. Boczek recalls driving around Mexico City for hours looking for the headquarters of Grupo Marti, a sporting goods distributor.
But the search paid off: Shares of Marti are up about 10% this year.
Other inquiries are less fruitful.
Management at Grupo Herdez, a Mexican food company, has turned down requests for a meeting from mutual-fund managers.
In Mexico, aside from Grupo Marti, Mr. Boczek also likes Tablex SA, a pasta and cookie company; Servicios Financieros Quadrum, a leasing and factoring company that recently received a banking license; and Radio Centro, a broadcast company.
Quadrum and Radio Centro trade on the New York Stock Exchange.
In Brazil, the G.T. fund purchased stock in retailing chains Mesbla SA and Casa Anglo SA. and in Iochpe-Maxion SA, a distributor of farm equipment and a maker of bus and truck chassis.
In Argentina, Mr. Boich of Montgomery suggests investors look at Banco del Sud, a regional bank.
The stock has a capitalization of about $550 million.
"Asset growth will be about 25% this year," he says, "and fee income is growing like crazy."
Mr. Boczek of G.T. Capital calls investing in small stocks in emerging markets "the next frontier.
Eventually, we are going to invest in the Middle East and Africa."
