Delta Air Lines announced plans to cut its trans-Atlantic capacity by 12% this summer, eliminating scores of the money-losing routes it inherited after buying Pan Am Corp.'s ailing European operations more than two years ago.
Late last fall, Delta said it would fix, sell or trade routes that weren't making money, and yesterday's announcement appears to follow through on that vow.
Atlanta-based Delta said it will drop to 259 from 293 the number of weekly flights across the North Atlantic this summer, as part of a detailed plan that calls for every Atlantic flight to pay its own way.
Delta has lost hundreds of millions of dollars on the European routes since it started flying them in November 1991, and the losses have forced the airline to initiate painful, companywide cost-cutting moves.
While industry observers generally approved of Delta's move, many thought it was about time the company undertook it.
"It's a much-needed, much-delayed step.
They needed to have done this sooner," said David Ulmer, vice president of the airline consulting firm Roberts Roach & Associates, in San Francisco.
"They've taken longer to digest the Pan Am system than they thought and it's been a bigger loser than they thought."
In a statement, Delta Chairman Ronald W. Allen said preliminary calendar year 1993 operating results for Delta's trans-Atlantic operations showed a 12% improvement year-over-year, once one-time charges are excluded, while unit costs are down 6%.
But even that improvement is costly to the company.
Paul Karos, an airline analyst with CS First Boston Inc., said he estimates Delta's loss on trans-Atlantic operations for 1993 will be $400 million.
Mr. Karos was enthusiastic about Delta's action, calling it a "very significant strategic move."
Even while Delta cuts down on flights across the Atlantic, it plans to beef up domestic service to its hub at New York's John F. Kennedy Airport and intra-Europe service from its hub in Frankfurt.
Delta said that effective May 1 it will restructure its JFK operations and add 10 domestic flights from other Delta hubs.
In Frankfurt, capacity will jump 42% on flights beyond the hub as the airline replaces smaller jets with larger ones.
On flights from Frankfurt to Athens, Moscow and Istanbul, for instance, Delta will replace 119-seat Boeing 727s with 177-passenger Airbus Industrie A-310s, and introduce its 265-passenger McDonnell Douglas MD11 from Los Angeles to Frankfurt and from Frankfurt to India.
Delta has said it fills a high percentage of seats on flights beyond Frankfurt.
In the competitive Frankfurt market, Delta can't afford to cut back.
"Delta probably is loath to give up any capacity, because somebody else will come in and get it," says Jon Ash, with the Washington consulting firm Global Aviation Associates.
"It's a tough position they're protecting there."
As for specific flights, Delta said it will discontinue its daily nonstops between San Francisco and Frankfurt in April and between New York and Budapest in May.
Delta also will begin a codeshare arrangement with Malev Hungarian Airlines in May, which will enable Delta passengers who want to go to Budapest to do so by switching to a Malev jet at JFK.
Last month, Delta began a similar codeshare arrangement with Sabena and eliminated its daily JFK-Brussels flight.
Delta already had announced plans to eliminate its nonstop Miami-Frankfurt and New York-Vienna flights.
