When I told a friend about "How We Die," Sherwin B. Nuland's new book on what happens to the body as it prepares to check out for good, he said: "It sounds like the perfect analogue to the doomed Clinton health-care plan."
Well, it is and it isn't.
"How We Die: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter" (Knopf, 278 pages, $24) certainly has some grisly pages.
As Dr. Nuland notes, for all the wonders of modern medicine, the goal of "death with dignity" remains disappointingly elusive: "We rarely go gentle into that good night."
But this wise, powerfully written book is not all bad news.
There are some painfully graphic passages -- about the devastating effects of cancer or AIDS or Alzheimer's disease, for example -- that most people will probably skim.
Dr. Nuland does not stint on the details.
But neither is he gratuitously morbid.
Unlike the Clinton health-care plan, death is unavoidable.
It cannot be repealed or tabled or voted out of office.
Dr. Nuland, a surgeon who has taught for many years at Yale University, seeks to present the hard, "biological and clinical reality" of death.
Yet he does so not to frighten but to inoculate us, "to demythologize the process of dying" by honestly describing what it is really like.
He also sets the record straight on many issues, large and small.
For example, never mind popular belief, hair and nails do not keep growing for varying periods after death.
It may seem odd that death is something we need to learn about.
After all, death, like taxes, is one of life's unpleasant certainties.
Over the past 50 years or so, medicine has made dazzling advances.
But, as Dr. Nuland points out, "modern biomedicine has also contributed to the misguided fancy by which each of us denies the certain advent of our own individual mortality."
Dr. Nuland is not himself a religious man, but his book is appropriate Lenten reading, coaxing us to reflect on the fact that all that is born must die.
It is one of Dr. Nuland's themes that the triumphs of modern medicine and administration have depersonalized death, rendering it more distant but also more forbidding than it has to be.
"In recent generations," he writes, "we have added something new: We have created the method of modern dying.
Modern dying takes place in the modern hospital, where it can be hidden, cleansed of its organic blight, and finally packaged for modern burial."
So much the better, you may say: Who wants more organic blight in his life?
But Dr. Nuland's point is that despite its efficiencies, "the method of modern dying" has robbed us of something important: the realization that death is the natural culmination of life.
The problem lies partly in the Promethean ambitions that modern medicine shares with all modern technology.
"Beyond the curiosity and the problem-solving challenge fundamental to good research," Dr. Nuland observes, "I believe that the fantasy of controlling nature lies at the very basis of modern science."
Patients have benefited greatly but also suffered greatly as a result of that fantasy.
Equipped with the arsenal of high-tech medicine, many doctors seem to regard every death as a personal affront, a failure, when in fact many are simply inevitable.
Hiding death away in the sanitized chambers of the intensive-care unit is not necessarily a step forward.
It can make the process of dying both lonelier and more frightening.
Lonelier, because it means that we end our days in a strange room embraced more closely by plastic tubes and monitoring devices than by our loved ones; more frightening because most of us have no idea what to expect.
Dr. Nuland hopes that if the "horsemen of death" become "just a bit more familiar, perhaps {they} will also become less frightening."
He also hopes that frank acknowledgment of death will lead us as a society to reconsider some of our health-care priorities.
Dr. Nuland is himself one of those "high-tech" doctors who practices at a major research hospital.
But when it comes to caring for the dying -- when the expensive interventions contrived by modern medicine can no longer heal -- he knows that the human touch provides the most effective consolation.
"Between the lines of this book," he writes in his conclusion, "lies an unspoken plea for the resurrection of the family doctor."
Modern medicine should do all that it can to restore a patient's health; it should also recognize that there comes a point when additional therapy is useless or even counterproductive.
Although the information it contains is very up-to-date, "How We Die" actually belongs to that ancient philosophical genre concerned with the ars moriendi, the art of dying.
At least since Socrates, philosophers have understood that there is a sense in which death is the measure of life.
But it also works the other way.
"The greatest dignity to be found in death," Dr. Nuland writes, "is the dignity of the life that preceded it.
This is a form of hope we can all achieve, and it is the most abiding of all.
Hope resides in the meaning of what our lives have been."
It is well that we recognize and accept our mortality.
Only then can we fully get on with the business of living.
