Tokyo share prices rose 1% Monday, even after a late bout of profit-taking eroded gains.
As recovery in European bond markets spilled over into stock markets, London equities rallied 1.4%, finishing at highs on the first day of a new trading account.
Frankfurt stocks rose solidly, buoyed by a recovery in the bond and futures markets.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 116.74, up 1.02, reflecting higher markets in all regions.
Consumer services stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 136.76, up 3.04, or 2.3%, with Actava Group of the U.S. posting a 4.6% gain in its local currency.
Tobacco stocks trailed at 81.77, down 1.69, or 2%, with Philip Morris of the U.S. sliding 3.5% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which climbed 37.90 points Friday, gained 193.82 to 19997.20.
In trading Tuesday in Tokyo, the Nikkei index climbed 181.72 points to close the morning session at 20178.92.
Monday's first-section volume was estimated at a relatively brisk 430 million shares, down from 447.9 million shares in the previous session.
Gainers trounced losers, 810-244.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which added 2.25 points Friday, surged 21.84, or 1.4%, to 1631.71.
The Nikkei opened at its intraday low of 19848.58 and scored a high of 20117.21, up 1.6%, then waffled before losing ground to profit takers and ending below 20000, a perceived support level.
Overseas investors and new Japanese investment trust funds were the main buyers, and corporations sold positions, booking profits ahead of the end of the fiscal year on March 31, though the corporate selling pressure lightened, compared with recent sessions.
Investors also awaited the Bank of Japan quarterly survey of business sentiment, called tankan, to be released Tuesday, indicating the economy's situation on the recovery trail.
Investors also were cautious about a potential shake-up in Japan's governing coalition.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index jumped 46.9 points to 3328.1.
The FT 30-stock index raced up 28.2 points, or 1.1%, to 2564.1.
Volume was a relatively low 705.4 million shares, compared with 792.4 million shares in the previous session.
The initial fuel for the London rise came from a rally in the bond and futures markets.
Gains were spurred further by British money-supply data that showed a strong economic recovery; solid corporate earnings; and a higher opening on Wall Street.
Following the London stock market's recent drops, which were considered overdone, investors found buying opportunities.
The bourse's strength was even greater than indicated by the index, as stocks that went ex-dividend shaved 5.2 points off the 100-stock index's finish.
Another bullish factor keeping equities in positive territory all day was the German Bundesbank's announcement that it will return to variable repurchase rates; the central bank on Dec. 2 froze the weekly repo rate with fixed-rate instruments, and the return to a variable rate was viewed in London as a signal for more European interest-rate reductions, which could boost economies and stock markets.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index rose 16.65 points to 2091.57, up from lows that resulted from news that U.S. fighter planes, under auspices of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, shot down Serbian aircraft over Bosnia in the civil war there.
German futures trading was strong, driven by a technical rebound, which in turn drove the stock market up.
In Paris, rebounding from last week's steep losses sparked by a smaller-than-expected French rate cut, stocks rallied 1.8%, though the rise was technically based and exaggerated a bit by thin turnover; blue chips gained broadly.
In Amsterdam, shares posted sharp advances, on expectations that the central banks of Germany and, in turn, the Netherlands will ease short-term interest rates this week, and on a rally in the Dutch government-bond market; shares also were buoyed by better-than-expected news of the Dutch economy's strength last year and of corporate earnings.
In Stockholm, equities staged a cautious blue-chip-led recovery from last week's slump, though they ended below intraday highs.
But in Zurich, stocks tumbled 1.5%, as heavy selling in the banking sector yanked other blue chips down; the sell-off was triggered by downgraded ratings of some bank stocks, and the Bosnia military action also scared some investors out of the market.
In Sydney, share prices climbed 1.5%, with most sectors gaining after last Friday's 2.2% sell-off; a steadier tone Friday on Wall Street also helped provide the market with direction, as did a higher gold price and softer Australian dollar.
In Hong Kong, stocks soared 3.1% in a technical rebound following two dives in a row on escalating Sino-British political tensions about the British colony's electoral reform plan; the market was propelled higher primarily by expectations for solid corporate earnings.
In Wellington, shares rebounded 1.3%, though the gains came on low volume.
In Taipei, equities sank 3.1% on increasing investor pessimism, adding to Saturday's 1.3% drop and continuing a two-week bear run linked to doubts about the Taiwan central bank's commitment to liberalizing financial markets; the plunge was led by financial shares that were considered overpriced after previous strong buying in that sector.
In Manila, shares slumped 3.2% in light volume, spooked by price pressure on the telephone sector.
In Seoul, the main index fell, pulled down by heavy selling of blue chips, though advancing issues outnumbered decliners as small, inexpensive stocks rallied.
In Bangkok, stocks plunged 3.3% on late profit-taking, but trading was light.
In Singapore, equities fell in cautious trading, as a robust start fizzled out.
In Kuala Lumpur, prices edged up in moderate trading, as an early advance was eroded by profit-taking.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end. that make up 80% of the world's stock market capitalization (in local currency)
Source: Morgan Stanley Capital Intl.
