High-tech pioneers Craig O. McCaw and William H. Gates are joining in an audacious bid to raise capital and attract dozens of partners to build a $9 billion global satellite communications system.
The two entrepreneurs hope to lure numerous manufacturers and governments to back what would be an extraordinarily costly project, which they describe as a wireless "global Internet."
By the year 2001, it would involve hundreds of small satellites circling the Earth in a low orbit, offering a broad array of interactive voice, data and video services at prices similar to conventional wired services.
The new partnership, which they call Teledesic Corp., is to be disclosed today.
It could well serve the vaulting ambitions of Mr. McCaw, who runs cellular giant McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., and Mr. Gates, who heads software titan Microsoft Corp.
But wireless experts say Messrs. McCaw and Gates face tremendous technical, financial and political challenges.
Motorola Inc. already has a headstart in forming a consortium to build a similar network, Iridium.
The new McCaw-Gates effort would have to persuade practically every national telephone company throughout the world to buy into its plan -- a political minefield, given the shaky finances and existing alliances of many nations.
The McCaw network's technical approach still hasn't been worked out.
Yet the McCaw-Gates effort would be far bolder and far more costly.
Other systems are planning similar rural communication links at a fraction of Teledesic's projected investment.
Motorola's Iridium project, which would deliver more elaborate "mobile" services to people in cars and boats, has taken three years to get started at a cost of $3.4 billion, and normal maintenance initially will cost an additional $2 billion.
The McCaw-Gates project is more than 10 times the size of Iridium, yet it must compete for capital and customers with still other networks.
Numerous governments are already major financial backers of such global systems as Intelsat and InMarSat.
Several have signed up as Iridium backers.
"This sounds shaky, shaky, shaky," said Barry Goodstadt, director of wireless industry consulting at Electronic Data Systems Corp., owned by General Motors Corp.
"With Motorola and others already in the game, how many players can play?"
While there is a global "niche market" for new services in rural regions, he added: "Who in the bush wants to do this?
What's a customer in Bangladesh going to pay?. . .
.TThey'll need these revenues to support the network."
But the new partnership, in a filing with the Federal Communications Commission, could get considerable political and financial backing from McCaw's soon-to-be owner, American Telephone & Telegraph Co.
"At this point, it's primarily a concept," an AT&T spokesman said.
"But it's the kind of gleam-in-the-eye venture that some entrepreneurs like Craig McCaw can bring off successfully. . .
.WWe'll be delighted to benefit financially from it."
In addition, the partners are shrewdly positioning the system as a way to mitigate the public policy dilemma of how to let everyone drive the so-called Information Superhighway.
"I can hear it now," said a skeptical Ira Brodsky, president of Datacomm Research Co., a Wilmette, Ill., research firm specializing in wireless technology.
"This will be a grand scheme conceived in the interests of all of us.
Rather than have all those different players out there building different systems, why not just have one giant system?"
Russell Daggatt, Teledesic's president and an expert in international law, countered that Messrs. McCaw and Gates "have no intention to maintain control.
Teledesic's goals will require a broad cooperative effort beyond the ability of any individuals or country to dominate."
Messrs. McCaw and Gates each own slightly more than 30% of Teledesic.
The remainder is held by McCaw Cellular (28%) and Kinship Ventures II (10%), a Los Angeles venture-capital fund run by Edward Tuck, who founded the Magellan global-positioning satellite system.
None of the principals could be reached for comment, but a McCaw spokesman said Messrs. McCaw and Gates have each committed only a "couple of million dollars" so far to the project.
"Obviously the bulk of the billions in funding is going to have to come from manufacturers and governments that will actually build and run the system," the spokesman added.
A spokeswoman for Mr. Gates said he expects his investment to decline over time as larger investors are brought in to fund the actual project.
A draft of Teledesic's proposal to the FCC, which must approve the project and set aside airwave space for it, shows the system borrows heavily from the now-defunct Strategic Defense Initiative ("StarWars") program.
Drawing from a Star Wars concept known as "brilliant pebbles", the new system would employ 840 refrigerator-sized satellites.
They would operate in the little-used, very high frequency "Ka-band" at 20 billion to 30 billion gigahertz, or billions of cycles a second.
Each bird would orbit 435 miles above the earth, compared with 23,000-mile-high orbits of geostationary satellites.
Acting as high-speed switches in the sky, each satellite would be equipped with new "asynchronous transfer mode" or ATM technology.
They would take traffic from phonebook-sized receivers and tiny wafer-sized antennas in homes and businesses and feed it to hundreds of ground stations connected to the regular telephone networks around the world.
The main virtue of the low orbit of the satellites is that signals are so much stronger, so users can access the system with handheld devices and receive data almost anywhere, even inside buildings.
The orbit also would cut out transmission problems such as the phone-call delays of conventional satellite transmission.
"Our conversations would travel about 2,000 miles total compared with 90,000 miles in a regular satellite-connected call," Mr. Daggatt said.
But it would create a much costlier problem known as satellite "churn."
Low-orbit systems are cheaper to launch and require less power, but their satellites will fall out of orbit at far greater rates than geostationary satellites.
"If Teledesic loses 10% of its satellites a year, they'll have to put up 84 satellites a year just to maintain regular service," said EDS's Mr. Goodstadt.
"That's going to be tremendously expensive."
While the Teledesic backers say that the plan has received a "design audit" from the famed Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, Macgregor Reid, technical executive assistant to JPL's director, hardly issues an endorsement.
He said Teledesic faces "tough technical problems that still need to be worked out."
The "substantial" switching in the sky still needs "detailed design and analysis," he added, and the venture must overcome problems with Ka-band radio transmissions, which "are absorbed and scattered by raindrops to a greater extent than conventional satellite transmission."
The McCaw-Gates pairing might seem an unlikely partnership.
But Mr. McCaw had asked his friend to invest in the project a couple of years ago.
McCaw's and Teledesic's Kirkland, Wash., base is only about a mile from Microsoft in Redmond, Wash.
Mr. Gates is a zealous booster of the so-called information highway, spending fully half his time trying to position Microsoft for the multimedia revolution now under way.
Still, DataComm's Mr. Brodsky said he is surprised that Mr. Gates would get involved in something he can't control.
"With Craig McCaw," he said, "Gates has another major player who has a lot to say" about the future of communications.
G. Christian Hill and G. Pascal Zachary in San Francisco contributed to this article.
