If the White House wants to emphasize worker training as part of its new "investment" budget, it ought to grapple with a political problem that has nothing to do with revenue: trade-union opposition.
But this it apparently will not do.
In several states, jobs await those taught to be electricians, heating and air-conditioning installers, welders and plumbers.
That's the early evidence from "parallel" apprenticeship programs offered outside the unions -- and over their objections -- in places where organized labor previously controlled entry to formal construction training.
These locations include California and Washington as well as major Midwestern and Eastern states.
How much of a difference would expansion of these efforts make?
A big one, says Herbert Northrup, an emeritus professor at the Wharton School.
He estimates that if these trades could truly be opened up, not just to full apprentices but to "helpers" currently stymied by union rules, 500,000 to 750,000 people -- many of them currently unemployable above the minimum wage -- could be added to the 3.8 million now in construction crafts.
David Turner, a federal training official in San Francisco, is more guarded but says nonunion contractors could be able to double the approximately 180,000 apprentices in the industry now.
The issue is hot in some of the 27 states that regulate apprentices.
There, the unionized sector -- even though its construction-market share has dwindled to perhaps 25% -- has dominated the licensing process.
However, a series of court interpretations of the federal law known as Erisa (primarily concerned with pensions) are forcing those states to open up.
But just as results from the new programs begin to show, with perhaps 1,000 already taking part in California, a political reaction has set in.
Rep. Howard Berman, a Los Angeles Democrat and onetime labor lawyer, has guided a measure through the House to return restrictive powers to the states.
Sen. Arlen Specter (R., Pa.), whom the AFL-CIO granted a third term, has picked up the legislation in that chamber.
Even without the Berman bill, it isn't easy to get a viable "open-shop" apprenticeship program.
Take the case of Leonard Edh, owner of Walther Electric in Ceres, Calif., near Modesto.
A Swedish immigrant raised in a world of widespread craft training, he's created a modern teaching facility at his company offices.
More than 25 high-school graduate hires are learning the trade there.
But Mr. Edh cannot be sure, a decade into the quest, whether his program will be allowed to yield many journeymen electricians.
He's been through years of union resistance in the bureaucracy and the courts, and his foes are still trying to catch him in some technical violation of payroll procedures that could void his efforts.
Unions shroud access to their own apprenticeships, Mr. Edh complains.
At one time, racial discrimination motivated their actions, but increasingly they are driven by the desire to protect the artificially high wages of existing members.
Because the burden of setting up apprentice training is so great, other nonunion firms are relying on programs run by the Associated Builders and Contractors (ABC), their trade group.
But in the Los Angeles metropolitan area, these efforts, too, have taken years to gain approval and some still are being stalled.
A nonunion roofing apprenticeship in Northern California got going in 1991 after a five-year delay, and has about 200 participants.
In that case, as in carpentry, the core issue is not so much restricted entry to the field as simply an intense desire by union shops to defend their market share.
The backdrop of this whole fight is the dramatic decline of the unionized construction industry.
Although nonunion contractors can get idle hands to slip over from the other side, or can rely on laborers to do some of the less-skilled craft work, they often hunger for sanctioned apprentices.
The reason is public works.
In a slack construction period, projects involving the government may account for a third of all business.
Under the federal Davis-Bacon Act and similar state statutes, a "prevailing" (union) wage must be paid on these jobs.
But apprentices may be used for as little as half the journeyman pay.
Because these apprentices must be officially sanctioned, nonunion contractors in some states can't compete for some public works because they lack a supply of this cut-rate personnel.
For electricians in California, the market rate for private jobs may be 40% below the approximately $35-an-hour journeyman scale.
With helpers, who are able to do many of the conduit and simple outlet tasks when allowed, savings may be even greater.
The result is more workers on more jobs, but for less money.
The unions don't buy that tradeoff, so they try to protect their scale and, by limiting supply from nonunion training programs, minimize the "out of work" time for their members.
The public-policy choice, then, might be reflected in this rough example: 100 craftsmen at $20 to $35 an hour vs. 200 at $10 to $25 an hour.
If the skill levels are adequate in both cases, a state and nation with a blue-collar employment problem should probably choose the latter.
(It would also enjoy lower construction and repair costs, and all the social benefits that follow.)
Yet this has not been the thrust in regulated states, even ones such as California with a Republican governor holding most of the levers of power.
The ABC trade group, despite its now overwhelming edge within the building industry, has been barely able to budge Sacramento.
In some other major states, organized labor is even more entrenched.
Its control in the New York metropolitan area is so tight that during the great 1980s high-rise boom, union work crews were brought from distant cities while locals wanted for jobs.
Unfortunately, because training such as the Clinton administration's planned "school to work" program entails major state participation, the political grip exercised by the construction trade unions is likely to limit the ability to put people to work in several key vocations.
Yet the White House backs the Berman bill.
Expanded job opportunities, it appears, aren't worth risking another tiff with the Big Labor base.
San Francisco attorney Mark Thierman, who has litigated on behalf of nonunion labor, says he believes that even if Berman passes, grounds can be found to secure the opening of new apprenticeship programs in the battleground states.
But others disagree.
Technology should slowly diminish the importance of the construction trades, as more structures are composed of modular arrangements straight from the factory.
But for some time to come, this line of work can be the ticket to a decent living for many more, if only all the states can be enjoined to make it possible.
