You may never have had more reason to mistrust your travel agent.
With low-cost airlines cutting fares, travel agents can save customers money -- but only by sacrificing part of their 10% commission.
Thus travelers must be particularly discriminating about who plans their trips.
But because the hermetic workings of computer-reservation systems are beyond the ken of most fliers, it is difficult for clients to know if they are well-served.
"You could spend all your life checking your agent's work, but why would you hire them if you didn't trust them?" asks Robert Atchison, corporate-travel manager for Apple Computer Inc. in Austin, Texas.
Still, he concedes, "you can never be sure you're getting the lowest fare."
For their part, travel agencies note that they operate on razor-thin margins even in the best of times.
Some low-fare carriers are a double whammy: They generate less commission revenue, and they require more work because they don't participate in computer-reservation systems; agents must call them.
"If fares are cut in half, that represents a 50% cut in commissions," says David Perelman, president of DMS Travel Inc. in New York.
"It's a disaster."
But his agency seeks out the lowest fares, he says, because without repeat clients, it couldn't stay in business.
A. Jenkins & Associates, Mountainview, Calif., audits travel agencies for companies who want to learn, among other things, how often their agencies get them the lowest fares.
The average error rate on a monthly audit has risen to 15% for airline transactions, compared with 6% three years ago, says Andre Jenkins, the firm's director of quality.
(The audit itself probably understates the errors because the agency knows when it is being reviewed and presumably tries to minimize mistakes.)
Many travel agencies now use software that supposedly plucks out the lowest fares.
But automation can't replace training, Mr. Jenkins says.
Training is particularly crucial now because computer-reservation systems are so complex -- and becoming even more so.
Developed by airlines, these systems are webs of interlocking databases that can spin out information on flights and fares; but sifting through it requires time and skill.
"Travel-agency managements take people off the street, put them in front of a computer-reservation system and tell them to punch a few buttons," Mr. Jenkins says.
Agency executives dismiss suggestions that their industry denies travelers the lowest prices.
The practice would be self-defeating, they say, because agencies need repeat business to survive.
With 32,200 retail locations nationwide, travelers who discover they have been gouged, or even think so, can easily go elsewhere.
"No agent is going to sell his client down the river for a few pieces of silver; it just doesn't make business sense," says Paul Ruden, senior vice president of the American Society of Travel Agents.
Agents sell 85% of all airline tickets and depend heavily on air travel for their own revenue.
Over the years, low-fare opportunities generally weren't an issue because ticket prices among carriers were so similar.
But that is changing now that the airline industry has begun to splinter into two camps -- full-service majors and low-cost discounters.
With no-frills Southwest Airlines plunging into new markets, new regional operators like ValuJet Airlines in Atlanta and graybeards like Continental Airlines initiating a low-fare service called CALite, there is much less lock-step pricing.
Consider the Chicago-Newark, N.J., route.
A round-trip fare costs $1,120 on UAL Corp.'s United Airlines or AMR Corp.'s American Airlines.
But Kiwi International Air Lines, which began operations two years ago, charges $238.
When an employee from International Business Machines Corp. in Chicago asked his company's travel agency, American Express Co., to book him on Kiwi, the agent said no because Kiwi doesn't accept the American Express card.
(The employee flew American Airlines instead.)
Kiwi does accept the American Express card.
Rob Kulat, a Kiwi spokesman, says some travel agents, including American Express in this case, ignore Kiwi because the agents get bonuses from major carriers that reward agents with higher commissions for booking travelers on those large airlines.
Despite Kiwi's low-fare product, Mr. Kulat says, "agents are still the gatekeepers to the industry."
Christine Levite, a spokeswoman for American Express, says, "It's against our policy to go outside what the client requests.
In this case, it sounds like the agent made an error."
American Express, the nation's largest travel agency, will only favor preferred suppliers if the customer does not express an airline preference, Ms. Levite says.
While low-cost carriers have made inroads, average domestic round-trip air fares still increased by 5% last year, to $555, compared with year-ago figures, according to Topaz Enterprises Inc. in Portland, Ore., which monitors prices.
But many agents are understandably worried.
They say it costs them $25 to $30 to book a ticket, which is more than the commission they earn on low-fare flights.
"Under $250 for a ticket, and you're hurting," says Robert Thaler, president of Sea and Air Travel Inc. in Fairlawn, N.J.
He says he books cheap tickets but finds ways to pare service.
When the agent recently booked a two-for-one special for $125 on Southwest for a couple in San Diego, he told his clients to pick up the tickets at the airport.
"It didn't pay for me to write the tickets and mail it out to them," Mr. Thaler says.
Indeed, passengers who have been spoiled by their friendly agent should brace themselves for changes.
In some cases, agent surcharges are already being added on low-priced tickets.
Alice Lambie, owner of Apex Travel Service in the Milwaukee area, charges customers $10 on tickets under $100.
Without such a charge, she says, "Volume of low-price tickets will drive me into the ground."
Agents may also start charging fees to rebook tickets, and some are even considering refusing to book tickets on low-fare carriers altogether.
"If the airline can figure out a way to offer a $99 fare profitably, that's good news for the airline and good news for the traveler," says Steve Glenn, president of Executive Travel Inc. in Lincoln, Neb.
"But it's the agent who's the most vulnerable."
UAL Corp.'s United Airlines says its nonrestricted round-trip fare between Chicago and Newark, N.J., is $682 for most travelers.
An article yesterday incorrectly reported the fare was $1,120, which is the highest published fare, but not what most travelers pay.
(WSJ Jan. 20, 1994)
