A decision last fall by Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co. against joining a global settlement of silicone breast-implant cases could prove especially costly following a huge Houston verdict against the company.
Plaintiffs' negotiators are asking 3M to pay $500 million upfront -- double what they were seeking -- to limit its breast-implant liability by joining a settlement deal.
They have upped the ante because of last week's jury award of more than $30 million in damages and legal fees against 3M and two other companies.
3M, based in St. Paul, Minn., is the only major manufacturer of silicone breast implants that hasn't signed on to the $4 billion tentative settlement deal.
According to people familiar with the talks, 3M last October could have joined up with a contribution of roughly half of what it likely will take now.
The plaintiffs' negotiating stance still could shift.
Or 3M could decide instead to fight lawsuits individually; the cost of doing that would be huge, however, say several lawyers in the litigation.
The tentative settlement would provide funds to settle silicone-implant litigation world-wide over the next 30 years and would construct a partial ceiling on liability for corporations.
Dow Corning Corp., Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., Baxter International Inc. and a number of smaller players in the industry have agreed to fund the tentative plan.
Dow Corning is a joint venture of Dow Chemical Co. and Corning Inc.
General Electric Co., another holdout, was a supplier of silicone.
A third holdout is comparatively small McGhan Medical Corp., owned by 3M from 1977 to 1984 and now a unit of Inamed Corp.
Plaintiffs' negotiators are insisting that 3M pay $500 million at the outset of the settlement program, if a federal judge approves any settlement.
By contrast, other companies' contributions are spread out over 30 years.
Thus, negotiators say, $500 million in upfront money would make 3M the third-largest participant in the deal.
3M has offered to pay about $250 million over three years instead, one negotiator said.
According to settlement participants, 3M negotiator Allen Kezsbom, a partner in the New York-based law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson, rejected the initial offer last fall and insisted that other companies were parting with far too much money.
Mr. Kezsbom didn't return phone calls for comment.
A 3M spokeswoman said: "We don't think it's appropriate for us to comment or for anyone else to do so."
Last week's jury award in Houston, which 3M says it intends to appeal, could well expand 3M's total liability greatly in other courts, according to litigators on both sides in breast-implant cases.
That's because of the sheer size of the verdict and one little-noticed aspect of the jury's decision.
The jury found 3M had engaged in a "civil conspiracy" to avoid breast-implant litigation when it sold McGhan Medical in 1984.
The civil-conspiracy finding could have wide ramifications.
It could assign liability to 3M for breast implants surgically implanted even after the 1984 sale of McGhan Medical, according to lawyers on both sides of implant litigation.
Richard Laminack, an attorney for plaintiffs in the Houston case, said the jury's finding would be followed in many Texas courts and contended, "This is a several-billion-dollar potential finding."
3M said it doesn't believe the breast implants caused women's illnesses in the Houston case.
The 3M spokeswoman said, "We didn't engage in any conspiracy to avoid responsibility and were surprised by the verdict."
