Investor Ronald Perelman is consolidating several media properties as he prowls for new acquisitions in a bid to build a large entertainment business.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission earlier this week, Mr. Perelman confirmed ambitious plans for his media empire, which initially will combine a group of seven television stations owned by SCI Television Inc. with two Perelman companies -- New World Entertainment, a television-program company, and Four Star International, a film library.
The new entity, which will be called New World Communications Group Inc., will acquire the latter two companies for stock.
In addition, the new company intends to acquire all of Genesis Entertainment Inc., a TV-syndication business 50%-owned by Perelman companies; Mr. Perelman's 37.5% interest in Guthy-Renker Corp., an infomercial company, and an in-house advertising business.
New World Communications' voting control will be in its Class B shares, which will have 10 votes each; the capital structure also permits issuance of Class A shares, which the filing says might be listed on the New York Stock Exchange or the Nasdaq market.
Mr. Perelman's Andrews Group Inc. will hold at least 51% of the new company after the various transactions.
On a pro forma basis, the company would have $630 million of debt, and the filing says funds from operations wouldn't be sufficient to make debt payments.
The filing also says the company might refinance, sell some assets or seek to raise additional debt or capital.
On a pro forma basis, New World would have had net losses, before extraordinary items and an accounting change, of $21.5 million for the nine months ended Sept. 30.
As part of the transaction, SCI Television and related entities are proposing a rights offering to SCI shareholders that could raise as much as $185.8 million.
Proceeds will be used to help purchase as many as five more network-affiliated television stations in the top 25 U.S. TV markets, the filing said.
Mr. Perelman owns a 54% interest in SCI Television.
Mr. Perelman has taken several moves lately to acquire and reposition media properties.
His MacAndrews & Forbes Holdings Inc. acquired the stake in GuthyRenker.
And MacAndrews officials have said the company will spend $1 billion over two years to build "a real entertainment company."
According to the SEC filing, Apollo Advisors, controlled by investor Leon Black, has an agreement in principle to invest about $60 million in SCI and Andrews Group.
"This is unprecedented," says Andrew Fredman, managing director at Associated Capital, a New York investment firm that owns SCI shares.
"I've never seen Apollo put fresh money in a venture without immediate intentions to sell and move on.
While Mr. Perelman's venture is no Paramount, it's an embryonic entertainment company and a cheap asset."
An affiliate of Apollo currently owns about 8% of SCI's outstanding common stock.
Mr. Perelman's holdings include Marvel Entertainment Group, which publishes Marvel comics; Fleer trading cards, and Toy Biz toys.
Mr. Fredman believes that Mr. Perelman stands to profit handsomely by combining his diverse programming holdings with TV and distribution operations.
He notes that the production company is already "ramping up" TV shows based on Marvel characters.
"This guy wants to be like Disney World," says Mr. Fredman.
Under terms of the rights offering, SCI shareholders will be offered the right to purchase about 1.9 shares of Class B stock in the new company -- New World Communications Group Inc. -- for each share of Class B stock at a price of $8.47 a share.
James T. Conroy, a senior vice president at MacAndrews & Forbes, said the rights offering was meant to protect the holdings of certain minority shareholders in New World Communications, who otherwise would see their equity stakes diluted as a result of the transactions.
He said Mr. Perelman won't receive any rights under the offering.
