The American people have a right to know the facts about the Whitewater/Madison affair.
They also deserve to know that laws will be enforced impartially even if that enforcement may touch upon powerful public officials.
Judging from the defensive reaction of Democratic political operatives in recent days, something may well be rotten in Little Rock -- and Washington.
Some have claimed that Congress must sit by idly until special counsel Robert Fiske completes his investigation -- an investigation that could take years.
Their rationale: Congressional intervention would compromise the integrity of his investigation.
On the contrary, I believe Congress must use its oversight capacity to protect the integrity of any Whitewater/Madison investigation.
Last week, the Senate Banking Committee discovered a clear threat to the integrity of the Resolution Trust Corp.'s investigation -- from top administration officials and political insiders.
The RTC's investigation may already have been compromised.
In deeply disturbing testimony, Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman confirmed that he and Treasury General Counsel Jean Hansen went to the White House to give a "heads-up" briefing.
This briefing was attended by White House Counsel Bernard Nussbaum and an unnamed assistant, Deputy Chief of Staff Harold Ickes and the first lady's chief of staff, Margaret Williams.
Apparently, Mr. Altman believed that top White House legal and political advisers needed his guidance to understand "the legal and procedural framework within which the RTC was working" in connection with Madison.
The White House now states falsely that Congress and the media also received such briefings.
But at the time this group was meeting at the White House, I was speaking out on the Senate floor about the RTC's failure to provide our committee with any information about its activities on the Madison/Whitewater mess.
And I have yet to encounter a reporter covering this story who says he was briefed by the RTC, let alone its acting CEO, Mr. Altman.
Mr. Altman's apparent lapse of judgment triggers serious questions.
Why did Mr. Nussbaum, as White House counsel, need to be briefed on the RTC's investigation of Madison?
This investigation does not touch upon the president in his official capacity.
And what about Mr. Ickes and Ms. Williams?
Why would these political operatives need to be briefed by a top agency official on that agency's investigation into a matter that has nothing to do with the executive office of the president?
Ms. Williams, a former Democratic National Committee operative, had earlier joined Mr. Nussbaum in searching Vincent Foster's office.
Why was this briefing attended by the Treasury general counsel, Ms. Hansen, when it dealt with matters within the RTC's authority?
Mr. Altman has finally recused himself from the Whitewater/Madison matter.
Unfortunately, that does not answer questions about the propriety of this meeting, and his recusal cannot ensure that a fair and impartial investigation will be conducted.
These are legitimate issues that warrant a congressional hearing.
The RTC's deputy CEO, John Ryan, recently wrote to me that "it is standard operating procedure not to discuss any matter relating to the review of potential civil claims of any institution" and that it was "inappropriate" to provide any "specifics" or any "information relating to the status of our review. . . ."
Apparently, different standards may apply to discussions with the White House.
Sen. D'Amato, of New York, is the ranking Republican on the Banking Committee.
