The National Association of Manufacturers jumped on the business bandwagon rejecting the Clinton health-care reform plan, saying it can't support the plan "in its present form."
The statement, which followed a debate among board members of the 12,000-member trade group, capped a week in which two other business groups announced their opposition to the Clinton plan.
Until Saturday's 56-20 vote by the NAM's board, the association had followed a strategy of public neutrality so that it could have more leverage in bargaining over health-care reform.
"We'll simply have to take our lumps with the Clinton administration," said NAM President Jerry Jasinowski, acknowledging that the administration won't be happy with the outcome of the NAM's meeting at a resort here.
But he said the group still wants to be involved in shaping reform legislation and that the "intent was to send a clear signal that we need major changes" in the Clinton plan.
Among other things, the NAM doesn't like what it sees as heavy reliance on government and price controls to solve the health-care problems.
"The Clinton bill has a lot of stuff that we find troublesome," said Chicago industrialist Robert Pritzker, who is this year's NAM chairman.
The move was just what the White House wanted to prevent: snowballing opposition to the legislation, at least by business groups.
The administration's plan was rejected by both the Business Roundtable and U.S. Chamber of Commerce, with the Roundtable supporting a rival plan by Rep. Jim Cooper (D., Tenn.).
The force of NAM members' hostility to the Clinton plan appeared to surprise some of the association's officials, who had said the group would neither reject nor endorse any of the competing health-reform bills.
In addition, Rep. Cooper helped his own cause Friday with a speech that was well received by the board, which is composed of top executives of manufacturers of all sizes.
The Cooper bill would provide tax incentives to help people buy health insurance and would rely on market forces to hold down prices.
But the NAM didn't go so far as to endorse the Cooper plan.
Although Hillary Rodham Clinton had been invited to address the group Saturday, presidential assistant Robert Rubin was scheduled to go in her place.
As momentum swung in favor of a stand against the Clinton plan, NAM members and executives feared an appearance by the administration would embarrass both the trade group and the White House.
"I did not urge him to break his back to get down here," said Mr. Jasinowski, who informed the White House Friday night of the likely vote.
The White House canceled the appearance.
Many NAM members felt it was time to state what they were already saying in private: most of its members don't like the Clinton plan.
"We've got to say this is trash," Warren Batts, chairman of Premark International Inc. argued Friday.
"Let's start over again."
He made the remarks at a meeting of the NAM's economic and regulatory policy committee, which unanimously urged the board's executive committee to express "full opposition" to the Clinton plan.
Others contended that rejecting the plan even with a subsequently toned-down statement would hurt their efforts to influence the final legislation.
"I just don't think it's good tactics at this point," Caterpillar Inc.
Chairman Donald Fites told fellow board members during Saturday's debate.
General Motors Corp. and truck maker Navistar International Corp. were among those favoring continued neutrality.
In addition to Premark, a maker of consumer products and restaurant supplies, larger employers who favored rejecting the Clinton plan included International Paper Co. and General Mills Inc.
Board members said they didn't want their rejection of the Clinton plan to be perceived as harshly as that of the Business Roundtable, a group of chief executive officers of large companies in both service and manufacturing industries.
Some members and NAM officials tried to soften the blow by noting that they still weren't endorsing any single plan.
Some even argued they weren't opposing the Clinton plan, but simply not supporting it.
Manufacturers remain divided on many aspects of health-care reform.
Larger, heavily unionized companies like the administration's idea of forcing all employers to contribute to a health benefits package.
But even though 97% of the NAM's member companies provide at least some health insurance, many smaller manufacturers oppose such mandates.
The resolution rejecting the Clinton plan reiterated the NAM's support for "affordable benefits, sound financing, adequate employer flexibility, encouragement of innovation, reasonable limits on government intrusiveness, effective cost controls and an end to cost-shifting to business."
But it said the administration's plan is "deficient in numerous significant areas" and the NAM "is unable to support in its present form the administration's healthcare reform plan."
Noting that he had already sent Mr. Clinton a letter objecting to parts of the plan, Mr. Jasinowski said the NAM's action essentially made public what it was already telling the administration in private.
