In a move certain to ratchet up tensions with Japan, President Clinton will soon issue an executive order renewing a tough trade provision, known as Super 301, that singles out countries for retaliation.
Congressional sources said they have been notified by the administration that U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor will announce the decision tomorrow.
Clinton administration officials said the president has made the decision to renew the trade measure, and that the announcement could occur as early as tomorrow.
The expected move follows the breakdown of trade negotiations last month during a visit to Washington by Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa.
Japanese negotiatiors resisted U.S. efforts to get Japan to accept numerical targets as part of a plan to cut Japan's huge trade surplus with the U.S.
Under Super 301, the U.S. targets countries that it concludes engage in a pattern of "unfair" trading practices.
It negotiates with those countries to clear up the trading disputes, and if a resolution isn't reached within 18 months, the U.S. would retaliate, most often with punitive tariffs on imports from the targeted country.
Officials consider the measure to be one of the toughest unilateral trade actions the U.S. can take.
Congress passed Super 301 in 1988 in an effort to force the Bush administration to take a tougher stance against trading partners.
The next year, the U.S. targeted Japan, Brazil and India, and eventually won trade concessions from Japan and Brazil before the law expired in 1990.
Renewal of Super 301 by the Clinton adminstration would supersede efforts in Congress to renew the measure through legislation.
After the trade talks with Japan broke down, the U.S. quickly pinpointed one area of dispute: cellular telephones.
Mr. Kantor hosted a huge briefing, where he charged that Japan unfairly closes its market to Motorola Inc., a maker of cellular phones.
The U.S. claims that Japan hasn't lived up to past agreements in which it pledged to open its market.
Japan contends the charges are unfair.
The U.S. has until about mid-March to draw up a preliminary list of sanction targets, as part of the cellular phone dispute.
After that, it will hold a public hearing and issue a final list, a process that usually takes three months.
