French and Belgian medical researchers said an experimental drug from Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. may be the first drug to slow the lethal progression of the nerve disorder that killed American baseball hero Lou Gehrig.
But a U.S. scientist said he was skeptical of the French-Belgian results and feared that publication of their research might interfere with further human trials of the Rhone-Poulenc drug.
The French researchers reported that use of the drug, riluzole, seemed to prolong the survival and slow the paralysis in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, known as Lou Gehrig's disease in the U.S.
In tests at several medical centers, half of the 78 patients who took riluzole were alive at the end of the one-year experiment compared with the survival of only a third of the 78 patients who took an inert or placebo pill, according to the researchers' report in this week's New England Journal of Medicine.
Tests of muscle function also indicated that the deterioration of muscles was slower in the riluzole-treated patients than in those taking the placebo.
The researchers said the drug seemed to work best in patients with the so-called bulbar-onset type of ALS in which the paralysis begins in the lips, mouth and throat, in contrast to the limb-onset type of ALS.
Of the 15 patients with the bulbar-onset ALS who receive riluzole, 11 were alive at the end of the year while only six of the 17 limb-onset patients were alive.
Rhone-Poulenc said a second trial of the drug in ALS is scheduled to be completed in April 1995.
Questions about the validity of the French-Belgian results were raised by Lewis P. Rowland of Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
Dr. Rowland said it wasn't clear whether the drug-treated and placebo-treated groups of patients were similar in the severity and types of ALS they suffered.
Differences other than the taking of the drug might have accounted for the differences in survival, he suggested.
With the publication of the report, Dr. Rowland noted, many ALS patients will be reluctant to volunteer for additional trials of the drug if they know they might receive an inert placebo instead of the drug.
Dr. Rowland added that in the past, ALS patients "have been misled by announcements of benefit from therapies that later proved to be ineffective . . . .
It would be sad if riluzole extended that list."
