The triumph of the U.S. ski team at these Winter Games puts the lie to half of that vicious canard.
The stunning victory by Tommy Moe in the men's downhill, followed by his silver in the Super G, Diann Roffe-Steinrotter's gold in the women's Super G and Picabo Street's silver in the women's downhill, have been all the more glorious for being utterly unexpected.
It is as cross-culturally shocking as if yodelers suddenly appeared on Billboard's Top Ten, with a bullet.
Behind this happy surprise is one of the enduring mysteries of winter sports: Why is it that U.S. Olympic skiing victories come in weird, simultaneous eruptions of genius, with long valleys of despond in between?
It happened for the first time in the slalom event at the Innsbruck Games in 1964, when Billy Kidd won the silver and Jimmy Huega won the bronze, the first Olympic Alpine medals won by American men.
Twenty years passed without another medal for the men's team, and then, at Sarajevo, Bill Johnson came from nowhere to win the downhill while the Mahre twins took gold and silver in the slalom.
Ten years later it is happening again.
Granted, the American women have been slightly more consistent than the men, but overall, on the World Cup circuit as in the Olympics, Alpine skiing has simply been owned by Europeans.
This is more puzzling than the similarly episodic U.S. experience in Olympic hockey, which is simply rigged (Olympic rinks are 15 feet wider than U.S. rinks, leaving our players spatially disoriented).
Alpine skiing may have been invented in the Alps, but its basic ingredients -- tall mountains, young athletes, Gore-Tex -- are American birthrights.
And with its implicit promise of physical harm, Alpine skiing makes for great television, and therefore, one would think, lots of endorsement money.
One of our important cultural institutions, the instant replay, was derived from Alpine skiing, after officials at the Squaw Valley Games asked CBS-TV to review a slalom race to see whether a skier had missed a gate.
But somehow, the U.S. rarely fields strong teams with depth, drawn from the huge American skiing population.
Rather, it periodically surprises the world, and itself, with quixotic squads -- like the Moe Better Downhillers -- that suddenly catch fire.
The U.S. skiing establishment has a few ready explanations for the perennially low expectations.
The Alpine skiing circuit is conducted mostly in Western Europe, experts point out, conferring a big advantage on the local teams, whose members go home between events for home-cooked gnocchi.
Our athletes, by contrast, live in European hotels, eating foreign gnocchi.
It is also said that in Europe, skiing is a sport for everyone, including poor kids for whom ski racing may be life's only chance at wealth and fame.
American skiers tend to be children of the upper-middle class, who have many options and are perhaps less willing to risk it all in the downhill.
These observations are undoubtedly to the point, and yet they don't seem to tell the whole story.
Sure, away games are tough, but such is the fecundity of U.S. sporting culture that Americans have triumphed in far more alien pursuits (sumo wrestling, anyone?).
Besides, who says children of the upper-middle class aren't as crazy as anyone else?
The current women's world champion in "extreme skiing," which is to the downhill as the downhill is to bocce, is the American daughter of an investment banker.
An investigative reporting trip to this remote village high in the Rocky Mountains suggests additional, cultural factors at work.
At 8:15 on a sunny morning, in the lift line at the bottom of the hill, a dashing local businessman sighs contentedly and muses, "Just a couple of years ago, right now everybody here would have been cutting up hits of blotter acid."
The slopes here are dusted with new powder, but underneath they are assiduously groomed, which points to another issue.
The terrain that Europeans learn to ski on is far wilder than what Americans are used to, especially since James C. Sunday, a beginning skier at Stratton Mountain in Vermont, caught his ski in a bush, fell down, and hit his head on a rock in 1974.
He sued and collected $1.5 million, prompting ski resorts across the country to smooth out trails, raise ticket prices to cover liability insurance, and hire guards to police the slopes and eject people acting recklessly.
"People have told me that the biggest shock of their competitive skiing lives was when they got to Europe and saw the conditions that they were asked to ski on," says a person close to the U.S. skiing establishment, asking to remain anonymous.
And on an investigative reporting trip up the chairlift, Heinz Rosch, a Swiss native who teaches skiing here, points to what may be the most basic issue of all.
"In Austria, in Switzerland, there is a lot of glory in being a ski champion.
But not here."
After all, Mr. Rosch and many others say, a young athlete needs a hero, and it is tough on the kids when so few of the gods who ski Olympus are their countrymen.
But Tommy Moe and his happy band have fixed that.
