Prudential Securities Inc. says it plans to set aside an additional $100 million in reserves this year to cover legal costs from limited-partnership claims.
The reserves would bring Prudential's total legal tab from soured partnerships to as much as $865 million.
The nation's fourth-largest brokerage firm already has paid $330 million into a restitution fund as part of an October settlement with regulators who had accused Prudential of widespread fraud in selling $8.15 billion of partnerships in the 1980s.
Previously, Prudential had paid out a total of $270 million to disgruntled partnership investors, and it has $65 million remaining in partnership reserves.
Prudential also has paid as much as $100 million in legal costs over the past three years.
Meanwhile, parent Prudential Insurance Co. of America, which reported that its 1993 earnings doubled, refused to offer unlimited financial support if Prudential Securities can't pay out investor claims.
So far, Prudential Securities' profit has been more than enough to cover the reserves.
But it's unclear how much restitution the brokerage unit will end up paying; regulators say the $330 million is merely a "down payment."
"Are we willing to bankrupt the Pru insurance company?
I can't say yes to that," said Robert C. Winters, Prudential Insurance's chairman and chief executive.
"I have no cap in mind," he said.
Although Mr. Winters said he thought that $330 million would be sufficient to cover investor claims, he added: "If it's $50 million over, then certainly we'd cover it."
The disclosure comes as the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan investigates allegations that Prudential brokers may have misled investors about their legal options involving partnership settlements.
As previously reported, prosecutors are examining whether brokers, at Prudential's behest, improperly prodded investors to accept small settlements involving portfolios of partnerships, rather than advising them of other legal options, people familiar with the matter said.
Prudential disputes the claims.
At the same time, Prudential Securities expressed support for two of its senior legal executives who are being questioned by criminal prosecutors in the investigation of the firm.
Neither of the executives -- Loren Schechter, Prudential's recently deposed general counsel, and Frank Giordano, former partnership chief who now is Prudential's mutual-fund general counsel -- "had anything to hide, neither of them had any culpability" in the partnership mess, said Hardwick Simmons, Prudential Securities' president and chief executive officer.
Prudential Insurance says it hasn't any plans to shed its brokerage unit or leave the brokerage business.
Separately, Mr. Winters, 62 years old, said he had no plans to retire soon and said he hasn't received any pressure from Prudential's board to step down amid the partnership mess.
Prudential has mandatory retirement at age 65.
Mr. Winters said he was saddened that "the public image of the Pru has suffered under my watch," and he apologized to the investors who suffered partnership losses.
"We have hurt too many of our customers, but there are 50 million customers of the Pru."
Prudential Insurance, based in Newark, N.J., is the country's largest life-insurance company.
Last year, it doubled its profit.
The mutual insurer, owned by policyholders rather than by shareholders, said earnings rose to $766 million from $347 million.
The profit helped boost capital to $10.69 billion from $9.82 billion.
Life insurance and annuity sales rose 28% to $2.7 billion from $2.1 billion.
Property and casualty sales fell 4.7% to $441 million from $463 million because of efforts to reduce exposure in hurricane-prone areas.
The return on Prudential's investments fell to 8.3% from 8.8% because of falling interest rates.
The amount of money Prudential manages for pension funds and other institutions rose 7% to $113 billion.
But new business fell because of Prudential's decision to sell fewer guaranteed investment contracts.
The company's health-care business grew sharply, with the number of individuals enrolled in Prudential's managed-care networks rising 20% to 3.8 million.
As reported, Prudential Securities posted 1993 net income of $145 million, down just 3% from 1992 earnings, despite setting aside more than $430 million in reserves for partnership legal claims.
