Tokyo shares rose slightly Wednesday, following two days of sharp drops, but investors were still nervous about the strength of the Japanese yen and the threat of U.S. trade sanctions.
London equities posted a solid advance, as British economic data boosted hopes for another reduction in the base lending rate.
Frankfurt stocks climbed 1%, pulled up by gains in financial shares on hopes for a German interest-rate easing.
But Hong Kong stocks skidded 3.4% to a five-week low on persistent bearish factors.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 116.39, up 0.21, reflecting higher European and American markets and lower Asia/Pacific markets.
Coal stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 105.63, up 2.01, or 1.9%, with Mitsui Mining of Japan posting a 6% gain in its local currency.
Real-estate stocks trailed at 138.17, down 2.74, or 2%, with New World Development of Hong Kong sliding 7.2% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which plunged a total of 1,016.1 points Monday and Tuesday, rose 77.51 to 19052.11.
In trading Thursday, the Nikkei fell 151.82 points to close the morning session at 18900.29.
Wednesday's first-section volume was estimated at 360 million shares, down from 389.7 million shares a day earlier.
Gainers outpaced decliners, 770-265.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which tumbled 26.64 points Tuesday, inched up 3.76 to 1559.10.
Though the yen's setback was limited, compared with its sharp gains earlier in the week following the failure of U.S.-Japanese trade talks, stock investors were wary of making any major moves given the uncertainty in the currency markets.
Japanese securities houses and dealers trading for their own accounts did most of the buying.
Arbitrage-related sales by Japanese investors knocked shares lower in afternoon dealings.
Overseas investors, credited with pushing shares up sharply earlier this year, watched the yen from the market's sidelines.
When the yen strengthened despite rumors that Japan's central bank had bought dollars for yen, stocks' morning rebound petered out.
Shares of cellular-phone makers were mixed after the U.S. said it would hold Japan in violation of a 1989 bilateral accord on that sector; many of these issues had plunged earlier this week on news about the coming penalty.
Market anxiety also intensified because of the U.S. threat to list Japanese products for possible trade sanctions.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index rose 24.5 points to 3417.7, near the intraday high.
The FT 30-stock index added 26.2 points, or 1%, to 2633.0.
Volume was 817.5 million shares, compared with 771.2 million shares a day earlier.
The gains were fueled by strong stock-index futures and gilts, or government bonds, as well as a higher opening on Wall Street.
But the main boost came from new British economic data: January retail prices fell, but volume rose slightly more than expected in each case; the number of people without jobs increased, but unemployment as a percentage of the work force was unchanged, as was the annual rate of increase in Britons' average earnings, while public-sector debt repayment data were positive.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index advanced 20.99 points to 2136.61.
Though bond prices slipped after the German Bundesbank allocated securities repurchase agreements at a fixed 6% rate, stock prices remained firm, as many investors bought shares in case the central bank cuts interest rates today.
Still, the unchanged repo rate was viewed as a clear hint that Germany wouldn't ease monetary policy this week.
With foreign investors cautious, trading generally was directionless and influenced by technical factors.
In Paris, stocks managed small gains late in the session, after being held back by doubts that Germany will cut interest rates today.
In Amsterdam, shares ended mostly higher across the board, led by multinationals and supported by strength on other European exchanges, a steady dollar at lower levels in foreign-exchange dealings, and Wall Street's steady start.
In Milan, after spending the session at lower levels, equities staged a late rally to finish higher.
In Stockholm, prices advanced broadly for the third consecutive session, led by blue chips.
In Zurich, stocks rebounded 1.4% as buyers returned following a weeklong correction, though sentiment remained unsettled by issues such as German interestrate intentions and the tensions linked to the Bosnian civil war.
In Mexico City, following five consecutive sessions of losses from profit-taking, stock prices rose, as a Mexican interest rate dropped to another record low, which prompted bargain hunting.
In Hong Kong, stocks slumped to end near their lows, amid continued wide fluctuations and light turnover.
Property stocks fared the worst, dropping 5.1%.
The market opened strongly after Wall Street's good performance Tuesday, and was underpinned by hopes and rumors about Hong Kong's new airport project, a bone of contention with China ahead of the British colony's change of control in 1997.
But prices fell on selling by locally based players, who had been the biggest buyers in recent sessions, and weakness in Hang Seng Index futures.
Sentiment also was hurt by persistent bearish factors, including concern about a Hong Kong interest-rate increase Friday and about China's economic reform plans, given the frail appearance of Chinese paramount leader Deng Xiaoping on television last week.
In Taipei, bargain-hunting pushed shares up initially, following Tuesday's decine, but the market ended down 2% in soft trading because large investors were sidelined.
While foreign fund managers continued to buy, domestic participants remained cautious amid hopes for Taiwan's central bank to loosen its position and allow more liquidity for investment.
In Seoul, equities surged 2.1% on news that North Korea agreed to open its nuclear sites to international inspections.
In Bangkok, stocks gained 1.1% in light trading, despite poor sentiment linked to Thai political problems; buying was strongest in the finance, banking and insurance sectors.
Among corporate developments, in Zurich, Swiss Bank jumped 16 Swiss francs, or 3.3%, to 506 francs ($348.58).
The commercial bank's 1993 group profit increased 36% to 1.37 billion francs ($940.3 million) from a year earlier, when results included special items.
Operating profit rose 31% to 9.18 billion francs.
Dividends are to be raised 14% each to 16 francs a bearer share and 8 francs a registered share.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
