MCI Communications Corp.'s chief financial officer, Douglas Maine, is working the Senate.
Citicorp's chief executive, John Reed, recently bent the ear of Arthur Levitt Jr., chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Raychem Corp.'s chief executive, Robert Saldich, cornered Commerce Secretary Ron Brown in California, then snagged a few minutes with Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman here in Washington.
The executives' cause: stopping the Financial Accounting Standards Board from requiring companies to calculate the value of certain employee stock options and charge that amount against earnings for the first time.
The complaints about the obscure accounting-rules body have even reached President Clinton.
"I've never seen the amount of corporate anxiety that this issue has raised," Mr. Levitt says.
Some 70 witnesses plan to address FASB (known as FAZ-bee) in five days of public hearings that begin today in Stamford, Conn., near the board's Norwalk headquarters.
One reason for the high anxiety: So many executives have so much at stake.
And those high stakes explain why some other people also are upset.
FASB's revival of a 1984 options proposal coincided with Mr. Clinton's election -- and with his promise to raise taxes on the rich.
Some corporate executives rushed to cash in their options just before the 1992 tax year ended.
The results were eye-popping.
Walt Disney Co.
Chairman Michael D. Eisner and President Frank G. Wells exercised options to buy a total of about 6.6 million Disney shares, then immediately sold nearly 5.1 million of them for a combined indicated pretax profit exceeding $187 million.
Stephen A. Wynn, Mirage Resorts Inc.'s chief executive officer, cashed in one million stock options for an indicated pretax profit of $23.3 million.
Even now, a record quantity of options sits in executives' desk drawers.
Last year, CEOs of Fortune 100 companies derived 29% of their total pay from options, up from 17% in 1987, according to Pearl Meyer & Partners Inc., a compensation consulting firm in New York.
Executives of some start-up companies draw as much as 80% of their pay from options.
If FASB issues its new rule later this year, as generally expected, it would take effect with 1997 financial statements.
But many companies aren't waiting; they are already revising their executive stock options (see: "Some Companies Already Consider New Stock Plans" -- WSJ March 7, 1993).
Most shareholder activists don't quarrel with options worth tens of millions of dollars as long as they are related to a company's performance, usually based on the achievement of specified returns on investment, equity or assets and sometimes on the stock's reaching a specified level.
Under current accounting rules, such "performance-based" options already must be charged against a company's profits.
That's not so, however, with the regular options -- the vast majority -- that have attracted the criticism.
They aren't linked to a performance goal but only to the recipient's staying with the company.
If the stock price rises, even with only a general rise in the market, the recipient can buy the stock at the low option price and sell it at a profit.
Critics complain that if the stock falls, some corporate boards lower the exercise price of the options -- a protective maneuver hardly available to ordinary investors.
Like FASB, Sen. Carl Levin wants the cost of all options to be charged against earnings.
The current practice "is misleading to potential investors, dilutes the value of the stock held by current stockholders, short-changes the company by forgoing capital and jeopardizes employee morale," the Michigan Democrat said when launching a campaign on the issue.
"It also encourages compensation excess because options can be given without reporting any cost to the corporation."
Companies defend options as a handy carrot for executives, who presumably will strive to increase corporate profits and thus raise the value of their own stock.
Defenders also say the executives' eventual exercise of their options shouldn't surprise shareholders, who at some point voted to approve the options grants.
If companies had to take a charge, executives warn, earnings would drop, depressing stock prices.
Raychem, which extends stock options to 800 of its 11,000 employees, estimates that the proposal would slash its annual earnings as much as 30%.
MCI, which gives options to about 4,500 employees, says that if the FASB rule had been in effect in 1992, its profit would have been reduced 12%.
ShareData Corp. of California estimates that Cypress Semiconductor Corp.'s 1993 earnings would have been wiped out.
An alternative to cutting earnings, of course, is reducing or eliminating stock options themselves.
Many companies say that's just what they will do if the FASB rule is adopted, and that's partly why the executives are racing to Washington.
Raychem's Mr. Saldich, who last year drew a salary and bonus of $607,289, holds options to buy stock worth an estimated $600,000 to $1.5 million over the next 10 years.
When he learned of FASB's proposal for a charge against earnings, he says, "The first stage I went through was total rage."
Mr. Saldich contends that the plan would hurt more than "just fat-cat business guys like me."
Executives at much smaller companies agree.
For example, all 150 employees of Verdix Corp., a small software maker in Herndon, Va., get stock options.
"Our salary system doesn't allow us to pay the same salary" as big competitors, CEO Ralph Alexander says.
If FASB's rule is adopted, "we will stop granting stock options, and it could cause us to lose certain people," he adds.
One solution might be to take the firm private.
Also opposing the FASB plan are all the major accounting firms.
They see great difficulty in valuing options years before they will be exercised -- if they are exercised at all.
High-tech companies, a crucial constituency for the Clinton administration, are at the forefront of the lobbying drive.
The American Electronics Association is spending $150,000 on such lobbying, including an airlift of 100 executives this Thursday to call on officials in Washington.
Other technology companies are working with a Washington lobbyist, Ken Hagerty, who formed the Coalition for American Equity Expansion to fight the FASB proposal.
Among the 34 companies that signed up are Apple Computer Inc., International Business Machines Corp. and MCI, as well as some tiny companies.
Rather than let the lobbying drive seem just a campaign to protect some multimillion-dollar pay packages, the high-tech groups' lobbyists are pointing to everyday people who also get options.
An ad in Roll Call, a biweekly in Washington, shows four young workers of different races under the headline "Meet the `Fat Cats' Who Receive Stock Options."
Similarly, MCI persuaded Lori Harrison, a 28-year-old purchasing agent in Richardson, Texas, and other employees to write their representatives in Congress.
Defending her options, Ms. Harrison says, "I do a good job, and it's an incentive for me."
Others fighting the FASB plan include Nasdaq, the market for the stocks of many small companies; the Business Roundtable, made up of top executives of many corporate giants; and the National Association of Manufacturers.
Another opponent is a sometime foe of corporate leaders: the Council of Institutional Investors, whose pension-fund members have fought hard for more-modest executive compensation.
They are treating this as a life-or-death struggle.
A news release last October from the Coalition for American Equity Expansion dubbed the FASB proposal "a potent and poisonous job killer that would hinder the formation of new companies."
The American Electronics Association trumpeted its "major effort to kill FASB options proposal."
FASB usually isn't considered a comic group.
Its roots go back to 1938, when the SEC, directed by Congress to oversee accounting rules, decided to leave the complex job to the accountants.
FASB, formed in 1973 and funded by accounting firms, is the latest of three such bodies.
In 1984, the board took up the stock-options question but did little.
The question erupted again around the time of President Bush's ill-fated trip to Tokyo in 1992 with 12 American executives in tow.
Although the entourage planned to complain about Japan's trade practices, the trip backfired; it mainly focused attention on the way American executives' huge pay dwarfed that of Japanese executives.
Part of that difference stems from stock options.
Sen. Levin jumped in with a bill that would require companies to disclose what they pay executives and why and to reduce corporate earnings by the value of all stock options.
The SEC issued rules requiring the disclosures but let options alone.
The Michigan senator didn't.
Last year, he introduced a bill to require that options be charged against profits.
He says he just wants them to "be treated like all other forms of compensation."
He adds: "FASB said for about 10 years that they ought to be," and his bill sought "to prod them to act."
When FASB finally proposed its options rule last year, Sen. Levin stopped pushing his bill.
Among FASB's supporters on the issue is billionaire investor Warren Buffett.
The Berkshire Hathaway Inc. chairman doesn't object to executive options, but has written that "it is both silly and cynical to say that an important item of cost should not be recognized simply because it can't be quantified with pinpoint precision."
Compensation expert Graef Crystal and many securities analysts agree.
Even FASB's corporate opponents are hard pressed to refute its basic tenet that stock options have value.
Their biggest question is whether any formula could accurately value them, since they may or may not be exercised in the future.
Given the accuracy problems, the executives question whether valuation is worth the resulting damage to the bottom line.
So far, FASB contends its plan is sound and refuses to worry about its impact on corporate earnings or executive pay.
But FASB's adversaries are making headway.
Freshman Rep. Anna Eshoo, a California Democrat representing Silicon Valley, is hounding colleagues to pass a "sense of Congress" resolution deploring the FASB proposal; so far, 50 have signed on.
On the Senate side, Connecticut Democrat Joseph Lieberman introduced a bill last June that would stop FASB cold.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen weighed in last April with a letter to FASB Chairman Dennis Beresford urging the board to give "careful consideration" to "an alternative approach which would emphasize full disclosure but retain current stock-option accounting standards"in other words, no charge to earnings.
Commerce Secretary Brown, after Mr. Saldich and other Silicon Valley executives cornered him for 40 minutes at a conference in San Francisco, ordered a study of the plan's effect on the U.S. economy.
When the lobbyists even reached the White House, Sen. Levin was alarmed.
In a letter to President Clinton last October, he argued, "Right now, stock options are the only kind of executive pay which a corporation can deduct from its taxes as an expense but isn't required to include on its books as an expense."
In a response, Mr. Clinton warned that "it would be unfortunate if FASB's proposal inadvertently undermined the competitiveness of some of America's most promising high-tech companies."
However, he disparaged the notion of legislating accounting standards.
For all the lobbying, the most direct power over FASB lies with the SEC, which can overrule any accounting standard that the board proposes.
"I think everybody in this building is being lobbied, from the people who guard the front door to the chairman," says Walter Schuetze, the SEC's chief accountant.
Mr. Schuetze wants FASB to complete its work in peace; so does the commission, except for Commissioner J. Carter Beese Jr., who has opposed the plan.
SEC Chairman Levitt has signaled his reluctance to interfere with FASB's rulemaking right now.
Yet he still listens to its opponents -- within limits.
"When I have dinner with business executives, I tell them we'll talk about stock options for 30 minutes, no more," says Mr. Levitt, a precise timekeeper.
"Then we talk about something more interesting."
