Economic reforms and huge returns were the buzzwords in the market for developing-nation bonds last year, but this year investors will be learning more about political risk.
The rebel uprising in Chiapas in southern Mexico has unnerved investors, dragging down prices for developing-nation bonds in realms from Latin America to Africa.
"Mexico has to win the prize for the best-kept secret of the year," remarks Lisa Hess, a portfolio manager at Loews Corp., the diversified holding company.
"The day after Nafta starts, they reveal that they have a little revolution brewing."
Nafta, the North American Free Trade Agreement, went into effect Jan. 1, the day of the Chiapas uprising.
The uprising has investors wondering: What political land mines might be awaiting investors elsewhere?
Some of these investors have responded by selling their holdings.
Political worries in Venezuela and Nigeria, two other popular nations for bond investors, have sharply pushed down bond prices there.
(Mexico's par Brady bond is still down over a point from the end of 1993 at 82.13, according to J.P. Morgan Securities Inc.)
Brady bonds are securities issued by governments as part of a foreign-debt restructuring program designed by former U.S. Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady.
The par bonds get their name from the fact that they are made from old foreign debt that has been converted at face value into the new bonds.
The price of Nigeria's par Brady bond has dropped nearly five points in the past two weeks, or nearly $50 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 59.75, according to J.P. Morgan Securities.
The reason: because of growing political instability, investors are concerned over the country's willingess to service its foreign debt.
Venezuela's par bonds have dropped nearly five points as well, to 70.50 over the same period, thanks to the suspension of the country's value-added tax and the introduction of temporary price controls.
Investors are worried about the government's ability to pay its debt service without the tax.
Venezuela's president-elect, Rafael Caldera, also reaffirmed his campaign promise to remove the valueadded tax.
Adding to the bad news was a crisis at one of Venezuela's biggest banks, Banco Latino, whose assets were frozen by the central bank.
An eagerly anticipated $1 billion global note offering from Mexico's Banco Nacional de Comercio Exterior was hurt by the political worries last week.
(A global security is one that is offered simultaneously in all the world's major markets and is intended to be easily traded in all those markets.)
Unlike a similar global note offering from Argentina in early December, the Banco Nacional offering received a lukewarm reception from investors.
The yield spread of the 10-year notes over comparable U.S. Treasury debt had to be widened in order to attract demand.
And shortly after the notes were priced on Friday, their price dropped about 1/4 point, or about $2.50 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 99.25.
The yield, which moves in the opposite direction of the price, rose to 7.36% from 7.32%.
Sharp price moves aren't new to developing-nation bonds but after a long run-up, it appears that investors ought to be worrying more about them, says Loews's Ms. Hess.
She says that until now many of these developing-nation bond markets "have gone only in one direction.
Any reasonable investors would see that is a warning sign."
Despite the unpredictability of political risk, a number of money managers with big bets on developing-nation bonds say they aren't losing any sleep over the shaky political climate in places like Venezuela or Nigeria.
One of the soundest sleepers is probably Nikos Pappayliou, a portfolio manager at G.T. Capital Management.
"Our belief is that disparate political ideologies -- whether it's Mexico, or Caldera in Venezuela, or President Carlos Menem in Argentina -- really don't matter" much to investors, he says.
"The trend to globalization will marginalize much of these political ideologies," he claims.
"When developing nations weigh the benefits of being reintegrated into the world economy, parties on the right and the left of the political spectrum will be confronted with one choice: to continue economic reforms," he explains.
Ms. Hess of Loews doesn't agree.
"You can be correct about broad economic trends but be wrong on specific securities prices in the short-term," she says.
"There is a tremendous amount of focus these days on missed opportunities and insufficient returns and not enough focus" on political and other risks.
Ms. Hess was quoted late last year in the trade publication Grant's Interest Rate Observer on the experience of a colleague at Loews with Mexican par bonds: "We had a sad experience in Mexican par bonds, the most liquid part of the emerging-markets debt market.
In five trading days, they went from a dollar price of 83 to a dollar price of 75, and three market-makers basically stopped answering their telephones."
The price drop was a reaction to worries that Nafta might not get approved, she says.
This year could be particularly wild for investors in Latin American bonds because so many of these nations face a change in leadership or new elections.
Mexico, Argentina and Brazil will have elections this year, points out Carol Ann Hoffmann, an emerging-markets analyst at J.P. Morgan.
Venezuela and Chile just had elections.
What's more, the Argentine government is closely watching the events in Chiapas because of worries that something similar could happen there as well, says Ms. Hoffmann.
Argentina put security services on alert 10 days ago.
And though few analysts and money managers will say so on the record, many of them worry about what would happen to investments if Mexico's ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party doesn't win the coming election and loses power for the first time in more than 60 years.
The re-election of the PRI -- the party's Spanish acronym -- is taken almost for granted, given the party's history of winning elections through alleged voting fraud.
But others point out that more so than in past elections, this year's elections in Mexico will be closely watched to see how serious that nation's leaders are about political reforms.
Mr. Pappayliou of G.T. Capital calls the dips and jumps in developing-nation bond prices in reaction to political events "hiccups" and say they are wonderful buying opportunities.
The death of Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping would be one possible buying opportunity, he says.
In Venezuela, says Mr. Pappayliou, investors "are sifting through the rhetoric and realizing that a lot hasn't changed" with the election of Mr. Caldera as president, even though he is a populist and continues to rail against the country's value-added-tax.
"He's surrounding himself with a prudent modern cabinet," says Mr. Pappayliou.
Robert Citrone, a portfolio manager at Fidelity Investments of Boston, agrees.
"In Venezuela during his election campaign, Mr. Caldera was being more populist than he really is," says Mr. Citrone.
"When he takes power next month, he will take a more rational position," insists Mr. Citrone.
"His advisers say the VAT will not be removed."
Nigeria's continued political problems "aren't a concern," says Mr. Pappayliou.
It's just "the continuation of a trend of autocratic rule" and "it doesn't affect Nigeria's "capacity and ability to pay its debts," he says.
Mr. Pappayliou is convinced that no matter what the politicians say, when it comes to making decisions in many of these nations, they will come down on the side of free markets.
For developing nations "there is no incentive to default and be excluded from the world's capital markets."
But investors who become enthusiastic about developing nations, especially in Latin America, ought to remember that there is a long and colorful history of politics getting in the way of paying off debts.
That's exactly what happened in Peru in the mid-1980s when it chose to limit its interest payments on foreign debt and cut itself off from foreign loans just when it needed them the most.
According to a study by Salomon Brothers Inc., the only region to be a "major defaulter" in all four of the major international debt crises since the 1820s was Latin America.
U.S. Treasury notes and bonds ended the week on a quiet note, posting small declines Friday in what traders are calling a directionless market.
The price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dropped less than 1/4 point, or less than $2.50 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 99 17/32.
Its yield, which moves inversely to the price, rose to 6.28% from 6.26% on Thursday.
The Treasury Department will be selling $17 billion of two-year notes tomorrow and $12 billion in five-year notes Wednesday.
In when-issued trading Friday, the two-year note yielded 4.11%, up from 4.08% on Thursday, while the when-issued five-year note finished the week at 5.05%, up from 5.03%.
Late Friday the Federal Reserve reported that its widely watched M2 measure of money supply, dropped $3.4 billion in the week ended Jan. 10.
That puts the M2 growth rate at 1.1%, compared with the fourth-quarter base of 1993, which is just within the Fed's target range of 1% to 5%.
M2 includes currency, checking accounts, money-market funds and certificates of deposit smaller than $100,000.
