Sugar-futures prices soared, pushing the value of the actively traded March futures contract to 11 cents a pound for the first time since October.
At New York's Coffee, Sugar & Cocoa Exchange, sugar for March delivery was up 0.52 cent on the day to settle at 11 cents a pound.
Lending strength to the sugar-futures market, which has traded in a relatively narrow price range for months, were expectations of the imposition of a white-sugar tax by Russia, a major importer of sugar.
Sugar traders have long expected the announcement of the Russian sugar tax, but most have been expecting the tax to be quite large -- perhaps as much as 50% of the price of sugar.
Yesterday, although there was still no formal announcement of the tax, the talk in the market was that it would be less than that, perhaps 20% to 25% of sugar's price.
"Everyone knows the tax is coming, but it's not going to be as big as people might have thought," said Sandra Kaul, senior analyst for Smith Barney Shearson.
Moreover, in the months between when the tax is announced and when it is actually imposed, many traders expect Russian imports to surge, providing additional short-term support for futures prices, said Judith Ganes, senior analyst for Merrill Lynch.
Also in the market yesterday, Ms. Ganes said, were reports that Egypt bought five cargos of sugar, or about 65,000 tons.
Demand for sugar is generally expected to be strong over the next few months.
Among the most prevalent reports circulating in the market are expectations that China and India will make major purchases of sugar sometime soon.
Buying has also been materializing from other quarters, Ms. Kaul said.
"We've been seeing increased Middle Eastern buying," she said.
"It's beginning to get us to a point where there are concerns about availability of white sugar."
Because of tight supplies of sugar and expectations of strong demand, many analysts expect prices to continue to rise over the next few months.
"The long-term picture for this market is certainly healthy," Ms. Ganes said, adding that it is possible the prices of sugar could rise to as much as 13 cents in the near future.
PRECIOUS METALS: Nervousness about the Federal Reserve Board's reluctance to intervene in the U.S. monetary system pushed precious-metals prices higher, analysts said.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery was up $2.60 to $389.10 an ounce, while the actively traded silver-futures contract rose 12.5 cents to $5.47 an ounce.
Metals prices were also supported by a sharp downturn in bond prices, which tend to move in inverse correlation to commodity prices in general, said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
Commodity funds, which are managed pools of investor money, helped to strengthen silver's rally yesterday as these funds bought large numbers of silver-futures contracts.
GRAINS & SOYBEANS: Prices of wheat-futures contracts settled lower in quiet trading.
Corn and soybean prices settled mixed.
The markets continue to be dominated by forecasts for a bumper soybean crop in South America as well as feeble foreign demand for U.S. grain.
"We've got the February blahs," said Daniel W. Basse, director of research at AgResource Co., Chicago.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the wheat contract for March delivery dropped 3.5 cents a bushel to settle at $3.7125 a bushel.
