Federal banking regulators, hoping to better monitor banks' activities in derivatives, plan to force banks to disclose more information about their dealings in the booming but little-understood market.
A committee of bank regulators proposed in the federal register, the official bulletin of federal rule-making, that banks disclose on a quarterly basis both their income from these businesses, and the amount of money they would stand to lose if their derivative holdings were to default.
Derivatives are financial arrangements between dealers and big investors whose values are linked to -- or derive from -- fluctuations in the prices of stocks, bonds, currencies or other assets.
A main risk in these arrangements is that the party on the other side of the deal fails to make good on its commitments.
No major dealers currently report income from derivatives activities, although big banks do report the dollar amount at risk from potential defaults on an annual basis.
The proposed disclosure rules, which will be open to public comment before being implemented by banking regulators, will shed new light on the returns -- and risks -- from derivatives, analysts say.
Late last year, banking regulators issued guidelines on acceptable risk-management practices at financial institutions that deal in derivatives.
The guidelines were intended for both banks and bank examiners.
But the proposed disclosure standards represent an "additional arrow in the examiners' quiver" to evaluate banks' derivatives dealings, said Paul Gottlieb, a partner specializing in derivatives at Seward & Kissel.
"It could also potentially be utilized as an early warning mechanism to identify financial institutions that require closer review by bank supervisors."
The moves come as banks are feeling pressure from the accounting industry, investors and others to improve the public information available on the size of their derivatives positions and the risks they entail.
"I think there's broad agreement that existing disclosures are inadequate," Federal Reserve Board governor Susan Phillips said in a recent speech.
Governor Phillips said the widely acclaimed "Group of 30" report, written by the industry's top practitioners and academics, fell short on the disclosure issue.
She called the industry's fears that more disclosure would help competitors "overstated," and said that, without additional disclosure, "I fear that institutions with substantial derivatives activities will continue to be plagued by highly exaggerated views of the risks of such activities."
The new proposals come at a time when Congress is preparing to review current regulation of derivatives.
Mr. Gottlieb said the proposed rule changes could show Congress that regulators are already on top of the issue.
The industry responded coolly to the proposal, especially relating to the disclosure of income.
Joseph Bauman, head of business development at Citibank and chairman of the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, said some data requested are being disclosed voluntarily by large banks such as Citicorp, albeit on an annual basis rather than quarterly.
But he said that the income-related information would be of limited value because of potential differences across institutions of how to measure profitability.
"My concern is that the income-statement data might not show a picture that would allow the analysts' community and other interested parties to properly weight the meaning of the number," he said.
Most of the new disclosure standards are slated to go into effect in the third quarter of 1994.
The most debatable item -- the disclosure of banks' derivative-related profits -- wouldn't be implemented until the first quarter of 1995.
For interest-rate and foreign exchange-related derivatives, regulators already require banks to disclose their "notional" values -- or the amount of underlying currency or bond instruments on which the derivatives' returns are calculated.
However, the proposed rule changes would include equity and commodity derivatives.
They would also require that banks separate exchange-traded derivatives, such as futures, with privately traded contracts.
In addition, banks would be required to report a single figure for the maximum losses a bank could take from all of its derivatives positions.
The proposed reporting requirements "give us the kind of information we feel we need to appropriately supervise banks' derivatives activities," said Douglas Harris, senior policy adviser at the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
"We think a lot of banks have the information readily at hand."
The proposed rules wouldn't just apply to big derivatives dealers.
Regulators want all banks with assets in excess of $100 million to abide by the new rules.
That would include almost all banks that use derivatives, even those that merely use them to reduce risks from fluctuating interest rates.
Aside from Banc One Corp., few banks that use derivatives to hedge have broken out how these instruments affect their bottom line.
