China confirmed it imposed a temporary ban last week on new orders for imported crude oil and some refined oil products, startling oil traders in Asia.
The move is designed to dry up a glut of oil products in China that has pushed domestic market prices down more than 20% this year.
The glut was attributed to heavy buying in recent months by Chinese traders who stockpiled oil products in the mistaken belief that China's tax reforms would push domestic prices higher.
The ban is expected to be lifted in May, after inventories shrink.
China's crude-oil importers pledged to honor contracts but asked for some delivery deferrals.
But oil traders said the abrupt ban was disrupting the market.
Some traders who have placed orders in anticipation of booming business from China are likely to be hurt.
Others have put contract negotiations on hold.
Though it is the world's sixth-largest oil producer, China became a net importer last year as oil consumption in the racing economy grew 15% to 1.1 billion barrels.
The first six-lane expressway in northern Vietnam opened to traffic.
The 9.3-mile road links the capital of Hanoi with Noi Bai International Airport, almost halving travel time.
The $20 million highway, the country's widest at 76 feet, can serve 8,000 vehicles a day at speeds up to 75 miles per hour.
Improving roads is among Vietnam's development priorities.
Of 65,720 total miles of war-damaged and neglected roads, only 8% are paved.
Most food production in Finland stopped, as employers began a nationwide lockout after wage talks with unions broke down.
But stores had several months of food supplies, and consumers didn't panic.
The lockout affected 30,000 workers at 400 sites, including bakeries, dairies, breweries and food plants, with sales totaling $9 billion a year.
The lockout followed selective strikes this week by unions demanding wage increases between 6% and 7%; they rejected an offer of 3% to 3.5% and mediation.
Food workers' pay averages $1,390 a month; the national average is $1,710.
Russia will resume sending natural gas to Ukraine, which agreed to pay arrears for Russian energy supplies last year.
To force Ukraine to pay about $586 million of gas debts, Russia's Gazprom utility last week sharply cut shipments to Ukraine, which relies on Russia for 60% of its gas needs.
Half of Ukraine's back payments will be in cash and half in gas industry equipment.
The deal lasts through April 10, when Russia will cut off supplies again if Ukraine delays any payments.
Hundreds of youths, mostly high school students, smashed shop windows and threw rocks at police in Paris as thousands protested against plans to offer lower pay for entry-level jobs.
Demonstrators marched in several other French cities, in the second round of union-backed protests in a week.
To spur employment of high school and college graduates, who have a 25% jobless rate, the government would let employers pay them 80% of standard wages for a year.
Printers in Berlin and Bavaria briefly walked off their jobs in a warning strike.
Arbitration failed last month to resolve contract negotiations with the IG Medien union.
Germany has been hit by rolling walkouts almost daily in the past month, as unions seek higher pay and job security from industries trying to recover from recession.
In Bonn, Germany's two largest political parties agreed to strip workers of pay for one rather than two of the 10 national holidays as sought by the government for a new insurance fund for nursing care for the elderly and disabled.
The government-paid program has been driven into debt by rapidly rising medical costs.
Mexican specialists on native affairs worry that concessions won by armed Mayan rebels could create a system patterned on U.S. Indian reservations.
A draft accord between the government and Zapatista insurgents lets the Mayas manage their affairs on their own land.
The U.S. reservations gave Indians some autonomy but also became pockets of economic misery and alcoholism.
Yet whereas U.S. Indians lost territory, the one million Mayas of the Chiapas region, left with nothing following the Spaniards' 16th-century conquest, stand to gain land.
The Zapatista New Year's rebellion was the latest bloody Mayan bid for autonomy in the five centuries since the arrival of Spanish conquistadors.
Mayas of the Yucatan fought from 1847 to 1917 to form an independent nation in what is now Mexico's eastern state of Quintana Roo and set up a form of government that survives in Mayan communities.
This leadership structure could help Mayas avoid pitfalls of U.S. reservations in channeling government aid.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Russia's space agency plans to build a cosmodrome near the Far East town of Svobodny by the year 2000, signaling that the armed forces have given up on a deal with Kazakhstan to use the former U.S.S.R.'s main military and civilian space-launch site in Baikonur. . . .
Brazil proposed making South America a free-trade zone.
The plan was presented in Buenos Aires at a meeting of the Mercosur common market, which includes Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay.
