With China set to entice the world's fund managers with offerings of shares in 22 state-owned companies, and with Beijing pursuing the favor of international bond investors, it would be interesting to know what China's home-grown wealthy are doing with their own money.
The data strongly hint that large sums are being funneled out of China without anybody knowing where they're going or whom they belong to.
Economist Friedrich Wu has examined "errors and omissions" in China's balance of payments, and finds evidence of $8 billion disappearing in 1992.
Frank Gunter of Lehigh University has compared China's trade statistics with those of its major trading partners.
He suspects enough money leaks out through phony import and export invoices to bring the total to roughly $20 billion a year.
Capital flight may reflect only the desire of the newly rich to remain rich by not putting all their eggs in one basket.
Nobody would seriously expect a Western investor to bet the whole ranch on China.
And given China's inflation and currency troubles, a Chinese enterprise manager would have sound reasons for wanting to stash his cash balances offshore.
Nevertheless, it's safe to assume that much of the outflow represents the illegal gains of well-connected Chinese officials.
Nobody doubts that turning state assets into private riches has become the primary occupation of the families of party bigwigs.
For all we know, though, these illicit riches are making a round trip, dipping offshore just long enough to disguise ownership and qualify for the tax advantages due foreign investors and joint-venturers.
There's at least one reason to be sanguine.
Unlike Latin America in the 1970s, where capital flight roughly equaled the influx of new loans to corrupt and incompetent governments, half the new money going into China is private direct investment.
Quite probably this money isn't being laundered through the government into the Swiss bank accounts of Chinese leaders.
By its nature, most of it goes into projects designed to yield a profit.
Lenders can hardly be so confident that the billions loaned directly to Beijing aren't being squandered or salted away.
Nor can the share investors now being courted to become Beijing's partners in dozens of state enterprises discount the possibility that their funds will end up in the regime's retirement accounts rather than paying to upgrade production and return them a profit.
These folks can judge their own risks, of course.
But in pondering the tea leaves, they ought to consider two questions: Does the capital flight represent a bet against China's future by those in the best position to know?
And can a ruling class so wedded to corruption shepherd China toward a future where property rights are guaranteed by law rather than by bribes and connections to the high and mighty?
