The U.S. central bank's decision to nudge up short-term interest rates marks a possible turning point in a story that has been powering the rallies on Asian stock markets, analysts say.
Throughout last year, low interest rates in the U.S. encouraged American investors to shift large sums of money from securities there into high-flying Asian stocks.
That wave of cash accelerated market rallies throughout the region, and by the end of last year had driven stock markets across Asia into record territory.
On Friday, though, the Fed appeared to throw a wrench into the works by pushing the Federal Funds rate, at which banks lend to one another, up 0.25 percentage point, to 3.25%.
That was the first rise in the rate since 1989.
On the one hand, analysts in Hong Kong view the action as symbolic because the increase was so small.
Any declines in Asian stocks today are likely to be only knee-jerk reactions, they believe.
"This rise is really just a warning shot," says Alan Butler-Henderson, director of Asian strategy at Baring Securities Ltd.
He expects Asian stock markets to generally keep rising during the next few months.
But on the other hand, "stock investors should be preparing to look for exit points," or what shares they want to sell for a quick retreat, Mr. Butler-Henderson says.
The real crunch could come in the second half, he believes.
By then, the U.S. recovery may be picking up steam, and Japan and Germany probably will have seen the nadir of their recessions.
Under such conditions, the Fed could raise shortterm rates as much as 1.5 percentage points, says Mr. Butler-Henderson.
In that case, "the vulnerable market will be Hong Kong," he says.
The monetary peg tying Hong Kong's dollar firmly to the U.S. dollar makes "Mr. Greenspan's monetary policy Hong Kong's monetary policy," he says, referring to the Fed's chairman, Alan Greenspan.
So interest rates would have to rise sharply in Hong Kong, too.
After four years of strong economic growth, fueled by the investment boom in China, Hong Kong's economy is "extremely tired," he says.
In particular, high inflation threatens to exhaust local consumer spending.
Meanwhile, Hong Kong companies' earnings growth is increasingly dependent on "crazy churning in the property market," he says.
The combination makes corporate Hong Kong particularly vulnerable even to fears of any credit crunch.
"Rising interest rates do imply that the earnings cycle in Hong Kong will be tiring a bit," warns Andrew Hall, research director of Morgan Grenfell Asia Securities (H.K.) Ltd.
"It will be increasingly difficult for companies to get 20% to 30% compounded earnings growth.
We will have to get used to compounded earnings growth in the teens," he adds.
Tokyo stocks rose Friday, partly because of arbitrage-linked buying despite Japanese political wrangling about tax policy.
London shares fell, socked by interest-rate worries after the Fed tightened credit.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 116.64, down 1.63, or 1.38%, reflecting drops in markets in all regions.
Real-estate stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 147.85, up 0.55, or 0.37%, with HKR International of Hong Kong posting an 8.82% gain in its local currency.
Coal stocks trailed, at 104.24, down 4.55, or 4.18%, with Cyprus Amax of the U.S. sliding 10.43% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which fell 75.21 points Thursday, rose 126.61 to 20301.43, also the intraday high.
In trading Monday, the Nikkei fell 262.53 points to close the morning session at 20038.90.
Friday's first-section volume was estimated at 370 million shares, down from 540.9 million shares a day earlier.
Gainers topped losers, 609-422.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which lost 14.93 points Thursday, gained 2.07 to 1614.80.
Investors continued to take profits from recent huge gains, and stocks fell further during the session because of futures-led trading reflecting Japanese political uncertainties about economy-stimulating moves, before arbitrage-linked buying and dealers buying for their own accounts helped stocks recoup losses and end higher.
In London, the FT-SE 100-share index lost 16.1 points to 3475.4, near the day's lows.
The FT 30-stock index declined 24.8 points to 2669.2.
Volume was 785.1 million shares, compared with 1.09 billion shares in the previous session.
Shares opened lower amid caution about U.S. economic data and climbed on the U.S. unemployment report, then tumbled after the Fed pushed up short-term interest rates.
Wall Street also was volatile, influencing London stocks, pressured too by the U.S. dollar's strengthening against the German mark, which could hurt chances of Germany lowering its interest rates and allowng Britain to follow suit.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index dropped 13.47 points to 2138.25 in technically driven trading, as many investors were sidelined, disappointed by Germany's decision Thursday to leave interest rates unchanged.
In Hong Kong, stocks rallied 2.6%, led by the banking sector on strong earnings expectations.
In Mexico City, prices inched up to another new high, after falling on profit-taking, rallying and then retreating as Wall Street sank.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
