On the Table?
OF ALL THE HINTS of flexibility on health care seeping out of the White House this week, the most significant was one offered by President Clinton himself at a private White House meeting.
In a talk with governors, Mr. Clinton hinted to Republican Carroll Campbell of South Carolina that he is willing to compromise on his plan's mandatory health-care "alliances."
Alliances are the new agencies the Clinton plan would set up to market health insurance to people and companies throughout a state or region.
The purpose of alliances, of course, is to push down insurance costs by pooling the buying power of health-care consumers.
But to many consumers, alliances are starting to look like a good idea embellished too far.
In some respects, alliances have emerged as an Achilles heel of the Clinton plan, an element that feeds the public's vague fears that that plan would simply be too bureaucratic and impersonal.
To critics of the Clinton plan, whose real objections actually lie elsewhere, alliances have become a device for undermining public confidence.
So, as Gov. Campbell and other governors gathered in Washington for their annual winter meeting agree, the president's willingness to compromise is an important step down the murky path toward a bipartisan health-care plan.
Most public attention has focused on the pieces of health-care reform on which President Clinton isn't compromising: his demand for universal coverage for all Americans and his call for employers to pick up 80% of workers' insurance costs.
In sheer political terms, those are big stumbling blocks with Republicans and conservtive Democrats.
But in public-opinion terms, Mr. Clinton is on fairly firm ground on those fundamental issues.
In a recent Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll, 78% of those surveyed supported the call for universal coverage, and 65% supported a mandate that businesses pay at least 80% of employees' cost, with government aid to subsidize small businesses.
YET OVERALL PUBLIC SUPPORT for the Clinton plan has been slipping.
That seems to be happening because of underlying fears that the plan would just create new health bureaucracies in the name of chopping down old ones.
Alliances lie at the heart of some of those fears.
Under the Clinton plan, the new regional alliances would be set up either as nonprofit organizations or state agencies.
They would be run by boards of directors including consumers and employers.
Alliances would first contract with insurance companies and health plans willing to provide a standard package of health benefits, and then let consumers pick from a menu of those qualifying health plans.
So far so good.
But the Clinton plan goes further.
It would require companies with fewer than 5,000 employees to get their insurance through alliances.
Alliances would have the power to approve marketing materials used by health plans, and they could exclude health plans that are deemed too expensive.
They would set a schedule for payments to be made under fee-for-service plans, in which patients use their insurance benefits to directly pay any health-care provider.
And if too many consumers want to participate in a particular health plan, the alliance could randomly select who get spots.
CLINTONITES have long viewed alliances as a way to give the average person a sense of power and local control.
But Celinda Lake, a Democratic pollster who has done extensive polls and focus-group discussions about health care, says the alliance system frequently arouses misgivings among consumers.
"They are very concerned about it being bureaucratic," she says.
"They think there's an intermediary now between them and their health-care providers, and they want to get rid of that layer."
And rather than reassure Americans, she says, the concept of a network of various state and regional alliances often raises fears of a patchwork health-care system in which people won't be sure what happens when they move from one state to the next.
Consumers do like the idea of giving small businesses and individuals more buying clout by helping them to form insurance-purchasing cooperatives, Ms. Lake says.
So, she says, paring the alliance concept back down to a simpler version would be appealing.
"What they need to do, in automotive terms, is strip away the fins," adds Peter Hart, a Democrat who conducts the Journal/NBC poll.
The White House seems to be moving in that direction.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said a few days ago that some companies with fewer than 5,000 employees may be exempted from the alliances.
And the message from Mr. Clinton this week was that the alliance issue is "on the table for discussion," says Vermont Democratic Gov. Howard Dean, who was involved in the White House discussion.
That, he noted, is a "very big thing."
