One little-noticed element of President Clinton's health care reform proposal is the introduction of implicit price regulation for pharmaceuticals.
The new Advisory Council on Breakthrough Drugs will determine the "reasonableness" of new drug prices, based on prices charged in other countries and producer costs.
For Medicare, the secretary of health and human services can "negotiate" a special rebate based on the lowest manufacturer price in any one of more than 20 countries.
This is in addition to the 17% across-the-board discount required for all drugs reimbursed by Medicare.
Failure to "negotiate" an acceptable rebate can lead to total exclusion from Medicare coverage.
A General Accounting Office report, released by Rep. Henry Waxman this week, concludes that drug prices are 60% higher in the U.S. than in the U.K.
But this study is based on flawed methodology that invalidates its conclusions.
Moreover, even a methodologically sound (and most are not) comparison of prices could not measure the full effects of regulation.
More fundamentally, the presumption that drug prices should be the same for all users is misguided.
In fact, price differentials benefit most consumers, including U.S. consumers.
Using foreign prices to regulate -- implicitly or explicitly -- prices charged at home has a long tradition in some countries, but that does not make it good policy for the U.S.
The GAO's U.S.-U.K. comparison includes only 77 leading branded products and, for each product, includes only one of the many dosage forms, strengths and package sizes that are available.
These packs account for less than 10% of U.S. sales, and are often unrepresentative even of the products included.
For the leading U.S. product Amoxil, for example, the U.K. price is 65% higher than the U.S. price for the particular pack in the study.
But when we average over all dosage forms and strengths, the U.K. price is three times the U.S. price.
Moreover, the GAO's U.S.-U.K. study does not give generics appropriate weight in the overall price comparison.
Yet generics account for one-third of all U.S. prescriptions.
Generic market share will surge in the next few years, with patent expiration due for more than 80 major products by 1999 and insurers increasingly reimbursing only for generics.
My study's comparison of drug prices in nine countries, using all sales of all matching products, including generics and some over-the-counter drugs, reaches very different conclusions.
Comparing price per dose (or unit), Canada, Germany, Switzerland and Sweden are more expensive than the U.S.
The U.K., at 24% lower prices than the U.S., is the lowest except for France.
My analysis, appropriately weighted to reflect each drug's importance to U.S. consumers, indicates that U.S. consumers are not as badly off compared to foreign consumers as the GAO has suggested.
Nevertheless, my measures still overstate the relative prices of drugs in the U.S. because they do not reflect the discounts and rebates received by managed care and by Medicaid and other government programs.
Managed drug benefit programs are rapidly becoming the norm, and this growth is accelerating.
It is these discounted prices that are the relevant benchmark for prospective policy-making.
Thus price comparisons such as the GAO's fail to measure accurately the cost of drug therapy to consumers.
These comparisons at one point in time also fail to meaningfully measure producer revenue, since this depends on sales over a drug's entire economic life -- which is often shorter in the U.S. because of regulatory delays in launching drugs and the rapid post-patent entry of generics.
But let's ignore faulty methodology and suppose that regulation does lower some prices in other countries.
It does not follow that the U.S. should mimic such policies.
Price regulation has long-term effects not reflected in simple price comparisons -- on innovation, drug availability, and the health and well-being of consumers.
Regulation that calibrates U.S. prices to foreign prices or to production costs -- as proposed by President Clinton -- is bad economics and bad industrial policy.
It ignores the critical role of "common" costs in the cost structure of research-based drug firms.
The costs of R&D are largely fixed, regardless of whether one patient or millions of patients are served, and cannot rationally be allocated to specific patients.
Moreover, the costs of "dry holes" that never make it to market are real costs of producing a successful compound, yet they cannot be attributed to any single product, still less to a particular pack sold in a particular country.
Production, marketing and distribution also entail significant common costs that cannot be precisely allocated to particular products.
This cost structure means that price regulation geared to costs is inherently arbitrary but with a strong downward bias.
Regulators and other powerful buyers face an irresistible temptation to pay only their marginal costs, which are a tiny fraction of total costs, hoping others will cover the common costs.
Small countries can freeride indefinitely without significantly affecting global sales, and such free-riding may be legitimate for low-income countries.
But if large, affluent countries such as the U.S. play the same game, no one is left to cover the common costs of R&D.
U.S. price regulation would impose at least an eightfold larger reduction on global revenues for research-based drug companies than similar regulation in the U.K., and the impact on U.S.-based companies would be even larger, since their revenues come disproportionately from the U.S. market.
The global supply of innovative products and our pre-eminence within this market would both decline.
Regulating prices by reference to prices in other countries is equally misguided.
Uniform world-wide prices would mean that many consumers in low-income countries couldn't afford innovative therapies.
And while lowering prices in richer countries to levels that poorer ones could afford would initially benefit wealthy consumers, the flow of innovative drugs would decline, including many that these richer consumers would have been willing to pay for.
Everyone would lose.
So who should pay for the common costs?
Consumers who value the services most, according to well-established economic principles.
This logic is applied in other industries with significant common costs: peak users pay more for electricity; airline passengers with inflexible schedules pay more.
Since Americans have a higher demand for most "high-tech" therapies than consumers in most other countries, Americans should pay more than a pro-rata share of the common costs of developing them.
If we don't, we will be the greatest losers in the long run.
The current interest in drug-price comparisons and regulation grew out of concern over unaffordable out-of-pocket drug costs for the elderly.
This is an insurance problem that should be addressed by appropriate insurance, not by regulating drug prices.
Competitive drug management plans could control drug costs for the elderly as they do for the nonelderly.
Let us hope that this approach to the proposed new Medicare benefit is addressed at Rep. Waxman's hearings, scheduled for Tuesday.
Managed drug benefit programs use a range of strategies that resemble some used by foreign governments.
But when government applies these regulatory controls as a monopoly purchaser, consumers have nowhere else to go if they don't like the package.
Ms. Danzon is a health economist at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.
