Supermarket sales of cigarettes are going up in smoke.
Greater competition from convenience stores, along with manufacturers' price cuts, has helped turn cigarettes into one of the fastest-declining categories in supermarkets today.
Dollar sales of cartons of cigarettes declined 22.5% during the 13 weeks ended Jan. 2 from a year earlier, according to Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.
Sales of individual cigarette packs dropped 19.4%.
Supermarket sales of every major tobacco manufacturer declined sharply during the fourth quarter.
Sales of individual packs of all Philip Morris Cos.' brands, which include Marlboro and Virginia Slims, dropped 18.7%, while sales of No. 2 tobacco maker RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. dropped 25.2%.
Sales of such smaller rivals as Loews Corp.'s Lorillard unit and Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., a division of B.A.TT Industries PLC, declined 23% and 29.1%, respectively.
Falling cigarette prices account for part of the decline.
In May, Philip Morris cut prices of its premium brands by 20%, and other major tobacco manufacturers quickly followed.
But while dollar sales are declining more sharply, unit sales in supermarkets of cigarette cartons and individual packs dropped 15.9% and 10.5%, respectively.
Total tobacco consumption, meanwhile, is declining at a much slower rate, averaging 2% to 3% a year.
Marketers and retailers attribute declining supermarket sales largely to changing shopping habits.
Smokers nowadays are less inclined to stock up on cartons of cigarettes, which can cost more than $20 each.
They are increasingly likely to pick up a single pack, a segment of the business dominated by such quick-service outlets as convenience stores.
While those retail outlets have long catered to consumers more interested in saving time than getting a bargain, convenience stores have scrambled to attract penny-pinching shoppers with budget smokes during the recent economic slump.
Despite manufacturers' price cuts and declining tobacco consumption, cigarettes continue to account for an increasing percentage of total convenience stores sales, according to the National Association of Convenience Stores.
Tobacco accounted for 26.5% of industry sales in 1992, the most recent year for which data are available.
That compares with 24.9% of sales in 1991.
Many convenience stores have been actively courting smokers in recent years with a broad selection of budget brands and their own private-label smokes.
At Uni-Marts Inc., a chain of 437 convenience stores based in State College, Pa., sales of cigarettes "increased slightly" at the end of last year, according to Bill Llewellyn, director of marketing.
He cites the popularity of the chain's private-label cigarettes, which it began selling 15 months ago.
Called Sebring, the cigarettes now account for about 25% of Uni-Marts' total cigarette sales.
Many supermarkets, meanwhile, say they must increasingly lock cigarettes up or keep them behind the counter to prevent pilferage.
Smith's Food & Drug Centers Inc., a chain of 120 stores based in Salt Lake City, began locking up cigarettes about two years ago.
Since then, sales have declined steadily.
Ned E. Meara, grocery merchandising manager for Grand Union supermarkets in Wayne, N.J., says the decline in cigarette sales may have accelerated in the third and fourth quarters because supermarkets, typically have larger inventories than convenience stores, and couldn't pass along manufacturers' 1993 price cuts as quickly as their rivals.
"Convenience stores simply reacted more quickly to pass along the price cuts," he says.
The list of fastest-declining products in dollar sales, compiled exclusively for The Wall Street Journal, is based on scanner data gathered from supermarkets.
Each quarter, Chicago-based Information Resources ranks 323 categories with annual sales of at least $100 million by percentage change in dollar volume from the year-earlier period.
Consumers' health concerns cut into quarterly sales of chunky peanut butter.
Dollar sales of the spreads dropped 14.3%, and unit sales declined slightly more, partly because some calorie-conscious adults now slather a little less of the fat-laden spread on each sandwich.
Quarterly sales of powdered laundry detergents declined 15% partly because consumers are switching to newer superconcentrated liquid detergents.
Changing shopping habits, along with a long-term increase in the use of automatic dishwashers, cut into sales of regular dish detergents, which declined 12.7%.
13 weeks ended Jan. 2
Source: Information Resources Inc.
