In a victory for luxury-goods makers, the European Union's highest court said Cartier SA could limit guarantees on its watches to those purchased from its approved dealers.
The ruling also boosts other sectors such as auto makers in maintaining the integrity of their dealership systems in the EU, formerly the European Community.
The European Court of Justice said guarantees are integral to a selective distribution system for luxury goods.
Thus, it decided Cartier didn't violate EU competition law by refusing to honor guarantees on watches sold by a German retailer outside the dealership network, because the network itself didn't violate EU anti-trust rules.
Residential land prices in Japan fell in 1993, marking the third consecutive annual decline.
But the pace of the drop in cities slowed, Misawa Homes Co.'s research arm said.
For example, Tokyo area prices decreased 7.5% last Dec. 1, compared with a year-earlier 14.5% drop.
Prices still remain well above levels prior to a speculative surge in the late 1980s.
The commercial real estate supply increasingly exceeds demand, but residential prices have benefited from low interest rates in the past 2 1/2 years that encouraged purchases, especially by first-time buyers.
Attacks on foreigners in Germany last year dropped 42% to 1,322 from a year earlier, the government said in a preliminary report.
Overall, 1,814 violent attacks, such as by neo-Nazis, were registered, down 30% from 1992 but up 22% from 1991.
Deaths from extremist violence in 1993 declined to eight from the previous year's 17.
Though extremism has been blamed on rootless youths from the formerly Communist east, western German states had the most attacks reported in the wave of violence that began after reunification in October 1990.
Russia's liberalization of prices helped raise them to 30% of world levels at the end of last year from 13% a year earlier.
Government price controls and heavy subsidies had kept prices well below world market levels.
The report by the government's Working Center for Economic Reform used U.S. prices as a benchmark for world levels.
Russia's gradual lifting of many of its controls has allowed the market to adjust.
This has won praise from many economists but also has contributed to worrisome inflation in Russia.
SINGAPORE ECONOMY GROWS 9.8%
Singapore's gross domestic product expanded a preliminary 9.8% last year, a blistering pace compared with 5.8% growth in 1992.
The city-state's economic performance, one of the best in Asia, was driven by financial services and manufacturing.
Singapore's stock exchange rallied last year, the futures exchange posted record volumes and the foreign-exchange trading center is the world's fourth largest.
Manufacturing is dominated by computer peripherals and oil processing.
Electronics output grew at least 25% a quarter in the past year.
The Czech government drafted legislation to return confiscated Jewish property, such as synagogues and cemeteries, to the republic's Jewish community, which has shrunk to about 3,000 members from 118,000 before World War II.
Jewish leaders have complained of government indifference to their demands for the property seized by Nazi Germany and former Czechoslovakia's postwar Communist governments.
Nazi seizures began in 1939, and Czech restitution laws cover only the period from the 1948 takeover.
The government said it doesn't consider the bill, to be introduced in Parliament, as restitution.
China blocked construction of golf courses, horse-racing tracks and other luxury leisure projects that cater to increasingly conspicuous affluence.
In China's latest bid to curb frenzied development, the China Daily said the "four no's" campaign denies permits, planning licenses, land allocation and lending.
This indicated that a government moratorium last spring and a freeze on luxury-project lending in a financial clampdown last summer have failed to cool developers' ardor to cash in on newly lavish life styles scorned by Communist hard-liners.
Golf courses were allowed in the 1980s to woo foreign investors, but the government underestimated their allure; at least 20 are under construction.
The luxury-property boom also has been targeted in China's anti-corruption campaign.
Officials said many projects have been financed illegally from local government revenues.
China, citing an acute shortage of arable land and limited financial resources, said that "every inch of land should guarantee the interests of the state."
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa plans to appoint Hisako Takahashi, 66 years old, to the Supreme Court next month, making the former Labor Ministry official the first woman ever to serve on the 15-member court. . . .
A strike by Bangladesh's 8,000 government doctors crippled subsidized medical services, relied upon by most people in the country.
The physicians want increases in pay and health-care spending.
