President Clinton's budget proposal offers a big boost to legal services for the poor, but even the 25% increase sought by the president wouldn't restore the level of services the program provided in the late 1970s.
The Legal Services Corp., which distributes federal money to local poverty-law agencies, came under heavy fire during the 1980s.
Republican officials criticized legal-aid lawyers for crowding the dockets with class-action lawsuits and for supporting liberal causes such as public funding for abortion and gay rights.
The Reagan administration, though unsuccessful in efforts to eliminate the LSC altogether, substantially cut its budget.
Since 1982, local legal-aid programs have been able to replace some of the lost federal funds through foundation grants and assistance from the private bar.
But many of those outside funds have dried up during the recent recession, leaving many programs strapped once again.
"It helped cushion the blow, but it didn't make up for the loss," says Linda Perle, a lawyer for the Center for Law and Social Policy, an advocacy group for legal-aid societies.
The president and Hillary Rodham Clinton have long been advocates of improving legal services for the poor, and Mrs. Clinton herself was chairman of the LSC during the 1970s.
Last year, Congress increased the LSC budget by $43 million, after President Clinton requested $75 million in new funds.
But even if Congress approved the new Clinton proposal, which would raise the LSC's budget to $500 million, the program wouldn't have nearly the spending power it exercised more than 10 years ago.
"It will still only enable the program to reach a fraction of the people in need," said Douglas Eakeley, the recently appointed chairman of the LSC's board of directors.
Under the president's current proposal, the vast majority of the LSC's funding would be used for local legal-aid programs that typically assist people with eviction, divorce or consumer-fraud cases.
The proposal also includes significant funding for legal assistance to Native Americans and migrant farm workers and, for the first time, would directly allocate money to aid people in mental-health institutions.
But despite the funding increase, legal services' lawyers will continue to operate under restrictions enacted by Congress in the 1980 to remove such lawyers from advocacy roles in legislative matters and to bar them from handling abortion cases and certain matters involving illegal aliens.
The limits will continue unless Congress changes the law.
Prosecutors can't ask broadly for all computer files of a company under criminal investigation but must narrow the request to specific categories of documents using a "key word" search, a federal court has ruled.
The decision involved a grand jury subpoena in a securities trading investigation by federal prosecutors in New York involving an unidentified corporation.
(No further information, including the names of the lawyers on either side, was given in order to maintain grand jury secrecy.)
The subpoena requested the central processing unit, including the hard-disk drive, of any computer supplied by the company for the use of specific officers and employees and all computer-accessible data, including floppy diskettes.
But U.S. District Judge Michael B. Mukasey of New York agreed with the corporation that the request was too broad and would likely produce too many irrelevant documents in violation of the federal rules of criminal procedure.
The government, itself, had acknowledged that a narrower "key word" search would uncover the needed documents.
The judge added that if there was reason to suspect that certain documents were being withheld improperly, a courtappointed expert could search the hard drives and floppy disks.
"It is easier in the computer age to separate relevant from irrelevant documents," he wrote.
(In Re Grand Jury Subpoena Duces Tecum, U.S. District Court, Manhattan, No. 93-M-11-189)
Margaret A. Jacobs contributed to this article.
