In a move that will sharpen competition in the hot realm of emerging-markets mutual funds, the $131 billion fund company Vanguard Group is preparing to launch a cheaper version.
It's called an emerging-markets index fund, and it is sure to stir up the mutual-fund industry.
That's because Vanguard's new fund will undoubtedly cost far less to run than most of the existing funds trying to beat the markets in exotic countries from Argentina to Thailand.
As an index fund, Vanguard's new entry will scoop up a basket of stocks in fast-growing developing nations, then hold them.
It's a way to keep trading and expenses to a minimum.
Index funds buy the same stocks as those in a particular stock-market index and then simply hang on for the ride.
The Vanguard fund could prove popular.
Many investors believe that trying to beat stock markets is a losing game for all but a few money managers.
Asked about the new fund, which was disclosed by people with ties to the fund industry, Vanguard spokesman Brian Mattes said: "We have filed nothing along those lines whatsoever.
I cannot comment any further about future plans with respect to any fund offering."
But people in the fund industry expect the new fund will invest largely in stocks in the Morgan Stanley Capital International Emerging Markets Free Index.
Some look for a few additions, such as Singapore, which straddle the line between mature and developing markets.
The new fund offering will bring normally cautious Vanguard into speculative terrain.
Many investment advisers recommend that long-term portfolios hold a leavening of emerging markets.
But these markets are subject to wild zigzags in price.
Take Malaysia, one of the best stock markets in the world last year.
It has since become a "submerging" market, losing 15.1% in dollar terms in January, according to the Dow Jones World Stock Index.
As recently as last year, Vanguard executives talked about the risks of mutual funds in emerging markets.
If there's a panic and holders flee, fund managers can be forced to sell stocks indiscriminately, hurting the remaining fund shareholders.
Moreover, brokerage and trading costs tend to be much higher in emerging markets than in the U.S.
But transaction costs may turn out to be an advantage for an index fund, whose buy-and-hold strategy eliminates heavy trading.
U.S. investors have been pouring money into emerging markets.
In the nine months through September, U.S. investors bought $8 billion more than they sold of emerging-markets stocks and mutual funds, according to the Securities Industry Association.
This onslaught beat the prior full-year record of $5.6 billion, set in 1992.
Stock funds investing in broadly diversified emerging markets had a total return, including dividends, of 66.10% on average last year, according to Lipper Analytical Services, which tracks mutual-fund performance.
But the Morgan Stanley emerging-markets index did even better with a gain of 74.84% in 1993, beating seven of the 10 open-end funds with full-year records tracked by Lipper.
(The Lipper data don't include publicly traded or "closed end" funds.)
Fund groups are tripping over themselves introducing new funds.
Last year there were 39 registrations filed with regulators for open-end and closed-end emerging market mutual funds, according to Mutual Fund Advance, a Washington, D.C., newsletter and a unit of Dow Jones & Co., publisher of this newspaper.
Only 12 registrations were filed in 1992.
Almost all emerging-markets stock funds are "active" managers, meaning that they do research to try to pick better-than-average stocks.
Diversified emerging-markets funds (as opposed to regional, Asian or Latin American funds) tracked by Lipper last year cost $1.96 a year to run for every $100 in fund assets.
At the high end, Fidelity Emerging Markets charged $2.60 per $100 in assets -- almost double the $1.34 average for all diversified stock funds investing primarily in the U.S.
Investing overseas costs more than investing in the U.S.
But the forthcoming Vanguard fund will most likely cost considerably less than even the average U.S. stock fund to run.
The exact cost isn't known.
But it probably won't be as cheap as the 32 cents per $100 in assets charged by Vanguard's Pacific index fund.
Moreover, although the new fund probably won't impose a sales charge or load, it will likely charge a one-time "portfolio transaction fee" to new investors.
That fee isn't technically a load, as it doesn't go to Vanguard.
It gets paid to the fund itself, to compensate existing shareholders for the costs of buying stock in thinly traded markets.
Vanguard charges a 1% fee for its existing international index funds, and it's conceivable that the fee might be higher for the emerging-markets fund.
Some institutions already invest in exotic locales.
State Street Bank runs indexed emerging-market accounts for institutional investors, and it charges 50 cents per $100 in assets for those with at least $5 million to invest.
State Street has filed to bring out a quasi-index mutual fund for small investors, Seven Seas Emerging Markets.
But its performance will differ from index returns because the manager will try to pick the countries with the best outlooks, rather than investing in them by their weight in an index.
Dimensional Fund Advisers, a big index-fund manager, runs an emerging-markets fund for an institutional investor.
The fund stays out of certain emerging markets where trading appears to be rigged against foreign investors, says Rex Sinquefield, chief investment officer at DFA.
Without being specific, he said in some markets, "brokers are just waiting for the next victim. . . .
There are a lot of games that can be played at your expense."
Emerging-market stock funds had a great year last year, but many of them failed to beat the Morgan Stanley index, a common index of emerging markets.
Below, total returns, including price movements and dividends, for funds in existence during all of 1993.
Source: Lipper Analytical Services Inc.
