Frito-Lay just keeps raking in the chips.
The PepsiCo Inc. unit is piling up such massive winnings in the high-stakes salty-snacks game that one rival, Borden Inc., already has decided to fold.
Now some wonder how much more Anheuser-Busch Cos.'
Eagle Snacks unit is willing to lose.
Eagle has been selling chips, nuts and pretzels for 15 years but has yet to post a profit.
Its market share remains in the single digits, and some analysts think Eagle's best bet would be to buy Borden's snack business, which is on the block as part of a massive corporate restructuring.
Frito, meanwhile, continues to defy those who view category leaders as lumbering, vulnerable giants.
In the past year, Frito, in Dallas, has added more than four share points to its potato-chip business and two points to its tortilla-chip share -- gains virtually unparalleled in the food business.
Each share point in the $5 billion chips market means $50 million in sales.
Data collected by Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service from U.S. supermarkets, drugstores and mass merchandisers for the 52 weeks ended Jan. 2 show Frito-Lay with a 41% share of the $2.1 billion potato-chip business, up from 36% a year earlier.
That achievement is all the more impressive in that Frito's bags are the priciest on the shelf, according to InfoScan.
While Frito added share, Borden lost it, and Eagle stood still.
In tortilla chips, a category that grew 10% in the past year, Frito boosted its share to a whopping 67% as it approached $1 billion in sales.
Its brands include Doritos, Tostitos and Santitas.
Eagle, by contrast, managed to add only two-tenths of a share point.
Borden lost nearly a half point.
Frito also picked up 3.5 share points in the fast growing pretzel market.
Eagle's pretzel sales also have taken off, although the brand remains well behind private-label products.
In salted nuts, Eagle trailed RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.'s Planters brand, Procter & Gamble Co.'s Fisher Nuts and private-label nuts in the 52-week period.
Given such tough competition, what is Eagle's flight plan?
New products, continuing aggressive pricing and expanded distribution, says its president, Kevin Bowler.
He predicts that Eagle will add "about a half share point" this year, partly because the line will expand its presence in convenience stores, a big snacks venue.
By year's end, Mr. Bowler hopes that Eagle will finally be making money.
As for Borden's snack business, he acknowledges that Eagle has eyed it, but a senior Anheuser executive says any acquisition would likely be of production facilities rather than Borden's regional brands.
Eagle recently announced it will produce Old El Paso-brand tortilla chips, under a licensing arrangement with Pet Inc., which manufactures the nation's leading supermarket Mexican food line.
The accord between Pet and Anheuser, both of St. Louis, also calls for Eagle to market Old El Paso salsas and bean dips, a growing adjunct to the tortilla-chips business.
(Frito, meanwhile, is distributing Taco Bell salsas, using the name of PepsiCo's Mexican fast-food chain.)
Eagle's biggest disadvantage may be that, next to Anheuser's leading beer operations, snacks are a grain of salt.
Anheuser's 1993 sales totaled $11.5 billion, while Eagle's were an estimated $350 million, according to InfoScan.
The brewer doesn't disclose snack unit numbers.
While thirst-creating foods are seemingly a natural for a beverage company, Eagle Snacks rates only a brief mention in Anheuser's annual reports.
Eagle is distributed by beer truck drivers, but Eagle's "sales and distribution can only focus on limited objectives at one time," Mr. Bowler notes, in apparent admission of the unit's back-seat status.
Nowhere is the disparity between PepsiCo's and Anheuser's snack businesses more evident than in their advertising budgets.
In the first nine months of 1993, Frito spent $50.7 million on advertising, according to Competitive Media Reporting.
By comparison, Eagle shelled out almost nothing.
Similarly, in 1992, when Eagle spent $1.3 million, Frito committed $65.1 million to media advertising.
"Last year we did minimal advertising as we shifted more of our focus into trade promotion activity," Mr. Bowler says, alluding to the costly price war raging in the salty snacks aisle, where $1 off per bag isn't unusual.
Indeed, pricing data from InfoScan indicate that during the 12 weeks ended Jan. 2 -- a period when millions of consumers cozy up to the TV set and have holiday parties -- 63% of Frito's potato chips were sold at discount.
Eagle countered by selling 65% of its volume for less than full price, the InfoScan data show.
Even so, "The consumer still thinks we're more expensive than we are," Mr. Bowler says.
Eagle also "will continue to spend more money in trade to expand our space in stores because as we expand our line it doesn't make sense to advertise if we don't have the space."
Efforts to create "more top-of-mind awareness for the Eagle brand name" are under way, he adds, declining to divulge details.
Anheuser does limited cross-promotion with Eagle.
The chips made a Bud Bowl cameo appearance during the recent Super Bowl telecast.
Eagle also joined Pepsi arch-enemy Coca-Cola Co. for in-store game promotions.
As for the Tony Randall-Jack Klugman "Odd Couple" duo once featured in Eagle TV commercials, Mr. Bowler says both actors are on call for special appearances.
Frito-Lay Soars Above Eagle and mass-merchandise outlets during the 52 weeks ended Jan. 2
Source: Information Resources Inc.
