If you like growth stocks, you'll love General American Investors and Jundt Growth Fund.
These two publicly traded mutual funds have languished over the past two years as their growth-stock style of investing has fallen from favor.
For people who think growth stocks will bounce back, the two funds offer a cheap way to play a rebound, fund analysts say.
"I'm not normally a big fan of growth-stock investing," says David Tepper of Tepper Capital Management, a San Francisco investment adviser.
But he thinks General American and Jundt currently offer "the best value" among publicly traded funds, also known as closed-end funds.
These funds have two different values, the price of the fund's publicly traded shares, and the fund's net asset value, which is the value of the fund's portfolio expressed on a per-share basis.
Analysts typically advocate buying a fund when its shares are trading below the fund's net asset value.
That's the case right now with both Jundt and General American.
Jundt's shares closed yesterday in New York Stock Exchange composite trading at 14 1/2, up 1/8 but 7% below the $15.56 per-share portfolio value late Friday.
General American closed at 21 3/4 on the Big Board, up 3/8, an 11% discount to its $24.33 portfolio value.
"If you go with the thesis that growth has been beaten up pretty badly, then it makes sense to look at funds that are at discounts," says Catherine Gillis, editor of Morningstar Closed-End Funds, a Chicago newsletter.
"The cheaper you can get them, the less downside risk you'll have going forward."
Both funds have had lackluster returns recently.
General American, which was launched in 1927 and has one of the best closed-end-fund track records for the past 10 years, has gained just 1.2% for the two years through 1993.
Jundt, run by highly regarded Minneapolis stock picker James Jundt, was launched in late 1991, near the height of the market's enthusiasm for growth stocks.
But over the past two calendar years it has returned 0.7%, far behind the 18% gain for the Standard & Poor's 500.
Mr. Jundt believes his fund will benefit as investors shift away from economy-sensitive stocks, the market's leaders in recent years, and toward growth stocks.
"You've had two years of significant outperformance by cyclicals," Mr. Jundt says.
"As cyclical earnings start to plateau, the earnings at growth companies will look better and better."
Jundt may trade at a smaller discount than General American, but some analysts think it's equally attractive.
In both August 1992 and August 1993, the fund held tender offers, allowing investors to sell shares back to the fund for the shares' full portfolio value.
The tender offers are at the discretion of the fund's board.
But analysts believe that the annual share buybacks will continue.
"They've been extremely honorable about holding a tender offer once a year," says Mr. Tepper, the San Francisco investment adviser.
"And they've raised the prospect" of converting Jundt into a regular mutual fund.
If Jundt continues the tender offers or becomes a regular mutual fund, shareholders should come out ahead, because they will be able to cash in their shares at full value.
Thus, even if the fund's portfolio value stagnates in the months ahead, investors will at least make the difference between, say, a 14 1/2 share price and a $15.56 portfolio value.
Jundt is heavily invested in software, networking, cellular-telephone and retailing stocks.
Its biggest positions include Best Buy, Intel, Sybase and Britain's Vodafone Group.
Health-care stocks, usually a staple for growth-stock funds, account for less than 3% of assets.
General American's portfolio is quite different.
At year's end, fund manager William Gedale had 26% in health-care stocks.
At that time, the fund's two largest positions were retailers Home Depot and Wal-Mart Stores, which together accounted for 13% of fund assets.
"We're looking for a hurdle rate of at least 15% annual earnings growth in each of the companies we own," says Mr. Gedale.
"In the case of Home Depot, we're looking for 25% to 30% earnings growth.
With Wal-Mart, we're looking for 20% per annum."
So which fund should you purchase, General American or Jundt?
Morningstar's Ms. Gillis suggests buying both.
"You've got two large-cap growth funds where you don't have that much overlap at all," she says.
"You've got two quite different ways to play a rebound in large-cap growth stocks."
