FED ROULETTE: Who will fill the empty chairs at the central bank?
With two vacancies on the board of governors, White House economist Alan Blinder emerges as the most likely successor to David Mullins as vice chairman -- if he wants the job.
Mullins uses his old Arkansas ties to lobby for him.
But it isn't clear if Brookings economist George Perry, another contender, would accept any seat other than the vice chairmanship.
Moreover, naming Blinder would add to pressure on Clinton to name a woman or minority, rather than Perry, to the other vacancy.
With white men running the Fed's 12 regional banks, it looks for a woman or minority to fill an impending vacancy at the Boston Fed; contenders include the bank's first vice president, Cathy Minehan, and Treasury official Alicia Munnell.
Speculation grows that Reagan appointee John LaWare, 66, may retire from the Fed board; his term runs to 2002.
OPTIMISM GROWS about Somalia as the U.S. exit deadline nears.
After months of expecting a fall-of-Saigon-type debacle when U.S. forces pull out March 31, officials now report a series of encouraging signs.
Despite an increase in banditry, "we sense a major shift, one that suggests our policies may succeed after all," stated a recent confidential State Department cable.
Officials now see at least the possibility of a peaceful resolution of Somali clan conflicts, a new willingness to compromise on the part of warlord Aidid and elements of a rudimentary police force coming together.
The U.S. committee running Somalia policy, in an undisclosed policy move, has decided that U.S. diplomats should remain in Somalia and involved after March 31; to protect them, the U.S. may follow a precedent set in Beirut and hire mercenaries.
CLINTONITES FACE liberal complaints on the crime bill.
Crowing that they have already stolen the get-tough side of the debate from the Republicans, they still must maneuver past rebelling House liberals if they hope to get a bill for the president to sign by early spring.
This week's blast by ex-Justice official Heymann cuts both ways.
Clinton advisers say happily it sounds as if he is accusing Clinton of getting too tough on crime, a rap the president will gladly accept in the current climate.
But Heymann's complaints may complicate negotiations with the liberals, because he is expressing misgivings they share.
One possible Clinton advantage in the struggle with liberals: Polls show black public opinion is turning notably hawkish on crime.
DEMOCRATIC OPERATIVES expect the labor movement, gathering at the annual AFL-CIO convention this weekend in Florida, to freeze out the official Democratic congressional and Senate campaign committees this year in protest of Nafta.
Labor will still spend money directly on individual Democratic candidates it likes, and will give substantially to the campaign to pass Clinton's health plan.
DEFICIT HAWKS in the administration wince as Clinton, stumping for his health plan and against the balanced-budget amendment, vows not to touch Social Security or Medicare benefits.
They account for nearly one-third of federal outlays and few credible long-run deficit-reduction plans exempt them altogether.
HOLLYWOOD CONTINUES to take care of Democrats, despite Clinton's efforts to strike some distance.
Hollywood moguls gave the Democratic National Committee over $1 million in the second half of last year, with Disney Studios head Jeffrey Katzenberg, producer David Geffen and Steven Spielberg giving $100,000 each.
Barbra Streisand gave $25,000.
HELLO AGAIN: Clinton moves ahead with plans to reappoint two Federal Election Commission members to their third six-year terms, despite complaints from election-reform advocates that the agency needs a total overhaul.
Only one new person has joined the six-member panel since 1986.
THE BALANCED-BUDGET amendment faces tough prospects in the Senate.
Debate starts next week, and sponsor Simon, backed by almost half of Democrats and a nearly solid GOP bloc, rides a powerful wave of public support.
But chief opponent Byrd may use his clout and mastery of Senate rules to delay a final vote -- two-thirds approval is needed -- while undercutting backers with crippling amendments.
Several remaining undecideds, including Democrats Reid, Harkin, Mikulski and Sasser, serve on Byrd's Appropriations committee.
Meanwhile, moderate Republican Jeffords, an erstwhile Simon co-sponsor, now is "leaving his options open," a spokesman says; White House state-by-state figures assert the amendment would cost his Vermont constituents $418 million a year in benefits and services.
Perot's United We Stand America serves notice that it intends to focus hard on the balanced budget vote.
MINOR MEMOS: Common cause: Balanced-budget amendment foes tout support not only from former Watergate prosecutor Archibald Cox but from the man who fired him in the "Saturday Night Massacre," Robert Bork. . . .
Mother Teresa files a brief urging the Supreme Court to hear an appeal in a New Jersey abortion case. . . .
A direct-mail piece hawking Rush Limbaugh's newsletter proudly trumpets, "This envelope was not printed on recycled paper."
