On the eve of historic Italian parliamentary elections, outgoing Prime Minister Carlo Ciampi says the country has "moved away from the abyss of economic crisis," but he warns that the next government will have to tackle a long list of economic and institutional ailments if Italy is to proceed along its bumpy road to recovery.
In a rare interview, the former central bank chief said he will turn over the reins of power "with tranquil serenity" after elections this weekend.
But he leaves open the possibility of returning to power as a continuing caretaker prime minister if asked, something that might arise if no clear winner emerges in Sunday's voting.
The last polls conducted before the elections showed none of the three alliances with an absolute majority.
"What I see negatively is that the next legislature is already being discussed as a brief legislature," says Mr. Ciampi.
"It's like a sick patient that's passed from one doctor to another -- he changes position in the bed because he hopes to have relief, but instead he should face the illness."
When pressed about the conditions under which he would accept another mandate as the house physician, he smiles.
"Man proposes and God disposes," he says, with the wave of a hand.
Although the confusing Italian political picture makes his return only one of several scenarios, his good and relatively apolitical standing has prompted speculation that he may return as prime minister of another coalition government if given a strong mandate to continue his original goals.
But he plays down such speculation and argues that there are limits to a caretaker government.
"I hope the new legislature is one that lasts because only in that way can you face the economic, institutional and political themes well," he says.
Yet Mr. Ciampi doesn't shy away from discussing the most pressing issues for any new leader.
He lists the need for implementing further cuts to the country's massive public debt, nursing the nascent economic recovery while safeguarding employment, continuing the country's ambitious privatization program and proceeding with institutional reform.
"This government defined and began a lot of things, but I see a lot left to do," he says.
"Whatever government comes in, I see the necessity for a continuity of objectives.
The instruments can be modified but the objectives cannot be changed."
Called in last April by President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro as a crisis manager after an epic corruption scandal decimated Parliament, the 73-year-old Mr. Ciampi's mandate has been transitory from the start.
He was charged with overseeing Italy's new electoral law, drawing up a 1994 budget and finalizing a revolutionary wage accord before elections could be called under the new voting system.
In a look back over his brief term, Mr. Ciampi sees his government's role as that of "a ferryboat" leading Italy from its first postwar republic to a new democratic order.
Nevertheless he will be remembered for initiating several lasting measures.
In addition to jump-starting the country's long-stalled privatization program, Rome political watchers say Mr. Ciampi also changed the style of Italian government from that of a cozy political club to a more informal and open-door business atmosphere.
And while the rest of Italy's institutions were discredited by the corruption scandal, Mr. Ciampi gained the confidence of international financial markets, helping to boost credibility in the lira, allow a desperately needed drop in interest rates, and stave off another currency crisis.
Observers say Mr. Ciampi's brief mandate and tenuous political support hampered his ability to make even greater budget cuts or further structural reform.
"He faced a hostile Parliament in approving the 1994 budget, and there were several times the four-party coalition would have loved to sink him," says one Rome observer.
Indeed, his term was marked by a series of potential land mines, including a rash of Mafia-led bombings in Rome, Florence and Milan, serious labor unrest, a deeper recession than anticipated and a discredited parliamentary majority fighting against reform.
"The past year was very difficult and it could've gone very badly," says Stefano Micossi, chief economist at Confindustria, Italy's industrialists association.
"The fact that we managed to get through it was an impressive political result."
Mr. Ciampi's first contribution was to restore international investor confidence in the economy after a severe economic crisis forced Italy out of the European Monetary System in 1992.
Austerity budgets by Mr. Ciampi and former Prime Minister Giuliano Amato have begun the painful process of reversing Italy's dangerous spiral of debt, which now amounts to about 114% of gross domestic product.
GDP is the total value of goods and services produced in a nation.
In 1993, Italy reduced its annual budget deficit in nominal terms to 153 billion lire ($91.95 billion, according to yesterday's currency-exchange rate), or just under 10% of GDP, for the first time in more than a decade.
As a result, interest rates have eased in line with other European rate cuts to 7.5% from 12.5% in April 1993.
Inflation, despite a 30% devaluation of the lira in autumn of 1992, has fallen to 4.2% from 5.3% a year ago.
Meanwhile, exports have surged on the back of the devaluation, giving Italy a net trade surplus of 13 trillion lire in 1993 and helping lead it out of recession.
If the current deficit-cutting trend is sustained, economists say the country should be able to reverse the public debt ratio by 1995 or 1996.
But economists warn that markets forgave the moderate cuts in Mr. Ciampi's 1994 budget due to the recession but that further cuts will be necessary in 1995.
"The budget was not as ambitious this year as perhaps markets would have liked, but I don't think Ciampi could have done better because of the recession," says Carmen Nuzzo, Italy economist at Salomon Brothers in London.
"Now the real test will come with the budget in 1995."
The prime minister has come under fire recently for a 10 trillion lire to 16 trillion lire budget shortfall in 1994 that will have to be corrected by the incoming government if interest rates don't fall further.
Also, some analysts have criticized costly restructuring agreements that the government recently negotiated with Fiat SpA and state steel group Ilva SpA, which will aggravate public finances.
Of 4.2 trillion lire budgeted to combat unemployment between 1994 and 1996, some 2.7 trillion lire already has been allocated to finance early retirements.
Others are disappointed that Mr. Ciampi was unable to begin reform of the country's bloated pension bill, which has climbed to nearly 15% of GDP.
Mr. Ciampi argues that the budget shortfall is due to a more severe recession last year than originally forecast when the plan was drawn up last September.
Any tougher cuts or higher taxes, he argues, could have jeopardized Italy's fragile economic recovery.
"No doubt, without recession, we could have made more incisive cuts," he says.
"But in a period of recession, when other countries normally increase the deficit, we continued going ahead with cuts and reduction of the deficit while taking into account the minimum hopes of an economic recovery."
As for the restructuring agreements, Mr. Ciampi argues that agreements at both Fiat and Ilva went beyond costly subsidization of layoffs and provided incentives for retraining and reinvestment.
"If we hadn't signed the agreements, we would have had clashes in the streets, it was a very dangerous situation," he says.
He notes that unlike in France, Germany and Spain, Italy has had no serious labor riots as it faces restructuring and unemployment climbs to over 11% from 9.7% a year earlier.
"We knew from the start that our horizons were limited," he says.
"But I like to think we operated looking beyond the horizon to the long term."
