Bending some previously rigid rules, big companies are offering more employees flexible work schedules.
Flexible schedules have long been used by managers to retain highly prized employees who might otherwise leave, says Rodgers & Associates, a unit of Work/Family Directions Inc., Boston.
But now, some of the country's major corporations are conducting experiments in flexibility on hundreds of workers with all kinds of abilities and needs.
The companies are pushing flexible work arrangements down through the ranks as a kind of shock treatment for stressed-out workers.
Their goal is not simply to satisfy employees' wishes but also to raise output.
"The work force today is screaming for flexibility," says Robert Lambert, executive vice president, human resources, for Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc.
"If you can help employees meet their outside responsibilities, you're going to have a more productive, more turned-on and more energized work force."
At Xerox Corp., tough productivity objectives led managers to look at what Wendy Starr, manager of life-cycle programs and policies, calls "radical measures" to improve output.
"We're not trying to make everybody feel good" by promoting flexible schedules, she says.
"The result needs to be a recognition that flexibility is a business tool."
Jim Edwards, one of the managers Xerox chose to test the limits of flexibility, used shock treatment to get the experiment rolling at his unit.
Known for his motto "WMB" -- for "We Mean Business" -- Mr. Edwards, the tough-talking controller of Xerox's administrative center in Dallas, had long banned flexible schedules in favor of an 8-to-5 regimen.
But last February, Mr. Edwards stepped to the podium at an annual employee meeting and dropped a bomb.
Starting right away, he told 300 assembled workers, employees could set their own hours.
"This is high risk to me," he told his stunned subordinates.
"But I am willing to take that risk."
Mr. Edwards says his surprise announcement was a "nice icebreaker" to start a needed "cultural change" in motion.
Workers in his division, which has a high proportion of single parents and dual-career couples with child-care and family problems, felt stressed by rigid schedules, according to interviews by Ford Foundation-funded researchers who are studying the Dallas experiment.
But while managers in the division had adopted corporate policies encouraging flexibility, employees hesitated to use them.
Many thought their bosses didn't approve of unusual schedules and felt they had to hide personal and family conflicts at work, the researchers found.
"There wasn't a trust level there," Mr. Edwards says.
"I decided I had to do something really dramatic."
After the speech, the whole unit experienced a kind of whiplash, with nearly half the employees choosing new starting times or compressed workweeks.
Reeling from the changes, middle managers started meeting weekly to share problems and solutions.
"We all felt uneasy," says Jill Allen, a Xerox customer-service manager.
"We were stepping out into the realm of the totally unknown."
But 10 months into the experiment, employees continue to cover their jobs without missing a beat, Mr. Edwards says.
Absences have fallen by one-third.
Teamwork has improved, and worker surveys show that morale has risen.
Follow-up interviews by the Ford Foundation team show "employees feel they have more control over their work and . . . are dealing better with their customers," says Lottye Bailyn, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology management professor who is heading the research.
Xerox is planning to apply what it is learning in Dallas at its Stamford, Conn., headquarters.
The new generation of experiments reflects interest in flexibility as a way to improve teamwork.
At Chicago's Harris Bank, executives first saw the link between productivity and work schedules in a 1991 employee survey ranking "more flexibility to get their jobs done" as workers' No. 1 desire.
"This was a big `Aha!' for senior management," says Kimetha Walther Firpo, work and life program coordinator at Harris.
Employees "weren't saying, `Cut back my hours.'
They were saying they wanted more flexibility to work."
In August, the bank set a sweeping new alternative-scheduling policy with 11 business goals, including improving productivity and reducing costs.
Many employees have seen the connection.
In one instance, four collectors in the bank's credit-card division created a schedule that combined 11-hour and four-hour workdays.
By splitting responsibility for the evening hours that no one wanted, they allowed each to fashion a schedule that was best for them.
The result has been increased coverage of early-evening hours, prime time for collections.
Employees "feel very committed to getting results so they can maintain the schedules that are workable for them," says Minerva Solano, a Harris Bank collection manager.
Flexibility isn't for everybody.
Many companies have tried compressed work weeks, only to have employees rebel upon realizing that 10-hour or 12-hour work days are just too long.
Others have ditched work-at-home setups because employees couldn't work unsupervised or missed their co-workers at the office.
Still others find employees can't work together well enough to coordinate flexible schedules.
But among those employers trying flexibility, some cite sharp gains.
To extend service hours, Stride Rite Corp. put the customer-service unit of its Sperry Topsider division on flexible schedules.
The result: Nearly 30 hours have been added to the unit's standard 40-hour work week; but because employees are stretched thinner during certain periods and can complete clerical tasks faster in the newly added evening hours, costs have increased only about 3%.
"What we're seeing is that if you allow people to have control over their schedule, productivity shoots way up," says Karen Leibold, Stride Rite's director of work/family programs.
Giving employees more flexibility also can heal morale after restructuring.
After employees of GTE Corp.'s telephone-operations division underwent consolidation of seven units around the country into one in Dallas, employees pressed for greater flexibility.
Startled by focus-group findings that 61% of participants had looked for other jobs that offered more flexibility, GTE began studying ways to build employee commitment and loyalty, says Richard Esquivel, assistant vice president, labor and employee relations.
Within a few months last year, 120 employees plunged into a work-at-home experiment that grew to part-time work and job sharing.
The pilot has expanded, and GTE managers are "constantly astounded at the creativity that employees bring to bear" to make nontraditional arrangements work, says Joe Hearn, a group product manager.
One woman who is sharing a product-management job volunteered to fill in for her partner when the latter goes on maternity leave, saving their boss the trouble of finding a backup.
Though the job sharers' boss, Carlton Baker, says he probably wouldn't have thought of the idea himself, he is so pleased with the initiative the women have shown that "I have turned 100% responsibility over to them."
GTE expects to expand the pilot to another 200 people at its Stamford, Conn., headquarters.
