Microsoft Corp. reiterated that it expects to ship its long-awaited Chicago operating system, a successor to the latest version of Windows, by the end of 1994, and said the program will get a face lift to make it easier for first-time personal-computer users to operate.
Paul Maritz, a Microsoft senior vice president, also told reporters that a new version of its Windows NT operating system, code-named Daytona, will ship by the end of the second quarter.
The update is designed to fix current deficiencies in Windows NT, in particular the amount of memory required to run the program.
In general, Daytona can operate in about four fewer megabytes of memory; since a current minimum configuration is 16 megabytes, Daytona would allow some applications to work with 12 megabytes.
Mr. Maritz said a test version of Chicago would go out to software developers by the end of March.
A much broader test would begin toward the end of the second quarter.
The company expects to ship as many as 100,000 test copies of the program, compared with around 10,000 for past operating systems, because of the need to ensure strict compatibility with an installed base of Windows operating-system users that now exceeds 40 million.
"We're pretty confident that we can still do that by the end of 1994," said Mr. Maritz, at a news conference held at a Microsoft-sponsored gathering here of computer-hardware developers.
Chicago is Microsoft's code name for a new operating system that will succeed Windows 3.1, the current version of the popular interface program that made IBM-compatible PCs easier to operate.
Chicago brings benefits that include multitasking, which is the ability to do multiple tasks at once, such as printing one file while creating another.
The new product, nearly four years in the making, is expected to have a major impact on Microsoft's business.
Analysts estimate the company could generate $1 billion in revenue from Chicago in its first 12 months on the market.
"It's a major, major endeavor for us," Mr. Maritz said.
He said the new interface for Chicago will allow users to discover how to perform simple tasks without ever using a manual, an asset as the company attempts to broaden its penetration in the home PC market.
In tests, Microsoft, based in Redmond, Wash., found that even familiar functions, such as activating programs by clicking twice on a symbol with a mouse pointing device, were beyond many consumers.
The new interface will use a single mouse click to activate programs, and add other features to help users with multitasking.
It will also add snazzier graphics, Microsoft officials said, though the exact appearance won't be set until after user tests.
While attracting new users, Microsoft doesn't want to alienate those hooked on today's Windows system.
For people who are upgrading from the current Windows 3.1 to Chicago, the new operating system can be set to offer a familiar configuration of features, including the Windows Program Manager and File Manager.
That way, corporate customers can plan when they want to move over to the new interface.
New computers that are targeted at first-time users will be arranged to default to the new interface, Mr. Maritz said.
Chicago is designed to operate on computers that have at least the power of a 386 microprocessor chip and four megabytes of memory.
On such a machine, Microsoft said, existing Windows application programs will run at least as fast or faster when users convert to Chicago.
For machines with more memory, Chicago's performance will be significantly better than Windows NT, the company said.
Chicago is also designed to make PCs easier to set up, with the addition of circuit boards and other accessories.
As part of an industry initiative called Plug and Play, Chicago will help make it possible for a PC to sense new add-on devices and automatically reconfigure itself to work with them, the company said.
Compaq Computer Corp., for example, showed a prototype notebook computer that plugged into a docking device to use typical peripheral devices.
As a result of Plug and Play features, the computer automatically stored files when a user removed the computer from the docking unit.
