MORE STATES consider tax cuts as economic growth lifts revenues.
At least 20 states are seriously considering tax cuts, says Steven D. Gold of the Center for the Study of the States in Albany, N.Y.
That is the largest number since 1985.
"The stronger economy clearly is easing state budget pressures," Gold says.
A few states, notably New Jersey, may cut individual income taxes sharply.
But most states' reductions "won't be large enough to make a significant difference in people's take-home pay," he predicts.
State tax revenues rose 6.1% in 1993's second half from a year earlier, a report by the center says.
Those gains came primarily from stronger economic growth.
Rocky Mountain states, especially Wyoming, posted the biggest increases.
Mississippi, helped by a "casino-related boom," also enjoyed strong growth, Gold says.
But a Merrill Lynch report warns that California, struggling to emerge from a deep recession, still faces "severe" problems.
"California has a tax climate that is hostile to both businesses and individuals," says Donald Straszheim, Merrill Lynch's chief economist.
CONNECTICUT TRIES to fix a bizarre tax-law quirk.
It may sound like a joke.
Indeed, some people refer to it as the "Monty Python's Flying Circus Tax Law."
But the people affected aren't laughing.
They are victims of a Connecticut tax-law provision that penalizes some people whose only vice is earning an extra $1.
For example, a single person with taxable income of $48,001 owes the state $217 more in taxes than someone with $48,000, says John R. Shaughnessy Jr., a lawyer at Robinson & Cole in Hartford.
Upper-income taxpayers may face an even bigger hit.
A married couple filing jointly with taxable income of $96,001 owes $433 more in taxes than a couple with $96,000, Shaughnessy says.
Gov. Weicker has proposed changes in exemptions and credits to fix these income-tax "cliffs," which have existed since 1991.
But these changes wouldn't be effective until 1995.
A Weicker aide says chances of passage are "very good," but the outlook is cloudy because "this is a political year."
ANXIETY GROWS over lack of IRS guidance on unclear tax-law provisions.
Treasury and IRS officials struggle to answer many questions about fuzzy provisions of the 1993 tax law and other issues.
Under the new law, for example, companies no longer may deduct many lobbying expenses.
But the law doesn't define lobbying.
Be patient, Treasury officials say.
Yesterday, they released a list of about 135 separate issues -- including lobbying -- they expect to have answers on by year end.
The new law also eliminated business deductions for club dues, effective Jan. 1 of this year.
Several tax experts think this provision may exclude some clubs, such as Rotary and Kiwanis, but they aren't sure if the IRS will agree.
"Frustration is building up over the lack of interpretative regulations," says Donald Alexander, a lawyer at Akin Gump in Washington and a former IRS commissioner.
"They are badly needed."
Don't blame the Treasury, some lawyers say.
The real problem, says Mary B. Hevener of McDermott, Will & Emery in Washington, is tax laws that are "confusingly drafted."
FIXING A PROBLEM everyone would love to have: The IRS widens a box on its 1994 W-2 form, after a complaint that there wasn't enough room on the 1993 form to type in wages of nine digits.
THE IRS AUDITED only 0.96% of all individual, corporate, estate, gift, partnership and fiduciary tax returns in the year ended Sept. 30.
That was about the same as 0.95% in 1992 but down from 1.03% in 1988.
`NAIL TAX COMES UNGLUED,' says a newsletter of the Federation of Tax Administrators and Multistate Tax Commission.
That refers to a ruling that New York can't impose a sales tax on the service of attaching and maintaining artificial nails.
LAWYERS LOSE another round in their bid to hide the identity of some clients.
The IRS says the law and several court cases require lawyers to divulge the name of any client who pays them more than $10,000 in cash in one transaction, or in two or more related transactions.
Unfair, some lawyers retort.
They say disclosure would violate attorney-client privilege.
They want the IRS to reverse a recent decision to impose big penalties on lawyers who don't obey.
But another court rules against the lawyers.
The U.S. Appeals Court for the Sixth Circuit rejects a bid by Robert W. Ritchie of Knoxville, Tenn., to shield the identity of three clients.
Even so, some lawyers hope the IRS will allow nondisclosure under certain circumstances.
"I'm hopeful" that the IRS and lawyers can reach a compromise, says Gerald B. Lefcourt of Lefcourt & Dratel in New York.
Reps. Kopetski (D., Ore.) and McCollum (R., Fla.) write the IRS to express their concern about imposing penalties.
BRIEFS: The IRS received 29.2 million individual tax returns as of Feb. 18, 5.5% less than in the year-earlier period. . . .
For 1990, of the 834,957 individual income-tax returns with adjusted gross income of $200,000 or more, 1,219 had no U.S. income-tax liability, the IRS says.
That is up from 1,081 returns in 1989. . . .
Humor columnist Dave Barry offers two rewards to readers who mail him the best tax tips: "A handsome mention" of their names in his column -- and "a chance to be audited for life."
