Federal prosecutors have decided to seek criminal charges against a U.S. unit of Britain's Lucas Industries PLC for selling the Pentagon allegedly defective missile hardware that failed during the Persian Gulf War, according to industry and law-enforcement officials.
The British aerospace and industrial giant also is the target of a separate criminal investigation, these persons said, focusing on allegations its U.S. operations sold the Army thousands of substandard hand-held radios over the years.
The Justice Department investigations, in which prosecutors are believed to be seeking well over $20 million in penalties from Lucas, threaten to derail the company's drive to snare more Pentagon business.
More broadly, the probes underscore a growing problem facing major U.S. and foreign defense companies as the industry consolidates.
Lucas acquired both of the businesses now under investigation in the late 1980s, with many of the questionable production procedures already in place.
With mergers and acquisitions among defense firms accelerating, surviving companies increasingly are likely to inherit potential legal liabilities like those confronting Lucas.
Robert Cohen, a New York lawyer representing Lucas, declined to comment, as did Justice Department spokesmen.
But others familiar with the matter said that in the next few weeks, Lucas will have to decide whether to plead guilty under a plea bargain or face the prospect of being indicted on fraud and other charges.
Lucas Aul Inc., Garden City, N.Y., makes classified missile devices -- called launch electronic units -- that pilots rely on to fire missiles.
The Brooklyn U.S. Attorney's office, according to these persons, recently told defense lawyers that prosecutors intend to seek false testing charges against the subsidiary for shipping allegedly faulty or inoperative devices used for Maverick air-to-ground missiles carried by Air Force A-10 jets.
The criminal probe was sparked more than two years ago by suspicions that faulty launch units were responsible for an incident in which a Maverick missile fired by an A-10 pilot mistakenly killed seven Marines on the Kuwati-Saudi Arabian border during the 1991 war with Iraq.
Those initial allegations linking the launch units to the deadliest such "friendly fire" incident of the Persian Gulf conflict haven't been substantiated, law-enforcement and industry officials said.
Nevertheless, prosecutors and Pentagon criminal agents soon discovered that some of the Lucas devices didn't operate properly.
According to one official, some units didn't operate at all when pilots pushed the fire button, and investigators uncovered allegedly widespread testing irregularities at the New York plant.
The investigation was first reported in the Long Island newspaper Newsday in August 1992, after federal agents raided Lucas Aul's facilities, but the Justice Department's decision to proceed with charges hadn't been known.
The separate investigation involving communications gear supplied by Lucas, which neither the company nor the government has disclosed, isn't believed to be as far along.
In that case, federal prosecutors contend that a Hazleton, Pa., firm whose radio business Lucas acquired in 1989 systematically used smaller amounts of corrosion-resistant gold or other precious metals than required in assembling military radios.
With world-wide revenue of nearly $5 billion, Lucas has increased its U.S. aerospace sales more than 10-fold since 1987 largely through a strategy of acquiring smaller outfits.
Lucas Aul and other units are important subcontractors in various missile and communications programs for the Navy and the Army.
The probes could result in some parts of the company being barred from receiving additional government contracts.
