General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers reached a tentative settlement to end a strike at GM's Shreveport, La., pickup-truck plant that was called to protest the auto maker's effort to boost productivity.
But the Shreveport settlement doesn't necessarily mean an end to GM's latest round of labor troubles.
UAW Vice President Stephen P. Yokich, the union's top bargainer at GM, said last week that once the Shreveport strike was settled, he would turn up pressure on GM's parts operations to back away from their demands to get more output with fewer workers.
GM wouldn't release details of the settlement, reached at 1:45 a.m.
The UAW local that represents about 2,300 workers at Shreveport had called the walkout last Tuesday to protest GM's move to boost production of compact Chevrolet S-10 and GMC Sonoma pickups.
Workers now are expected to return to their jobs tomorrow, after a ratification vote scheduled for today.
All of GM's U.S. plants are shut today in observance of Martin Luther King's birthday.
The terms of the Shreveport settlement promise to be a benchmark for GM in future disputes with the UAW over productivity.
And many such disputes are likely as President John F. Smith Jr. pushes to make North American operations profitable this year.
GM spends nearly $800 more to assemble a vehicle than rival Ford Motor Co., according to a study by the consulting firm Harbour & Associates.
Mr. Smith has vowed to close that gap by 1996.
As GM's U.S. factories get new, better-designed products during the next two to three years, such as the redesigned S-10 pickups built at Shreveport, local managers are expected to use the model change to make big strides toward matching Ford productivity levels.
But UAW leaders said the Shreveport strike was a warning to GM not to push too far too fast with plant-level efforts to speed production while simultaneously trimming the hourly work force.
A GM spokeswoman wouldn't say yesterday whether GM agreed to hire more workers or slow the production speed as part of the Shreveport agreement.
But she insisted the agreement "allows us to be more efficient and produce the volume of trucks we need."
Analysts had estimated that the Shreveport strike would cost GM about $2 million to $3 million a day in lost production, or about $8 million to $10 million for the duration of the walkout.
But the costs could be greater if the UAW decides to shut down a parts plant.
A strike at a key parts factory could quickly idle several assembly plants.
The potential for conflict over productivity in GM's parts operations has loomed greater in recent weeks since J.T. Battenberg III, the group vice president in charge of GM's Automotive Components Group Worldwide, began bluntly and publicly stating that roughly 20% of GM's remaining U.S. parts operations could face shutdown or sale if they don't achieve competitive profit and productivity targets by the end of this year.
Managers at GM parts plants have angered UAW leaders by pushing hard to get productivity concessions in local contract talks.
Mr. Yokich himself unleashed an angry tirade at Mr. Smith last month during the signing ceremony for the UAW-GM national agreement, in part to vent his displeasure with management bargaining tactics at a big GM parts operation in Sandusky, Ohio.
