I think it was Prince who said, "Two thousand-zero-zero, party over, whoops, out of time."
Just six years away from the big 2000, and already everyone's a little nervous.
Photo editors are scurrying around, trying to line up the images for that special year-end issue -- great moments of the millennium in pictures: the Magna Carta, the Black Death, the French Revolution, Chubby Checker invents the Twist.
If "Ancient Prophecies" (NBC, Tuesday, 8-10 p.m. EST) is correct, the whole thing is moot, because we'll all be chewing dust by then anyway.
If you revel in doomsday millenarianism and strange, inexplicable coincidences, if you believe that the Virgin Mary may have visited your toolbox, if the thought that your birthday divided by two equals 666 sends chills down your spine, then this is the program for you.
One of the great assemblies of wackos, mystics, oddballs and assorted spooky mumblers, "Ancient Prophecies" is as much fun as you can have contemplating the end of humanity.
Right from the start, it's clear that "Ancient Prophecies" is a breed of program apart, coming equipped as it does with a whole primer of explanations on how to interpret the footage you'll see -- a compendium of precredit instructions that indicates just how nervous this two-hour special makes even NBC, with its penchant for magically exploding GM trucks: "The following is not a news program or a documentary," reads the screen as the music churns ominously.
"The people appearing on camera are not necessarily experts. . . .
Although significant opposing viewpoints exist, they are not included. . . .
Some predictions by the same sources, though not mentioned, have proven inaccurate. . . .
It is not the intent of the broadcasters to suggest that any prophecies are true. . . ."
Now let's see just how sensational we can get!
The program starts, as all such programs must, at the Great Pyramids on the plains of Giza.
Pacing through hallways of stone, our host, David McCallum ("The Man From U.N.C.L.E."), leans solemnly toward the camera and intones: "Embedded within the pyramid's interior passageways and chambers may be a timeline for telling the future."
According to this calendar of stone, if one were to measure the length of the halls of the Pyramid of Khufu, with each inch corresponding to one year, the entire history of humankind would be mapped out, with all the notable events: the birth of Christ, World War II.
And at the year 2000, in May, there's a huge gaping pit.
You can take that any way you want.
Next stop is the south of France, and Michel de Notredame . . . the prophet Nostradamus.
Peering into his black mirror, Nostradamus was able to predict (in coded quatrains that might mean just about anything) the rise of Napolean, the triumph of Hitler, the death of JFK and the landing on the moon, although he also picked Buffalo in the '93 Super Bowl.
One other tidbit from Nostradamus and his followers: Feb. 4, 1962, is the birthdate of the Antichrist, who is currently living among us.
He'll make himself known in 1995, and lead the world into "a war of unspeakable horrors," which should wipe out the planet by . . .
May of the year 2000.
You read it here first.
A few pit stops for Edgar Cayce and Elizabeth Clare Prophet bring us up to present-day America, and Gordon-Michael Scallion, who reads the future not in a black mirror but on the monitor of his word processor.
Staring into the screen he sees visions of "Cataclysmic disasters -- simultaneous tornadoes, earthquakes, hurricanes and volcanic eruptions, all exploding across the planet in the years leading up to the millennium."
Mr. Scallion must have the model with one of those new Pentium chips, because my old 386 machine can barely run the new WordPerfect.
Still, he claims he predicted Hurricane Andrew and the eruption of Mount Pinatubo, and now he's got a map of the future U.S.
One hint: Don't buy any real estate west of Nebraska unless you've got a snorkel.
The great thing about this wonderfully cracked program is that it tackles the big questions -- the really big questions.
And for disaster specialists, it's a thrill a minute, laying out a catalog of calamities: dictators, nuclear bombs, plagues, armies of genetically mutated killers, even the greenhouse effect.
The prophets here find signs everywhere that the planet is falling apart, but never in the same places I do -- like the way the judges shafted Torvill and Dean.
The end of the world has been coming for a long time, but if the portentous year 2000 makes you nervous, as it does so many of the visionaries of "Ancient Prophecies," I do have one piece of advice: On the Jewish calendar, it will register as a pleasingly asymmetrical 5761.
Meanwhile, the sad truth is that it's easier to watch the final fiery days of the apocalypse on the delightfully catastrophic "Ancient Prophecies" than to sit through 50 minutes of reality from Bosnia in "Sarajevo: The Living and the Dead" (PBS, Tuesday, 9-10 p.m. EST; check local listings).
Scarier than future global devastation is this intimate look at the way a handful of ordinary people -- a newlywed couple, a teenager, a nurse -- go about their day-to-day lives while snipers try to pick them off on the street.
Radovan Tadic's documentary is muted and uninflected: There's no heavy breathing here, just the numbing routine of lives under siege in winter with no water, no heat.
Although it occasionally rambles, Mr. Tadic's film is a powerful testament to the way people strive for normality even under the most dehumanizing of circumstances -- the way a woman crossing an open intersection holds up her pocketbook in front of her head, as if that offers protection from a fragmentation bullet . . . or the way a doctor delivers a baby as he tries to complete an amputation.
"Can you see the miracle?" asks the surgeon.
"In the midst of all this death, a life is born . . .
Life demands the right to survive this hell."
On the streets of Sarajevo, apocalypses come and go.
