Paramount Communications Inc. attempted to tighten the bidding rules in its takeover contest to prevent QVC Network Inc. and Viacom Inc. from changing their bids after Feb. 1.
Paramount also proposed rule changes aimed at reducing the chances of last-minute gamesmanship that could confuse investors or needlessly prolong the fourmonth contest.
The entertainment giant took the steps after being criticized by some traders as having adopted a laissez-faire attitude in refereeing the contest.
The criticism followed a restructured bid by Viacom a week ago that boosted the amount of cash being offered while leaving the bid's total value largely unchanged.
Both bidders are offering cash for 50.1% of Paramount and securities for the remaining 49.9%.
Partly because Viacom announced its revised $9.3 billion offer late Friday amid speculation of a much higher bid, and because complete terms of the Viacom offer weren't disseminated immediately, QVC lost the chance to gain 51% of Paramount stock and close out the contest, despite its higher offer, now valued at $10 billion.
Paramount said it was only "clarifying or refining" bidders' existing obligations rather than making outright changes.
It asked the bidders to file any changes in their offers with the Securities and Exchange Commission by 5 p.m. on the day their offers would otherwise expire.
And it said each bidder should be barred from changing its offer of securities for a minority of Paramount shares primarily to force its opponent to extend its offer.
In declaring that the bidders can't change their offers after Feb. 1, Paramount was addressing an ambiguity that might have allowed Viacom or QVC to change the securities being offered for a minority of Paramount's stock, known as the "back end," up until Feb. 7.
Because new offers must be kept open for 10 business days and the contest is supposed to end Feb. 14, Paramount has said that the deadline for "highest and final" bids is Feb. 1.
But securities laws allow changes in the securities being offered for a minority of shares to remain open for only five days, which might have left the door open for changes in the first week of February.
Spokesmen for QVC and Viacom said they weren't yet aware of the proposed bidding-rule changes and couldn't comment.
