In a move that elated independent inventors, the Commerce Department said the U.S. is pulling back from international negotiations aimed at bringing the world's patent laws into harmony.
The negotiations, which began nearly a decade ago, were aimed at moving the U.S. from its current "first-to-invent" system to the "first-to-file" method used by most other countries.
Under first-to-invent, patents are awarded to the person who first invents a product rather than to the inventor who first files for patent protection.
Many independent inventors feared that such a switch would put them at a disadvantage to big corporations that have the financial resources to file countless patent applications.
This in turn would hinder innovation and threaten a 200-year-old U.S. tradition of patent protection, inventors say.
The U.S. adopted the first-to-invent system during George Washington's presidency.
But yesterday, Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown said that the U.S. "would not seek to resume negotiations of a treaty harmonizing the world's patent laws at this time."
Mr. Brown held out the possibility that the U.S. would resume the talks at a later date.
"We will maintain the first-to-invent system while keeping open the option of full patent harmonization," he said.
Herbert Wamsley, executive director of Intellectual Property Owners Inc., a trade association in Washington, D.C., interpreted yesterday's decision as a "clarification" to U.S. trading partners that they would have to make concessions to the U.S. on a variety of demands.
He contended that first-to-file will inevitably be adopted.
But Raymond Damadian, president of Fonar Corp. in Melville, N.Y., and the inventor of magnetic-resonance imaging, said the announcement was "absolutely critical" in preserving the nation's entrepreneurial economy.
"The fundamental thing is that this country's wealth was generated by small inventors who were able to use their patents to build big companies.
AT&T, International Harvester, IBM -- the list is endless," Dr. Damadian said.
He said big U.S. and foreign corporations -- notably those in Japan and Germany -- had exerted tremendous pressure on the U.S. to make the change.
If the U.S. had acquiesced, he said, those corporations could have flooded the U.S. Patent Office with endless filings, essentially destroying garage tinkerers who have big ideas but little money.
