Look in the average American's wallet, and you're likely to find an automatic teller machine (ATM) card that allows him or her to withdraw or deposit money from a bank account at thousands of locations around the country and even around the world.
ATM cards have eased the daily lives of working Americans who often don't have time to stand in bank lines to make transactions.
But behind the ATM machine is a web of activity and bureaucracy: Thousands of bank employees are responsible for keeping the ATMs in working order, making sure there is no fraud or abuse, dealing with customer complaints, and fulfilling federal and state laws and regulations.
And thousands of federal and state government officials oversee the banking industry and protect the rights of consumers.
If consumers realized how much went into each ATM transaction, would they cut up their card and go back to rushing to the bank to get in line before 3 p.m.?
I don't think so.
Because to the average consumer, ATMs have made life much easier and the various levels of personnel and bureaucracy don't make a whit of difference.
When it comes to reforming our health care system, President Clinton takes a similar consumer-oriented approach.
He believes an American's interaction with the health care system should be painless.
That's why he has proposed reforms that will place real decision-making authority in the hands of consumers in a streamlined system that's sensitive to the needs of patients and their families.
Under the president's Health Security Act, each American will receive a Health Security Card that functions much like an ATM card.
So, when a woman goes to the doctor, she simply presents her card to the doctor, who uses it to process the claim, make sure that the right health plan is billed, and then sends the patient home.
What then of the "massive bureaucracy" charted out by Senators Bob Dole and Arlen Specter?
Actually, we in the administration also believe there is too much bureaucracy in health care.
In fact, the excess amount of red tape in the current system is one of the things that brought us to this debate.
As the president said last September: "The medical care industry is literally drowning in paperwork."
Americans spend twice as much on health care overhead than any other country in the world.
That's why the Health Security Act takes specific steps -- steps that are not taken in most of the Republican alternatives -- to alleviate the burden of paperwork and bureaucracy for consumers, doctors, nurses and hospitals.
Specifically it will:
-- Replace the nearly 1,500 separate claims forms now used by insurance companies with a single, one-page claims form that will be easy to complete and simple to process.
-- Eliminate insurance company rules and regulations that restrict consumers' access to coverage -- including the 81 million Americans living with pre-existing medical conditions that hamper their ability to get coverage.
-- Create a standard, comprehensive benefit package that will eliminate the hassle of figuring out if a needed service is covered or not.
-- Expand the use of electronic billing so that providers can be paid quickly, patients can avoid the headache of filling out forms, and fraud and abuse caused by repetitive billing can be curtailed.
-- Eliminate a string of labor-intensive, invasive oversight activities that serve only to aggravate providers and patients alike and do nothing to improve the quality of care rendered.
These changes will produce a health care system that is easy to understand, easy to access and easy to use.
And they will eliminate the burdensome insurance industry red tape and bureaucracy.
As with the ATM card, the Health Security Card will improve the quality of our lives and the quality of our health care system.
Donna E. Shalala
