Poland reached an agreement late last week with commercial banks to reduce and restructure more than $13 billion of debt.
The nation stands to receive a reduction of more than 40% in principal and as much as 20% in unpaid interest arrears, according to analysts.
Last July, talks with the banks stalled when they offered a total reduction of less than 30% in principal and interest while Poland demanded a total reduction of 50%.
The good news for Poland was bad news for investors who watched the value of their Polish debt paper plunge Friday in reaction to the generous terms of the restructuring.
The agreement was announced in Frankfurt by Berhard Walter, a member of the board of directors at Dresdner Bank, which headed the bank advisory committee in the London Club of commercial creditors.
Hundreds of creditors must still join the agreement, which Poland says it wants to complete by this fall.
Bankers and analysts said the debt restructuring is the first step to opening Poland's economy to new investment by developing its capital markets.
Last year foreigners invested more than $400 million in Poland, according to Chemical Bank analyst Ernesto Bergeron.
The agreement should undo a "blockage" in Poland's economy that will allow it "to gain market access in the not too distant future," said Robin Hubbard, an economist and head of fixed-income research for emerging markets at Paribas Capital Markets Ltd. in London.
The restructuring will affect $8.1 billion in principal, $3.8 billion in past-due interest, and $1.1 billion in trade loans.
It will allow Poland to meet the final conditions of a separate 1991 agreement with the Paris Club of official creditors for a 50% reduction in $33 billion of official debt owed to other nations.
The agreement follows passage the previous week of a 1994 austerity budget, which, in turn, was a crucial requirement for meeting International Monetary Fund economic targets.
The agreement comes after 13 years of on and off again efforts to manage Poland's foreign debt load.
Poland has been "rescheduling and renegotiating" its debt since 1981, said Alexis Rodzianko, managing director of emerging markets trading at Chemical Bank in New York.
"That's longer than anybody else."
In fact, the agreement announced last week affects debt that was last restructured in 1988.
After stopping payments on its foreign debt in 1989, Poland became a pariah in the international debt markets.
It wasn't until May of last year that the country started making some small payments on that debt again.
For many investors, the generous terms of the debt agreement were a surprise.
In similar debt restructurings in Latin America, the debt reduction has been around 35% and there was no reduction of unpaid interest arrears.
Poland had sought a reduction of as much as 50% of its principal, as received by Bulgaria last year, something which commercial bankers balked at granting.
The bankers feared that it would set a precedent for even greater debt forgiveness in nations that are still seeking to restructure their debt, like Peru, Panama, and Ecuador.
Unlike past debt restructurings under the guidelines set up by former U.S. Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, some of the bonds into which the commercial debt will be converted won't be backed by enough 30-year zero-coupon U.S. Treasury bonds to collateralize as much as 18 months of interest payments.
There will only be enough collateral to guarantee the repayment of the principal.
"You can bet that any nation that wants to do a Brady deal . . . is going to look at this very closely," said Mr. Rodzianko.
"If I were a banker at that table, I would have been very reluctant to give that deal," he added.
Once traders realized how generous the terms were, the price of Polish commercial paper began to plunge.
On Friday, the price dropped more than five points, or more than $50 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 40 cents on the dollar.
There were selloffs in the commercial debt of Peru and Panama; both dropped about three points.
The forgiveness of past-due interest in Poland could have a particularly bad effect on Peruvian debt paper since Peru has accumulated interest arrears that are nearly equal to the principal.
Under the Poland agreement, creditors have a number of conversion options.
These include par bonds, discount bonds, new money bonds, and a debt buyback option, according to Mr. Bergeron of Chemical Bank.
Developing nation debt traders were quick to note that the Polish debt agreement has much further to go before it can be finalized.
Unlike the commercial debt of other nations that have had their debt restructured under the Brady guidelines, well over 25% of Poland's debt is in the hands of individual and other nonbank investors who could balk at accepting the terms negotiated by the commercial banks.
George P. Bayliss and Michele Wucker contributed to this article.
