Hewlett-Packard Co., Palo Alto, Calif., has awarded a small but pivotal contract for new battery technology to Valence Technology Inc., officials of both companies said.
The contract provides for initial delivery of $3.5 million of Valence's new solid-state lithium batteries, which provide more energy at a smaller size than conventional batteries.
More importantly, it is an implicit endorsement of Valence's technology over a rival offering by Sony Corp. of Tokyo, and gives Valence a leg up in the mobile-computing battery market.
Valence, based in San Jose, Calif., is building a plant in Northern Ireland scheduled to start commercial production about July.
It has a contract with Motorola Inc., Schaumburg, Ill., to deliver $100 million of batteries for Motorola's cellular phones, provided the commercial product meets Motorola's specifications.
Robert Frankenberg, an H-P vice president and general manager, said his company looked at a Sony lithium battery and a battery offered by an unnamed third company but selected Valence because "we were convinced that Valence is the furthest along in real production."
H-P also was attracted by the energy-storage efficiency per space or volume of the Valence product.
Calvin Reed, Valence's chief executive officer, said his company's battery technology has more shape and size flexibility than Sony's because it uses a solid-state polymer electrolyte, instead of a liquid, to connect anodes and cathodes.
The H-P contract "opens a new market for Valence in mobile computing," Mr. Reed said.
While the cellular-phone market is growing at a rate of nearly 40% annually in the U.S. and is booming worldwide, the mobile-computing market is potentially as big.
Mr. Reed said the contract calls for deliveries over an 18-month period, which could be increased "depending on our joint success with H-P." Terms weren't disclosed.
Because of heavy capital investments, Valence isn't expected to be signficantly profitable until its fiscal year ending March 31, 1996.
It closed at $19.375 a share, up $1.125, or 6.2%, Friday in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
H-P shares closed at $84.75, up $1.625, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
