When big businesses recruit new college graduates nowadays, they increasingly encounter new competition: small businesses.
More small-company owners are turning to colleges and universities to fill jobs.
Entrepreneurs, who once had to hunt for the campus welcome mat, now find placement officers eager to court them.
At the same time, small employers also receive more attention from job seekers discouraged by weak prospects at many larger companies.
"Many more M.B.A. graduates and alumni are going into start-up ventures," says Lynn Schumacher, director of the Center for Professional Career Development at DePaul University in Chicago.
Hiring by small businesses also has soared recently at St. Lawrence University.
"We're looking at about 30% of our 1993 graduates going to work for small companies," says Lee Svete, director of career planning for the Canton, N.Y., school.
That percentage was just 8% to 10% three years ago.
"Some of these companies, I never even heard of," he adds.
Last spring, St. Lawrence assisted Keith Besse in finding a technical sales representative for Sapphire Engineering Inc., his small specialty manufacturing firm in North Falmouth, Mass.
Mr. Besse says that St. Lawrence, his alma mater, lined up a pool of qualified applicants within two days.
He selected Scott Bishop after interviewing nine students.
The 1993 graduate "is doing a great job," Mr. Besse says.
The traditional college placement system doesn't always fit the needs of small and midsize companies, however.
Their hiring patterns differ from those of big concerns.
"They don't sit there in July and plan out a college recruiting plan," notes Robert Greenberg, director of career services at the University of Tennessee in Knoxville.
Small-business owners tend to fill vacancies as they arise and aren't interested in traveling to different campuses to fill a position, Dr. Greenberg says.
In fact, many entrepreneurs lack the time to conduct any job interviews on campus.
So, placement directors are tailoring their services to suit small-business owners.
Harvard Business School says it's exploring the use of videoconferencing to spare small businesses the chore of going to the campus for interviews.
Some schools are running job fairs aimed at small-business owners.
Others are sponsoring internship programs to familiarize them with the idea of using college placement offices.
Victor R. Lindquist, director of Northwestern University's placement service, says he recently spent 15 minutes on the phone helping a small-business owner write a job description for an industrial engineer.
The owner later posted the vacancy on campus.
Boston University's School of Management established a computerized job-matching system for new and recent graduates during the past year.
Small- and medium-size firms are heavily using this new system, officials say.
The school also employs Career Search, a Needham, Mass., firm that lists 247,000 businesses, to assist graduates in locating other smaller employers.
Nearly two dozen 1993 graduates landed jobs, many of them with small businesses, through Career Search or the job-matching system, school officials report.
Peter Veruki, director of career planning and placement at the Owen School of Management at Vanderbilt University, says that he and his staff compiled a list of 5,000 mostly smaller businesses by visiting chambers of commerce in Southeastern cities.
Now, once a year, Mr. Veruki's office sends those companies profile books describing the school's latest graduates.
The effort has begun to pay off.
"We're starting a formal recruiting program for college graduates" this year, says Leon Klein, president of Shared Resources Management Inc., an information-technology services firm in suburban St. Paul, Minn.
Mr. Klein initially hesitated when Paul Redin, career-services director at Bethel College in St. Paul, Minn., invited him to recruit last fall.
Instead, Mr. Klein selected one Bethel student as an intern.
The intern is working out so well that Mr. Klein says he plans to hire at least seven college graduates this spring -- out of the 70 employees expected to join his 130 -- person firm during 1994.
Shared Resources's revenue has grown 100% to about $7 million during the past two years, he notes.
"We're at the size where we're building teams, and we can start exposing college graduates to projects."
Small businesses aren't only filling entry-level spots through their expanded college recruiting.
Business school graduates, many with extensive work experience, "are able to hit the ground running" and can even take senior-level management positions at small businesses, says Paula Deslatte, director of career services at the Graduate School of Business at the University of Chicago.
Two years ago, Kurt Cerulli founded Cerulli Associates Inc., a strategic-consulting firm for financial companies, after working many years for larger concerns.
He hired three of the Boston firm's five staff members straight out of business school.
"My ideal candidate was someone coming out of business school who had three or four years of financial-services experience," Mr. Cerulli recalls.
All three successful candidates brought such experience.
At Cerulli Associates, people lack titles and separate offices -- and every consultant gets the same salary and bonus based on profitability.
Mr. Cerulli says that's why he sought highly motivated people who may have been disillusioned by the politics and waste often found in a larger corporate setting.
That disillusionment, along with the drastic reduction in job openings at bigger companies, has changed many recent graduates' negative attitudes about working for small businesses.
"What's exciting about being with a small company is you're really establishing a precedent.
All the rules haven't been written yet," says 26-year-old Eli Neusner.
Mr. Cerulli hired Mr. Neusner last May after he received an M.B.A. from Boston University's Graduate School of Management.
Scott Bishop interviewed with 25 or 35 mostly larger companies before he accepted Sapphire Engineering's $30,000-a-year offer.
Most of his classmates went to work for bigger corporations.
But Mr. Bishop doesn't regret his decision.
He notes: "I got the feeling that if I came to work here, I wouldn't just be some number stuck in a cubicle."
