Jitters over the investigation into the involvement of President Clinton and his wife in a soured Arkansas land venture helped drag the dollar marginally lower against most currencies in a thin market.
The main beneficiary of the Whitewater affair was the mark, which rose in spite of bearish German data indicating a rise in domestic unemployment and a contraction in fourth-quarter gross domestic product.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7143 marks, down from 1.7195 marks late Monday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 105.37 yen, down from 105.55 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4880, down from $1.4900.
About noon Wednesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 105.23 yen and at 1.7117 marks.
Traders said dollar prospects are dimmed by the widening investigation into Bill and Hillary Clinton's investment in the Whitewater Development Co., a failed real-estate development with ties to a savings and loan that was taken over by federal regulators before Mr. Clinton became president.
"Articles have started to appear outside of this country, and that will keep a top on the dollar until there's a resolution," said Justin McCarthy, a trader for National Westminster Bank in New York.
"But there won't be one soon, and the dollar will be lower for weeks to come."
But other traders see the problems facing the Clinton administration as placing a cap on market activity, rather than fomenting any major dollar sell-off.
"Whitewater is a good obstacle for the dollar moving either way," said Jack Stapleton, chief corporate dealer for Standard Chartered Bank PLC in New York.
"The majority of American traders see it as a sale of the dollar, while Europeans buy on the thinking that nothing will really come of it," he added.
Political concerns in the U.S. overwhelmed bad economic news from Germany, and the mark gained despite reports that the western German GDP contracted 0.5% during the fourth quarter of 1993, compared with the third quarter.
The data strongly suggested the German recession is deepening, according to economists.
That news buttressed an earlier bearish report that the German unemployment rate rose to 8.9% in February, from 8.8% a month earlier.
Traders noted the bad economic news should have been a detriment to the mark because it adds pressure on the Bundesbank to lower key interest rates.
Traders said the market is now looking to the results today of the latest round of Bundesbank securities repurchase agreements, or repos, for clues as to the direction of German rate policy.
Repos are the Bundesbank's main instrument for influencing the money market, and the market is expecting another slight reduction in the repo rate to about 5.90% from the previous 5.97%.
Meanwhile, the dollar slipped marginally against the yen, as traders turned away from official rhetoric on the Japan-U.S. trade dispute and toward chart points to determine direction, said Earl Johnson, vice president of Harris Trust & Savings Bank in Chicago.
"Nobody knows for sure whether to be buying or selling yen, but the market appears to have calmed down right around 105 yen," he said.
