London shares rose but ended well below yesterday's highs, as sentiment was undermined by a sluggish start on Wall Street.
Frankfurt equities advanced as the bond market steadied.
Paris prices jumped 1.1% on hopes for a French reduction in interest rates.
Tokyo stocks finished mixed in sleepy dealings, as many reluctant investors waited for signs of Japanese government intentions on trimming income taxes and boosting trade with the U.S.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.82, up 0.25, reflecting higher Asia/Pacific and European markets and lower American markets.
Plantations stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 244.03, up 9.97, or 4.26%, with Asiatic Development of Malaysia posting an 8.7% gain in its local currency.
Oil drilling stocks trailed at 107.42, down 1.55, or 1.4%, with Energy Service of the U.S. sliding 3.6% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index rose 8.2 points to 3341.9.
The FT 30-stock index edged up 1.9 points to 2578.4.
Volume was 822.4 million shares, up from 625.2 million shares in the previous session.
Stocks in the 100 index were mixed, with companies that reported earnings showing the biggest gains and losses of the day.
New York stocks' weak opening was mainly responsible for pulling the benchmark gauge down from the session peak of 3355.0.
The exchange was heavily influenced by activity such as basket trades in the futures market.
The bourse opened slightly higher, as investors were relieved by U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan's congressional remarks Tuesday on monetary policy, which conformed with expectations in London.
Stocks remained in positive territory until the results of a gilt, or government bond, auction showed relatively low demand, also disappointing the stock market.
In Frankfurt, shares rose solidly in quiet dealings, helped by stabilization of the bond market.
The DAX 30-stock index climbed 20.05 points to 2127.67.
Though the bond market slipped back following early gains on the Greenspan remarks, the overall effect on the stock market was positive; in the past year, Germany's stock and bond markets have tracked each other closely, as the stock exchange looks to bonds as an indicator.
In Paris, the market's rally was bolstered by hopes for a Bank of France interest-rate cut this week, but volume was extremely low.
Other central banks in the European Monetary System core reduced lending rates after Germany led the way last week.
In Amsterdam, shares posted strong and broad gains, buoyed by higher prices on other European bourses and by a rally in the Dutch bond market.
In Madrid, following several days of declines, stocks staged a technical rebound, though they finished off their highs after the weak opening in New York; the Spanish central bank's cut to 8.5% from 8.75% in its 7-to-13-day repurchase tender yesterday morning had been discounted in stock prices and didn't have any affect on them.
In Milan, prices dropped, attributed to profit-taking and the coming Italian election campaign.
In Stockholm, equities advanced after three losing sessions in a row, though trading was dull and largely trendless, with blue-chip prices remaining within narrow ranges.
In Zurich, stocks rallied 1.5% in active dealings, buoyed by the previous day's gains on Wall Street and by enthusiasm about Swiss corporate news; many investors found bargains or covered short, or oversold, positions.
In Mexico City, stocks plunged 2.4% in continued profit-taking, as investors ignored another significant drop in bellwether Mexican interest rates on the belief that the market remains overvalued.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which fell 51.31 points Tuesday, slipped just 0.80 to 19341.83.
In trading Thursday, the Nikkei index rose 355.24 points to close the morning session at 19697.07.
Wednesday's first-section volume was estimated at 270 million shares, down from 325 million shares a day earlier; thin as it was, the turnover was swelled by cross-trades.
Gainers edged decliners, 517-453.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which added 2.21 points Tuesday, rose 5.68 to 1577.85.
Overseas investors did most of the buying, while Japanese corporations remained sellers.
Dealers held few positions, as Wednesday was the last day of trading for settlement in this month's account, further sapping market vitality.
Consumer consumption-related shares were stronger on a news report that the government was considering applying an income-tax cut for longer than the proposed one-year period.
The Tokyo market also was quiet as investors waited for any Japanese trade measures to mollify the U.S. ahead of Saturday's meeting of officials from the Group of Seven major industrialized nations.
Furthermore, the Japanese yen's rebound against the U.S. dollar put on hold the market's rebound from its currencymarket-induced tumble at the start of last week.
In Sydney, on perceptions that the market's recent correction seemed to have abated, prices closed mostly higher, lifted by an easing of fears of rising U.S. interest rates, based on the remarks by the U.S. Federal Reserve chief.
In Hong Kong, shares posted another strong rise, propelled by a 1.2% gain for the property sector, but turnover remained anemic; the main index headed up in what was termed a technical rebound, but slipped from its peak in the final minutes, tracking the market for stock-index futures.
In Singapore, shares rose about 1% in active dealings, with over-the-counter issues accounting for the increased volume; institutions bought a wide range of stocks, anticipating that the government's budget proposal would contain benefits for business.
In Kuala Lumpur, stocks ended broadly higher, taking the main index up 3.3% in moderate trading, bolstered by the return of foreign investors and by continued speculative buying.
In Taipei, the benchmark index rose slightly, marking the first upturn in the past five sessions, but losing issues outnumbered winning issues; dealings remained lackluster amid the consolidation that has lasted almost two weeks.
In Seoul, prices declined on concerns that the South Korean central bank would drain liquidity in a monetary tightening to fight inflationary pressure; these reports wiped out early gains for stocks and pushed them into negative territory.
In Wellington, stocks jumped 2.1% in busy trading, as the market rebounded after a three-session losing streak, benefiting from positive reports on New Zealand corporate earnings and debt ratings.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
