Aeroflot Russian International Airlines signed a letter of intent to lease four Boeing 767s for use on its trans-Atlantic routes.
The aircraft will be leased from GPA Group PLC of Shannon, Ireland.
While the deal hasn't yet been made public, GE Capital Aviation Services, which manages GPA's assets, signed the letter of intent with Aeroflot late last week.
"They've got to get the various approvals and so do we," said Trevor Henderson, chief marketing officer for the unit of General Electric Co. of Fairfield, Conn.
"But I don't see any problems there."
If the deal receives the necessary green lights, Aeroflot will take delivery of the aircraft between April and June of this year.
Mr. Henderson says the deal calls for a standard five-year operating lease for the four planes.
The deal represents an important toehold in Russia for both GPA and Seattle-based Boeing Co.
Although the Russian economy is in a shambles, many analysts believe its vast geography and huge population present enormous opportunities for the aviation industry.
Moreover, Aeroflot Russian International stands out as a clear winner in the fractured Russian airline sector.
The once monolithic Aeroflot has splintered into more than 100 separate companies, many of them still flying the Aeroflot colors.
But the government has granted Aeroflot Russian International exclusive rights to the Aeroflot brand name and made it the country's main international carrier.
Aeroflot officials in Moscow could not be reached for comment.
According to Mr. Henderson, Aeroflot will use the planes on its North Atlantic routes.
Currently, Aeroflot flies Soviet-built Ilyushin aircraft on its trans-Atlantic services to Montreal, New York, San Francisco, Chicago and Washington.
The twin-engine 767-300ER, the model Aeroflot will receive, seats as many as 260 people in a two-class configuration and is designed for long-distance routes with only moderate traffic.
Aeroflot does operate some Western jetliners, flying five Airbus Industrie twin-engine A-310s from Moscow to London, Tokyo, Hong Kong and Sydney.
But analysts say Aeroflot, which has 103 Soviet-built aircraft, has been actively looking for additional Western wide-body planes for about a year because of problems obtaining new planes from Russian factories.
The stumbling block has been how the Russian carrier would pay for the expensive Western equipment.
The list price for the four 767s, for example, would be $280 million.
GPA, however, has extensive experience in dealing with difficult cases.
"GPA has done deals with a lot of people banks wouldn't touch," said Chris Avery, aviation analyst for Paribas Capital Markets in London.
"The reasoning seems to be they can get their planes back pretty quickly."
In fact, GPA's portfolio includes Boeing planes leased to a number of states formerly in the former Soviet bloc -- in particular, two 737s with Air Ukraine and one with Lithuanian Airlines.
GPA usually ensures the carrier will have enough hard currency to make the lease payments by requiring that the aircraft be used on international routes.
Currently, GPA has two of the 767s that will go to Aeroflot placed with other airlines and will take delivery of the final two jetliners this spring.
