I overheard two women talking about "Angie" after a screening of the movie.
"Wasn't it amazing, the way Geena Davis chopped off her hair herself and came up with a better cut than I pay $70 for?" one of them said.
"I liked the way she hopped on a bus a week after giving birth," said the other sarcastically.
"What a lousy movie."
"Angie" is a lousy movie and Ms. Davis is amazing in it, and I am not being sarcastic.
She has a way of making the most implausible situations believable -- and she is given plenty of opportunity to prove it in "Angie."
Adapted from a novel called "Angie, I Says," by Avra Wing, the movie is supposed to be a heartwarming story about whimsical working-class people from Brooklyn.
The heroine, Angie (Ms. Davis), has spent a lifetime longing for the mother who abandoned her.
She remembers her mother as someone who danced barefoot in the snow and wants to be "special" like that.
When she is past 30, she becomes pregnant by the man she has dated since she was 14 but hasn't married, and decides to demonstrate her own specialness by visiting the Metropolitan Museum of Art for the first time.
There she meets a pretentious Irishman who lives in a loft.
In the course of the movie she resolves her relationships with many people -- her old and new boyfriends, her father and stepmother, her mother, and the baby whose birth we get to watch in excruciating detail.
When the movie is almost over Angie explains the lessons she has learned, much the way Dorothy lets us know that "There's no place like home" at the end of "The Wizard of Oz."
However, the only wizardry in "Angie" is Ms. Davis's.
She wins tears for Angie and her travails in circumstances that are made to seem more fantastic and certainly more inauthentic than anything Dorothy encountered in Oz.
(However, not even Ms. Davis can take the embarrassment out of a scene that has her happily dancing around in a provocative Santa Claus suit in her ninth month of pregnancy.)
Stephen Rea, who was so affecting as the IRA man and lover in "The Crying Game," seems to have realized the whole thing was hopeless from the start.
He treats his part -- as the hip Manhattan lover -- like a cat who's found a comfortable couch.
Occasionally he lifts his head to meow a line and then drops back to sleep.
The many miscalculations in this movie were made by many talented people.
The director Martha Coolidge showed a deft hand with sensitive material in "Rambling Rose."
The screenwriter Todd Graff successfully wrote about a whimsical family of the outer boroughs in "Used People."
But when they put their heads together they produced a big "ouch."
To paraphrase Stephen Sondheim, whimsy isn't easy.
"You an orphan?" asks a woman of a man trying to pick her up at a bar.
"I'm an orphan of destiny," he replies.
He's flirting but he isn't kidding.
No one jokes for nothing in "China Moon," an earnest reproduction of 1940s films noirs.
Despite appearances, and George Fenton's over-the-top musical score, this isn't a parody.
It seems that screenwriter Roy Carlson was perfectly serious when he wrote the portentous dialogue.
For example, when the man gets the woman out of the bar onto a lake for a nighttime boat ride, he points at the flat, round moon and says, "My grandmother used to say that when the moon is like a big old plate of china, strange things happen."
The problem with this big old plate of china is that it isn't strange at all.
You've seen stacks and stacks of it on the late show -- or did, before the late show was made obsolete by cable-TV movie channels and home videos.
Like those late-night movies, there doesn't seem to be much reason to watch "China Moon," yet it isn't bad to watch either.
It's been nicely photographed by Willy Kurant, and directed with an eye to the photography by John Bailey, the cinematographer making his directing debut.
Ed Harris handily carries off the role of the smart cop who becomes very stupid when he falls in love with the woman from the bar.
Madeleine Stowe -- of "Blink," "Short Cuts" and "Last of the Mohicans" -- becomes more intriguing every time you see her.
She's the beautiful neurotic who leads the cop astray.
The British actor Charles Dance, as the husband, plays mean better than he pronounces it with an American Southern accent.
"Reality Bites," about four friends just out of college, probably isn't the defining movie of its generation.
But this hip comedy by Ben Stiller is smart and funny and has some great moments that make it seem like it could be the defining movie of its generation.
The movie is worth seeing to watch Wynona Ryder prove she can be charming in this lifetime and to see The Gap installed in its rightful place as a major cultural landmark.
VIDEO TIP: If whimsy's your thing, watch "Used People," the delightful 1992 picture about an eccentric Jewish family in Queens made happy by a romantic Italian, played by Marcello Mastroianni.
This cute fable takes place in 1969, a year that anything seemed possible -- the Mets won the pennant and a man landed on the moon for the first time.
