Winner International Corp., maker of well-known car antitheft device the Club, took an unusual step to lock out competitors of the popular product and found itself in a legal tangle.
Winner, the undisputed leader in the automobile steering-wheel-lock market, wrote to one of its distributors demanding that it stop selling a competitive steering-wheel lock made by Kryptonite Corp.
The letter last fall, to retailer Beverly Hills Motoring Accessories, charged that Kryptonite's lock and its packaging were too similar to the Club's and violated the law.
And "any entity within the chain of distribution can be liable" for infringement on the Club's trade dress, the letter said.
The letter pointed out a number of actions against products that Winner said infringed on the Club's patents or trade dress.
But significantly, Winner hadn't started any legal action directly against Kryptonite, and didn't notify Kryptonite before threatening action against the seller.
The letter to the distributor prompted Kryptonite, based in Canton, Mass., to sue Winner, charging obstruction of business, and the two companies in late January reached a preliminary settlement in which Winner agreed to send no more letters.
Intellectual-property specialists find the Club maker's aggressive approach highly unusual.
Michael Blommer, executive director of the American Intellectual Property Law Association in Arlington, Va., said attacking a competitor through a third party is "very rare, indeed," because such moves are likely to prompt lawsuits.
"You open yourself up to a claim" that you interfered in contractual relations with the distributor, said New York lawyer Kenneth Madsen.
David Bernstein, another New York lawyer who specializes in intellectual property, said he has contacted distributors, "but with caution," in cases where his client has a court order to interrupt a competing product's sale, or where the producer's identity is ambiguous.
Neither was the case with Kryptonite.
Winner knew who manufactured the lock before the competitor hit the market late last year.
And there was no court order for sellers to pull the device.
Winner spokesman Tom McCartney said Winner's legal counsel considers the third-party letter "a normal reaction" the company has "done before" to warn competitors they may be breaking the law and could face legal action.
Winner has maintained an aggressive campaign against alleged imitators of the Club, the antitheft device that virtually created the market.
The Sharon, Pa., company is said to control 75% of the $130 million market that has attracted scores of competitors.
Beverly Hills President Andy Cohen said his company "made it clear" in its catalog that the Kryptonite lock wasn't the Club.
He said Kryptonite's brand name was marked plainly.
Mr. Cohen sells the Kryptonite lock for $89.95, compared with $44.95 for the Club.
And although they both come in red and would hit a windshield, keeping a steering wheel from turning, the devices have different steering-wheel attachments.
But Winner's Mr. McCartney pointed out the Club, which the Beverly Hills, Calif., retailer also sells, wasn't in that catalog.
And people, therefore, might identify the Kryptonite lock as the Club.
The upshot of the dispute is that despite the tentative agreement under which Winner said it won't write any more letters to retailers about Kryptonite, the newcomer still isn't satisfied.
President Peter Zane said his company, which filed its suit in December in a U.S. District Court in Massachusetts, will seek a judgment so it has ammunition if Winner doesn't keep its promises.
A court date hasn't been set.
