Powersoft Corp., which grew sharply in the past year by selling complex software tools to large corporations, will target personal-computer software buyers with a desktop database package to be unveiled today.
The move puts the Burlington, Mass.-based upstart in direct competition with Borland International Inc., Software Publishing Corp. and to some extent, even Microsoft Corp., the market leader.
Mitchell E. Kertzman, Powersoft's chairman and chief executive, said yesterday he's pushing into the retail mainstream of the market because he expected Borland, Microsoft and other database makers would soon attack his own niche.
"We want to engage them in their space instead, where they're relatively vulnerable right now."
Some analysts say Borland could have the most to lose.
"Powersoft is going straight for Borland's jugular, at a time when they're especially vulnerable," said Donald DePalma, an industry analyst at Forrester Research.
"Millions of users have been left behind by Borland," he said.
The Scotts Valley, Calif., concern has repeatedly delayed needed updates for its aging dBase line, which had dominated the market.
Analysts now say the new dBase won't be out until June.
David Watkins, a Borland vice president, dismissed his would-be rival.
"We've been in the business 10 years, and they've been in it for about two hours," he said.
Borland has nine million users who know dBase programming, he said, while Powersoft "is asking them to forget everything they know to learn a whole new language."
Powersoft's design embraces the fast-growing client-server model, in which desktop PCs or "clients" are tied to large server computers in a network.
Most PC databases were built for stand-alone PCs and don't easily "scale up" to large client-server systems.
Powersoft's sudden thrust into PC software follows a year of strong growth for its core PowerBuilder line, which is sold to professional developers of software for large systems.
Last year, revenue more than doubled to $51 million from $21 million in 1992.
Powersoft will sell its new product, PowerBuilder Desktop, at a promotional price of $249 through May 31, when it rises to a retail price of $695.
The company also will trim pricing across its entire line, cutting some packages by $100.
Its flagship, PowerBuilder Enterprise, will slip $200 to a suggested retail price of $3,395.
Powersoft must build a retail presence, said Rick Sherlund, an analyst with Goldman, Sachs & Co., while "Borland and Microsoft already have well-established, broad-based distribution channels."
Separately, Powersoft said Friday it completed its purchase of Watcom Corp., Waterloo, Ontario, for 1.11 million Powersoft shares, or about $58 million.
The acquisition, announced last year, brought Powersoft strategic new database technology, analysts said.
