Advanced Logic Research Inc. said it won a patent on upgrading personal computers by adding new microprocessor chips, a technique popularized by Intel Corp. and used by scores of PC makers.
The breadth of ALR's patent wasn't immediately clear.
But some analysts believe it will let the company seek royalties from numerous competitors and possibly Intel, the No. 1 chip maker.
"I believe it has broad implications," said Stephen Smith, an analyst at PaineWebber.
"I expect ALR to pursue this aggressively."
ALR's stock rose 16% on the news, rising $1 to $7.125 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
ALR, a midsize PC maker formed in 1984, was among the first to promote the concept of letting computer users upgrade their systems' power rather than buying complete new systems.
In 1989, the company filed for a patent on its upgrade scheme, which started on PCs powered by Intel's 286 microprocessor and could be updated by inserting a small circuit board that contained the more-powerful 386 chip.
The company has continued to sell upgrade systems with later generations of Intel microprocessors, including the flagship Pentium chip.
Separately, Intel began a campaign to get computer makers to add extra sockets in their systems, allowing consumers to insert so-called OverDrive chips to boost the speed of their systems.
Dataquest Inc. estimates that 35 million computers based on Intel's 486 chip had been installed by the end of last year.
A "large majority" of them used the OverDrive design, said Kimball Brown, an analyst at the San Jose, Calif., research firm.
Ron Sipkovich, ALR's chief financial officer, said the patent covers a technology that turns off the original microprocessor when an upgrade chip is installed.
The Intel design uses that basic approach, but ALR's lawyers said they haven't yet determined whether other systems violate its patent.
"We are in the process now of evaluating other vendors' products to determine whether there is infringement or not," Mr. Sipkovich said.
He wouldn't comment directly on the company's strategy about seeking royalties, but said "it is our intent to enforce the patent if we believe there is infringement."
Intel and several other PC makers declined to comment until they had a chance to study the patent.
Sean Burke, a director of product marketing and planning at Dell Computer Corp., said that though many consumers are buying upgradeable PCs, not that many end up buying the upgrade chips, which typically start at around $400.
He suspects that is because the microprocessor chip is only one component affecting a system's speed.
Consumers also may want other new features, including larger disk drives for storing data, he said.
