The Energy Department said a cooperative research program with Energy Conversion Devices Inc. and Canon Inc. produced a new solar cell that can halve the cost of solar energy for the home.
The new solar or "photovoltaic" cell is an ultra-thin sheet of silicon alloy that converts sunlight directly into electricity.
The energy department said that if the new material were incorporated into roofing shingles of a south-facing home, it could supply the home with electricity during the day, when the sun is shining, at a cost of 16 cents per kilowatt-hour.
The cost could eventually drop to 12 cents, it said.
Electricity from conventional photovoltaic cells currently costs 25 cents to 50 cents per kilowatt-hour, it said.
During a standard 1,000-hour-long test, the new photovoltaic cell converted sunlight directly into electricity with an efficiency of 10.2%, according to United Solar Systems Corp., the joint venture of Energy Conversion Devices of Troy, Mich., and Canon, the big Japanese maker of copying machines.
This stable 10.2% efficiency is a record for an amorphous silicon solar cell, the company said.
Higher conversion efficiencies have been achieved by solar cells made with crystalline silicon or other crystalline materials but these materials are more expensive than the amorphous material.
Unlike crystalline solar cell materials, which must be produced in batches, the amorphous silicon alloys originally developed by Energy Conversion Devices can be produced in a continuous sheet.
United Solar Systems is building a $30 million plant, financed largely by Canon, in Newport News, Va., to produce the new amorphous silicon alloy, beginning in 1995.
Sheets of the alloy can be fabricated into roof panels, battery-charging panels, wallcoatings for commercial buildings or any of a host of other devices.
The new material, which is much thinner and consequently cheaper than previous amorphous silicon photovoltaic materials, was developed under a three-year, $6.3 million cost-sharing program between United Solar Systems and the energy department's National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
The company credited a team led by Subhendu Ghua, vice president of research and technology, with developing the new material.
But it also represents a triumph for Stanford Ovshinsky, the founder and chief executive officer of Energy Conversion Devices.
Mr. Ovshinksy pioneered the development of amorphous silicon as an electronic material.
For several years his assertions that he could make cheap photovoltaic cells in volume using amorphous silicon alloys have met with considerable skepticism.
