Mental illness in America is heavily concentrated among 14% of the nation's population, who have three or more lifetime brushes with depression, alcoholism or other psychiatric disorders.
That finding, central to the battle over health-care reform, comes from a landmark government census of the nation's mental health.
The government sent a team of researchers to do something no one had ever done before: interview a large national sample of Americans about their experience with every major mental disorder.
The survey also found that nearly half of all Americans experience a psychiatric disorder at least once in their lifetime -- far higher than previous estimates.
But the survey, using the American Psychiatric Association's definitions of disorder, includes functional cases of mild depression, anxiety and other conditions that often do not require professional care.
The 14% group, never before identified or described, could offer a middle ground in the policy debate between advocates who brandish far higher numbers and cynics who dismiss much mental illness as late-20th-century malaise.
"The people that clearly need help are those who have that pileup of problems," says Ronald Kessler, the University of Michigan survey researcher who led the three-year study.
"The trick for the future is to figure out who are the people at risk for that pileup and to develop early intervention."
The survey, funded by the U.S. government, offers a vivid picture of the people in the ill-starred 14% group.
They are most likely to be low-income, low-educated, city-dwelling white women in their 20s and 30s.
In an interview, Mr. Kessler outlines one common life story of the "pileup" group: A schoolgirl with anxiety disorder seeks to ease her pain by abusing drugs; in her 20s, her life in growing disarray, she plunges into depression.
The scenario's details vary; but "by the time you're in early midlife, you have something having to do with anxiety, something having to do with depression and something having to do with substance abuse," he says.
One eye-popping statistic in the survey: In a given year, the 14% group accounts for 89% of all cases of the most severe psychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia and manic depression.
The report, published in the January issue of the Archives of General Psychiatry, confirms several facts about mental illness long suspected or estimated based on weaker data.
Depression and other mood disorders are more common among women (24% have at least one lifetime episode, compared with 15% for men).
The same is true of anxiety disorders (a 31% rate for women, compared with 19% for men).
But men are far more likely to abuse or become addicted to drugs or alcohol at least once in their lifetime (35%, compared with 18% for women).
Men are also much more likely to have antisocial personalities, a diagnosis describing persistent criminal or destructive behavior (5%, compared with 1% for women).
The report paints a bleak picture of substance abuse in America, with sharply higher rates than earlier surveys.
Mr. Kessler cautions that the reports of abuse include rambunctious teenagers who go on to lead healthy adult lives.
But 11% of all men reported a dependence on alcohol in the year preceding the survey.
Four percent reported drug dependence.
Mr. Kessler says the two groups have a big overlap.
The new data support the belief that mental illness becomes more common as income and education levels drop.
A more surprising finding: Americans between the ages of 25 and 34 are more likely than any other age group to have suffered a psychiatric disorder sometime in their lives.
Mr. Kessler says other surveys have found similar results, in part because modern young people face inordinate stresses from drugs, alcohol and fears about the future.
"The scariness of what might be bad is a lot worse than the reality of what did go wrong," he says.
The data also found many diagnoses are significantly more widespread among whites than blacks.
Blacks were 63% less likely to have depression or another mood disorder and 35% less likely to have a substance-abuse problem.
Those findings echo earlier surveys, though the gaps between whites and blacks didn't previously appear to be so wide.
Of particular importance for health-policy makers, the study looked at how commonly Americans seek professional help for mental disorders.
Only about 40% of all those who reported any disorder said they obtained professional help.
Of course, with any medical problem, only a fraction of people with a complaint actually take the trouble to call a doctor.
More disturbingly, only six out of 10 people in the crucial 14% pileup group with three or more lifetime disorders ever received treatment.
And of all the people with three or more disorders during the year preceding the survey, only a third received treatment during that year.
"These results argue for the importance of more outreach and more research on barriers to professional help-seeking," Mr. Kessler and his co-authors write.
An important unanswered question is the extent of those barriers in other branches of medicine.
The Clinton administration's national health plan has drawn controversy by singling out mental health for special limits, imposing ceilings on hospital days and outpatient visits that don't apply to any other kind of care.
Thus far, the debate over mental-health care has drawn heavily on a single epidemiological study, in which five big universities sent researchers into their local neighborhoods between 1980 and 1985.
The federal government adjusted the findings to try to reflect the entire national population.
In the new study, Mr. Kessler's team at the University of Michigan sent surveyors across the country to interview a sample of 8,098 Americans in 34 states, between 1990 and 1992.
The survey grew out of a mandate by Congress to study the concurrence of substance abuse and psychiatric disorders.
