Apple Computer Inc. expects to announce a deal this year licensing its Macintosh operating system to another computer maker, as part of its strategy to more than double the Macintosh system's personal-computer market share to 25%.
Michael Spindler, president and chief executive of the Cupertino, Calif.-based company, made these comments in an interview following yesterday's launch of a line of Macintoshes based on a microprocessor called PowerPC.
Mr. Spindler, who had told shareholders Apple had agreed to license its System 7 operating system for the first time, said the company is in discussions to do so with "a number of" companies he declined to identify.
Several industry sources have said Apple has approached such rival PC makers as Compaq Computer Corp. and Dell Computer Corp. about licensing System 7, but that the companies deemed terms too restrictive.
It also isn't clear whether computer makers can make Apple clones cheaply enough to make them profitable.
Apple hasn't commented on any such negotiations.
Mr. Spindler said Apple needs to license its operating system to boost the Macintosh market share from its current worldwide level of about 11%.
Though Apple officials last week predicted the Macintosh share itself would grow to about 20% in the next two years, Mr. Spindler said he "would like" the Macintosh's system share to grow to 25% through licensing.
PCs running on operating software by Microsoft Corp. and chips by Intel Corp. now constitute about 85% of the market.
Analysts say Apple needs to license its operating system so the volume would increase and more software developers would write programs for the Macintosh system, thus enhancing the appeal for customers.
Currently, nine out of 10 programs are written for Microsoft's DOS and Windows PC systems.
But they question whether Apple can significantly boost its market share anytime soon, given the Microsoft-Intel hegemony.
They say, at best, Apple may boost its share by five percentage points over the next five years.
"They have a job ahead of them," said Michael K. Kwatinetz, analyst with PaineWebber Inc.
Besides licensing its software, Apple is counting on the greatly enhanced performance of its new line of so-called Power Macintoshes to lure more programs and customers.
"Today, we make a quantum leap forward," Ian W. Diery, executive vice president of Apple's personal computer division, told about 700 industry supporters at a theatrical unveiling of the line at the Lincoln Center.
Mr. Diery said Apple had already booked orders for 150,000 of the machines from resellers and that he anticipated the company would ship one million over the next 12 months.
But Mr. Spindler said inventories of Power Macintoshes at the reseller level are very low, because "we didn't want to stuff the channel."
He said shipments would increase as demand builds through the summer.
Despite the low manufacturing cost of PowerPC, which was developed by Apple, International Business Machines Corp. and Motorola Inc., Mr. Spindler said the new chip won't necessarily spell an end to Apple's diminishing profit margins, which have plunged to about 25% from 40% amid an industry pricing war.
Mr. Spindler said he hopes to improve Apple's margins through sales of ancillary products, such as hand-held Newton MessagePads that can get data out of a Macintosh and a recently introduced on-line service.
