Railroads in Europe are trying to figure out how to reverse declining ridership and deal with a lack of innovation.
Officials of the unprofitable and deeply indebted systems said they need revamping to lure motorists from highways and compete with other kinds of transportation.
Antonio Lorenzo Necci, an Italian railroad administrator and chairman of the International Union of Railways, said, "Little by little, we've become a system of transportation that's become marginal."
In the past two decades, the rail share of the European passenger market fell to 7% from 10%.
Current trends aren't encouraging.
Rail passenger traffic fell in all 12 countries of the European Union last year, for an average drop of 3.6%.
Yet "our advantage now is that highways are full," Mr. Necci said.
Among solutions proposed by the rail group: Franco-German cooperation in the high-speed train business and higher gasoline taxes to pay for rail improvements.
The Georges Pompidou modern art center in Paris, touted as the world's most-visited museum, will be renovated in a campaign to renew the French capital's cultural landmarks.
The Pompidou center opened 17 years ago with capacity for 300 staff members and 7,000 visitors a day, but has 1,500 staff serving 25,000 visitors daily.
A $20 million, two-year overhaul of the exterior "Piazza" will start next January; the second phase is to upgrade the interior.
Other aging and structurally defective landmarks to get improvements include the Palais Garnier opera house, Pantheon, Grand Palais exhibition hall, Comedie Francaise theater and Trocadero square.
To help bolster Ukraine's faltering economy, European Union ambassadors agreed to offer the republic a more generous partnership and cooperation agreement, similar to that being negotiated with Russia to soften EU trade defenses.
The 12-country bloc also agreed to negotiate meatier free-trade pacts with Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, such as lowering barriers on products, in a move toward concluding more advanced association accords with the three Baltic nations.
The steps are expected to be endorsed by EU foreign ministers on Monday.
Consumer-products companies hoping for Chinese consumer spending to surge over the lunar new-year holiday may be disappointed.
Chinese buying habits have changed in recent years, reflecting increasing urbanization and exposure to Western customs, a Hong Kong Trade Development Council economist said.
"The Chinese purchase more at Christmastime nowadays," he said, and this restrains spending in the Chinese New Year, celebrated next Thursday.
But in rural areas, few people exchange gifts at Christmas and thus are more likely to spend more for the Chinese New Year.
Britain began a pilot study by forensic scientists to set up a genetic database to trap criminals.
Legislation before Parliament would widen police powers to take DNA samples from saliva and hair samples for a national database of convicted criminals.
"We will bring the full force of modern science to bear on the modern criminal," a U.K. official said.
Taiwan's cabinet approved reimposing a capital-gains tax on securities that was scrapped in 1989, and cutting the stock-transaction tax to 0.2% from 0.3%, starting July 1.
Under the plan, which needs parliamentary approval, some individuals would be subject to a 0.6% capital-gains tax.
The levy would be 0.3% for institutional investors.
Separately, in its bid to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, Taiwan offered to cut tariffs on 475 imported items an average of 20%.
The U.S. seeks a halving of duties on 699 items.
One-day protests of governments' inaction, action and proposals stretched from South America to Asia.
In Poland, 60,000 arms-industry workers shut 31 factories in a nationwide warning strike to demand a vision for the ailing defense sector.
Unions want higher pay and more government purchases and subsidies for restructuring the sector, its sales crushed by the East bloc's collapse.
In Ecuador, a general strike to protest the government's 71% increase in gasoline prices turned violent in many areas.
In Pakistan, a strike called by a political opposition party over power dilution from redistricting shut down Karachi, where shootings caused fatalities.
In western Germany, metalworking industries held to a proposed wage freeze, as union warning strikes extended into a fourth day; 176,000 workers walked out of 590 enterprises.
France tightened customs' quality controls after 1,200 striking fishermen sacked a huge wholesale food market to protest inexpensive imports they say threaten their livelihood.
They want European price minimums and import protection.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
British customs officers emptied 10,000 beer, wine and liquor bottles into sewers to warn against bootlegging.
In the barrier-free European Union, taking alcoholic beverages home from other countries for personal use is legal but profiteering isn't. . . .
Mount Semneru, a 9,877-foot-high volcano in East Java, Indonesia, erupted for the first time in 13 years.
