When the Rev. Albert DiUlio arrived at Marquette University as president in 1990, he faced a disturbing prospect: Marquette and its 11,000 students might have to wall themselves in for their own safety.
Gangs, drug dealers and prostitutes had moved into Avenues West, a 100-square-block area near downtown that has been home to the Jesuit university for 113 years.
Fear and violence moved in with them.
"We were having drive-by and stand-by shootings," says Virginia Johnson, a community activist.
But instead of building a wall around the university, Father DiUlio has led Marquette in rebuilding the community.
"I could see where we were going.
I could see the economic consequences.
And I could see the economic potential of reversing the decline," he says.
Marquette's situation exemplified a town-and-gown dilemma confronting many urban colleges and universities.
Built near city centers on once-prime acreage, they now are encircled by neighborhoods mired in crime, decay and human misery.
Security concerns often compete with education for attention and financial resources.
Some institutions have bailed out of the cities.
In the wake of the Watts riots in South Central Los Angeles, Pepperdine left the area for Malibu, Calif., in 1972.
Marquette's former medical school moved to a suburb in the 1960s.
But now, many urban schools are no longer trying to put distance between themselves and their troubled surroundings.
Instead, all over the country, institutions have been getting more involved in attacking problems of their home turf.
The University of Southern California has become involved in providing counseling, tutoring and college preparatory classes for children in South Central Los Angeles.
Yale has agreed to invest $50 million in improvement projects in New Haven, Conn., while more than half of its students are volunteering in local social service programs.
And Illinois Institute of Technology is getting more involved in community revitalization efforts on Chicago's South Side.
It is different "from the 1960s and 1970s, when the school was trying to put in a buffer" between itself and the community, says Leroy Kennedy, IIT's vice president for community relations.
"You can only run so far."
In Milwaukee, Marquette has been steadily increasing its presence in the Avenues West community.
Through urban renewal and other acquisitions, the campus has grown to 80 acres, from 26 acres in 1965.
In the neighborhoods around the university, crime had been steadily rising over the years, and occasionally spilled onto campus.
Three students became homicide victims between 1985 and 1991; two of the killings occurred near the school.
Then Jeffrey Dahmer was arrested in July 1991 for multiple murders and cannibalism.
His apartment, where some of the victims' remains were found, was just 10 blocks from Marquette.
Maps accompanying Dahmer stories often used the campus as a reference point.
Attendance at evening campus events fell.
Graduate students sought housing elsewhere.
Freshman enrollment, 2,113 in 1989, plunged to 1,685 in 1993.
If Marquette was to stay in the community, Father DiUlio saw just two options: "We could wall ourselves in or we could weave ourselves in."
Doing the latter meant melding with a neighborhood spiced with racial and ethnic diversity but soured by poverty and neglect.
It was a place that had become "older rather than younger, poorer rather than richer," says the 50-year-old Father DiUlio, a Marquette student in the early 1960s.
In 1990, most of the 16,000 or so residents in Avenues West had incomes below poverty level, according to census data.
About 60% of the buildings contained 20 or more rental units, and only 4.2% of housing units were owner-occupied.
Much of the property was owned by absentee landlords who let it fall into disrepair or ceded it to drug dealers.
In casting Marquette's lot with Avenues West, Father DiUlio decided to take a "comprehensive approach" that would go beyond simply restoring property.
"You can't just say you're interested in student housing," he says.
And it would take more than altruism to win support of Marquette's trustees, he reasoned.
"To sell this to the board, it had to be in rock-solid, understandable business terms."
His emphasis on the pragmatic persuaded trustees in late 1991 to commit $9 million in university funds.
Hearing of the president's plans, a wealthy widow and longtime Milwaukee resident donated $8.2 million anonymously.
Another anonymous donor gave $500,000.
Although he had a business background, Father DiUlio knew little about real estate.
He hired an alumnus, Patrick LeSage, 50, a former real estate developer and entrepreneur.
Mr. LeSage and a small staff began working from a 1988 study assessing the community's needs and commissioned by Avenues West Association, a civic group.
They formed two nonprofit corporations, one for residential and the other for commercial real estate.
Then several local organizations were recruited as partners, including the Avenues West Association; Aurora Health Care System, which runs Sinai Samaritan Medical Center, the area's last remaining hospital; and Ameritech of Wisconsin, which has facilities in the area with more than 300 employees.
Aurora, with 1,400 employees at Sinai Medical, has promised $4.1 million in land, cash and services.
"We decided that, instead of crying in our beer about the neighborhood, we've got to do something about it," says Aurora's president, Ed Howe.
In December 1991, Marquette and its partners launched Campus Circle Project.
Its aim was to buy residential and commercial properties, including several bars catering to the bottle-in-a-paper-bag crowd, fix them up and lease them.
Priorities were to clean up crime, upgrade the real estate and keep housing affordable, while retaining the community's ethnic and economic diversity.
But many residents reacted with suspicion.
"It has not been in Marquette's history to work in the community," says Joyce Henry, who runs a halfway house for homeless people.
"Their community -- yes.
The rest of the community -- no."
Father DiUlio concedes that, previously, beyond offering some health and legal services, Marquette "simply did not do anything in the neighborhood."
To gain support, Marquette formed Neighborhood Circle, made up of representatives from local businesses, churches, community groups and some residents, to help in planning and to keep people informed.
They held scores of meetings with organizations, landlords, tenants and city officials.
When initial turnout was poor, they began serving food at meetings.
"We went on a road show," says Mr. LeSage.
Ms. Johnson, the community activist, who owns a tax preparation and accounting service, attended one of the early gatherings and spoke out forcefully on behalf of low-income residents.
"She `Uzied' us," recalls Sandra Hintz, vice president of Campus Circle, who was there to hear the criticism.
Ms. Johnson says her concern then was that Marquette "had this fancy plan that was like an elegant box with nothing but a card inside."
Attitudes softened as Campus Circle bought one apartment house after another, renovating some units and temporarily boarding up others that required extensive overhaul.
In one structure with 60 apartments, more than two-thirds had been damaged by fire or used for drug activity.
(It has been sold to be converted to low-income housing for the elderly.)
Whenever possible, occupants were allowed to remain in their buildings, but some were relocated in the neighborhood.
Students and non-students were moved into some of the same buildings.
Tenants suspected of drug dealing were sent a message that they weren't wanted, as the new owners hired security guards to patrol properties and enforced lease clauses banning misuse of premises.
Other landlords in the area were notified of the evictions.
"No loitering" and "no trespassing" signs began appearing in apartment-house lobbies, and tenants and visitors were admonished against drinking or making loud noises outside the buildings.
Some community leaders have criticized the approach as heavy-handed.
"They have what appear to be valid community goals, but the process is questionable," says MacCanon Brown, a longtime advocate for the poor and homeless in Avenues West.
She has repeatedly at meetings and in the press charged the project with insensitivity toward the poor.
"Campus Circle is better than what we had, but the people I'm in the network with are primarily the poor, who have watched Marquette for many years and know they have been a bad citizen," she says.
Some renters griped that the new landlords took too long to complete repairs.
One former tenant, Dennis Hodorowski, 45, says his treatment by Campus Circle amounted to "harassment," after he was told he was behind in his rent.
"They gave me five days notice of eviction but they couldn't find where I had a missing payment," he says.
Campus Circle staffers attribute some of the problems to outside contractors hired to provide security and management services.
They say some erroneous eviction notices were sent because of bookkeeping problems caused by the change in ownership to Campus Circle.
"We acquired a lot of properties" in a short period of time, says Art Murchinson, manager of tenant relations.
"They had had absentee landlords that didn't care about the neighborhood or the buildings and allowed any and everybody to move into them without any type of screening process."
The confusion subsided when Campus Circle itself began managing the properties and providing security, screened tenant applicants more closely, installed new locks and other protection devices and helped form tenant councils.
It also began renovating the small business district near campus, buying nine of the 15 taverns.
All but three of the nine bars have been closed, and five have been demolished or are scheduled to be.
Residents responding to a questionnaire said a supermarket was a top priority.
Although the neighborhood's demographics have been a turnoff for major supermarket chains, Campus Circle is trying to woo a store "way above anything the neighborhood has had," says Father DiUlio.
It would be part of Campus Town, Campus Circle's $30 million makeover of business and apartment buildings near Marquette.
When completed this fall, Campus Town will have 152 apartments, an athletic center and 89,000 square feet of commercial space, including a Blockbuster Video store that is already open.
All of this activity has attracted some developers into the neighborhood separate from Marquette's efforts.
Last August, a builder completed a 179-unit apartment complex adjacent to Campus Town.
The view from the community now is that things are looking up.
"I saw the downslide and now I think we're on the rebound," says Tom Wiseman, owner of Brett Funeral home and a businessman in the area since 1968.
Campus Circle now owns and manages 1,113 units in 137 properties that include residential and commercial buildings and vacant lots.
It has spent $25 million to buy property, $3 million on housing rehabilitation and $26 million on Campus Town.
Among residents who had to be relocated because of redevelopment, 74% remain in the community.
Campus Town financing was aided by a $4.17 million low-interest loan from the city of Milwaukee, tied to future property-tax revenue from the project.
The city also has agreed to spend $750,000 to improve the area's streets.
"This project is uplifting, not just for this neighborhood but for other parts of the city," says Mayor John Norquist.
"I see it as a model."
So do other urban universities that have come to take a look, including Loyola in Chicago, the University of Cincinnati, Illinois Institute of Technology and the University of Southern California.
"I think there is a real need to reach out, to develop those sorts of bridges between the communities that surround us," says Marshall Goodman, an associate dean at the University of Cincinnati.
At Marquette, the outreach has gone beyond rebuilding the city-scape.
Some Marquette students tutor neighborhood children.
In addition, the university has received $650,000 from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for programs in crime prevention and landlord-tenant relations.
The battle against crime in the community isn't won, but it is making significant gains.
Mayor Norquist set up a police mini-precinct in the area staffed with 50 officers.
The police cracked down on an "open drug market" along several blocks, says Lt. Robert Surdyk.
"Some of my officers even wrote suspected dealers pedestrian tickets for obstructing traffic.
They'd stand out in the street and sell to passing cars."
He adds that in the first half of 1993, more than 200 prostitution citations were issued.
Through last September, major crime in Avenues West was down 34% from a year before.
Lt. Surdyk says many complaints now have to do with "quality of life" issues such as loud radios, illegal parking and loitering.
Said Virginia Johnson recently: "I haven't heard a gunshot in two weeks."
