So you think cellular-telephone competition is tough in the U.S.?
Well, take a look at Italy.
Here, the battle for a second mobile-phone license pits the country's three titans of industry -- Gianni Agnelli of Fiat SpA, Silvio Berlusconi of Fininvest SpA and Carlo De Benedetti of Ing.
C. Olivetti & Co. -- in a brutal contest for one of Europe's fastest-growing telecommunications markets and one of the last to open up to competition.
The intensity is understandable: Italy's cellular market is now valued at about $1 billion and is expected to quintuple by the year 2000.
But this battle is about much more than money.
Much of the animosity between the combatants is personal -- and long-running.
In addition, the future of at least one of the competitors -- Olivetti -- could depend on the decision.
And the phone contest is a major test of whether things have truly changed here, following a two-year investigation that revealed that nearly every government contract awarded over the past 10 years has been padded with extortion payments.
"Until now, we've seen how contracts were awarded in Italy," says Lorenzo Colucci, Italian market analyst for Natwest Securities in London.
"You can bet they're going to be very careful with this one."
After years of delay and pressure from the European Community, the Italian government announced in mid-December that it would end state phone company SIP SpA's longtime monopoly on cellular telephones and award a second license -- for the Italian portion of the pan-European digital GSM system -- to a private bidder by the end of April.
The top two contenders are Omnitel, a consortium led by Olivetti and in which Bell Atlantic Corp. holds a 16.6% stake, and Unitel, a group comprising Olivetti's longtime rivals Fiat and media giant Fininvest, along with the U.K.'s Vodafone Group PLC, BellSouth Corp. of Atlanta, state energy giant ENI SpA and Millicom Inc. of New York.
Another bidder, considered less likely to win, is Pronto Italia, a consortium of Italian companies with Pacific Telesis Group of California and Mannesmann AG of Germany.
The company with the most at stake is computer maker Olivetti, which, after three years of losses and restructuring efforts, is counting on diversification into telecommunications.
"It's crucial for us to get that license," says Mr. De Benedetti, the controlling shareholder in the company.
The problem, he says, is that the company doesn't "have the means to be a global player in a new, enormous multimedia market where borders are not defined."
He adds: "What's the solution?
Form new alliances and find entry points in this new world of digitalization, which is putting together telecommunications, computers and media.
For Olivetti, telecommunications is our entry point in this world."
Mr. De Benedetti met with Prime Minister Carlo Ciampi about the contract last fall, explaining that it was critical for Olivetti's future, and that losing the contract may result in significant layoffs.
"Olivetti's effort at downsizing its computer business is only achievable if it channels its workers into telecommunications," says Paul Dionne, an analyst with Pasfin Securities in Milan.
"If they don't get the license, you can bet there will be numerous shutdowns, and the market will take it very badly."
Unitel, the Fiat-Fininvest-ENI consortium, argues that the cellular license is an extension of its core auto and media businesses.
Fiat, which has a joint venture with International Business Machines Corp. for data-transmission services, wants to further develop data and voice transmission for the transportation and retail sectors, says Nicolo Nefri, chief executive of the Unitel consortium.
Furthermore, Fininvest, which owns three national television networks and a department-store chain, plans to develop multimedia applications with the license.
"Just because someone has the hardware like Olivetti doesn't mean they have the service culture and experience necessary," Mr. Nefri says.
"That's like saying Apple Computer should manage the cellular network in the U.S."
The bidding war is just the latest example of corporate combat the three industrial barons have waged against one another periodically.
In a country where a few families still control the bulk of private industry, business can and does become very personal.
Mr. De Benedetti and Mr. Berlusconi already are in the midst of a vicious three-year-old war of words, following a high-profile battle for control of the Mondadori publishing house in 1991.
After dividing Mondadori's newspapers and magazines between them, the two now use the periodicals to snipe at each other.
In a December cover story in the De Benedetti-controlled Espresso newsmagazine, Mr. Berlusconi was portrayed with a Pinocchio nose, and was called "the magnificent liar."
Mr. Berlusconi's Panorama magazine often attacks Mr. De Benedetti's various businesses.
When competitors aren't pointing fingers at one another, they take aim at SIP, the state phone operator.
Bidders accuse SIP of doing everything -- legal and illegal -- to pressure the government to postpone awarding the second license until it has reached a dominant position in the cellular market.
After three years of cellular service, SIP has 1.2 million subscribers, primarily to its analog cellular system.
"There's no doubt SIP was instrumental in delaying the whole thing," says Natwest's Mr. Colucci.
"In that business they want to reach critical mass, and now they've reached one million subscribers, so they'll have a hard core of users."
The government's delay in opening the market to competition became so controversial last summer that Italy's independent antitrust authority stepped in, issuing a critical report.
"Any further delay in opening up to competition risks compromising the future order of the digital cellular phone market," the authority said in its report.
The report said, among other things, that SIP had an advantage over competitors, because it has already been able to invest in the new GSM system while it will take competitors at least 18 months to catch up.
SIP also had been selling and advertising the GSM to the public in violation of the government's concession, which granted SIP only experimental operation rights until a second operator is named, the antitrust authority said.
"The limitation of the market prolongs the period necessary to reach a break-even point for competitors," the authority said.
SIP Responds SIP denies it has lobbied to delay opening the market.
"SIP has always been amenable to the opening to a second operator," says Ernesto Pascale, SIP chairman.
"In fact, we already asked the Minister of Post and Telecommunications a while ago to speed up the relevant decisions."
SIP argues that it previously had been granted the telecommunications monopoly concession for Italy until 2004.
With the introduction of a second operator, SIP says it is entitled to compensation for the loss of future business.
Although government lawyers argue that the original concession did not include GSM digital technology, the telecommunications ministry has agreed to negotiate with SIP over possible compensation.
Meanwhile, SIP says it has stopped advertising the GSM system until the second license is awarded.
However, almost every day there is a newspaper ad by GSM hardware suppliers that features photos of SIP's GSM phones.
While few of the players will emerge without battle scars, the big winner should be consumers.
Analysts say the introduction of competition into Italy's bureaucratic state telecommunications sector is destined to revolutionize the way business is done here.
According to Natwest Securities, prices for using cellular phones in Italy should fall in line with those in other European countries that recently opened their markets.
After competition was introduced in the German cellular market in mid-1992, prices immediately fell 30% to consumers.
That can only be good news for Italians, who have embraced their "telefonini" as the latest status symbol for the '90s.
Ms. Bannon is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Milan bureau.
