Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa hammered out a $140 billion stimulus package that may not get Japan's economy racing but should keep it from reversing again.
The package, which includes a one-year cut in income taxes totaling 5.47 trillion yen ($50.3 billion) and much-needed aid for the nation's struggling banks, ought to add between one and two percentage points of growth to the economy, analysts say.
But they warn that the steps won't end Japan's downturn, and worry that the temporary nature of the tax cut might blunt its stimulative effect.
"It's not the best outcome possible, but it's better than waiting further," said Mitsubishi Bank Ltd. economist Donald Kimball.
"At best, it might just shore up the economy in the medium term."
The package is the result of a last-minute compromise worked out by Mr. Hosokawa's coalition government.
Mr. Hosokawa had proposed raising sales taxes to pay for the income-tax reduction, but the notion threatened to split his government and hurt him in the polls.
Last night, a humbled Mr. Hosokawa issued an apology to the nation over the uproar.
"More than anything, the procedure was abrupt," he said.
"I must apologize sincerely to the people."
Mr. Hosokawa rushed out the measures in order to have something to show President Clinton when the two leaders meet in Washington on Friday.
The U.S. has been pressing Japan to boost its economy so that it will import more.
But economists say the package probably won't fully satisfy Mr. Clinton.
"The U.S. has been waiting for Japan to pull out the stops in stimulating domestic demand," said James Vestal, economist at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Ltd.
"They haven't."
Washington also is demanding that Japan sign agreements to open specific sectors to more imports, but those talks are considered stalled.
In Washington -- where U.S. officials have argued that only Japan has the wherewithal to cut taxes and spur world economic growth -- Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen responded cautiously.
"This is a modest step.
Every little bit helps," he said.
"It remains to be seen whether this package will be adequate to spur strong demand and to reduce the current account significantly."
U.S. officials say it's hard to tell how much stimulus will result from a Japanese government spending package without knowing how much of the money would have been spent otherwise or where offsetting spending cuts are being proposed.
As U.S. experience illustrates, a tax cut billed as temporary is less potent than a permanent cut because consumers are more likely to save the windfall than spend it.
In the end, it seems U.S. pressure ultimately saved Mr. Hosokawa by forcing a coalition compromise on taxes.
Most politicians felt it would have been a disaster for Mr. Hosokawa to meet Mr. Clinton empty-handed.
"The Hosokawa administration is in a state of total chaos and on the verge of implosion," political commentator Minoru Morita said the day before the tax compromise was reached.
But "the Japan-U.S. summit can be described as the savior for Mr. Hosokawa."
More than any postwar Japanese prime minister, Mr. Hosokawa has drawn his power from his sky-high popularity, which has stemmed, in part, from his confident image.
Yet in contrast with the steady way he seemed to handle other issues -- opening the rice market and enacting political reform -- Mr. Hosokawa has seemed weak and indecisive on the tax matter.
The battle has badly bruised him, contributing to a slide of nearly 20 percentage points in his popularity ratings.
Mr. Hosokawa's image had another blow with a report published this week in the magazine Bungei Shunju, alleging extensive financial ties between Mr. Hosokawa's family and a scandal-tainted trucking firm.
Similar allegations surfaced against Mr. Hosokawa last year but did little damage.
The stimulus plan announced Tuesday represents Japan's fourth attempt in 18 months to rev up the economy.
The centerpiece is 5.85 trillion yen in tax cuts, including 5.47 trillion yen in national and local income-tax reductions.
Other tax breaks include reducing new-car sales tax to 3% from 4.5%, a move that could boost sales by 50,000 vehicles a year.
In addition, the package calls for 7.2 trillion yen in spending and investment for items such as home financing and new medical and research facilities.
The steps also include cheap loans and other help for small businesses.
Unlike previous packages, this round also has sizable provisions to stimulate the moribund land market and to help banks restructure bad loans.
Analysts warn, however, these measures won't be sufficient to solve many of the problems affecting the Japanese banking and real-estate sectors, which are a drag on growth.
Land will be purchased by a private entity, which will receive a 500 billion yen government guarantee, plus subsidies and no-interest loans in order to buy up land and "warehouse" it until needed.
The government also will let the banks set up special companies to take over "restructured," or low-interest, loans, which will then be sold back to the banks at a lower value, in the form of bonds.
The bank will be allowed to move the loan off its books and take tax write-offs that will free up funds for new lending.
Economists expect these measures to provide enough of a jolt to business activity to keep the economy afloat this year.
But the effect might not be felt until June or later, and even then no one expects the package to kill off Japan's slump, which began nearly three years ago.
The consensus: Even with the package, Japan's economy will grow less than 1% in 1994.
What's more, business leaders and economists worry that the last-minute compromise on the income-tax reduction may hinder its impact on consumer spending.
A TV news program estimated that a typical family of four, earning $46,000 a year, will pocket just $375 in tax savings.
Last week, Mr. Hosokawa unveiled a plan to cut taxes by six trillion yen a year, to be offset three years later by more than doubling the nation's sales tax.
Mr. Hosokawa's Socialist allies threatened to bolt from his government if levies were raised, while the conservative Finance Ministry resisted raising taxes without some guarantee of higher levies later.
The final solution split the difference: The national income-tax cut, retroactive to Jan. 1, will be effective for just this year.
Later this year, leaders promised to decide whether to extend the reduction and how to pay for it.
The tax reductions will be returned to consumers in two chunks, one in June and one in December.
The government will issue roughly six trillion yen in bonds to bridge the revenue shortfall.
