At Epcot Center these days, a peek into the future is more like a look into the past.
Founder Walt Disney envisioned Epcot as a futuristic community where new and constantly changing methods of living and working would be tried out on a grand scale.
But his successors turned Epcot into an amusement park with educational overtones that, just over a dozen years after opening, already seems outdated, somewhat boring and in need of renovation.
At Exxon Corp.'s Universe of Energy pavilion at Epcot, for example, the control center of a "cutting edge" electric plant features rotary-dial telephones.
And American Telephone & Telegraph Co.'s Spaceship Earth history of communications exhibit ends with views of early, bulky computers.
Even Walt Disney Co. executives agree that the company seemed to forget about Epcot -- one of three major parks at the Walt Disney World resort here -- since opening the $1 billion attraction in 1982.
But now the company is embarking on an intensive effort to revive Epcot, partly by harking back to Mr. Disney's initial idea.
Opening in July, an attraction called Innoventions will be a constantly changing exhibition of products such as voice-activated appliances and virtual-reality gaming technology.
Innoventions will feature products dreamed up by futurists at companies including General Motors Corp. and Apple Computer Inc.
"It's like starting over again, but that's what's so exciting," says Linda Warren, who was recently tapped to lead Epcot's revival.
Ms. Warren, a former top aide to Disney's chairman, Michael Eisner, adds: "Yes, some of the attractions don't look credible anymore.
They need updating."
Disney doesn't release figures, but industry executives say admissions at Epcot have been dropping.
Amusement Business, a trade magazine, reported that only deep discounting and local promotions kept Epcot's attendance steady at about 10 million visitors last year.
But Disney hopes to reverse the trend with its overhaul.
Two major pavilions in the park's Future World section -- its signature geodesic dome Spaceship Earth and The Land -- are being completely redesigned, and others are set for refurbishment starting next year.
In the World Showcase section -- where themed pavilions invite visitors to sample the culture of various countries -- a Denmark pavilion will be built, the first addition since 1988.
Epcot is on Mr. Eisner's priority list, and Ms. Warren says she believes the company will spend whatever is necessary to fix it up.
"There has to be an idea and a story" behind each attraction, she says.
"It's incumbent on us to come up with those ideas, and then Michael will agree to anything that makes sense."
Although an Epcot enthusiast, Ms. Warren is also one of its toughest critics.
She suggests the main problem is that visitors don't feel very "connected" to one another or to Epcot's attractions.
What's more, she worries that the vision of Epcot has blurred, questioning the appropriateness of a show now playing there: "The Magical World of Barbie."
"That's the kind of thing we're going to be looking at more closely," she says.
Ms. Warren also sees room for improvement at the World Showcase pavilions.
She says there isn't enough outdoor activity to connect the pavilions, which in some cases are hundreds of feet apart.
To liven up the area, she envisions recreating outdoor marketplaces of France and Italy.
Outside the China attraction she might add a tai chi instructor, with visitors participating in demonstrations.
Timeliness is a key.
Ms. Warren notes that the Norway pavilion generated a lot of excitement by celebrating the winter Olympics.
The Chinese New Year should be welcomed at the China pavilion and Cinco de Mayo at Mexico, she says.
Epcot's Future World pavilions have corporate sponsors that each signed 10-year contracts -- agreeing to put up about $35 million -- when the park opened.
When the contracts expired in 1992, Disney asked for significantly higher fees and got a lukewarm reception.
Kraft General Foods pulled out as sponsor of The Land and General Electric Co. withdrew from Horizons.
Disney got Nestle USA Inc. to take over sponsorship of The Land, but it hasn't yet found a new partner for Horizons, which focuses on lifestyles in space, under the sea and in the desert (and which remains open).
General Motors and Exxon also haven't yet renewed long-term contracts although they are expected to do so soon.
Disney is now working to stagger the expiration of new contracts so that pavilions won't all go stale and need freshening simultaneously.
Although it will take years to completely overhaul Future World, Disney hopes this year's moves will be a significant step in the right direction.
After the newly refurbished Land pavilion opens in June, Disney plans to put a new 3-D movie into Eastman Kodak Co.'s Journey Into Imagination pavilion.
Under a plan devised before Michael Jackson's well-publicized problems, the rock star's "Captain EO" film will be replaced with "Honey, I Shrunk the Audience."
The revised Spaceship Earth attraction, opening in December, will have new interactive exhibits.
Among other things, visitors will be able to "step into" an outsize fiber-optic line to learn how data are transmitted.
Disney and General Motors are in the concept stage for a new World of Motion pavilion tentatively set to open in 1997; early ideas call for a "thrill ride and a test track," Ms. Warren says.
Marketing remains a daunting challenge.
Ms. Warren says many people still think all of Epcot's attractions are up in the silvery dome that houses just Spaceship Earth.
And at about the time Innoventions opens, nearby Disney-MGM Studios will open its Twilight Zone Tower of Terror thrill ride.
Ms. Warren says that Innoventions may well be the more stimulating attraction, but she worries that it will be harder to sell in a 30-second commercial.
She also believes that Innoventions is in line with what the company founder had in mind.
"We didn't do as good a job as we should have" following Mr. Disney's vision, she says, adding: "But Epcot really is going to be as wonderful as everyone had planned for it to be in the first place, as wonderful as it was when it first opened."
