With $9.8 billion in annual revenues and a sixth of the nation's 40 million HMO subscribers, the Oakland-based Kaiser Permanente Foundation Health Plan is considered the paradigm for prepaid health-care delivery, and it wears the label proudly.
The latest Kaiser annual report brims with references to Total Quality Management and other industrial buzzwords.
A look at Kaiser, however, raises concerns about the medical and ethical underpinnings of managed care, a cornerstone of the Clinton health plan and several reform alternatives.
The Kaiser system is rooted in two core principles: Cut the fat and control the patient.
The fat-trimming shows up in Kaiser's doctor-patient ratio, which, at 1.3 per 1,000, is roughly a third the national average for health-care systems.
As for controlling the patient, at Kaiser you check your right to chart your own medical course at the door.
That privilege falls to the medical group to which you are assigned.
Member physicians weigh the cost of the proposed treatment against its probable long-term outcome.
This is the very heart of managed health care, enabling Kaiser and its imitators to offer employers a substantial savings in premiums.
In 1992, U.S. companies paid $3,313 per worker for Kaiser-type coverage, as against $4,080 for fee-for-service insurance.
But for consumers, such economies come at a price.
Descriptions of the Kaiser system are uncomfortably evocative of a free clinic, with rotating casts of doctors -- or nurse-practitioners, if one's complaint is not deemed worthy of a doctor's time -- endless waits for appointments, and tales of dozens of people standing in line to give blood or urine samples.
Kaiser's own in-house magazine, Coverage, reported in December 1992 that two-thirds of subscribers were dissatisfied with the amount of time one must spend on the phone to make an appointment.
And, in fact, a record 62,700 subscribers defected from Kaiser that year.
The Coverage article conceded that the exodus was prompted at least in part by "service issues," and Kaiser officials expressed their commitment to addressing them.
Critics charge Kaiser with valuing thrift above thoroughness, wealth over health.
"There just isn't as much of an incentive for you to stay well as there is for them to stay profitable," says Richard Mattingly, a San Diego branch manager for Robert F. Driver Co., a giant in the field of employee-benefits consulting.
Consider the case of Angela Farnum, now age 38.
Mrs. Farnum felt the first twinge in her breast in 1985.
She promptly made an appointment with her Kaiser physician, who she says dismissed the problem as "fibrocystic disease," a benign condition.
The symptoms persisted and she requested a mammogram, but according to Mrs. Farnum her doctor said there was no basis for the test, even chastising her for her "hypochondria."
When she became pregnant soon after and the symptoms abated, Mrs. Farnum convinced herself that doctor knows best.
A few springs later, while nursing her third child, Mrs. Farnum was aghast to note that the infant appeared to be spitting up blood.
Kaiser physicians again were dismissive, she says.
Later, after she complained of pain in the pelvic area, she says Kaiser staff insisted, still on the basis of a superficial exam, that she suffered from lingering postpartum soreness.
Only in 1990, after she found dimpling in her breast -- a classic sign of advancing cancer -- was Ms. Farnum able to obtain authorization for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
The results were devastating: A virulent carcinoma had metastasized throughout her system.
Kaiser spokesman Daniel Danzig says, "Our contention is that the chronology and particulars of the Farnum case are not as damning as her allegations make it appear."
Still, in 1992, Mrs. Farnum and her attorney, Merel Nissenberg, won a $500,000 settlement from Kaiser.
Angela Farnum's story is hardly unique.
There's the Wells Fargo teller whose nagging "sciatica" turned out to be a spinal tumor that spread to her brain and the cosmetologist whose chronic "finger fungus" turned out to be a melanoma.
These cases epitomize a very specific type of problem arising within managed care: the off-the-cuff diagnosis that proves grievously off the mark.
Says attorney Susan Finkelstein, one of the near-dozen malpractice specialists consulted for this piece, "Clearly with Kaiser there are a disproportionate number of cases relating to continuity of medical care or inadequate testing and followup."
Just how much is hard to say.
Plan membership entails an implicit consent to binding arbitration.
Kaiser's policy of privately administered arbitration frustrates any attempts to research the total number of malpractice claims or peruse relevant transcripts afterward.
(Nor, for that matter, is there an appeal process.)
Kaiser partisans bristle at having their record impugned on the basis of damning anecdotes.
Says Hugh Jones, senior vice president and general manager of the Southern California health plan, "If there were a way to compare the incidence of those types of occurrences in our population with the incidence in others, I think I'd be very proud of Kaiser's record."
Mr. Jones and others cite surveys by the Group Health Association of America showing that a typical contingent of 1,000 HMO enrollees age 65 and over will require an aggregate of only 1,543 days of annual hospitalization, as against a national average of almost 3,000 days.
Critics, though, denounce such statistics as tendentious.
"Sure, if you don't hospitalize sick people, they'll spend fewer days in the hospital," says Ms. Nissenberg.
"Some of them will go straight from their homes to the morgue."
Kaiser insiders do not deny keeping a tight rein on the screening tests collectively regarded as the hallmark of contemporary preventive medicine.
"There are a lot of common myths about routine screening," asserts Kaiser CEO David Lawrence.
"Like, a physical exam every year.
You don't need that."
Figures specific to Kaiser are hard to come by, but data compiled by the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey confirm that HMOs and other managed-care plans are less likely to authorize high-tech testing.
In the case of MRIs and CT scans, the difference is a factor of at least two to one.
As just one example, managed-care gurus have determined that women under age 50 do not need routine mammograms.
As for the reputedly small number of women whose cancers such tests would find?
They become acceptable losses in a system designed for broad-based cost containment.
Says Dan Nixon, American Cancer Society vice president for professional education, "The logic seems to be that if a certain therapy is of dubious value for the majority, then you don't offer it to the minority it will benefit, either."
Obtaining authorization for tests can be a Sisyphean undertaking even for someone who is bleeding rectally.
Vernon Story "presented every classic symptom that cried out for evaluation for colon cancer," according to medical malpractice attorney Virginia Nelson.
Ms. Nelson claims that Mr. Story had pain; that he had the bleeding; that he was a male in his mid-40s, an age group where this sort of cancer has become all too prevalent.
Most ominously, she reports that Vernon's father died of that very disease while in his 40s.
Even so, over an eight-year period, the attorney says Mr. Story was unable to prod Kaiser physicians into treating him as a high-risk cancer patient.
In early 1990, the lawyer says, he was diagnosed with Stage 3 colon cancer.
Says another malpractice attorney, "I get 15 or 20 calls a year from people regarding late diagnosis for cancer . . . at Kaiser."
Why might a doctor withhold treatment that could benefit the patient?
Kaiser medical groups are expected to hit certain budgetary targets, drummed in during a two- or three-year probation period.
Groups that stay beneath their established ceiling are rewarded with an end-year bonus amounting to 3% or 4% of annual salary (known in managed-care parlance as "at-risk compensation".)
Though Frank Murray, board chairman and medical director of Kaiser's Southern California plan, claims the few extra percentage points do not "constitute a meaningful incentive to any particular behaviors," Ms. Nissenberg finds it "frightening to think your doctor's course of treatment might be based on how much money he'll have left over for himself at year's end."
Says Walter Lawrence of the American Cancer Society: "It's not necessarily that these are bad doctors or bad people.
It's the culture in which they operate" -- a culture in which every decision is assessed in terms of statistics, and probabilities, and dollars.
And therein lies the critical fallacy in this whole attempt to apply to medicine the lessons of TQM and advanced industrial-management theory.
One does not weigh decisions bearing directly upon life and death as one would, say, a decision on whether to invest in a given commodity.
We cannot in good conscience reduce the practice of medicine to the equivalent of a Las Vegas odds board.
Mr. Salerno, who lives in San Diego, writes frequently about medical issues.
