Two months from today, on March 31, the last U.S. troops will pull out of Somalia.
No one knows what will happen on April 1.
U.S. officials are hoping that the Somali people are so weary of famine and death that they will restrain the warlords from launching another all-out civil war.
Instead, a U.S. diplomat predicts, there will be "midlevel gang warfare.
It won't be peaceful, but it might be reasonably stable."
No one is ruling out a return to total anarchy, though.
The U.S. and several European nations that also are getting out have made contingency plans to evacuate remaining United Nations forces should they come under attack.
For now at least, some 20,000 U.N. troops (drawn almost totally from the Third World) have agreed to stay on.
The Clinton administration has come up with an interesting rationale to cover its retreat.
Although no one has used the term, it is a foreign-policy version of "empowerment."
We did the best we could for the Somalis, the argument goes, and now it's up to them to decide whether they want war or peace.
While intended to insulate President Clinton from further blame, the argument may contain the kernel of a new, more modest, peace-keeping doctrine for both the U.S. and the U.N.
If Somalia stabilizes, the U.S. may be willing to consider other limited missions, and press forward with much-needed reforms of U.N. peace-keeping capabilities.
But if all hell breaks loose, the administration -- with a heartfelt "I told you so" from the Congress -- could walk away from peace-keeping altogether.
It's not clear, however, that the Somalis have been given what they need to take control of their own destiny.
As ever, the biggest doubts revolve around the U.N. failure to disarm Somali clans and militias.
A U.N. Security Council resolution, which could pass this week, will call for "voluntary" disarmament.
The U.N., meanwhile, will provide aid and reconstruction help only to Somali leaders who are willing to keep the peace; those who attack peace-keepers or each other will have to do without such support.
The U.N. and the U.S. already have built a new highway around Mogadishu, where the militias again control the streets, so they can bypass the capital and still deliver aid.
The U.N. could end up abandoning Mogadishu altogether.
With this approach, officials are hoping to build at least some stability region by region.
The U.N. will continue to encourage negotiations between the different clan leaders and warlords, with little expectation that they will agree on who should control a new central government.
"It could be years before Somalia has a functioning government," says one U.S. official.
There are dozens of reasons why such an approach could fail.
The biggest problem remains warlord Mohamed Farah Aideed, whose lust for power is matched only by his animosity toward the U.N.
Meanwhile, the reconstruction program that is supposed to encourage Somalis to keep the peace has gotten off to a slow start.
The U.S. has pledged $100 million and is hoping to raise more at a donors' conference scheduled for this week in Nairobi.
The U.N. also is hurrying to train and arm a new, neutral Somali police force.
But the new force may not have the skills it needs in time to stand up to the warlords and their teen-age thugs, or even to hold on to their newly imported weapons.
The approach does have in its favor the moral strength of Somali clan elders and religious leaders who desperately want peace.
The memories of 350,000 dead also are a force for peace.
No matter how Somalia turns out, empowerment may be a good basis for the Clinton administration's long-postponed peace-keeping doctrine.
But it still doesn't get the U.S. off the hook.
For empowerment to work, countries must be given the minimum conditions from which to build peace.
Even that entails real dangers and sacrifices.
If a peace accord is signed in Bosnia, for instance, the U.S. will have to decide whether it's worth taking even the diminished risks of helping to keep a peace to which all sides have agreed.
But if President Clinton or Congress decides not to send troops, no amount of rationalization will be able to cover their retreat.
