YOU GET A GREAT job offer.
A great new boss.
A great new company.
What's wrong with this picture?
You lack a written employment agreement.
In an era of rampant job insecurity, more managers are seeking these pacts to reduce the dangers involved in switching companies.
Some accords now go far beyond the usual sweetened severance package -- offering extended medical benefits or a guarantee to move you back if you relocate, for example.
But watch out: Employers are demanding tougher tradeoffs in return.
These pacts are written understandings outlining your employment conditions -- including compensation, benefits and any severance agreement -- and your employer's expectations.
They should contain language saying the accord is binding.
Between 20% and 25% of middle managers now get the pacts -- usually less formal than full-blown contracts -- when they change employers, up from 5% or less five years ago, estimates Pearl Meyer, a New York compensation consultant.
Jobhopping, she says, entails "a much higher risk than in prior years."
A simple offer letter may not suffice.
In July 1992, Sweet Life Foods in Suffield, Conn., wrote Arnold Margolis confirming his selection as the $72,500-a-year director of health and beauty aids for the wholesale distributor of food products.
Mr. Margolis, then 44 years old, says he gave up a marketing director's job in Rochester, N.Y., and moved to Connecticut.
But Sweet Life inexplicably withdrew its offer a few days before he was supposed to start work in August, he contends.
"I thought I had protected myself.
I was totally left holding the bag," complains Mr. Margolis, now a consultant.
"I haven't been able to find a position in my chosen profession."
He has sued the company for breach of contract.
Sweet Life declines to comment.
SEVERAL FACTORS may influence whether you can obtain a detailed employment agreement for posts below the highest rungs, career specialists say.
Obviously, the scarcer your skills and the more you are in demand, the better.
A large manufacturer recently attracted a $100,000-a-year finance executive by agreeing that if things don't work out, the company will maintain his medical benefits until he finds an employer offering the same coverage.
Such an open-ended commitment is unusual.
But "they wanted the guy a lot," explains Harold Johnson, a managing director of recruiters Norman Broadbent International in New York.
The promise of continued coverage expires after he's worked there for two years.
Moving long distances for a job also may strengthen your chances of negotiating a generous employment accord.
Many transferred managers seek a pledge that an employer will move them back at company expense if they lose their positions.
An operator of steel foundries hired a Chicago man to be a senior manager in an Iowa town of 13,000 people.
"I couldn't afford to be stuck here," he remembers.
"It's pretty hard to get a job in a town this size."
At his insistence, the company gave him a written guarantee "that if the job ended, I would be moved back to Chicago."
The 44-year-old manager quit last September, three years after moving.
But he decided not to use his return guarantee.
The man, now a general manager for a local trucking company, met a woman in town, and they plan to marry next year.
In addition, you can reasonably demand an employment agreement when you join a financially risky situation.
Nowadays, a chief executive enlisted to revive an ailing business commonly insists on a letter of credit or escrow account to safeguard severance pay against a possible bankruptcy.
THESE CEOS often get similar -- though usually more modest -- deals for other members of their management teams, recruiters and investment bankers say.
"There is a finite amount of talent to fix big problems in companies," notes Ray Hipp, 51, former executive vice president of Comdisco, a hightechnology equipment lessor in Rosemont, Ill.
In January, he rejected an offer to turn around a data-processing company because he believed he couldn't fix it.
But Mr. Hipp believes he could have won an agreement for two years of severance pay if he left by mutual consent during the first six months.
"When you are going into something that uncertain," he says, "you need some degree of assurance" -- and not just for taking the top job.
A company may exact onerous tradeoffs for such assurances, however, such as advance notice of resignation or less protection against firing without cause.
As high technology simplifies the theft of corporate secrets, businesses have begun to tighten noncompete clauses in employment accords.
Some bar you from working for a lengthy list of competitors during a set period.
These clauses are sometimes contested in court.
But you may be able to overcome them without calling in the lawyers.
One marketing vice president received an offer from a rival software-systems maker listed in his agreement's noncompete clause.
He persuaded his old boss to remove the restriction by swearing that "he wasn't going to do the same thing" in the new position, says Alan Glou, president of Glou International, a search firm in Needham, Mass.
So, the vice president job-hopped -- and pocketed more than $250,000 of severance pay.
