Public-service announcements, those 30-second spots on everything from drunken driving to AIDS, are expanding into infomercials, a format previously reserved for hawking merchandise.
The Advertising Council, a nonprofit organization supported by advertisers, ad agencies and the media, has produced its first long-form program on the subject of volunteering to help children.
In another unusual move, the half-hour show is scheduled to air Sunday on a majority of ABC's 225 affiliated stations.
Usually, public-service announcements are sandwiched in during the wee hours of the morning when viewership is as low as the ad rates.
But many of the Capital Cities/ABC stations plan to air the program, "Breaking the Cycle: Changing the World of a Child," after the highly rated ABC News program, "This Week with David Brinkley."
The public-service program includes 2 1/2 minutes that each station may sell for paid advertisements.
If no ads are sold, other public-service spots will be shown.
The program, focusing on the importance of early-intervention programs for disadvantaged children, is slickly produced, and viewers who stumble upon it might be confused initially.
It features "Good Morning America" co-host Charles Gibson, sitting on the set of the top-rated network morning show.
The logo of the show also is used.
Mr. Gibson says that the viewer is "witnessing something of a break in our normal routine. . . .
Today, however, a different kind of program, a different companion."
His usual co-host is Joan Lunden.
Mr. Gibson, who narrates the program, introduces Mary Nissenson, a former network correspondent who is the president of a Chicago independent production company, Foresight Communications.
Ms. Nissenson wrote and produced the program, which was funded by the Gerber Foundation, the charitable foundation established by Gerber Products, and the Points of Light Foundation, a charitable foundation based in Washington.
The show's production budget of $200,000 is a fraction of what many advertisers spend on their flashy 30-second commercials.
"This is a very important breakthrough for us, and I'm convinced it won't be our last long-form effort," says Ruth A. Wooden, president of the Advertising Council.
Discussions are under way to produce a second, long-form PSA on organ donations to buttress an existing campaign with the slogan, "Share Your Decision With Your Family."
"The long form will generally lend itself to more complicated issues that aren't easily put into a 30-second piece of advertising," Ms. Wood says.
She says ABC became involved after Robert A. Iger, president of the ABC Television Network Group and a member of the Advertising Council's board, saw a version of the program and said he wanted the network's eight owned stations and affiliates to air it.
The Advertising Council is planning to offer an alternative version of the show, minus Mr. Gibson, for non-ABC stations.
Ms. Nissenson narrates that program.
Stations also may have their own local news anchors narrate the show.
An ABC spokeswoman says the network carefully reviewed Mr. Gibson's participation and determined it didn't violate any network standards.
Indeed, Ms. Lunden does Vaseline commercials as a paid spokeswoman.
Both are employees of ABC Entertainment, not ABC News, which has tighter restrictions on what its employees may do professionally.
In watching the show, a viewer isn't necessarily aware that it is a public-service announcement.
Indeed, Ms. Nissenson bristles at being placed in that category.
"I would be very distressed to have this called a 30-minute PSA," she says.
"It is a documentary in the truest sense of the word," Ms. Nissenson says.
Foresight Communications, which also produced 30-second public-service ads for National Breast Cancer Awareness Month, worked with Grey Advertising, one of many agencies that produces pro-bono work for the Advertising Council.
Grey reviewed the script and worked with the Foresight team, Ms. Wood says.
The program profiles some volunteers and the children who benefit from their work.
"We wanted ethnic and geographic diversity," Ms. Nissenson says.
"We didn't want this to be all about the Beltway Washington, D.C. or New York City."
Ms. Wood says she is "surprised" at the number of ABC stations taking the show.
Increasingly, network affiliates use the time between Sunday morning news programs and afternoon sports telecasts to sell an entire half hour to an infomercial pushing, say, an exercise machine or juicer.
But ABC says its stations have a history of airing public-service programming on Sundays, including a religion series titled "Visions and Values" produced by the Interfaith Broadcasting Commission.
One contributor, Gerber, doesn't get any credit in the show; the foundation isn't even listed in the closing credits.
"We are known in communities as being an advocate for children," a Gerber spokesman says.
"It isn't necessary for us to get the extra credit."
Ms. Wood hopes other Advertising Council clients notice the thrifty price and will want to produce long-form public-service shows.
She says, "There is an appetite for news shows, and we hope to benefit from that."
Colgate-Palmolive Co. pulled its estimated $30 million Mennen toiletries business from Interpublic Group agencies as part of a consolidation of its world-wide advertising with Young & Rubicam and Foote, Cone & Belding Communications.
Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson lost the Mennen deodorants account, and another Interpublic unit, Lowe & Partners/SMS, lost Mennen's aftershave and baby-products accounts.
The move was considered inevitable after Colgate acquired Mennen in 1992, because Interpublic agencies work for Colgate rival Unilever.
Genova Hartwick Juliano, a small Greenwich, Conn., shop, lost the estimated $5 million Murphy's Oil Soap account.
Colgate shuffled brands between its two global agencies, putting Y&R in charge of most of its personal and oral-care advertising, including the big Colgate brand.
Foote Cone was put in charge of household and laundry products and also received the Mennen and Murphy's accounts.
The effect on billings couldn't be determined, but executives say the shift resulted in a $35 million boon to Foote Cone in the U.S. and a hefty increase for Young & Rubicam overseas.
A Colgate spokesman declined to comment, beyond saying the split between the two "is as equal as possible."
Colgate also said it will change the way it compensates agencies, basing what it pays on performance rather than on a fixed portion of media billings.
And instead of pitting its agencies against each other, Colgate said it now will ask various offices of a single agency to compete for an assignment.
Colgate, which spent more than $500 million on advertising in 1993, said it will save money under the new arrangement and put it into a "substantial" increase in ad spending.
William Muirhead, chairman of Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising's flagship London office, was named the successor to Robert Kennedy, who abruptly left the post of North American chairman and chief executive last month.
Mr. Muirhead, 47 years old, who has headed the agency's London operations since 1986, presided over the downsizing that followed the holding company's overheated expansion in the mid-1980s.
He has headed the agency's European operations since 1992.
Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising is a unit of Saatchi & Saatchi Co.
Mr. Muirhead's likely successor in London is Jeremy Sinclair, world-wide executive creative director and co-chairman.
Ad Notes. . . .
ALLY & GARGANO: At Ally & Gargano, Mal MacDougall, named chief creative officer in 1991, is giving up day-to-day control of the agency's creative output, concentrating on three accounts he drew to the agency.
And Warren Dechter, the agency's 55-year-old president, is leaving for Marketing Corp. of America, the company that had sold its stake in Ally & Gargano to Wesray/Vestar Capital Corp.
Tony Fisher, 49 years old, succeeds Mr. MacDougall, 64, as executive creative director.
Eric von der Lieth, 51, was named an executive vice president.
EPB: Earle Palmer Brown, Bethesda, completed its expected acquisition of the Philadelphia office of Ketchum Advertising.
EPB said it will merge the $55 million Ketchum office with its own Philadelphia operations, which bill an estimated $117 million.
BRISTOL: Bristol-Myers Squibb tapped the Asia operations of WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather to handle a number of consumer brands, including Clairol haircoloring brands in southeast Asia and Bufferin in China.
Bristol declined to say which of its agencies had handled the assignments previously.
CHIAT/DAY: Mellon Bank Corp., Pittsburgh, pulled its Mellon Trust account from Chiat/Day, New York, consolidating it with its retail and wholesale banking advertising at Werner Chepelsky & Partners, Pittsburgh.
Billings couldn't be determined.
ACCOUNTS: Martin Agency, Richmond, won the $5 million Checkers Drive-In Restaurants account, besting two other contenders, Chiat/Day and Ayer, industry executives said.
