Japan is worried that the Clinton administration's results-oriented trade policy really amounts to guarantee-oriented trade.
In the current trade battle over Japan's cellular-telephone market, the U.S. hasn't just asked Japan for measurable results, but has also attempted to mandate the specific steps Japan should take to achieve them.
Japanese officials say they're dismayed by the lengths to which the Clinton administration is willing to push its results-oriented policies.
"We have to solve this problem of the Japanese trade deficit, but not through detailed control of business activity, like that in a totalitarian country," says Yoshio Utsumi, a director general at Japan's Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications.
The disagreement over the cellular market reflects the deeper distrust that has begun to tinge U.S.-Japanese relations.
That mutual suspicion culminated in the collapse of the "framework" trade talks just over a week ago, when Japan rejected U.S.-proposed import targets as a violation of free trade.
U.S. officials, weary of U.S.-Japan trade agreements that unravel years after both sides thought matters resolved, argue that micromanagement of the market-opening measures is needed to guarantee that Japan lives up to its commitments.
But the more vehemently the U.S. insists that Japan accept numerical measures, the more vigorously Japan rejects U.S. efforts as managed trade.
"I don't have any idea, to be honest, on when and how we can break the deadlock" over import targets, Deputy Foreign Minister Koichiro Matsuura said Monday at the Japan National Press Club.
Tempers in Tokyo are starting to fray over the U.S. threat to impose sanctions if Japan doesn't agree to its proposals in the cellular case.
Early Monday morning, vandals spray-painted the Tokyo headquarters of Motorola Inc., a central figure in that dispute, with slogans such as "Anti-America" and "Crush the product-pushing U.S. imperialists."
The cellular dispute offers a clear illustration of the tactics that might follow the imposition of numerical targets.
Motorola has long tussled with the Japanese government over the densely populated Tokyo-Nagoya cellular corridor.
Although the company gained a nearly 50% market share in other areas of Japan, it wasn't able to sell its TACS cellular equipment in the Tokyo-Nagoya area until 1989, when under U.S. trade pressure Japan paired Motorola with cellular operator IDO Corp.
Since then, however, Motorola has charged that IDO has put most of its effort into a rival system designed by Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp.
IDO says it merely had a late start with TACS.
When U.S. officials began meeting with Japanese over the issue last year, they suggested a series of steps Japan could take to ensure that IDO, or someone else, completed the Motorola-compatible network.
"Without a guarantee, it was basically an issue of trust," says a U.S. official.
"We'd already been had once.
We needed a little more."
For instance, the U.S. suggested that the postal ministry either hand over IDO's additional frequencies to another company that would build a Motorola-compatible system, or break up IDO into two companies, one to run the NTT system and one to run the TACS system.
In another, U.S. trade officials suggested that IDO could transfer roughly one-third of the frequencies used for the NTT system to the Motorola-compatible system, thereby limiting the growth of the NTT system and encouraging the company to develop TACS more fully.
Japan rejected those ideas.
As the clock ticked down toward a Feb. 15 deadline for further action, Motorola asked IDO to buy 225,000 of its cellular handsets as a way of guaranteeing that IDO would seek at least that many customers.
"That is like burglary," says IDO Chief Executive Officer Takeo Tsukada.
"Motorola has no right to dictate our business plan."
IDO now says it will invest an additional 30 billion yen ($285.1 million) to complete the TACS network by Motorola's requested date of March, 1995, but the U.S. side is unmoved.
"We're looking for something more concrete than the postal ministry saying, `We stand behind IDO's efforts.'
They said that last time," says Frank Sanda, general manager of Motorola's cellular business in Japan.
Michael Williams contributed to this article.
