Before the world becomes totally enamored of Subcomandante Marcos, the main spokesman of the "Zapatista" rebels fighting in the southern state of Chiapas, attention should be focused for just a moment on the Indian and mestizo peasants who have been displaced by the fighting.
They do not share Marcos's European good looks.
Nor are they as eloquent or amusing as the well-educated "subcomandante."
But their stories are more poignant.
"The Zapatistas came in and took all our food and killed our animals.
They're still living in our houses, so we have to camp here," says Jesus Morales, gesturing to the civic auditorium, which has been turned into living quarters for about 300 displaced families.
The auditorium is running out of potable water, medical services (not to mention the three bathrooms) are stretched to the limit, and more refugees are arriving daily from the surrounding forests.
Mr. Morales is no fan of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (the PRI), which he says has stolen every election he's voted in.
But it is the Zapatistas against whom he rages the loudest.
"Life was tough enough for us here before.
Now it's much worse," he says.
Most rebels appear to be local peasants who joined out of frustration from worsening repression by corrupt, local leaders (known as "caciques").
However, the Zapatista leaders and their shady financial and strategic support base include a multitude of international political, social and religious forces whose concerns and interests extend beyond, and sometimes conflict with, those of Chiapas's peasants.
The primary thorn in the body politic here is the destructive role of caciques and their heretofore cozy relationship with the ruling party.
Caciques act as the eyes, ears and vote-getters for the PRI.
In return, they are granted official recognition as a community's social, economic and judicial authority.
In some cases, they are powerful landowners of European descent who hold official (if uncontested) public offices.
In other cases, they are Spanish-speaking Indians who assume less formal titles such as village elder.
And they control PRI-approved concessions vital to Indian communities, such as food and liquor stores, transportation services and housing.
In all cases, the caciques allow no dissent, and their word supersedes established laws.
Those who prefer to operate outside the caciques' monopoly concessions are banished from their communities and beaten or killed if they try to return.
"Killings are used only when caciques feel people have grown accustomed to beatings," says Abdias Tovilla Jaime, a San Cristobal lawyer who works on behalf of banished Indians.
He displays a photograph of the badly mangled body of Vicente Mendez Velasco, a Mitontic Indian beaten to death in April after returning to a community from which he had been banished.
Another photo shows his bereft wife and six children.
With such fertile ground for revolt, Zapatista militants had little trouble finding recruits.
Many of the refugees in Las Margaritas claim that Zapatista leaders are either non-Indian Mexicans or Central Americans.
"We heard Guatemaltecans and Salvadoraneans giving orders," said several peasant refugees on the cloud-covered road from Las Margaritas to nearby Comitan.
Of course, rumors spread quickly in small towns under duress.
Nevertheless, among the clothing captured by the military was a sweatshirt from a Guatemalan military post marked "Guatemala; Zona Militar no. 23; Peten."
Captured documents -- which date from 1982 to the present -- are rife with references to and strategy manuals from other Central American guerrilla groups.
While Marcos and his top commandos were well trained in military strategy and have been photographed carrying sophisticated weapons and communications equipment, most of the peasant fighters were far less prepared.
In some cases, they were sent to the front lines carrying phony wooden rifles with crude spears wired to the tips.
Gen. Miguel Godinez, commander of the Mexican armed forces in Chiapas, says, "They were trying to bait us into committing massacres against poorly armed peasants to win the human rights battle."
Some massacres apparently did occur.
But the Mexican army deserves no more contempt than those who sent men into combat with fake rifles.
One source of moral -- if not logistical -- support for the guerrillas comes from the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Cristobal, headed by a noted liberation theologian, Archbishop Samuel Ruiz.
Now the official mediator in negotiations between the rebel leaders and the government, Bishop Ruiz's fiery sermons often veer too far to the left for many parishioners.
There's a bitter split in the Catholic community between his supporters and detractors.
"Many people just want to go to church to reflect on their faith without a lot of politics mixed in," says a local doctor who preferred not to be named.
A cagey interview subject, Bishop Ruiz denies preaching politics from the pulpit, but adds, "I oppose the neo-liberal modernization of the economy, not as a political gesture, but because the capitalist, global economy is dehumanizing -- especially to the Indians."
When asked whether Zapatista leaders are Indian or not, he responds, "Does that make their cause any less just?"
Of course the cause of defending Indian rights is perfectly just.
And some good may yet come from the resolution of the conflict and the attention it has focused on the deprivations here.
However, the cynical use of the Indians as cannon fodder, or even the invocation of their pain to negotiate on behalf of anachronistic ideologies should not be tolerated.
If the rule of law -- and not the arbitrary wishes of caciques -- at last comes to Chiapas, it will come as a part of the same modernization process that is increasing individual rights all over Mexico.
The Indians may lose some of their communal tradition, as Samuel Ruiz fears.
They may also decide to vote for opposition parties, as the PRI fears.
But their rights as Mexican citizens must be protected above all else -- no matter whether their culture is revered as more important by some or reviled as less important by others.
President Carlos Salinas has shown before that he is capable of strong executive action to enforce the rule of law.
Just weeks after becoming president in 1988, he sent federal troops to arrest an infamous union leader who had turned his personal mandate from the PRI into a mafia fiefdom.
It is time for such action again to lock up murderous caciques.
This action should not be predicated on the edicts of Subcomandante Marcos, but on the long overdue exercise of justice.
Mr. Asman edits the Americas column.
