"We have a lot we can learn from the Germans," President Clinton said recently, trying to sell his health care plan.
"The Germans are able to provide a very high-quality health care system at a much lower cost than we are, because they have much more discipline in the way it's organized and financed."
In an address to the National Governors Association yesterday, German Chancellor Helmut Kohl said that in the "run-up" to America's health care reform, "there was an intense exchange of opinions between American and German experts."
On the surface, the German system does indeed look good: It insures society comprehensively and gives individuals quality coverage that is permanent and portable from job to job.
Germany spends about 10.6% of its gross domestic product on health, as opposed to about 14% spent in the U.S.
But simple comparisons are misleading.
Germany and the U.S. differ greatly in aspects not controlled by doctors and hospitals, such as crime-related injuries, malpractice insurance and nursing care for the elderly.
It is worth noting, too, that the costs of Germany's plan have risen by a sharp 23%, after inflation, over the past three years.
It pays to take a good look at the German system before prescribing it in the U.S.
The similarities between the Clinton plan and the German system are striking.
The president wants universal coverage; Germany has nearly achieved that.
German law mandates that everyone enroll in the health insurance system, with the important exception of higher income earners making more than $3,300 a month.
The opt-out income level is set relatively high so that about 74% of Germans must join.
Another 14% voluntarily join or stay in the statutory health system although their income has risen beyond the cutoff.
About 10% (higher-income employees, self-employed) have private insurance, and fewer than 1% have no insurance.
Regional health alliances, a big Clinton idea, are the cornerstone of the German system.
Companies with more than 1,000 employees (5,000 in the Clinton plan) have the option of forming a corporate alliance.
These roughly 1,000 regional or other alliances are the monopoly buyers of medical services for the 88% of Germans who belong to the statutory system.
The Clinton team wants a system that guarantees identical benefit standards for all alliances; the American debate over coverage for mammograms and prostate-cancer tests already gives a whiff of how controversial the contents of this list will be.
In Germany, which already has such unified standards, the contents of the list are so important they can affect elections: coverage of abortions, for example, will play a role in elections this year.
The net result, Germany shows, is that the list simply grows over the years.
Germans pay for their plan through what is essentially a payroll tax, just as the president would have Americans do.
Employers and employees in Germany each pay half of the tax (rather than the 80%-20% split proposed in the Clinton plan).
The tax rate differs among the alliances, ranging from 8% to 16.8% of payroll (aggregate of employer and employee share), with an average of 13.4%.
Yet Germany's program gives us clear evidence of the degree to which this system lends itself to abuse.
Once their tax is paid, Germans graze themselves to obesity on medical services.
The Clinton plan has the same bias toward excessive individual use of medical services -- at the expense of all members of an alliance.
The German system's major fault is that it doesn't put people first, in the sense of building on individual responsibility and control through effective copayments and other incentives to save.
It is interesting that corporate alliances, organized by companies that have an interest in holding their own 50% share down, typically have premiums far below the average regional alliance.
The Clinton plan's critics believe that this system also strengthens bureaucracy.
The German plan proves them correct.
While the alliances were originally devised as nongovernmental health plan purchasing cooperatives, they have degenerated into de facto government agencies.
Some 112,000 employees in western Germany alone work for alliances, their administrative costs per member having risen by 53.5%, adjusted for inflation, from 1982 to 1992.
This is more than the increase in the alliances' total health costs, revealing that the disease of bureaucracy is the real problem.
The Clinton plan's critics also fear that it will quickly become a single-payer system.
In effect, Germany's has already become one, financed by the payroll tax (for the 88% in the statutory system).
Patients do not see a doctor's bill.
Thus, they have no way of realizing whether the charge for a service has been particularly expensive, or even whether the service has actually been rendered.
The doctor sends his bill to his regional association of physicians as the financial clearing house and counterpart of the patient's alliance.
Hidden taxes, a flaw in the Clinton plan, are already part of the German plan.
Because the average German carries only 50% of his health care costs directly, he is aware of only his 50%, and increases may not bother him too much.
But the 50% the employer carries is reflected in overall labor costs that make Germany the second-most-expensive country in the world to employ people (after Switzerland), and one with higher unemployment than the U.S.
Under the planned 80% employer cost-sharing in the Clinton plan, this labor-depressing effect would even be more pronounced in the U.S.
Cost-sharing and lack of incentives to save form a potent drug driving health costs up.
Unobserved, hidden taxes grow.
The German payroll tax rose from an average of 6% in 1950 to 8.4% in 1960 and 11.4% in 1980, before reaching its current 13.4%.
Financially, the German plan is also no model.
For 20 years, it has vacillated between financial distress and collapse, and the government has intruded with ever-tighter regulations.
Since 1977 alone, there have been nine federal laws trying to curb costs.
German measures to control costs foreshadow the results of the Clinton plan: price controls and control of supply.
Last year, physicians, dentists and prescription drugs were each, as a group, subjected to narrow budget caps, and tight regional quotas now limit the number of doctors allowed to practice under the system.
The physician associations have to police their members with respect to "excessive," above-average services.
More cost-effective -- particularly corporate -- alliances now have to cross-subsidize high-cost alliances, thus rewarding inefficiency in the name of solidarity.
Prudent insured people and prudent doctors are still not rewarded for cost savings in the form of lower premiums or bonuses.
Needless to say, all reform attempts have missed their targets.
Although only 10% of Germans are covered by private insurance, it offers some obvious lessons for everyone.
First, payroll taxes in the statutory system are 25% higher than private premiums, since private insurers compete vigorously.
Their benefits are better, and the administrative cost per insured person is only half.
Second, the private alternative forces the statutory system to improve, within limits, since otherwise its voluntary members would opt out for private insurance.
This beneficial effect is indirectly evidenced by the larger inefficiencies in countries that force everybody into a statutory system.
Maybe the Clinton team looked at various statutory systems and concluded that Germany's looked best.
The one-eyed is king among the blind.
But why does the president want to emulate the 90% of the German system that is failing instead of the 10% that is effective?
Perhaps the most interesting revelation from the German plan, though, is that it shows how unrealistic Mr. Clinton's is.
In the U.S., the maximum premium to an alliance will be about 10% of payroll.
This is supposed to pay for health costs that now amount to 14% of GDP, set to rise to 17.3% in the year 2000 under the Clinton plan's reform projections (18.9% otherwise).
If a 13.4% payroll tax in Germany is needed to finance 10.6% of GDP, it is hard to conceive how, in the U.S., a much smaller payroll tax of 10% can finance U.S. health care costs at a much larger share of 14% to 17% of GDP.
The missing gap is too large to be filled by the designated subsidies and sin taxes.
If you want to copy pages out of the German social policy book, have your checkbook handy.
Mr. Prewo is chief executive of the Chamber of Industry and Commerce in Hanover, Germany.
