China agreed to grant expanded operating rights to foreign banks, and the U.S. said it will help China improve its tools for managing its massive economy.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and Finance Minister Liu Zhongli said the accords reflect a larger commitment by the two countries to improve their trade and investment ties.
They said one focus of continuing discussions by the Sino-American Joint Economic Committee will be finding ways to keep China's economy growing at a stable, predictable rate-a goal that's important for regional and world trade, as well as for China itself.
Throughout three days of meetings with Mr. Bentsen here, Chinese officials showed a strong appetite for learning how to make monetary and fiscal policy more effective in maintaining consistent, noninflationary growth.
The Chinese economy has grown at an annual rate of 9.5% in the last decade, but year-to-year activity has been volatile, swinging from 10% growth in 1988 to 4.5% in 1990 and as much as 13% last year.
These wide swings have complicated planning efforts.
In addition, officials worry that the Chinese economy is overheating.
Inflation is running at an annual rate of 20% in the cities and 13% in rural areas.
Both merchants and consumers are complaining about rising prices.
But the government, worried about jacking up interest rates, has found it difficult to rein in credit enough to curb inflation.
U.S. and World Bank officials worry that inflation could weaken China's commitment to economic reforms designed to produce a more market-oriented economy.
Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan plans to visit China to discuss a wide range of monetary policy issues, and the Fed is prepared to provide technical assistance.
In addition, Internal Revenue Service officials will advise China on the development of a more-efficient tax-collection system.
Because of the way that China's tax revenues flow up from the provinces, revenues received by the central government have fallen in the past 15 years to about 18% of gross domestic product from 36%.
As a result, the Beijing government lacks the revenues it needs.
In the banking area, China said it will allow foreign banks to expand their branch networks.
Branching already is permitted in 13 cities and economic zones.
Outside these zones, banks can open representative offices as long as they don't engage in profit-making activities.
China will add cities where foreign banks can open branches.
The scope and timing of the expansion still must be worked out.
China also agreed to experiment with allowing banks to transact business in renminbi, the Chinese currency.
This could allow banks to develop retail banking franchises that lend to small businesses and make auto and mortgage loans.
In another effort to help Beijing modernize its economy, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission is preparing to provide advice on how to regulate securities markets.
