If you're a buy-and-hold investor, there's no need to read further.
Ron Rowland's mutual-fund investment strategy isn't for the complacent.
Mr. Rowland, who publishes a monthly newsletter, the Sector Ace, is an aggressive investor who advocates frequent switching between mutual-fund sectors to profit from the waxing and waning of various industries.
He has developed a proprietary formula, called Relative Strength Momentum, which calculates a series of moving averages to produce a single indicator showing an industrial sector's most-likely course over the next three to four months.
He recommends investing in the highest-rated sector or sectors at any particular time.
When a sector's ranking begins to slip -- typically between one month and four months later -- he recommends switching into a higher-rated one.
The recipe, though risky, has shown some impressive results.
For the 12 months ended Feb. 28, Mr. Rowland's three model portfolios -- which returned 36.2%, 32.9% and 17.7%, respectively -- walloped the Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index's 5.1% showing.
Not bad for a newsletter writer whose background is in electrical and computer engineering, and whose most recent job title was senior engineering manager at International Business Machines Corp.
Mr. Rowland, 38 years old, left that job in January to pursue his newsletter career, which has its roots in 1986: While examining his individual retirement account and 401k accounts, Mr. Rowland says he realized that if he put as much time into managing his investments as he did working at IBM, "the investments would provide more income than my job."
In 1991, after years of refining his investment formula, he started the Sector Ace.
Since then, the newsletter's recommendations have returned a cumulative 128%, or 31.6% annually, which Mr. Rowland claims bests the three-year gain of any mutual-fund newsletter tracked by the Hulbert Financial Digest, an Alexandria, Va., newsletter that focuses on the investment newsletter industry.
Publisher Mark Hulbert doesn't verify those numbers, because his newsletter hasn't been following the Sector Ace that long.
However, Mr. Hulbert reports that for 1993, the Sector Ace ranked fifth-best of the 50 mutual-fund newsletters his publication tracks.
Mr. Rowland, who works from an office in his Austin home, invests his own money in his three model portfolios.
Two of those portfolios focus solely on Fidelity Investments' family of 35 sector funds, covering just about every industry big and small.
His Single Sector Portfolio, the riskiest, invests 100% in just one sector fund; the Multiple Sector Portfolio holds four Fidelity sector funds and offers more stability.
The third portfolio recommends four no-load mutual funds, and focuses on "style" investing-value, growth, small-capitalization, cyclicals, etc. -- rather than sector investing.
(No load means the funds have no upfront sales charges.)
But the high risk involved in frequent fund switching can scare away many investors.
Amy Arnott, an analyst at Morningstar Mutual Funds newsletter in Chicago, notes that sector funds, by definition, are volatile investments designed to give investors a long-term concentrated bet on a single industry.
"The problem is that, over time, few people have been able to successfully time sector rotations," Ms. Arnott says.
Switching also can lead to added transaction costs.
Fidelity, which is keeping tabs on several high-profile and active sector switchers, has begun imposing redemption fees for traders who jump into and out of funds within 90 days.
Those who hold for less than 30 days are slapped with a fee of 0.75% of the transaction value, a $150 charge for a $20,000 trade.
Also, sector rotation isn't for small traders.
Many funds that Mr. Rowland recommends require minimum investments of $5,000.
As such, he notes that subscribers should start with a bankroll of at least $20,000 for his Multiple Sector Portfolio.
He also advises that followers of the no-load fund portfolio open accounts at discount brokerage firms that allow free switching between fund families.
Drawbacks aside, Mr. Rowland's 1,200 subscribers -- who each pay $99 a year -- have received some winning recommendations in recent months.
A four-month commitment to the broadcast and media sector last year netted a 12.1% gain, while his recommended investment in emerging markets earned 25.3% in just three months.
Fidelity's Select Medical Delivery, one of Mr. Rowland's current favorites, is up more than 16% since he recommended buying it in mid-October.
In addition to medical delivery, which he recommends for both the Single Sector and Multiple Sector model portfolios, Mr. Rowland these days is partial to the computer, technology and industrial material sector funds.
In the no-load fund basket, Mr. Rowland currently likes Scudder's Japan Fund and the Robertson Stephens Value Plus and Emerging Growth funds.
He has a quarter of the $50,000 portfolio in cash, ready to deploy soon in either the Warburg Pincus Growth & Income fund or the Evergreen Global Real Estate fund.
(To keep subscribers apprised of his decisions between issues, he offers a toll-free hot line updated every Sunday.)
Mr. Rowland is the first to concede his formula isn't perfect.
It typically catches trends midcycle, meaning investors miss out on the first third or first half of gains.
And it doesn't fare particularly well in raging bull markets.
"In those kinds of markets, it sometimes acts as an overbought, oversold indicator, and you end up buying at the peak just as a fund is about to hit a minor correction," he notes.
And his formula doesn't always pick winners.
In late-November, he recommended switching into Fidelity's Select Software fund, only to jump out less than a month later with a 2% loss.
After peaking, the fund dropped 5%, which triggered a stop-loss order Mr. Rowland employs.
At times, though, his calls do seem prescient.
For example: In January 1992 his investment model warned of a momentum slowdown approaching the bio-tech world.
As such, he urged subscribers to take their 8.9%, five-week gain and move on.
Over the next few months that sector fund lost one-third of its value.
Spaghetti Warehouse, the Dallas restaurant chain, jumped $1.50, or 19%, for the week, to close at $9.25.
Robert Hawk, the company's founder, chairman, president and chief executive officer, picked up 20,000 shares of the company's distressed stock last month for $150,000.
First USA, the Dallas credit-card issuer and processor, rose $2.375 on more than four times its average daily volume.
Early last week, a secondary offering of five million shares of convertible preferred stock was priced at $31.875.
The stock closed at $34.375.
Landry's Seafood Restaurants gained $2.25, or 9.3%, and traded at nearly nine times its average daily volume.
A secondary offering of 2.2 million shares of stock for the Houston chain was priced Thursday at $26.
Landry's stock closed at $26.50.
