AN EARLY EASTER -- and finally a thaw -- jump-starts spring apparel sales.
Easter is putting the winter-weary in a shopping mood, say East Coast apparel retailers like Dress Barn and Burlington Coat Factory Warehouse who report an early pickup in sales from last year.
"It's our best spring" in four years, says Kris Isaacson at a Nordstrom store in San Francisco, crediting unseasonably dry weather there.
In Texas, Dad & Lad's says sales are up 20%, a sign of the recovering state economy.
But retailers are far from sewing up the season.
Prices are in line with last year's or slightly lower, as in the stores of Seattle-based Jay Jacobs.
Kurt Barnard of Retail Marketing Report in New York sees only a "modest" 4% rise in sales for the season.
"People today just spend less on preening," he says.
George Rosenbaum of Leo J. Shapiro & Associates in Chicago adds that the recent rise in interest rates may put a brake on apparel spending.
Shoppers may shift to big-ticket items like furniture (which often need financing) before rates rise further, he says.
FIND THE CARDBOARD: Sports trading cards pile on the high-tech gloss.
To attract blase youngsters, trading-card firms are toying with more and more sophisticated gimmicks.
This year's lineup from Action Packed Trading Cards, Itasca, Ill., includes minor-league baseball card inserts that use heat-sensitive ink.
The ink fades to reveal a forecast of when the player will be called up to the majors.
New basketball cards from Upper Deck, Carlsbad, Calif., come with 3-D glasses.
SkyBox International weighs hologram technology that creates a standing image.
A Batman card this April will be the first tryout.
Trading-card firms have been forced "to come out with new ideas" due to more competition and an industry slump, says Robert Lifson of Robert Edward Auctions, Hoboken, N.J.
But he isn't keen on the newfangled cards as investments.
"There are millions of them," he says.
The sportscard market shrank 6% to $1.71 billion in 1993, says Action Packed.
IT WAS A WINTER of discontent for ski resorts, despite good snow in the East.
New England resorts report a flat season, even with this winter's heavy snowfall.
Too many Friday storms curbed travel, says the Vermont Ski Association.
The cold hurt, too: Sunday River in Maine had six prime ski days with temperatures below zero.
The exception was Sugarbush, Vt.
It had a near-record season after boosting its vacation business, which is less weather-sensitive than weekend trips.
Out West, mediocre snow kept resorts even for the year.
But the lackluster year isn't thwarting expansion.
Two Utah resorts plan new lifts.
Vermont's Killington will replace its gondola with a speedier one and will open new trails.
Colorado's Vail is planning a 25% increase in terrain.
Sunday River will expand onto a new mountain.
Telluride, Colo., seeks permits to double acreage with six new lifts and four eateries.
Sugar Bowl, Calif., plans a new lodge, lifts and trails.
One flat year doesn't affect these plans, say resorts, which are taking a longer view.
THE MAYO CLINIC got a $3.5 million contract from the federal Office of National Drug Control Policy to put together a satellite-based navigation system and test it on its medical helicopter.
The system eventually will be used in drug enforcement.
"The needs of law enforcement and medical helicopters are very similar," says the clinic's David Claypool.
AN UNCENSORED STERN?
A New York gubernatorial run may give controversial disk jockey Howard Stern some censorship relief, says Gigi Sohn of Media Access Project in Washington.
Candidates' speech can't be restricted, she says, and "it'll be difficult to discern when he's speaking as a candidate and when he's not."
INTERACTIVE TV is direct marketers' preferred route into the interactive arena, says Vos, Gruppo & Capell in New York.
Of 130 firms, 65% plan to enter the market with interactive TV, but more (82% vs. 67%) expect eventually to use on-line computers than TV sets outfitted with special keypads.
ART APPRECIATION: Cities ponder a sales tax to fund cultural groups.
Faced with dwindling arts budgets, some regions have adopted or are mulling a culture tax similar to one in Denver and five nearby counties.
The 0.1% sales tax there raises $20 million a year to fund groups like the botanical gardens, says Ciruli & Associates, a research firm.
Fresno, Calif., adopted a similar tax last year, while Kansas and Missouri are working to put to a popular vote a sales tax of up to 0.25% in a five-county, bistate area.
Such a "dedicated tax" gains favor not only among arts groups but also among politicians, says Laura Loyacono of the National Conference of State Legislatures.
Lawmakers think a tax for a specific use is "more palatable to their constituents," she says.
Even so, a bill to extend Denver's culture tax to 2006 faces more vocal opposition now than in 1988, when it was first passed.
And Salt Lake County in Utah defeated such a tax last June.
In California and Tennessee, fees for some vanity license plates provide for arts funding, Ms. Loyacono says.
BRIEFS: A sign of the telecommunicating 1990s?
"No Computer In This Car," reads a notice spotted in an automobile window in New York City. . . .
A recent race for lawyers at Indiana University, Bloomington, used an ambulance for a pace car.
