WordPerfect Corp., among the world's largest software makers, plans to introduce on Tuesday a program that will pit the Orem, Utah, company against Adobe Systems Inc. in a race to supply a key piece of electronic-publishing software.
Adobe, which created a lucrative franchise on the strength of its computer-printing software, aims to win the major share of an emerging software market with a program, called Acrobat.
The program, Adobe says, makes it possible to view in a consistent way text and graphics published electronically.
The entry of WordPerfect, a closely held company, makes it Adobe's first big competitor in this market.
John Warnock, chief executive officer of Adobe, said WordPerfect's entry confirms the market's potential.
"People are realizing that we weren't crazy" to emphasize the importance of software that enhances the readability of electronic documents, he said, adding: "I'd be disappointed if we didn't draw competitors."
"This will have appeal and make WordPerfect a clear No. 2 from the start," said Russell Crabs, an analyst at Soundview Financial Group.
As demand grows for electronic versions of books, manuals and even magazines, publishers are strugging to find a way to ensure that every reader sees the same consistent design, no matter what their brand of computer.
The market for the software tools that ensure consistency is tiny today, but is expected to grow sharply.
WordPerfect says it has the edge over Adobe because its program, called Envoy, is smaller, faster and able to work on more types of computers than does Adobe's Acrobat.
Customers so far have reacted coolly to Acrobat because it takes up so much space on the compact discs that are increasingly used as the media for electronic books, some analysts say.
The large size of Acrobat also makes it unsuitable for attaching to documents that are distributed on line, or over telephone lines, they add.
WordPerfect, which sells the most popular word-processing software, has growing links with publishers.
The company already sells the electronic version of the unabridged Random House dictionary and other reference books.
Donald Emery, who heads WordPerfect's Electronic Publishing group, said a few major publishers have agreed to use the company's document-reader software in forthcoming electronic books and said details of those deals will be released next Tuesday.
Separately, Adobe said fiscal first-quarter revenue rose 19%, though profits were flat due to an extraordinary gain in the year-earlier period.
The company reported net income for the period ended Feb. 28 was $15 million, or 32 cents a share.
That compares with year-earlier profit of $15.4 million, or 34 cents a share, including a nonoperating gain of $3.9 million, or five cents a share, from sale of stock held as an investment.
Profit was toward the high end of Wall Street estimates, which ranged from 26 cents to 33 cents.
Revenue rose to $81.2 million from $68.5 million, largely driven by a 61% gain in the company's application programs.
Adobe, which on Tuesday announced a deal to acquire Aldus Corp. in a stock swap, released its earnings report after the stock markets closed.
In trading yesterday on the Nasdaq Stock Market, its shares closed at $30.875, up $1.375, or 4.7%.
Volume totaled 2.6 million shares, or almost triple the stock's daily average volume.
