The Clinton administration eased regulatory restrictions on computer exports to most countries, as part of a broad policy review of government controls over the sale of high-technology goods.
The action fulfills a pledge President Clinton made last fall.
It will make it easier for U.S. companies to ship exports to many countries, but doesn't affect a group of countries, such as China and Russia, for whom exports are most tightly restricted.
"It's a big deal," said Greg Garcia, senior manager for international trade affairs at the American Electronics Association, which represents major high-tech companies.
"It's going to free up a significant amount of exports."
The administration estimated that the new regulations will free up $30 billion of computer exports annually.
The administration said that for most countries, restrictions would be eased for digital computers operating up to 1,000 MTOPS, or million theoretical operations per second.
It also said it would ease rules for the computers operating up to 500 MTOPS to countries the U.S. has pinpointed as designing or building nuclear weapons.
Under these new requirements, U.S. companies would have to get only "general licenses," which don't involve an elaborate bureaucratic process.
The limit for both categories was raised in October to 195 MTOPS from 12.5 MTOPS.
The 500-MTOPS level covers the most powerful personal computers and some mainframes, while the 1,000-MTOPS level covers most types of advanced workstations and many mainframes.
Yesterday's actions don't apply to countries restricted by the Coordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls.
Earlier this year, Cocom decided to ease controls for computers operating up to 260 MTOPS, much less than the 500-MTOPS level the Clinton administration was seeking.
Cocom -- which includes Japan, Australia and North Atlantic Treaty Organization members except Iceland -- restricts exports to such nations as China and the former Soviet republics.
As part of its overall review, the administration yesterday introduced, as expected, legislation aimed at reducing the amount of time it takes for the administration to consider applications for export licenses.
That legislation didn't go over as well as the news about the eased computer export restrictions.
A band of high-tech companies and trade associations trashed the legislation as deficient.
The licensing requirement emerged during the Cold War as an effort to curb the sale of "dual-use" goods that could be used for both military and civilian purposes.
The goal then was to stop such shipments to Communist countries.
Introduction of the legislation has been delayed since the fall as various administration agencies have battled over how much to liberalize export controls.
State and Defense Department officials pushed to keep tight controls for national-security reasons.
Commerce Department officials wanted to ease controls so U.S. companies wouldn't lose business.
The issue was so contentious President Clinton had to settle a question of when to limit the use of unilateral controls.
Some key U.S. officials weren't notified of the decision until yesterday morning, just hours before the unveiling of the legislation.
A U.S. official said Mr. Clinton opted for lifting unilateral export controls if they meet certain conditions: They fail to stop the targeted country from curbing undesired policies; other countries don't go along with the controls multilaterally; and the targeted country gets the goods from non-U.S. sources.
The official said the reviews wouldn't apply if the goods contribute to human-rights abuses, terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass-destruction or regional instability.
