Earlier this month, Undersecretary of State Lynn Davis was asked on the "MacNeil-Lehrer" program how the U.S. could be confident that a diversion of nuclear materials wasn't going on at North Korea's Yongbyon research facility.
"Well, because we've had this safeguards regime in place over the past year, and, indeed, had an inspection in August, so it isn't that we haven't been carrying out this regime," she answered.
But officials of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Vienna-based group that actually carried out that August inspection, paint a vastly less rosy picture.
Its inspectors, the group says, were literally left groping in the dark.
They were permitted to leave their barracks-like guest quarters at Yongbyon, 60 miles north of Pyongyang, only after 6 p.m.
As night fell, they were escorted into the pitch-black innards of several buildings.
There, using flashlights because the buildings' lights were kept out, the inspectors only replaced the batteries and videotape in cameras that they use to monitor some parts of the facility.
End of inspection.
"Our August inspection was not a good one.
It was something we launched unwisely," says David Kyd, spokesman for the IAEA.
As the IAEA negotiates for a fresh look at seven declared nuclear sites at Yongbyon, the administration is again accentuating the positive.
Ms. Davis, for instance, has predicted that the agreement the U.S. has won from North Korea will allow the IAEA to "tell the rest of the world that there are no dangerous activities occurring in North Korea with respect to nuclear weapons."
But while outside experts disagree over just how to handle the North Korean situation, there is widespread agreement on one thing: It is probably impossible now for the IAEA to ensure anything like the level of comfort the administration is promising.
David Kay, a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst who led United Nations inspection teams in Iraq, says the possibility that North Korea may already have at least one nuclear weapon makes an IAEA declaration that there are no dangerous activities under way in North Korea extremely unlikely.
"The agreement calls for the inspection of only seven declared sites.
Now no one believes that the bomb is going to be in the basement of any of those sites," Mr. Kay asserts.
Administration officials express hope that further bargaining will gain IAEA access into other sites where they suspect bomb-making activity has gone on.
To that, Albert Wohlstetter, a sometime Pentagon consultant who is considered the dean of U.S. thinkers on how to contain the spread of nuclear weapons, has a short answer: "This is a joke."
The administration, Mr. Wohlstetter thinks, has vastly oversold the ability of IAEA inspections to penetrate the deep secrecy of North Korea, where Stalinist dogma approaches Orwellian levels of control.
"A lot of this stuff becomes a dream if you're not talking about an open society.
You're talking about a society where whistle-blowers commit suicide. . . .
I really feel that people are getting off the point."
The point that he and others are focusing on is that if North Korea has the bomb or has drawn off enough plutonium from its "peaceful nuclear research" to make one or two nuclear devices -- as the CIA has suggested -- then the relationship between the isolated regime of Kim Il Sung and its neighbors has already changed, and IAEA-style inspections won't be able to reduce the perception of danger.
Critics say the extravagant claims for the IAEA are in keeping with the administration's uncertain handling of the entire North Korean nuclear issue.
The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, says Mr. Kay, requires that "either you completely give up your bomb program the way South Africa has, with intrusive inspections to prove you have given it up, or else you get out" of the treaty.
But by negotiating inch by inch, North Korea has gotten what it apparently wanted: more time to work on its nuclear weapons -- and the missiles to carry them -- without outside interference.
Kongdan Oh, a Rand Corporation analyst who closely follows North Korea, says that the U.S. "showed the worst aspect of negotiators.
We showed them Americans are impatient for results.
They North Koreans played the game much tougher.
Now we look like we are giving things away.
It's a very sad situation."
By hanging tough, Pyongyang appears to have won the termination of this year's Team Spirit joint exercise between U.S. and South Korean forces.
This was the carrot that was originally dangled before Pyongyang as a lure to get them back into the treaty, but the Pentagon didn't enhance it much by failing to put the funds for the exercise in its 1994 budget.
U.S. intelligence estimates see North Korea with, at best, a primitive nuclear device.
First-generation nuclear weapons weigh at least 1,100 pounds.
North Korea has Scud missiles capable of carrying such a load to Seoul and is developing the Nodong-1, which could carry such a warhead to parts of Japan.
North Korean engineers are still trying to perfect the guidance system for the missile, a process that could take several more months.
Meanwhile, North Korea continues to lay the groundwork for further delays.
At Pyongyang's request, the IAEA has twice written lengthy explanations of what it wants to inspect.
Last week, North Korea asked for a third.
So far, it has refused to resume diplomatic dialogue with South Korea.
Both the inspection and the dialogue are prerequisites for talks leading to a "package solution" outlined by the U.S.
After U.S. officials made it known last week that they are considering sending Patriot air defense missiles to protect ports and airfields that would be needed for U.S. forces to reinforce South Korea, Pyongyang issued a statement saying that the real reason for the missiles "is to impede the progress of the DPRK North Korea-U.S. talks for a fundamental solution to the nuclear issue."
According to U.S. officials, the IAEA can end the impasse by simply declaring that it can no longer assure the continuity of its safeguards efforts.
If the delays continue, such a statement is likely on Feb. 22, when the agency's board of governors holds its next meeting.
That would send the matter back to the U.N. Security Council, which would then consider imposing economic sanctions.
Although U.S. negotiators are feeling heat from the White House to resolve the North Korean problem, some suggest that the U.S. shouldn't be in such a hurry.
Rand's Ms. Oh, for example, suggests that it is North Korea that ought to feel that time is running against it.
With their poverty-stricken economy verging on total collapse, she says, Kim Il sung and his son and annointed successor, Kim Jong Il, are desperate for Western aid.
But if they open their economy to the outside influences that come with aid from the West, Ms. Oh believes, their regime will collapse.
"The country that has to be nervous is North Korea, not us," she insists.
"But for some reason, we are the nervous party."
DAVID KAY previously was an official for the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna.
In an article yesterday about inspections of North Korea's nuclear sites, Mr. Kay was incorrectly identified as a former analyst for the Central Intelligence Agency.
(WSJ Feb. 1, 1994)
