FRIGID WEATHER may warm up the outlook a bit for some utilities.
Deflated utility stocks may benefit from the recent cold snap, says Dean Witter analyst William Tilles.
Still, he cautions that the 1993 first quarter was a cold one, too, which may temper any year-to-year gains.
Utilities that supply natural gas for heat stand the best chance of a lift.
But electricity use also rises.
The Edison Electric Institute says usage in the first two weeks of January is 8% above a year earlier and more than twice the rate of gain Edison sees for '94.
The American Gas Association says many natural-gas pipelines are running at or near capacity, and utilities have begun to dip into vast supplies.
But the utilities' expenses rise in a freeze, too.
Brooklyn Union Gas Co. transports record volume so far this month.
But the utility notes that any possible earnings gain is moderated by regulatory caps on rates.
"Still, this will be better for us than a mild winter would have," says a Brooklyn Gas official.
"No question we'll get a revenue kick from this," says Wisconsin Public Service in Green Bay, where it hits 20 below.
QUAKE AID and other disaster relief from corporations grow more organized.
After Hurricane Andrew, Kmart Corp. sent all sorts of goods to help victims and found there were some "tremendous mismatches."
Now, to help out in L.A., it gives cash and bottled water.
Some companies team up with Gifts in Kind America, an Alexandria, Va., nonprofit group that matches and transports donated goods.
About 20 firms, including Avon Products, New York, and Recreational Equipment Inc., Seattle, give goods in advance that are stored by Gifts in Kind.
Avon, which last year gave away some $9 million worth of personal-care items, this year turns over the whole donated-goods job to the go-between group.
"It's efficient and timely," says Glenn S. Clarke, head of the Avon Products Foundation.
Avon pays under $50,000 for the service -- "about one-third of what it would cost us to run it," says Mr. Clarke.
Recreational Equipment lets the group pick items, such as first-aid kits and lanterns, from its catalog.
NIBBLING THE EAR of the audio market, romance novels court listeners.
Some 46% of all paperbacks sold are romances, yet such titles account for only a tiny part of the audio-book market, says DCC Compact Classics, Los Angeles.
But that may change as DCC's new romance audio unit and others woo fans of the formula tales.
"It's a market that hasn't been fully explored," says an Avon Books official.
Johanna Lindsey, a top Avon author, is one of 15 writers signed by DCC, which sells tapes for $5.99 in grocery and book stores.
The romance genre tried the listening market in the early 1980s without much success, says Jim Brannigan of the Audio Publishers Association, Wallingford, Conn.
He adds, "I suspect it was too early."
Pricing and distribution strategies differ.
Audio Entertainment in Denver started with a $4.99 tape in stores, but now focuses on mail-order sales at $6.99 per tape.
The Denver firm records original tales told only on tape -- not published novels.
Audio Entertainment recently held a "tape signing" for two of its authors at the Tattered Cover Book Store in Denver.
CASH FLOW in the first quarter could rise nearly 12% from a year earlier, say chief financial officers surveyed by A.T. Kearney, Chicago consultants.
Executives said they expect modest sales increases but stronger operating profits.
FROM RUSSIA, WITH GUNS.
Organized criminal gangs from the former Soviet Union have set up shop in 30 countries, says Control Risks Group, a McLean, Va., international security consultant.
It adds Nordic lands are most at risk, due to proximity to the former Soviet Union.
GOODBYE LAPTOP, hello pen-based mobile computer.
Field reps for SmithKline Beecham Consumer Healthcare, Toronto, use tablet-sized PCs with electronic pens to call up product information, transmit orders and stay in touch with the main office.
The Canadian unit says U.S. and U.K. operations are monitoring the field program.
ANNUAL REPORTS double as marketing material at more companies.
Generic drug maker Barr Laboratories produced extra annual reports for fiscal 1993 in order to send copies to prospective shareholders and clients.
In Dallas, Mesa Inc., Boone Pickens's energy company, plans to use its annual report "as a marketing tool" when it pitches Wall Street and the financial-conference circuit this year, says a Mesa executive.
In New York, consultant Addison Corporate Annual Reports advises more firms to use the reports to actually sell.
Its client, Duracell International, added a four-page foldout meant for current and potential investors.
Many firms still plan to stress their competitiveness this year.
Sequent Computer Systems, Beaverton, Ore., wants its annual report to convey a "permanent white-water" attitude toward its fluid market, says Casey Powell, CEO.
In the volatile computer field, astute shareholders know they should be hearing a lot about change, adds Mr. Powell.
BRIEFS: T-T-T-Taxi!
A cab-fare increase took hold in Chicago this week as subzero cold grips the streets. . . .
Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J., responds to a patient-satisfaction survey by slashing its parking rates and letting outpatients, senior citizens and blood donors park free.
