The German mark spent most of the day getting kicked around by its foreign counterparts, gaining only against the dollar as the U.S. currency again failed to break a key technical level.
Behind the mark's decline was continued bad feelings about Germany's economic situation, traders said, and the perception that the Bundesbank isn't ready to fuel growth by lowering interest rates any time soon.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7496 marks, down from 1.7508 marks late Monday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 110.90 yen, down from 111.70 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4945, virtually unchanged from $1.4946.
About midday Wednesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 110.50 yen and at 1.7465 marks.
Exacerbating the German currency's problems was bullish news elsewhere.
The mark lost ground against the Italian lira as a new political coalition formed in Rome and it sank against Sweden's krona on strong current-account data from Stock holm.
The mark also fell against the Belgian and Spanish currencies after those two countries cut interest rates.
The mark was so out of favor that it even lost value against the yen, despite new rumors that Japan's government might be heading for a fall.
Meanwhile, two key Bundesbank members again expressed determination to keep interest rates steady.
Vice President Johann Wilhelm Gaddum said cuts would not be even considered until growth in Germany's M3 money supply came closer to the bank's 4%-6% annual growth target.
December M3 data, the release of which has been delayed until next week, is expected to show growth as high as 7.2%.
Reimut Jochimsen, a member of the Bundesbank's policy committee, said sta bility of the mark was an essential ingredi ent in Germany's economic recovery, im plying that rate cuts that might lower the mark's value would not be considered.
But Carl Amendola, a vice president at Bayerische Hypotheken & Wechsel Bank in New York, said the market was already sure that the Bundesbank would be forced to cut rates, and that the Germans weren't doing themselves a favor by delaying it.
"The longer they wait, the deeper the cut will have to be," Mr. Amendola said.
The mark was able to gain against the dollar, which bounced lower after again failing to break through 1.7550 marks.
Traders said there was a strong perception that major sellers, perhaps central banks adjusting their reserves, were active at that level.
At the same time, there is active interest to hold the dollar, which is unlikely to fall below 1.7350 marks, they said.
Despite the mark's gains against the dollar, the German currency sank against such former European weaklings as the Spanish peseta and Belgian franc.
Late in New York, the mark was trading at around 80.83 pesetas, compared with 81.27 pesetas late Monday, and at 20.73 Belgian francs, down from 20.82 francs Monday.
On Monday, Spain cut its benchmark interest rate to 8.75% from 9%.
Belgium, which also has been beset by political problems, cut its main interest rate for money market lending to 7% from 7.10%.
Mr. Amendola said those cuts cheered the market and generated interest in the franc and peseta.
The smaller European countries are "being very pro-active about their economies," he said.
"They're on their way fast to having a much stronger economy than the Germans."
The Bundesbank's Mr. Jochimsen brushed off suggestions the mark looked pallid.
Rather, he said, European currencies which had been undervalued were simply regaining their proper levels.
Indeed, one of the day's biggest winners was the Italian lira.
The mark fell to 971 lire late in New York trading form 974 lire late Monday.
Supporting the lira was news that a new, seemingly viable centrist party had been formed ahead of Italy's March elections.
The lira has been sold heavily in recent months on worries about who would be in power following the recent corruption scandals.
The Swedish krona continued its comeback against the mark, trading at about 4.5784 kronor late in New York compared with 4.7214 kronor late Monday.
