Last year, the U.S. Senate put aside all its other business for a lengthy debate on the sexual harassment allegations against Senator Bob Packwood.
In contrast, House leaders have refused to address court documents in which federal prosecutors maintain several Members embezzled taxpayers' money from the House Post Office.
Why the double standard?
House leaders have tried for two years to declare the Post Office scandal a dead letter, but it keeps turning up.
Six postal employees were convicted on financial or drug charges.
The last was House Postmaster Robert Rota, who pleaded guilty last July to a 20-year conspiracy with Members that gave them cash from Post Office funds, while making it appear they were buying stamps for official use.
At the time of Rota's guilty plea, federal prosecutors filed papers stating that had Rota gone to trial they would have proved that his embezzlement involved "several Members of Congress, including two who are designated in the Information as `Congressman A' and `Congressman B.'"
Specific facts provided by the prosecutors led reporters to speculate that Congressman A was Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski and Congressman B was Rep. Joe Kolter, who lost his seat in 1992.
But no effort has been made by the House to find out the other Members who embezzled money through Rota.
The Justice Department's investigation has slowed to a crawl.
The original grand jury had to disband, and new Clinton-appointed prosecutors have expanded the mandate of the second jury.
At this pace, nothing more may be known by the time voters go to the polls in November.
A House task force did probe the Post Office scandal back in 1992, but Rota was still covering up his involvement, and its report ended up only reviewing Post Office procedures, not the behavior of any Members.
The task force concluded that any violations would have to be handled by the House Ethics Committee.
But the Ethics Committee has refused to investigate further.
Chairman Jim McDermott claims Justice has asked him not to act while its criminal probe grinds on.
But Rep. Ernest Istook, a freshman Republican, notes it's "neither new nor unusual" to conduct parallel investigations.
"Justice's concern is criminal activity, the House has a duty to police the ethical behavior of its Members," he says.
"So long as Congress doesn't grant immunity to any witness, there's no harm in having Ethics look at this."
Last week, Mr. Istook and 54 co-sponsors demanded a House investigation.
They include moderate Democrats Jim Cooper of Tennessee and Tim Penny of Minnesota.
Their motion will be voted on sometime next week, and it's unclear if Democratic leaders will demand that their Members oppose it.
Take the case of Rep. Rostenkowski, a 35-year House veteran, who faces three opponents in his Chicago primary next month.
Polls show him with only 25% support and a third of voters undecided.
Voters have been left to assume the worst, absent a credible House effort to get at the truth.
The spectacle of House Members next week protecting a few bad Post Office apples can only serve to increase public mistrust.
