Sen. David Pryor released a report that said the pharmaceutical industry continued to raise some prices of frequently prescribed drugs far more than the overall inflation rate last year.
The findings of the report, prepared by the Senate Special Committee on Aging, "call into question the ability of the marketplace to contain drug prices," Sen. Pryor (D., Ark.) said.
Although drug-price inflation in the aggregate moderated last year, average wholesale prices of more than two-thirds of the 200 most frequently prescribed outpatient drugs rose more than the 2.7% increase in the consumer price index, according to the report.
A spokesman for the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association conceded that prices of some individual drugs rose faster than the consumer price index.
But he argued that industry's price increases should be viewed in the aggregate across all products and all customers.
Such a comparison would show that drug price increases have moderated to 3.1%.
Sen. Pryor's report identified the 2.5-milligram dose of Lozol, a heart drug made by Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc., as having the highest price increase, at 21%.
The second-highest increase, at 13%, was for a 200 milligram dose of Zovirax, an antiviral by Burroughs Wellcome Co., a unit of Wellcome PLC.
Lorcet Plus, a pain killer made by UAD Laboratories, a unit of Forest Laboratories Inc., was listed with a 12% increase.
A Rhone-Poulenc Rorer spokesman disputed the report's rate of increase for Lozol.
He said the company increased the price of Lozol by 5% in June and 6% in December.
After discounts and promotions in December, the latest net price change was a negative 2%, he said.
The company last year introduced a lower-dose version that had a 20% lower price, he added.
Overall, prices for Rhone-Poulenc Rorer products rose 2.3% in the U.S. last year, the spokesman said.
A spokesman for Forest also disputed the report's figures but said he couldn't provide the actual numbers or comment on the report, which he said he hadn't seen.
As reported, a Burroughs Wellcome spokesman confirmed the increase for the specific dose of Zovirax, but noted the average increase for all seven formulations of the drug was a much lower 6.8%.
The report used average wholesale prices, the equivalent of list prices that manufacturers suggest wholesalers use when selling their products to community pharmacists.
The prices don't reflect actual prices paid after discounts, or prices paid by hospitals or managed-care groups, which can exert far more clout than community pharmacies when negotiating prices.
Mary Agnes Carey in Washington contributed to this article.
