WHITE HOUSE AIDES TESTIFIED before a federal grand jury.
In a politically charged atmosphere, White House officials began appearing before the grand jury in connection with Whitewater, and the administration gave investigators an attache case full of subpoenaed documents.
The two leadoff witnesses were Hillary Rodham Clinton's chief of staff and press secretary.
Clinton's communications chief, Gearan, also testified, while seven other officials under subpoena were permitted to postpone their appearances.
The subpoenaed documents were delivered to the grand jury by the White House deputy counsel, who refused to say whether the president or first lady turned over any material.
Serbs blocked a U.N. aid convoy trying to reach a besieged Muslim enclave in Bosnia, but the convoy's leader said he would keep trying until he delivered the food to residents of Maglaj.
Separately, Serbs fired on U.N. peacekeepers near Bihac, prompting NATO to send jets over the Serb positions.
The U.S. told PLO chief Arafat to resume talks with Israel or Washington would veto a U.N. Security Council resolution condemning the Feb. 25 massacre of Palestinians in Hebron, Palestinian sources said.
A PLO official said Secretary of State Christopher phoned Arafat to discuss the matter.
Israeli troops were under orders not to open fire on Jewish settlers, even if the civilians shot at Palestinians, an Israeli police commander told a hearing into the Hebron massacre.
Separately, violence erupted in Hebron as hundreds of Palestinians hurled stones and set tires ablaze.
Thousands of rioters stormed through the capital of South Africa's Bophuthatswana black homeland, declaring victory over homeland President Mangope, who had rejected demands for democracy.
Witnesses said Mangope, ruler of the homeland since it was formed in 1977, had left in a helicopter for an unknown destination.
The Clinton adminstration will give U.S. companies greater leeway to sell satellite photos and remote imaging systems without jeopardizing national security.
The technology, used widely in espionage, also has commercial applications.
Russia moved closer toward dismantling its inefficient, collectivized system of farming.
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin announced that he would expand a pilot project in Nizhny Novgorod aimed at breaking up the farming sector, saying, "This program should become a national program for Russia."
A House panel split sharply over proposed controls on private medical expenditures.
The panel's chairman, Rep. Stark, signaled he could drop the provisions to save his goal of ensuring universal health coverage.
He implicitly challenged business to rally GOP support for an alternative cost-control mechanism.
Premier Li Peng struck a note of caution in his annual report to China's legislature.
He called for a reduction in the nation's growth rate, to a proposed 9% in 1994 from over 13% last year.
Meanwhile, dissidents formed an unofficial labor union on the eve of Secretary of State Christopher's arrival today.
The Abu Dhabi government agreed to pay the liquidators of BCCI Holdings (Luxembourg) $1.8 billion as part of a revised accord to try to settle billions of dollars of creditor claims against the defunct bank.
A federal judge in Virginia extended the freeze on about $2.2 million worth of assets allegedly belonging to CIA officer Ames, who is accused of spying for Moscow.
An FBI agent told the court that the CIA knew as early as 1990 that Ames held foreign bank accounts containing unexplained sums.
A suspected German agent was detained in Moscow on espionage charges, according to Russia's Interfax news agency.
No further details were available, and Bonn authorities wouldn't comment on the report.
Deval Patrick told the Senate Judiciary Committee that, if he is confirmed as the nation's top civil rights law enforcer, he would use the position as a "bully pulpit" to speak out against bigotry and hate crimes.
Patrick, a Boston attorney, was nominated by Clinton last month for the post, which has been vacant for more than a year.
