The European Union Commission imposed fines totaling 104 million European currency units ($116.7 million) against 16 steel companies, saying they were engaged in massive price fixing and collaboration in the market for steel beams.
The heaviest fines were issued against British Steel PLC, with 32 million ECUs; the Unimetal SA division of France's Usinor Sacilor, with 12.3 million ECUs; and Arbed SA of Luxembourg, with 11.2 million ECUs.
British Steel and Usinor both indicated they expect to appeal the fines to the European Court of Justice.
"We're rather surprised by the principle as well as the overall size of the fines," said Jean-Yves Gilet, director of strategy and international affairs at Usinor, Europe's largest steelmaker.
"We contest the logic of all this."
Some industry officials said privately they were "outraged" by the decision.
The commission, however, said the companies' allegedly anticompetitive behavior warranted the big fines.
"This was a situation where everything that could be infringed was infringed by these companies," said the European Union's competition commissioner, Karel Van Miert.
"We had to be tough."
One element of the cartel, he said, involved restricting the flow of information on the steel sector in order to freeze out any new competitors.
The commission's record fine to a single company is a 75 million-ECU levy against the Swedish-owned packaging concern Tetra Pak in 1991.
Collectively, however, the fines announced yesterday represent the largest penalty ever imposed under EU competition law.
The fines, however, will do little to resolve a deadlock between the commission and much of Europe's steel industry over the need for cutbacks in EU steel output.
Both sides failed to put forth any new ideas during a dinner meeting in Brussels Tuesday.
They've agreed to meet again in late March.
Unsubsidized steelmakers complain that the subsidies the EU approved in December for state-owned steelmakers in Germany, Italy, Spain and Portugal are distorting the market.
The commission, represented by Mr. Van Miert and fellow industry Commissioner Martin Bangemann, pressed the unsubsidized producers to cut back laminating capacity in the flat-products sector by several more million tons than already realized or pledged.
But many steelmakers are reluctant to shut down mills at a time the market looks as if it's about to rebound.
Some steel executives say they see a contradiction in the EU's policy, which they say distorts fair competition by subsidizing some producers while fining others for allegedly breaching competition law.
"The commission must reassure unsubsidized steelmakers that they mean what they say" in pledging to block any new subsidies.
"Then they'll get cooperation and progress," said one industry official.
