CLINTON CAUTIONED against superficial tinkering with the health system.
The president said he opposed any legislative efforts to achieve health-care reform incrementally, saying it would be a mistake to "tinker at the edges."
Meanwhile, the White House lobbied to stave off an embarrassing vote by an influential business group in favor of a rival health-care bill.
The Business Roundtable plans to vote today on a panel recommendation supporting the competing legislation authored by Rep. Cooper and Sen. Breaux.
A key Clinton ally on health care, Sen. Jay Rockefeller, criticized the president for talking about compromise on cost controls during a meeting with governors, saying Clinton's comments weren't "particularly useful."
The head of the IMF said his agency would not back away from the stiff conditions it has set for the release of more aid to Russia.
Camdessus predicted that because of the IMF's position and comments made by the Yeltsin government, talks aimed at unlocking $1.5 billion in IMF funds "may not be easy."
A Boston lawyer was nominated by Clinton to be assistant attorney general for civil rights.
Deval Patrick, 37, has been involved in a number of pro bono civil-rights cases.
The post for chief civil-rights enforcer has been vacant since Clinton took office.
Two prior choices, Lani Guinier and John Payton, were forced to withdraw.
Serbs are intensifying their persecution of Muslims and Croats in northwestern Bosnia with killings, beatings and evictions in the vicinity of Serb-controlled Banja Luka, a U.N. official said.
In Washington, Britain's foreign secretary urged the U.S. to assume an active role in diplomatic efforts to settle the war in Bosnia.
Russian leaders clashed over the possibility of air strikes against Serbs in Bosnia, with Premier Chernomyrdin ruling out air raids and Foreign Minister Kozyrev saying Moscow doesn't oppose the idea.
Ultranationalist Zhirinovsky vowed in Montenegro that he would unseat the Moscow government and help Serbs resist the West.
Irish activist Gerry Adams called for the Clinton administration to be actively involved in the Northern Ireland peace process and to prod Britain to break a deadlock.
Speaking in New York, Adams, who heads the IRA's political wing, accused the British of stalling.
An embargo on Vietnam may be lifted this week by Clinton, a senior U.S. official said.
Presidential advisers have recommended such a move, based on Hanoi's cooperation in efforts to help the U.S. resolve cases of MIAs from the Vietnam War.
Last week the Senate approved a resolution calling for an end to the 19-year-old embargo.
The U.S. was forced by its major trading partners to scale back a plan to liberalize export controls on certain computers.
Administration officials said that members of Cocom rejected the U.S. proposal to ease restrictions.
Commerce Secretary Brown is expected to be informed by the Justice Department this week that it hasn't found any evidence to support charges that Brown sought a bribe to influence U.S. policy toward Vietnam.
A letter from the department will most likely be sent to Brown within a few days, an administration official said.
The PLO has assured Israel that Palestinians are headed toward confederation with Jordan rather than a separate state, the Israeli foreign minister said.
Many Israelis have feared that Palestinian autonomy in Gaza and Jericho could lead to a Palestinian state.
Israel will be allowed to export equipment to the U.S. derived from that nation's ballistic missile program.
As a result, U.S. firms may be able to import Israel's spacelaunch vehicle.
Tonya Harding's ex-husband pleaded guilty to taking part in the Jan. 6 attack that forced Harding's rival, Nancy Kerrigan, out of the U.S. Figure Skating Championships.
Jeff Gillooly struck a plea bargain under which he confessed to a racketeering charge in exchange for his testimony.
Harding has denied that she helped plan the attack.
A House committee approved $7.7 billion in emergency assistance for victims of the Los Angeles earthquake, clearing the way for the full House to consider the matter as early as tomorrow.
