After nearly 10 years in parliament, Abdul Wahab Darawshe felt the moment had arrived for the appointment of Israel's first Arab cabinet minister.
He wanted to be that person.
His timing seemed propitious.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin had said he wanted to expand his narrowly based ruling coalition to shore up support for the peace accord with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
If Mr. Rabin was willing to shake hands with Yasser Arafat, Mr. Darawshe reasoned, why shouldn't he be ready to accept Abdul Wahab Darawshe, a loyal Israeli citizen, into his government?
But Mr. Rabin has so far rebuffed the overture.
Even though the government depends heavily on Arab parties to win key Knesset votes, Mr. Darawshe says he is told that the Israeli public isn't ready to accept Arabs as full-fledged partners.
Mr. Darawshe now declares that if he isn't accepted by the end of January, his Democratic Arab Party -- and its two seats in the 120-seat Knesset -- will join the opposition.
The idea of peace between Israel and Palestinians may be in the air, but Israel's 800,000 Arab citizens -- almost all living within Israel proper, not in the occupied territories -- still feel like second-class citizens.
Says Mr. Darawshe: "I'm not sure this government, or any other government, will ever give us real equality."
Israel's Arab citizens, who make up 16% of the Israeli population, overwhelmingly saw the Israel-PLO agreement as leading to sweeping improvements in their lives.
The Jewish majority would no longer have any reason to doubt their loyalty or to feel threatened by their identification with the PLO.
Discrimination in jobs, housing and education, which have existed since Israel's founding in 1948, should no longer be justified, Israeli Arab leaders argued.
Yet the prospect of peace, instead of closing economic, social, and educational gaps between Israeli Jews and Arabs, is threatening to widen them.
Arab towns continue to lag severely in economic development and have higher unemployment, according to Sikkuy, a Jerusalem-based organization promoting equal opportunity.
The government hasn't integrated Arabs into the civil service, and many government offices have no Arabs on staff.
While 31% of Jewish students went on to higher education in 1992, only 10% of non-Jewish Israeli students did.
Now a scramble by Israeli Jews to go into business with Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip is stirring bitterness among Israeli Arabs, who haven't been able to attract significant investment to their own communities.
True equality won't be possible in any case as long as old hostilities and prejudices linger, on both sides.
Atalia Dror, a liberal Israeli Jew who works at a suburban Tel Aviv newspaper shop, says she is a strong believer in equality.
Yet "the fear of Arabs is a feeling that's hard to erase.
It comes from deep inside my belly," she says.
"After all, they did attack us and try to destroy us."
Among Israeli Arabs, there is ambivalence about their identity in a country that defines itself foremost as a Jewish state.
Their allegiance to Israel also infuriates some Palestinians in the occupied territories.
"They say they want equality within Israel, they say they want democracy, but they'll never get it," says Ghassan Kabha, a Palestinian activist in Barta'a, a border town that spans both Israel and the West Bank.
"Look at the Middle Eastern Jews and the European Jews who live in Israel," he says, seated in his cousin's stone house on the West Bank side of town.
"There hasn't been equality between them since the state began.
And if there's no equality between the Jews, why do the Arabs think there will ever be equality between the Arabs and the Jews?"
In fact, even before the Israel-PLO accord, significant progress had been made in closing some gaps.
Budgets earmarked for the Arab sector have more than doubled since the Labor Party came to power 18 months ago.
The first Israeli Arab was named to head a government-owned company, and the government has promised to equalize child-care allowances for Arab and Jewish families.
Yet because marked differences remain, Israeli Arabs fear that the government doesn't intend to grant them civil equality.
"The peace accord," contends Elie Rekhess of Tel Aviv University, "is relegating Israeli Arabs to the margins of both the Palestinian mainstream and Israeli society."
And they would be harder hit by the economic restructuring required by peace, argue Amiram Gonen and Rassem Khamaisi, researchers at the Floersheimer Institute for Policy Studies in Jerusalem.
Foreign investment in Israel following peace would be concentrated in capitalintensive industries in metropolitan areas, they say.
But most Israeli Arabs live in rural areas on the periphery of the country.
And Israeli Jews, more than Israeli Arabs, have acquired the skills to take advantage of opportunities expected in areas like technology and science.
Labor-intensive industries that employ many Israeli Arabs, on the other hand, would find it hard to compete with cheaper Palestinian labor across the border, and some may end up shutting down or relocating to the West Bank, worsening unemployment.
"Some Arabs and Jews in Israel will benefit economically by peace, but the Jews will benefit much more," says Mr. Gonen.
"Some Arabs and Jews will be hurt economically by peace, but the Arabs will be hurt much more."
For Mustafa Abu Raia, an Israeli Arab who is a former head of the Sakhnin local council in the Galilee, the peace process has brought some welcome changes.
He says a court case against him for making statements supporting the Palestinian intifada was dropped by the Israeli authorities after the PLO pact was signed.
Villagers have been allowed to carry Palestinian flags during demonstrations supporting the peace process.
But he worries that peace, and the eventual relinquishing of Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza, would cause government attention to turn instead to "Judaizing the Galilee," the area in northern Israel where Israeli Arabs are most concentrated.
During the 1948 war, Sakhnin elders met with the approaching Jewish army and offered to turn over their arms and remain neutral if Jewish soldiers would refrain from attacking the village.
A deal was struck and the villagers sat out the war at home, the village untouched.
But over the years the government built new Jewish towns on land that was once part of Sakhnin.
Outside Mr. Abu Raia's home stands a memorial to six people killed during a 1976 protest against government confiscation of Arab land.
The memorial, a boxy sculpture of people crouching and shielding themselves with their arms, is a constant reminder of the importance villagers attach to the land -- and of their fears of losing it.
"We look at the Jewish towns around us.
The government offers financial inducements to encourage Jews to move there or to set up companies.
They make sure that the Jewish towns have phones, water, sewage and electricity, unlike many of the Arab villages in the Galilee.
We want the same rights and benefits the Jews receive," says Mr. Abu Raia.
"I don't mind if they want to put new immigrants in the Galilee.
But I want to make sure that there is going to be enough land for us to live here 50 years from now as well."
Sakhnin residents are especially worried about a proposal by the Jewish Agency, a nonprofit group that works closely with the government, for 26 future Jewish settlements in the Galilee.
To them, it confirms suspicions that once the occupied territories are returned, Jewish settlement in northern Israel will expand.
"One day there will be no more Israelis in the occupied territories; they'll leave their homes and come to the Galilee," worries Hamad Khalaily, an ex-Knesset member.
Benny Shiloh, head of the minorities desk at the prime minister's office, dismisses this notion.
And he says the government is trying to close the educational and social gaps between Arab and Jewish communities.
Arabs here "are going to benefit from peace," Mr. Shiloh contends.
"If Israel can spend less money on defense, there will be more money to spend on improving cities and towns, and this will include Arab towns on equal terms with Jewish ones," he adds.
"We are committed to ensuring that Arabs will have equal job opportunities, now and when there is peace."
Azmi Bishara, an Israeli Arab who heads the philosophy department at Bir Zeit University in the West Bank, says Israeli Arabs are beginning to realize that even if a Palestinian state emerges, their status in Israel won't change so long as Israel continues to define itself as a Jewish state.
He believes territorial autonomy for Israeli Arabs is out of the question, since Jews and Arabs are geographically intertwined.
But Arabs should at least have cultural autonomy, he says, overseeing the books their schools use and the way Arab history is taught, for example.
"Why should a Romanian Jew decide what Arabic literature I study in school?
Why should Jews run the Israeli Arabic television?
Why shouldn't there be an Arab university in Nazareth offering courses taught in Arabic?"
Mr. Bishara asks.
Such arguments frighten many Israeli Jews, who fear cultural autonomy would be the first step toward Israeli Arab secession -- and destruction of Israel from within.
At a Tel Aviv University panel discussion on peace's effects, the mostly Jewish audience could barely control itself when an Israeli Arab posed the idea.
One man stood up and denounced the speaker, drawing hearty applause from others.
Mr. Darawshe, the Knesset member, says that while Israeli Arabs don't seek territorial autonomy, the new political situation has made Israel seem even more markedly a Jewish-Zionist state.
He plans to offers a bill to expand Israel's definition -- currently the "state of the Jewish people" -- to add "and the state of all its citizens regardless of national or religious affiliation."
The proposal "is a test," he says, "for how seriously Israel wants the Arab citizens to integrate."
