Volkswagen AG's Spanish subsidiary, Seat SA, confirmed that its former chairman withheld full information about the extent of the company's financial crisis from VW.
But the unit offered no explanations and remained tight-lipped about the thinly veiled threats from German headquarters of possible legal action.
Highlighting a breakdown in reporting and control mechanisms between VW and its units, the fiasco at Seat pushed the group into a loss of 2.3 billion marks ($1.31 billion) last year and is now the focus of a battle between VW Chairman Ferdinand Piech and the struggling unit.
Already angered by the "earnings shock" from Seat, which forced him to eat his oft-repeated pledges of getting the VW group out of the red in 1993, Mr. Piech now has hired external auditors to investigate how and why details of Seat's financial situation were hidden from the parent company.
"Once the results of an audit are complete, we will have to talk about the consequences and possibly what legal actions must be taken," said a VW spokesman in Wolfsburg, Germany, where VW is based.
Over the weekend, Mr. Piech told Spanish newspaper El Pais that he considered the events deliberate misinformation representing not only bad management, but "an offense with criminal consequences."
Former Seat Chairman Juan Antonio Diaz Alvarez was unavailable to comment.
According to a preliminary internal VW investigation, a report warning that Seat was technically bankrupt was prepared by then-Finance Director Eberhardt Mueller in June.
The report, which predicted that losses for the year would exceed the company's share capital of 80 billion pesetas ($557.3 million), however, wasn't presented to a June 23 meeting of Seat's supervisory board.
Instead, VW managers at that meeting were told to expect a 12 billion pesetas shortfall.
VW headquarters was unaware of the extent of the problems until September.
Seat required a 2.2 billion mark bailout from VW.
Mr. Mueller, whose report VW discovered in October, was sent into retirement by Seat management after the June board meeting.
Although unable to provide his exact age, Seat said: "It was time for Mr. Mueller to retire."
Mr. Piech's crusade to get to the bottom of the Seat question comes against the backdrop of some recent corporate bombshells in Spain and Germany, namely the near bankruptcy at German conglomerate Metallgesellschaft AG and the state takeover in Spain of Banco Espanol de Credito, or Banesto.
The crisis at Metallgesellschaft -- where the supervisory board apparently was unaware of mounting losses and speculative deals -- has created concern about whether these supervisory bodies at German corporations are doing their jobs of overseeing management and protecting shareholder interests.
Banesto's problems, arising six months after the bank launched Spain's biggest-ever rights issue, similarly raise questions about market supervision and accounting practices.
The public airing of Mr. Piech's gripes against Mr. Diaz Alvarez also signals the desperation at VW.
Europe's largest car maker ranks as one of its most troubled, trying to claw its way back into the black in the face of a dismal European car market and plummeting sales.
In 1993, sales at the VW group plunged 20.1%, steeper than the 15.1% drop for the European market as a whole, and VW's market share fell to 16.4% from 17.5% in 1992.
In Frankfurt trading yesterday, VW lost 6.50 marks to 424 marks.
