For months the glass has been half full for the bond market, but yesterday many investors decided it was half empty.
Sentiment in the U.S. bond markets turned decidedly negative yesterday, and investors have begun to assume that the big players are now selling bonds, not buying them.
For many bond salesmen on Wall Street, yesterday was a new experience.
Despite sharply rising prices early in the day, many clients seemed more interested in selling than in buying, or even holding their Treasury securities.
Rumors that certain large Wall Street firms were unloading huge amounts of Treasury securities helped push prices lower yesterday as did fears that the Japanese would sell U.S. Treasurys in response to a potential trade war with the U.S. Assumptions that the Federal Reserve will soon move again to raise short-term interest rates, to ease inflationary pressures, also contributed to the gloomy feeling in the market.
The catalyst for the selling yesterday was a business-outlook survey from the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Board, which said that more purchasing managers in the region paid higher prices in January than had paid higher prices in the previous month.
The report came after the bond market had actually begun to rally in response to the release of the consumer price index, an important measure of inflation.
The index came in as expected, but investors concentrated on the Philadelphia report instead.
By day's end, the price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond had dropped more than a point, or more than $10 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 96 4/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, rose to 6.54% from 6.46% on Wednesday.
That's the highest yield since August.
For much of the past year, investors worried little as they watched the U.S. economy build up steam.
Many of them convinced themselves that the economy wasn't growing fast enough to lead to sharply higher inflation.
So in large part, these investors were willing to keep betting on lower bond yields.
Bond investors fear inflation because it makes investments with a fixed rate of return unattractive.
That has changed.
"The bull market is over," said William Gross, a managing director at Pacific Investment Management Co. of Newport Beach, Calif.
Now "the real question is how deep and how significant is this interlude" of rising rates, he said.
Mr. Gross said he believes long-term rates may soon stabilize.
But the market has been anything but stable in recent weeks.
The sell-off yesterday "did take on the characteristics of opportunistic selling," said Mr. Gross.
"Institutions seem to be selling on the way down as prices fall as opposed to buying on the way up" as prices rise, he said.
Trading volume was very heavy.
According to GovPx Inc., which tracks the trading of Treasurys, volume reached $92 billion yesterday, the sixth-highest since GovPx started keeping track of volume in 1991.
GovPx, owned by a group of primary dealers in the Treasury market, estimated that its numbers cover about 65% of all trading volume in the Treasury market.
"The market has developed a psychology of waiting for the other shoe to drop," said Donald Fine, chief market analyst at Chase Securities Inc.
Investors are waiting for the Federal Reserve to boost the federal-funds rate, the rate at which banks lend each other money overnight, from 3.25% to 3.5%.
The Fed raised that rate two weeks ago from 3% to 3.25%.
Like many economists, Mr. Fine didn't consider the Philadelphia report as important a measure of inflationary pressures as the CPI report, which showed subdued inflation in January.
"If there was a firm feeling in the market that inflation wasn't going to be a problem," he said, the Philadelphia Fed report "wouldn't have shaken the market."
The negative reaction, which surprised many in the bond markets, shows that "investors are getting a little more inflation-conscious here," said Mr. Fine.
Long-term interest rates are unlikely to return to their levels of last October, said Mr. Fine, when the yield of the 30-year Treasury bond dropped to 5.79%.
"To get back to 6%, you will have to have one hell of a U-turn in the economy," he said.
"This economy will have to go in reverse and by and large, economic growth is continuing," he added.
The Philadelphia Fed's business-outlook survey said 30.4% of the purchasing managers reported paying higher prices in January than the month before.
Of the purchasing managers reporting, 17.9% said they received higher prices in January than the month before.
The percentage of purchasing managers noting an increase in prices paid in January was the highest percentage seen since December 1990, said Ray Stone, of Stone & McCarthy, a firm that provides economic analysis.
The percentage noting an increase in prices received was the highest since June 1989, Mr. Stone says.
While only 30.4% noted increases, another index in the Philadelphia survey noted that no managers surveyed reported a decrease in prices paid, which is highly unusual.
Only a small percentage reported a price decrease in prices received.
But, Mr. Stone cautioned, the Philadelphia survey is notoriously more erratic than other inflation numbers, such as the CPI.
"My opinion is that it might be pulling in the right direction, but it certainly is exaggerating the magnitude of any impending price pressures," he said.
Now "there is a lot more of the dynamics and price volatility" in the bond markets "that you would associate with a bear market," said John Costas, head of government trading at CS First Boston Inc.
"People are all rushing through the door" trying to get their selling done in one day instead of over a week, said Mr. Costas.
According to Mr. Gross, investors in the U.S. markets should keep a close eye on the brewing trade war between the U.S. and Japan.
"There is more to the trade element than most investors are giving credence to," he said.
"One of the primary weapons that the Japanese have is to sell bonds and notes and basically destroy Clinton's economic foundation," explained Mr. Gross.
"The Japanese can single-handedly destroy Bill Clinton's economic architecture" he said, "and that might be one of the key reasons why a sophisticated investment house or investor would be selling" U.S. Treasurys these days.
Developing countries sold a record $57.7 billion of bonds last year, more than double the amount sold the previous year, according to the World Bank.
The amount of bonds sold by developing nations just in the last quarter of 1993 nearly surpassed the whole of 1992, with issues totaling $19.7 billion in the quarter against $21.2 billion for all of the previous year.
In its latest quarterly bulletin, the World Bank said that despite the sharp rise in bond issues in 1993, the average gap between the yields of developing-nation bonds and U.S. Treasury securities with comparable maturities also narrowed last year.
Over 1993, the average yield gap of dollar-denominated issues over U.S. Treasurys narrowed 0.60 percentage point to 2.80 percentage points, according to the World Bank.
The narrowing gap reflected the surge of investor interest in developing-country bonds, the World Bank said.
World Bank economist Punam Chuhan, who wrote the quarterly report's item on financial flows to developing countries, stated that "the recent surge in private capital flows is significant" because of the retreat of voluntary bank lending to most developing countries since the 1980s.
The corporate bond market took a slight beating as prices dropped with Treasurys.
Even so, more than $1.5 billion of corporate and agency debt was sold during the session.
New issues were seen from Webcraft Technologies Inc., PepsiCo Inc., Pennsylvania Power & Light Co. and Ford Motor Credit Corp., a unit of Ford Motor Co.
Weaker prices in the investment-grade market spilled over into the junk bond market where prices dropped by more than 0.50 point across the board.
But the bonds of Sullivan Graphics Inc. traded up on news that its parent, Sullivan Communications Inc., sold one of its units.
Sullivan Marketing Inc., a coupon-insert company, was sold to News America FSI Inc., a unit of News Corp., the huge media company.
Sullivan Graphics' senior subordinated debentures rose 4.75 points, or $47.50 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 108.5.
The yield dropped to 11.03% from 14.04%
Sullivan Marketing was considered a weak performer compared with the other companies owned by Sullivan Communications, and it depressed the value of Sullivan Graphics' bonds, one syndicate official said.
The bonds now better reflect the value of Sullivan Graphics, he said.
Sullivan Communications also pulled its $185 million junk bond offering, which was to be sold in the private placement market, sources close to the transaction said.
Mortgage securities plunged like Treasurys after debt players decided to focus keenly on the price components of the Fed survey.
Though the Philadelphia Fed numbers knocked both markets down, mortgage securities fared a little better than Treasurys.
In secondary trading, Government National Mortgage Association 6.5% securities for March delivery finished 21/32 lower at 98 5/32.
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold 6.5% issues and Federal National Mortgage Association 6.5% issues, both for March delivery, were off 20/32 at 98 10/32 and 98 5/32 respectively.
Meanwhile, MBNA Corp.'s MBNA America Bank unit succesfully sold a $750 million five-year, floating-rate credit-card issue through underwriters led by CS First Boston Inc., even though the deal appeared to be priced at a tight yield spread to Treasurys.
MBNA MCCT 1994-1 carried a coupon of the one-month London Interbank Offered Rate plus 0.15 percentage point, or 3.5875%.
It was priced at 99 29/32 to yield a spread of 0.17 percentage point over the one-month Libor or 3.6075%.
The yield floats to a 12% cap.
CS First Boston officials said the deal was completely sold.
Prices of municipal bonds were pulled down in the sell-off that affected Treasurys, with some tax-exempt issues ending a full point lower or more.
Among actively traded issues, the Reedy Creek Improvement District of Florida's 5.00% bonds of 2019 finished a point lower at 93 1/4, to yield 5.43%.
Muni selling also was fueled by concerns about a series of bid-wanted lists from bond funds, traders said.
The selling interest stems from portfolio adjustments, some muni specialists say.
Separately, little new debt was offered.
A Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority offering of $185 million of Series 1994A revenue-anticipation notes was won by seven lead bidders.
The notes, which are due March 1, 1995, have a MIG-2 rating from Moody's Investors Service Inc. and an SP-1 rating from Standard & Poor's Corp.
Many of the notes have a 3.75% coupon and are priced to yield 3.00%.
Abby Schultz contributed to this article.
