As a 35-year veteran agent in the life insurance industry, I am responding to your Jan. 21 page-one article on life insurers being held liable for abuses by agents.
There are "rogue" agents who represent a tiny minority of career agents.
They are difficult to identify by company managements, agency managers and even fellow agents.
But, once identified, they should be dealt with swiftly and decisively by management.
Otherwise, the industry suffers for the acts of a few.
However, you then attack the sale of permanent life insurance (whole life) as though it were in the same class as stealing from a client.
Hundreds of my clients who own whole life have thanked me time and again for urging them to purchase this type of coverage.
You seem to lack full understanding of the proper uses of permanent life insurance.
You take the position that its sale is simply commission oriented with no thought to the best long-term interests of the client.
Thousands of professional agents work hard every day helping clients face up to their needs, explaining complex modern life insurance contracts and trying to suit those contracts to their needs.
Thomas K. Leach, CLU
Ridgewood, N.J.
As a life insurance agent with more than 30 years in sales and sales management, I think it's time for a serious review of selling practices in our industry.
Although instances of fraud as cited in your article are relatively rare, an industry-wide compensation and recognition system exists that too often results in the sale of high-premium insurance products when the consumers' interests would be better served by the purchase of low-premium (and low-commission) term products.
For years, many companies -- especially the large mutuals -- have configured their commission scales (the ultimate incentive program) to discourage the sale of economical term protection in favor of high-commission, higher-premium cash-value products.
Given the huge commission differential among policies providing equal protection, life insurance's complexity, arcane language of policy contracts and the ease with which computers crank out proposals dripping with apparent authority, it is virtually inevitable that the seller's and buyer's interest are divergent.
While life insurance companies are justifiably proud of their prompt, honest claims handling and long history of financial stability, the consumer deserves protection from the high pressure sale of inappropriate life insurance products.
Charles A. Wunder, CLU
