Federal prosecutors are considering seeking criminal charges against Democratic Rep. Walter Tucker of California, people close to the situation said.
A nearly three-year investigation by the U.S. Attorney's office and the Federal Bureau of Investigation here focused on alleged bribery while Rep. Tucker served as mayor of Compton, Calif., in 1991 and 1992.
Relying on tapes from hidden video cameras and other material gathered during the undercover phase of the inquiry, these people said, prosecutors here are leaning toward seeking felony charges against Rep. Tucker and Patricia Moore, a former member of the Compton City Council.
But the final decision has been referred to senior Justice Department officials in Washington because of the possible political sensitivity of the case.
Both Rep. Tucker and Ms. Moore said they weren't aware of the investigation and denied any wrongdoing.
"It's an election year," Rep. Tucker said in a telephone interview yesterday.
Justice Department and FBI press officers in Los Angeles and Washington declined to comment on the case, although others said that local prosecutors months ago urged proceeding to indictment.
But prosecutors could still change their current plan to present their findings to a grand jury.
The case could be controversial, because both former city officials are prominently identified with minority causes and have close ties to some of the area's most powerful black community leaders.
Black leaders in the past have criticized the Justice Department for what they claim is the unfair targeting of minority officeholders for criminal prosecution.
Compton, an economically depressed city south of the Watts section of Los Angeles, became a symbol of racial division during the riots here two years ago.
Rep. Tucker, a 36-year-old minister who is serving his first term in the House, gained prominence escorting President Bush and other dignitaries around the damaged area.
The son of a long-time Compton mayor and a former county prosecutor himself, Rep. Tucker is one of the fastest-rising black politicians in Southern California.
One person familiar with the case said any indictment would be based partly on tapes of a sting operation that appear to show Rep. Tucker and Ms. Moore accepting money allegedly to make sure certain items were placed on the city council's agenda.
Asked about those allegations, Rep. Tucker said "I deny them, of course."
He said he could "think of a lot of people who would like to smear my name," adding that no federal investigators "have talked to me about this."
In a separate interview, Ms. Moore, a long-time community activist, said "I've never done anything like that," adding that "this is the first time I have ever heard of this."
