The International Energy Agency, in its first bullish note for oil markets in months, revised upward its forecast of world petroleum demand for the first quarter.
The Paris-based agency now estimates first-quarter oil demand will average 68.7 million barrels a day.
That is sharply higher than oil consumption of 68.3 million barrels a day in the year-earlier period and also is 200,000 barrels a day more than the IEA was forecasting only a month ago for the current quarter.
An affiliate of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the IEA monitors world energy developments for Western oil-consuming nations.
Its estimates are used for planning purposes by both oil-consuming and oil-producing nations and can have a significant impact on world markets.
Oil prices had plunged below $14 a barrel to five-year lows late last year after numerous downward revisions in the IEA's forecasts of 1993 world oil demand and the late-November refusal of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to cut output.
Helped by the drain on supplies from the frigid weather gripping much of the U.S., petroleum prices have recovered somewhat so far this year, rising last week to the highest level since late November.
But, on Friday, crude oil prices declined again despite the upbeat IEA report.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude oil for March delivery fell 26 cents to settle at $15.63 a barrel.
In its monthly Oil Market Report released Friday, the IEA cited abnormally cold weather in the U.S. as well as "unexpectedly strong deliveries" of fuels in Japan among reasons for the upward demand revisions.
The agency noted it also increased retroactively prior estimates of oil use in the 1993 fourth quarter.
But the IEA reduced slightly the earlier estimates of world oil demand for the final three quarters of 1994.
That left unchanged its previous projection of 67.6 million barrels for the entire year.
On the supply side, the IEA said OPEC's January crude oil output remained in a range between 24.7 million and 24.8 million barrels a day for the third consecutive month.
That is higher than the production ceiling of 24.5 million barrels a day, but is in line with requirements for OPEC's oil as indicated by the IEA figures.
Although the IEA takes into account past production, it doesn't forecast future OPEC output.
But the IEA's latest assessments of world oil use imply that much more OPEC oil is needed during the current quarter than indicated by earlier demand estimates.
Based on the IEA report, 25.5 million barrels a day of crude oil will be required from OPEC and from withdrawals from world inventories for the 1994 first quarter.
For the seasonally weak second quarter, however, the IEA's figures suggest that the need for OPEC oil, even assuming no withdrawals from inventories, would drop to 23.3 million barrels a day.
Normally, oil companies draw down their inventories during the peak demand period of winter and then rebuild them in the second and third quarters.
