When Robert Joss stepped up to the microphone at Westpac Banking Corp.'s annual meeting in January, it was the first chance for most shareholders to have a look at the American brought in a year ago to revive their bank.
Although Mr. Joss, the bank's managing director, hadn't planned to speak, it was clear that the throng of 1,500 people wanted to hear from him.
Propping himself on the podium, one hand lodged in his pocket, the wiry Californian with thinning brown hair and an easy smile cautioned that his remarks would be off-the-cuff.
Then Mr. Joss outlined his plans, wrapping up with: "We know exactly what we're doing.
We know where we have to go."
Applauding investors seemed willing to give the 52-year-old outsider time to put his words into action at Australia's oldest corporation.
Mr. Joss and his team face the task of turning around a nationwide bank mired in bad loans and steeped in a cozy corporate culture nurtured over 176 years.
It is an institution whose staff has been whipsawed by huge job cuts and frequent management changes.
Bad publicity over questionable lending practices has shaken customer confidence, and layoffs have sapped morale among middle managers.
Some industry watchers give Westpac high marks just for having survived.
Even Westpac's chairman, John Uhrig, concedes that "the independence of the bank" was at risk.
Troubled loans, which peaked at 14% of the bank's portfolio in 1992, remain uncomfortably high at 10% of total loans.
But Westpac has bolstered its capital, and it reported a profit of A$39 million (US$27.8 million) for the year ended Sept. 30, after tax and accounting items.
That compares with a loss of A$1.6 billion a year earlier, reflecting a A$2.8 billion write-down of loans.
"It was an unusually severe deterioration in asset quality and certainly one of the worst experienced by such a major bank in the world," says David Marshall, an analyst at IBCA Ltd., a London bank credit rating agency, which ranks Westpac as the 80th-largest bank world-wide in terms of assets.
"To survive that with one year's loss and then to recover is quite a good experience," he adds.
Since Mr. Joss, a former executive of Wells Fargo & Co., San Francisco, took over in February 1993, the price of Westpac shares has jumped 70%.
Mr. Joss says that Westpac's net profit this fiscal year will exceed last year's A$39 million and that the bank is cutting costs, reducing bad debts and refocusing its businesses.
But he warns, "We still have a long way to go."
A look at some key ratios shows just how far.
According to the brokerage firm of J.B.
Were & Son, National Australia Bank Ltd., or NAB, the pacesetter among the country's banks, posted a return on average assets in the latest year of more than 1%; Westpac trailed at 0.18%.
NAB's ratio of operating costs to operating profit was about 56%, much leaner than Westpac's 65.5%.
Critics say Westpac's troubles are rooted in its arrogance and the global expansion strategy it pursued in the 1980s, when Australia deregulated its financial system.
At home, lax credit controls allowed the bank's assets to balloon.
Abroad, Westpac opened several branches in Asia and added offices in the U.S.
A deep recession in Australia in 1990-91 soured loans, exposing Westpac's inefficiencies.
Enter Mr. Joss, with a doctorate in finance from Stanford University and 22 years at Wells Fargo, where he helped chop costs, sort out real estate loans and refocus the bank on its home market, away from international aspirations.
As soon as he arrived, Mr. Joss set about discovering "what makes the bank tick . . . the way decisions get made. . .," he recalls in an interview at Westpac's downtown headquarters, which tower over Sydney harbor.
What he found, he says, was a paternalistic culture where banking was done by committee.
"It was very hard to identify accountability," he says.
In those early days, Mr. Joss relied on Mr. Uhrig, the bank's chairman, to guide him through Australia's cultural and business thickets.
Insiders say the head of each division was required to make a presentation to the new boss.
"What he got out of those presentations was a feel for people, the personalities -- who was trying to pull the wool over his eyes," says an executive who has since left the bank.
"He didn't act immediately, but made the decisions later, and I think he was pretty right on them."
Mr. Joss visited a few of the bank's 1,200 branches, where he found employees performing some tasks, such as accounting functions, that U.S. banks took out of the branches a decade ago.
He donned a trainee uniform, putting in an eight-hour day at the Railway Square branch in Sydney.
And he started a hotline for any bank employee to phone him on the first Friday of each month.
Now Mr. Joss is one year into a five-year drive for full recovery, built around "keeping it simple."
He has made several key appointments, including Robert Nimmo, a 46-year-old Australian and former New York-based executive with Citibank, who became Westpac's chief credit officer.
Patrick Handley, a 49-year-old American who is a former chief financial officer of Banc One Corp., this month becomes Westpac's chief financial officer.
Moreover, the bank overhauled its retail banking operations, closed about 200 branches, and plans to shut 100 more.
It reorganized its corporate banking business, tightened credit evaluation and set up a special group to oversee the sale of its big property holdings.
And it is concentrating on Australian and New Zealand clients rather than seeking far-flung customers.
Over the past year, Westpac has shrunk its total assets to A$105 billion from A$111 billion, partly by selling a chunk of its U.S. loan portfolio.
Most of its Asian businesses are on the block.
And total number of employees has been slashed 14% to 33,724 over the past year.
Top management ranks also have been purged.
David Morgan, who heads the retail operations, recalls that when he joined the bank in January 1990, he became part of a seven-man executive committee.
Today, he's the only one left.
Although unfavorable publicity chased some deposits away, Westpac officials say that flight has been reversed.
Retail deposits now total A$29 billion, up 7.4% from late 1992.
Mr. Joss, described as a team player and a patient listener with remarkable recall, says he expects to lop another A$5 billion off Westpac's balance sheet over the next three years.
Aside from the Asian sales, the shrinkage will come mostly from letting loans mature, Mr. Joss says.
He says he's happy with the bank's relatively small operations throughout the South Pacific nations; contrary to some speculation, he doesn't envision changing the bank's name, which was adopted in 1982 and stands for Western Pacific.
While many Westpac watchers agree that the bank had to slim down, some suggest that pulling back from Asia -- the fastest-growing area of the world -- is an overreaction.
Mr. Joss counters that Westpac's strategy is "to support its customers as they exploit" Australia's link with Asia, rather than operate its own banking network there.
The stock market has been focusing on the target that Mr. Joss inherited from previous management to cut Westpac's ratio of noninterest expenses to operating profit to 58% by 1995 from 65.5% currently.
Mr. Joss says Westpac will reach that goal, mainly through further cost cuts.
Mr. Joss, who signed a five-year employment contract, says he'll know he's done his job when Westpac can post a sustainable annual return on assets of 1%, compared with 0.04% on last year's net profit of A$39 million.
One factor making his job easier, Mr. Joss says, is the staff's "great willingness to change."
Gone are the arrogance and fiefdoms.
The bank, one senior Westpac executive says, is becoming a "depoliticized meritocracy."
If anything, says Mr. Morgan, the retail chief, the staff doesn't "feel as good about themselves as their performance deserves."
