The Philippines, one of Asia's fastest-growing travel markets, may be out of reach for thousands of tourists during its busiest holiday season of the year.
Flight attendants at Philippine Airlines have threatened to strike next week unless their demands for better working conditions are met.
The walkout would coincide with Lunar New Year celebrations and damp tourism in a country struggling to re-establish itself as a prime travel destination.
Leaders of the Flight Attendants and Stewards Association of the Philippines said at a news conference in Manila on Wednesday that an overwhelming number of PAL's 1,814 flight attendants had voted for a stoppage.
The pilots union and the ground employees association said they backed the flight attendants.
PAL said it was "saddened by the announcement," but added that airline executives would meet with union representatives again in an attempt to avert a stoppage.
A company spokeswoman said the Department of Labor will mediate.
The dispute dates to December, when the airline launched nonstop flights between Manila and Los Angeles, requiring its staff to work beyond an agreed-upon limit of 14 hours at a stretch.
PAL suspended 71 flight attendants who refused to fly the long-haul flight last month, but about 20 have returned, a union spokeswoman said.
The flight attendants union is also demanding wages more in line with those paid by other Asian carriers.
A union spokeswoman said that the starting monthly salary for a PAL flight attendant is about $260, compared with about $1,000 for a recruit at Hong Kong-based Cathay Pacific Airways.
A strike would cripple PAL and hurt tourism in the Philippines during the peak season for visits from neighboring countries.
After a long dry spell, the return of political stability helped boost tourist arrivals last year to a record 1.4 million, up about 20% from 1992.
This year the Department of Tourism is aiming for a 15% gain to 1.6 million.
"People who had shied away because of national calamities and political uncertainties were starting to visit," said James Kaplan, managing director of Kaplan Consultancy, which specializes in emerging tourism markets.
"A strike is the kind of thing that will turn some people off."
During January 1993 -- in which last year's Lunar New Year fell -- about 62,000 East Asians visited the country, compared with 30,000 to 40,000 in other months, according to official figures.
About half of the visitors arrived on PAL flights.
News of a possible walkout sent people booked on PAL scurrying to find seats on other carriers.
"I can't get a seat on any flight out of here," wailed Luz Lorenzo, a senior economist at Peregrine Brokerage Ltd. in Hong Kong, who is booked on a PAL flight to Manila next Wednesday.
"It looks like I might get stuck here."
For many travelers, it brings back bad memories of last year's Lunar New Year, when Cathay's 3,800-member Flight Attendants Union launched a 17-day strike.
"They're taking their cue from Cathay Pacific," said Jim Eckes, director of Indoswiss Aviation, a regional airline consultancy.
"They're picking the optimum time to try and squeeze the most out of the airline."
