Bill Clinton wants Congress to "guarantee every American private health insurance that can never be taken away."
Flourishing his pen, he asserts he'll veto anything less.
We're impressed.
Impressed not merely with the breathtaking scope of Mr. Clinton's grand plan for American health care, but also with the Moses-down-from-the-mount quality of his pronouncements on this subject.
With whom has Bill Clinton been communing?
What is the source of this President's expansive sense of diktat?
Let's understand something here: No one in America is being denied medical treatment.
There is simply no relevant incidence of sick people being told by doctors to go out into the street to lie down and die.
Were that true, "60 Minutes" would have scandalized us with it years ago.
The poor already have medical insurance through Medicaid, and the elderly through Medicare.
And any sentient American has known for years that for people without insurance, care gets provided first and worries about payment come later, as indeed Mr. Clinton's own examples show.
The issue is how best to pay for this care, in a way that both fairly spreads the financial risks and creates incentives for efficiency.
The notion that this can be done only through guaranteed, universal and "private" insurance (if indeed those notions can be combined at all), is simply arbitrary and capricious.
In recent years the costs of care for the uninsured, and indeed for below-cost reimbursement for Medicaid and Medicare, have been shifted onto all the rest of us -- largely, we'd add, with the public's socially conscious assent.
But as the inefficiencies and distortions of this shifting became too costly, the system had lately begun to respond and reorder itself -- HMOs and managed care are but two examples.
The year-over-year increases in medical costs has been declining rather smartly.
Yet Mr. Clinton and the plan's moving spirit, his wife Hillary, arrived in Washington with their 43% mandate and announced that the American health-care system, 14% of gross domestic product, was in "crisis."
Not just some bleeding corner of the system, such as portability or pre-existing conditions or Medicaid -- but the whole system.
The hospitals, the physicians, the drug companies, the insurance companies, employers -- all are in the crisis, and so all of it must be reassembled, by Hillary Clinton and by Ira Magaziner.
Bold is indeed a word for it, though we think our arbitrary and capricious fits better.
Mr. Clinton's health crisis reminds us of Jimmy Carter's energy crisis.
We were told the earth's crust was running out of hydrocarbons, and now we're told that the best health care in history is killing us.
So Washington sets out to reorder huge hunks of the economy.
While the administration refuses to admit it, its proposal is a system of price control, the ones that gave us gasoline lines.
To put our objection bluntly: Bill Clinton's diktat is going to louse up your health care.
Why is Bill Clinton insisting on engulfing all the rest of us in his attempt to command the health-care waves to rearrange themselves?
That answer, we're convinced, is pretty secular: It's about politics.
The Clinton brain trust, as it has made explicit in articles, speeches and TV appearances, thinks its central task is to recapture the loyalty of the middle class, which concluded that Democratic liberalism wasn't about them.
The strategy now is to give the middle class a new federal entitlement.
That word is out of favor, however, so here it's called a "guarantee," or more majestically, a "right."
Whether this will work even as politics is open to question.
Polling on the Clinton plan suggests strongly that the more already-insured people learn about the plan, the more they are likely to oppose it.
The economic recovery also takes the edge off the recession's portability scare.
And recall that as the public caught on to the Carter energy program, it fell apart one piece at a time.
What the Clinton strategy does have going for it is Bill Clinton.
As the State of the Union rhetoric made clear, this is a new kind of presidency.
Mr. Clinton doesn't merely appeal to the electorate, he tries to envelop it.
Listening to the depth of feeling with which Mr. Clinton described what "we" can do, on every imaginable front, one had the sense that this isn't just politics; this is going to be a relationship.
We have, it seems, entered the age of the co-dependency presidency.
"But what we do here is really beginning to change lives. . . .
Though we are making a difference, our work has just begun.
Many Americans still haven't felt the impact of what we've done . . . let us resolve to continue the journey of renewal. . . .
I want to say something to everybody here who cares about this issue. . . .
Everybody can contribute something if we want to solve the health care crisis."
It sounds appealing and captivating -- and more than a little tough to believe.
Our advice is, keep a good grip on your wallet, and if anything like the Clinton plan ever passes, don't get sick.
