Silvio Fauner edged Bjorn Dahlie in a furious finish, boosting Italy to victory over Norway in the men's 40-kilometer cross-country ski relay and denying Mr. Dahlie a record sixth Olympic gold medal.
With the 0.4-second victory, Italy gained its first Olympic relay gold.
It came after successive second places behind Norway in the 1992 Olympics and last year's World Nordic Ski Championships.
Finland was third, 1:00.6 behind the winning time of 1 hour, 41 minutes, 15.0 seconds.
The mixed-style event was watched by another sellout stadium crowd of 31,000 and tens of thousands of flag-waving fans lining the trails.
Organizers said the crowd totaled a record 105,000.
"The biggest satisfaction was to come into the stadium and hear that the crowd was silent.
We were able to shut them up," said Marco Albarello, Italy's No. 2 racer.
He said the Italians had won at "the temple of cross-country skiing."
Norway had won the three previous men's cross-country races in these Games.
Germany, led by large hill individual champion Jens Weissflog, captured the team event when Japan's last jumper blew a huge lead by landing short.
Mr. Weissflog soared 135.5 meters on his better jump, equaling the hill record.
Japan's last jumper, Masahiko Harada, who went right after Mr. Weissflog, managed only 97.5 meters and Japan fell short of winning its first gold medal of the Games and its first ski-jumping gold since 1972.
Austria clinched the bronze ahead of Norway.
Germany's winning point total was 970.1.
Japan collected 956.9 and Austria had 918.9.
"I was really excited before both jumps.
I was telling myself, `Don't mess it up just now in the team event,'" said Mr. Weissflog, who won the individual 120-meter hill title Sunday.
The team competition, in which four jumpers for each team have two jumps, was contested for only the third time in the Olympics.
Finland won in 1988 and 1992.
South Korea's Kim Ki Hoon defended his gold medal in the 1,000-meter short-track speed skating in 1 minute, 34.57 seconds.
Canadian Derrick Campbell led from the start of the nine-lap final, but lost his balance fighting for the lead with Britain's Nicholas Gooch in a turn with three laps remaining.
Mr. Campbell didn't finish.
Mr. Gooch finished second, but was disqualified after a review of his bumping with Mr. Campbell.
Chae Ji Hoon of South Korea finished third and was awarded the silver.
With two of the four finalists out of contention, the bronze went to Canadian Marc Gagnon, even though he didn't skate in the final.
He fell in the semis but won his consolation heat.
In the women's 3,000-meter relay race, South Korea set an Olympic record of 4 minutes, 26.64 seconds.
About 15 minutes after the race, China, after finishing second, was disqualified for interference.
Thus Canada, the five-time defending world champion, won the silver in 4:32.04.
The U.S. won the bronze, despite finishing fourth in the four-team finals.
