You sort through the mail and suddenly your blood runs cold.
There, amid the bills and the junk, is the letter taxpayers dread: The Internal Revenue Service wants to ask you a few questions.
Few things strike more fear into people's hearts than the prospect of the IRS's examining their tax return.
For many people, the fear is unfounded: Audit rates have dropped over the years to less than 1% of all tax returns in 1992.
But for others, the increasingly sophisticated computers and procedures at the IRS make the chances much greater that their return will be scrutinized in some way.
While the typical middle-income salaried worker, indeed, has only the slimmest chance of ever hearing from the IRS, the odds start to rise the higher your income or the more sophisticated your return.
Nearly 5% of taxpayers with incomes of more than $100,000 were audited in 1992.
The IRS has many ways of examining returns short of a full-fledged audit.
And some returns will always receive more attention than others, as IRS agents have been trained to examine certain types of returns that historically tend to understate the tax due.
To stay off the IRS's radar screen, it's important to know what catches the IRS's attention.
That way you may be able to avoid -- or, at least, minimize -- the sorts of things that are apt to subject your return to unnecessary scrutiny.
Knowing what's likely to sound alarms can also help you know when to provide additional information that may head off an audit by explaining legitimate entries the IRS is likely to question.
The IRS relies heavily on information forms -- such as W-2s from employers, 1099s from banks, brokerage firms and mutual funds, and 1098s from mortgage lenders -- to flag returns that omit taxable income or claim excessive deductions.
In many such cases, the IRS sends out letters requesting verification of missing income, proof for a deduction, or some other form of clarification.
"Partly because our computer system is so sophisticated, we'll catch things that would previously have been audited," says Robert Kobel, public affairs officer for the IRS in New York.
But in addition to checking returns for missing items, IRS computers are also programmed to give each return a score -- known as a "discriminant function," or DIF -- that measures disproportionate levels of deductions, credits and other items based on typical ratios for various income levels.
Taxpayers with the highest DIF-scored returns are audited; other returns with high, but not necessarily the highest scores, are pulled for audit because they include the types of entries that the IRS has found to be associated with underpayment of taxes.
What sort of things are apt to raise suspicions of the IRS sleuths?
The IRS doesn't disclose the components of DIF scores.
But tax professionals say the odds are good that an agent at some level of the IRS will look your return over if it includes the home-office deduction, especially for the first time; Schedule C (Profit or Loss from Business), especially one showing a loss; significant travel or entertainment deductions; high casualty-loss deductions (because the IRS assumes people tend to overvalue their lost or destroyed property); passive losses, such as real estate or partnership write-offs; or complicated tax shelters.
It usually takes about a year for the returns to make their way through the pipeline, so high-scorers won't be notified for at least that long.
Despite most taxpayers' fears of an auditing IRS agent sitting forbiddingly in their home, such "field exams are primarily for business returns," not personal 1040s, says John J. Monaco, assistant IRS commissioner for examinations.
If you cringe at the thought of any IRS scrutiny, you can do a few things to be an IRS wallflower.
First of all, don't make mindless mistakes that will hold up processing your return, such as forgetting to sign it, omitting some of the W-2s you received, or neglecting to report income included on a 1099.
Also, if you are paying alimony or taking a tax credit for child-care expenses, you must provide the IRS with Social Security numbers they ask for.
Since the IRS gets many of the same income statements you do, make sure an agent can easily see that you have reported all your taxable income.
Each individual item of income should be listed clearly on your return, tax pros say.
For example, those receiving interest from investments might get three or four 1099-INTs from various banks or brokerage firms.
Instead of adding all of them together on your Schedule B, list each one separately on its own line, suggests Stephen DeFilippis, an "enrolled agent" from Glen Ellyn, Ill.
(An enrolled agent is a tax professional licenced by the federal government who can represent taxpayers before the IRS.)
"The computer will look for this, and if it doesn't see it, you are going to be asked why," says Sheldon Ganis, a tax partner with Grant Thornton in New York.
If you sense that one of your deductions is inordinate, attach proof that it is legitimate right along with your return, tax pros suggest.
Similarly, if you take your normal level of deductions but your income has dropped, perhaps because you were laid off for part of the year, an attached explanation might forestall a letter or request for an IRS office visit.
"If there is something that is confusing but correct, explain it in a statement attached to your return," says Robert J. Garner, national director of personal financial counseling at Ernst & Young in New York.
"Be direct and concise."
Even if people don't owe tax on the full amount listed on their 1099 or other statement, it's better to list it clearly on the return, and then subtract any offsetting deductions or adjustments.
For instance, say you have $100,000 of interest on a bond, but when you bought the bond it already had $30,000 of accrued interest, for a net taxable income of $70,000.
Rather than write $70,000 on the return, list what's reported to you, and then subtract out the accrued $30,000.
"If you don't do it that way, you will definitely generate a letter," says Mr. Ganis.
If you know a 1099 or W-2 is wrong, get the issuing bank, brokerage firm or employer to correct it rather than try to explain to the IRS that the issuer is wrong.
Once a number is in the IRS's computer system, it's very hard to get it out.
"The cleanest way to resolve that is to go back to the issuer and have them send you and the IRS a corrected form," says Mr. Ganis.
Those who know ahead of time that they will trigger some degree of IRS review should take what they are entitled to, but fortify their records.
For instance, if you are claiming part of your mortgage interest, utilities and other home expenses for a home-office deduction, make sure you have a log that proves you use the space exclusively and regularly as your principal place of business.
Also, self-employed people who are audited can expect to be asked to verify their deductions and prove that they haven't hidden any income, tax advisers say.
They should keep a file of bank-deposit records and expense receipts.
Despite your best efforts, sometimes the worst audits are random and unavoidable.
For years, the IRS has selected around 70,000 tax returns every three years for exhaustive audits known as the Taxpayer Compliance Measurement Program.
These audits are essentially research tools to help the IRS pinpoint problem areas, but can result in significant additional taxes due.
The next wave of these big audits is scheduled to begin in October 1995, and will cover the 1994 returns of approximately 93,000 individuals: 68,000 with some form of business income, such as that reported on a Schedule C or partnership return, and 25,000 without business income.
Those who've been through one of these audits say it's grueling.
Taxpayers must produce proof for every line of their return, including birth certificates for their dependents, marriage license to prove they can file jointly, and receipts for every writeoff.
"Every deduction has to be documented," says Mr. Ganis.
Still, he says philosophically: "Even if an item is going to raise the IRS's eyebrows, if it's documented and proper, why worry?"
