QVC Network Inc., behind in the bidding for Paramount Communications Inc., is navigating a legal and regulatory minefield as it attempts to regain momentum in the takeover contest.
With a majority of short-term stock traders favoring a rival bid for entertainment and publishing giant Paramount by Viacom Inc., one immediate goal for QVC Chairman Barry Diller is to see to it that Viacom, a cable television programmer, doesn't gain the 50.1% of Paramount stock needed to win when both companies' takeover bids expire Monday.
But Mr. Diller is laboring under a handicap because the auction ground rules agreed to by both Viacom and home shopping company QVC bar both bidders from changing what were supposedly their last, best offers, which they submitted Feb. 1.
Both bids are valued at more than $10 billion each.
So instead, Mr. Diller is pursuing his goal by hinting during meetings with analysts and traders of possible future efforts to shore up his bid, which consists of both cash and QVC stock.
QVC's hints have already raised questions from the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Yesterday, SEC staff members called both QVC and some analysts who attended the meetings to ask for information on what was said, according to stock traders.
The SEC declined to comment.
At the meetings Tuesday, Mr. Diller and executives of Comcast Corp., a QVC investor, broached the possibility that BellSouth Corp., which has already agreed to invest $2 billion in QVC, might join with other QVC backers in promising to buy QVC stock at some point in the future.
Depending on the specifics, such an announcement could strengthen the QVC bid by giving Paramount stockholders some assurance that QVC stock wouldn't fall sharply after any QVC acquisition of Paramount.
Peter Siris, an analyst from UBS Securities Inc. who attended one of the Tuesday meetings, issued a report to clients yesterday that said: "We believe that QVC and its partners intend to strengthen its Paramount bid by devising a mechanism that would let the partners support the price of QVC's stock."
Some analysts said the meeting raised regulatory issues about statements by Mr. Diller that such a plan is under consideration, how those statements were disseminated, and whether they constituted a change in the QVC offer that would have to be disclosed in public filings.
One person close to QVC acknowledged receiving a call from the SEC, but characterized it as "no big deal."
One analyst also acknowledged receiving such a call but declined to comment.
Mr. Diller said, "We were obviously very careful about what we did say.
We responded to a good many questions at the meetings with that care in mind."
Some lawyers following the Paramount battle believe that any eventual announcement, even if made by BellSouth or others instead of by QVC, might by itself constitute a change in the QVC bid, since it would affect the perceived value of the QVC stock in QVC's offer.
If such a move contributed to Viacom not receiving 50.1% of Paramount stock, Viacom could well bring a lawsuit charging that QVC broke the bidding rules, delaying the already protracted battle.
But Paramount advisers have hinted they may act to bring the curtain down quickly if Viacom falls short of 50.1% but appears to be the clear winner anyway.
Another legal question is whether BellSouth could under securities underwriting laws make an announcement that it planned to purchase QVC stock.
One lawyer noted that there are tight rules governing the simultaneous offering and buying of securities, designed to guard against securities being sold at artificially inflated prices.
Some takeover traders believe Mr. Diller may be trying to accomplish his goal of denying Viacom 50.1% of Paramount merely by holding out the hope that a higher bid may be possible after Feb. 14, when both QVC and Viacom would both be free to change their bids if neither side received 50.1% of Paramount's stock.
Some traders would like to see whether QVC can come up with a higher value before the contest ends, even though the bids have generally disappointed traders since early December, when a Delaware court ordered Paramount to give equal consideration to the bids from Viacom and QVC.
Since November, Paramount stock has declined by more than 8% before rebounding this week on hopes of a new QVC bid.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Paramount shares rose 62.5 cents to $77.375.
QVC stock was unchanged at $45.125 on the Nasdaq Stock Market, while Viacom Class B shares jumped $1.375 to $33.25 on the American Stock Exchange.
Another factor that could hurt Viacom's chances of receiving 50.1% of Paramount's stock is that about 17 million Paramount shares are subject to stock-option sales, which may restrict some of them from being tendered.
Options are contracts to buy or sell an underlying security at a specified price.
