The New York Stock Exchange announced six new listings including two initial public offerings and the National Association of Securities Dealers announced nine listings including seven initial offerings.
The American Stock Exchange announced three listings including two initial offerings.
The Big Board began trading the initial offerings of Cold Metal Products Inc., Youngstown, Ohio, a steel products maker, under CLQ; and JDN Realty Corp., Atlanta, an investment trust, JDN.
Also Titan Holdings Inc., San Antonio, an insurance holding company, TH; Titan Wheel International Inc., Quincy, Ill., a manufacturer of steel wheels and rims, TWI; and Rhodes Inc., Atlanta, a furniture retailer, RHD.
These three companies previously traded over-the-counter.
The other NYSE new listing is International Colin Energy Corp., Calgary, B.C., Canada, a Western Canada oil and gas company, KCN.
The Nasdaq added the following initial offerings to its national market system: Career Horizons Inc., Woodbury, N.Y., a provider of temporary personnel, CARH; Dakotah Inc., Webster, S.D., a manufacturer of home furnishings, DKTH; Gulf South Medical Supply Inc., Ridgeland, Miss., a distributor of medical supplies and related products, GSMS; GaSonics International Corp., San Jose, Calif., a developer and supplier of equipment used to make integrated circuits, GSNX; and MFB Corp., Mishawaka, Ind., a bank holding, MFBC.
Also, Motorcar Parts & Accessories Inc., Torrance, Calif., a maker of replacement alternators and starters, MPAA.
Vectra Banking Corp., Denver, a bank holding company, VTRA and preferred stock under VTRAP.
Integrated Micro Products PLC, County Durham, U.K., a computer systems supplier, IMPTY and New World Communications Group Inc., Marietta, Ga., a broadcast television holding company, NWCG.
The Amex began trading the initial offerings of Hi-Shear Technology Corp., Torrance, Calif., a manufacturer of products for the defense industry, HSR; and Highlander Income Fund Inc., Minneapolis, a closed-end fund, HLA.
The Amex also added Frontier Adjusters of America Inc., Phoenix, a licenser and franchiser of independent insurance adjustors, FAJ, previously traded over-the-counter.
The Amex began trading options on Cytec Industries Inc., and Stock Market Annual Reset Term Notes, issued by Merrill Lynch & Co., a debt security tied to the movement of the exchange's Oil Index.
The Philadelphia Stock Exchange began trading options on Sovereign Bancorp Inc. and Tesoro Petroleum Corp.
