Chandler, Ariz. -- Published reports have put the salary Alan H. "Bud" Selig is receiving as chairman of Major League Baseball's executive committee -- a post that makes him the game's de facto commissioner -- at $1 million a year.
Selig will neither confirm nor deny the figure, possibly out of the conviction he's being shamefully underpaid.
The owner of the Milwaukee Brewers has occupied baseball's top job since September of 1992, when Fay Vincent, a slow learner, finally read the handwriting on the wall and quit in a huff.
Selig stepped in for what he thought would be three or four months.
He's been there for 18 months now, and his tenure could last a good bit longer.
"A lot of the owners think we shouldn't pick a new commissioner until after we get a new labor agreement," he notes in his tiny office in his team's spring-training headquarters here.
Given the sharply opposed stances of the two sides, that could take the slim 59-year-old to the normal age of retirement.
That a team owner has been guiding baseball for a longish period is seen by some -- mainly sports writers and legislators, it seems -- as evidence of drift and decay in the erstwhile national pastime.
Others will concede that, at least, the arrangement has the advantage of clarity; some past commissioners -- Vincent included -- didn't fully realize they were "owners' men" until the owners shoved them out the door.
But the observant note that Selig's official-unofficial reign has been marked by more substantive changes than those of duly chosen others who served much longer.
Last season's two-team expansion of the Major Leagues was carried out amid smiles and attendance records.
Realignment of the divisions on rational geographical grounds, and an expansion of the postseason playoff field that will add late-season spice, became a reality after years of wrangling.
Owners agreed conditionally on revenue sharing between teams in the largest and smallest markets, and, almost 74 years after the office was established, finally sat down and defined the duties of the commissioner.
The last development especially wasn't carried out without external criticism and internal nonsense.
Putting such matters as future realignment and interleague play beyond the next commissioner's unilateral reach, and ratifying his status as an owners' rep in labor affairs, led some to conclude that the individual will be toothless.
In an article on the subject for the New York Times, Selig found himself summoning the "original intent" of the cigar-chompers who hired the first baseball commish, as if he were writing about Jefferson, Franklin and Adams.
Yet Selig pronounces himself well pleased with the efforts.
"We {he and his fellow owners} have gotten along better and done more in the last 18 months than in the previous 25 years," he declares.
"We've been more involved, and more appreciative of each other's problems.
A couple of years ago, bringing up revenue sharing guaranteed angry reactions.
After we approved it in January, people were shaking hands and hugging."
Many who follow baseball have thought that, if anyone could get the lords of the game to hug (and, just maybe, please the fans, too), it'd be Bud Selig.
The Milwaukee auto dealer got into the game as a fan, haunting owners' meetings on behalf of a team for his home town from the time the Braves moved to Atlanta in 1964 until he and others were allowed to buy and move the foundering Seattle franchise in 1970.
As the Brewers' first and only president, his 24 years in ownership puts him second, behind only the California Angels' Gene Autry, in longevity among the moguls, and his willingness to do the work of the game put him in charge of its most powerful committees at one time or another.
He conducted the searches that led to the hiring as commissioner of Peter Ueberroth and Bart Giamatti.
After Vincent, the late Giamatti's ex-aide, terminally alienated his bosses, they figured any outside successor would be more curse than blessing, and let Bud do it for the nonce.
That period will, almost surely, span the bargaining that's getting under way for a labor contract that would take effect next season.
The owners say they're bound and determined to get a salary cap and an end to the salary-arbitration setup that, more than anything else, has sent their payrolls skyrocketing for the past 20 years.
The players, fat and happy, like things pretty much the way they are, causing most to doubt the likelihood of an easy accommodation.
Beyond recognizing that a salary cap would be more palatable to the players in the form of a topper than a beanie, Selig declines to offer concrete suggestions.
"That'll be up to Richard Ravitch and Donald Fehr," the owners' and players' chief bargainers, respectively, he says.
But he's quick to assert that he's sure some will be forthcoming.
"We've got to have a system that ties salaries to revenues.
The NBA and NFL have one, and it should be our turn," he pleads.
"Things are too unpredictable now.
The small-market teams are fighting for their lives, and I think the fans are tired of the constant player-club acrimony over money.
It's in everyone's interest to get this resolved on a sensible basis."
Selig adds, a bit wistfully, that a labor accord would allow him to return full time, Cincinnatus-like, to his primary task of running the small-market Brewers, who need all the help they can get.
That team has long been plumping for a new ballpark to replace County Stadium; one with a retractable roof that would shield fans and players from the frosty Wisconsin Aprils and Septembers is finally on the drawing board.
It'd have the so-called luxury boxes that County Stadium lacks; that's what he means when he says it'd put the team in a position to compete in "the new economic environment."
He concludes: "I'm as much a traditionalist as anyone.
I wish we could turn back the clock to the 1950s, when a box seat cost $2.50 and there were teams in Ebbets Field and the Polo Grounds.
But wishing won't make it so."
