Gertrude Himmelfarb obviously has expert knowledge of the Victorian period, and did a good job of proving that the feminist school of thought does not share anything with the real Victorian Age ("`New Victorians' Don't Earn That Label," editorial page, Jan. 12).
Her interpretations of Catharine MacKinnon's work and beliefs, however, are incorrect and misleading.
Her discussion of the morality factor in Ms. MacKinnon's feminism illustrates the misunderstanding of and subsequent attack on Ms. MacKinnon's writings by the press and mainstream liberals.
First, she is wrong when she states that this feminism preaches morality, because it absolutely does not.
The things Ms. MacKinnon, and myself, object to (pornography, hate speech, sexual harassment and rape) are odious not because they are immoral but because they degrade, humiliate, oppress and silence women.
Morality has absolutely no place in this school of thought; it is completely removed from the subject matter because feminism sprouts not from immorality but from injustice.
Proving that she has not thoroughly read Ms. MacKinnon, Ms. Himmelfarb claims that "They {MacKinnon's feminists} do not propose to do anything about the kinds of crime -- violent, irrational, repeated and repeatedly unpublished crime -- that is the most pressing concern of most citizens; they propose only to pass new legislation to punish speech or conduct normally regarded as uncivil rather than illegal."
This is untrue.
In fact, the very acts of prohibition she discussed earlier in the article are the proposed deterrents to those crimes.
Pornography has been shown to induce sexually violent behavior in irrational individuals with perverted sexual fantasies.
These individuals (who are not few) are a threat and a danger to every single woman and child.
Additionally, sexual crimes such as child molestation, rape and street harassment are perhaps the most repeated and repeatedly unpunished crimes in our society.
These crimes are caused by the very sexual exploitation, degradation, humiliation, dehumanization and domination of women that is portrayed in pornography, announced in hate speech, revealed in sexual harassment and manifested in rape.
Therefore, this feminist school of thought is fighting to protect women from violent crimes, not dictate morality to men or women.
The Victorian Age was one of the most oppressive and tormenting periods of women's history.
I find it ludicrous that a woman in 1994 can portray Victorian women as having a more favorable outlook than Ms. MacKinnon's feminists.
Santa Cruz, Calif.
-- Twenty-nine of 36 serial murderers interviewed by the FBI confessed that pornography had a negative impact on their thinking and behavior.
-- The Los Angeles Police Department points out that in the more than 40 child sex abuse cases it investigated between October 1976 and March 1977, pornographic photos were found in every case.
-- According to police vice squads across the nation, 77% of molesters of boys and 87% of molesters of girls confessed to imitating the sexual behavior depicted in pornography.
-- A study by Canadian psychologist Dr. William Marshall of rapists in Canadian prisons found that "various forms of pornographic fantasies may lead to crime."
Pornography reduces sex to a plaything, human beings to mere bodies, and human bodies to sex machines; it denigrates the sacredness of sex, marriage, family and human life; it transforms sex from a sacred union of life and love to a tool of voyeuristic gratification.
Certainly pornography helps create a moral and social climate conducive to sexual abuse and exploitation.
If the great works of the moral and intellectual giants of civilization can educate, enlighten and inspire, then pornographic works can corrupt by glamorizing and encouraging pernicious ideas and behavior: Ideas do have consequences.
Arlington Heights, Ill.
