John Motley is speaking at the Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza ballroom here before 200 small-business owners, trying to fire them up for an assault on President Clinton's health-care reform plan.
His entreaty, replete with warnings about "payroll taxes" and "bureaucrats with tremendous power," evokes only a restless mumbling.
Then, out of nowhere, a spark hits dry kindling.
"I haven't heard the word `socialism' used in all this," offers Nancy Rogalski, president of R&C Manufacturing Inc., a local sheet-metal and machine-tool firm.
"We should use it. . . .
Maybe it would rile people up."
Sure enough, the word quickly begins to echo from table to table: "Socialism, socialism."
Energized, Mr. Motley, chief lobbyist of the National Federation of Independent Business, leans his burly frame closer to the group.
"Do I believe it's socialism?
Do I agree with all the other things you're saying?
Hell yeah, I absolutely do," he says.
"But if I say those things, reporters would never write it.
You're helping me express views I can't get in the media."
By the time the gathering breaks up, many of the entrepreneurs are eager to help Mr. Motley in his struggle against the Clinton health-care plan.
Leaping to his feet, one small-business owner declares, "When you get to where they don't believe you, just call.
I'll go down to wherever I have to.
I'll send a handwritten letter."
Once again, John Motley is molding a contingent of dry cleaners, home builders, corner-store operators and other business owners into a lobbying force formidable enough to send many a lawmaker scrambling for cover.
With some 607,000 members, stretched across every congressional district in the country, the National Federation of Independent Business has made itself into one of the pre-eminent grassroots lobbying powers in Washington.
"When you walk Main Street, as most members of Congress do, almost every business has an NFIB sticker on the door," says Rep. Mike Synar, an Oklahoma Democrat.
Mr. Motley calls on this legion to write letters, make phone calls and visit Capitol Hill to pressure lawmakers.
About 40,000 NFIB members are particularly active, a core group known as the "Guardians."
"Some lobbyists make their reputation because they know Danny Rostenkowski personally or they play tennis with George Mitchell," says beer-industry lobbyist David Rehr, referring to the House Ways and Means chairman and the Senate majority leader.
"John's not like that.
He gets his strength from being able to get tens of thousands of people across the country to do something for him."
Sharp-tongued and energetic enough to play tennis until 11 p.m. one night and then three more sets at six the next morning, the 49-year-old Mr. Motley has come to personify the federation he toils for.
"He practically has `NFIB' stamped on his hindquarters," says former Rep. Mike McKevitt, a Colorado Republican who once ran the group's lobbying operation.
The NFIB is the nation's biggest small-business group, and those who don't share its views feel Mr. Motley's wrath.
"I don't take kindly to people who say they're our friends and then vote against me," he says.
Mr. Motley spearheaded intense NFIB opposition that helped defeat two chairmen of the Senate Small Business Committee in their re-election bids: Republican Lowell Weicker, now Connecticut's governor, in 1988, and Wisconsin Democrat Gaylord Nelson in 1980.
Four years ago the group helped win repeal of a tax law, known as Section 89, that forced companies to prove they distributed employee benefits fairly.
Now, Mr. Motley is taking charge of his group's newest priority: killing the Clinton proposal that would require all businesses to help pay for their employees' medical coverage.
The NFIB contends that the so-called employer mandate would devastate many small firms and cost 1.5 million jobs.
Mr. Motley says it is like "tying small employers to a sled, pushing them off a cliff and hoping they're upright when they reach the bottom."
The meeting in Phoenix is the first of more than a dozen scheduled to sharpen the NFIB offensive when Congress takes up health care after reconvening Jan. 25.
Mr. Motley also will bring some small-business owners to Washington to lobby.
He has designated some of the most dedicated federation members as a Health Action Response Team.
Such small-business opposition is a huge threat to passage of an employer mandate, the financing linchpin of the Clinton plan.
After Mr. Motley attacked the plan in a talk to governors in Tulsa, Okla., last September, President Clinton was so irked that in his subsequent speech he challenged Mr. Motley by name.
Mr. Motley "is not to be taken for granted," says Jeff Eller, a communications strategist for the Clinton health-care team.
But he says the administration hopes to get around him by showing business owners how they would benefit under the Clinton plan.
That won't be easy.
Many small-business people really are afraid of new costs and regulations.
"For small businesses, there's indeed a lot to fear from Washington," says Allen Neece, a lobbyist who works for several small-business groups.
At the same time, the material the NFIB sends its members contains scant information about the subsidies the Clinton plan would give small firms to help them provide workers with health coverage.
In the eyes of Mr. Motley's foes, his implacable position on the mandate is symptomatic of a broader tendency: He does more than just fight against those government proposals that small-business owners should truly be afraid of; he eagerly stokes their every concern -- and the NFIB profits in the process.
"John and his boys make a lot of money by inciting a lot of fear," charges Rep. Synar, who has clashed frequently with the lobbyist.
Mr. Motley says that "we're not out influencing our members' opinions."
The NFIB represents small businesses whose sales average $300,000 a year, but the group itself has turned into a big business during Mr. Motley's 23-year rise through the group's ranks.
It now pulls in annual revenue of more than $60 million, runs a political-action committee that spent $785,000 on campaign contributions and "political education" during the 1991-92 election cycle, and leases a suite of tony offices in the shadow of the Capitol.
Mr. Motley was paid $138,010 last year, according to NFIB tax records.
Nearly all of the NFIB's money comes from members' dues, which average $125 yearly.
Many critics see Mr. Motley as a diehard right-winger, and some see him as a Republican front man, but his past suggests someone much harder to label.
He comes from a family of Long Island union activists, and he says he is a registered independent and has voted for plenty of Democrats.
"Look, I represent a very politically conservative group of people," he says.
"They are risk takers.
They have everything they own at risk.
They are fiscal conservatives, and so we are a conservative business organization."
Indeed, hard-line stances are nothing new for the federation, which was founded in 1943 in San Mateo, Calif.
Over the years, NFIB representatives have reacted stridently to issues ranging from regulations of the Labor Department ("it operates as the Gestapo . . .") to raising the minimum wage ("another step in the direction of complete government controls . . .") to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration ("Our members are asking, `Is this still America?'").
When he started at the NFIB, Mr. Motley never saw himself as a business leader.
While studying American colonial history at Georgetown in 1970, he joined the federation, hawking memberships door to door.
He soon decided that being a salesman wasn't for him, so he had lunch with his boss, who made him an intriguing offer: Would he like to become a lobbyist?
His reply: "What's a lobbyist?"
By the mid-1970s, Mr. Motley was building the base of the organization's power, computerizing the membership list and tabulating congressional voting records.
The NFIB began giving lawmakers who frequently support its positions "Guardian of Small Business" awards.
Now an NFIB vice president, Mr. Motley often works in his Washington office deciding how to deploy his troops.
With a few computer strokes, he can select which members to marshal.
Within hours of sending out an "Action Alert," he can have any representative's or senator's office inundated with phone calls and constituent letters.
"All I need is 20,000 members who want to be involved, and I can turn this town inside out," he asserts.
That is just what happened during the years-long fight over family-leave legislation, which the NFIB played a prime role in killing during the Bush administration.
Mr. Motley says it was an overarching concern about government meddling that spurred the NFIB to fight the bill requiring firms to offer unpaid leave so workers could care for newborns, newly adopted children and seriously ill family members.
At one point, NFIB members sent Sen. Orrin Hatch 500 letters a week, so worried was the group that the Utah Republican might reverse his opposition to the bill.
In Missouri, members told some financial backers of GOP Sen. Christopher Bond that he was working against their interests by pushing compromise legislation.
Sen. Bond told aides he had never seen such hardball tactics.
Democratic Rep. Pat Schroeder of Colorado says she fought the NFIB for years over family leave, even though the legislation would affect only firms with 50 or more employees and, therefore, spared 95% of the mom-and-pop businesses that make up Mr. Motley's membership.
"I went over to do a forum on family leave for small businesses, and everybody was screaming and yelling at me," she recalls.
"I told them it didn't affect them, but they wouldn't listen to me.
They were listening to him."
Despite Mr. Motley's efforts, early last year Congress passed the bill and Mr. Clinton promptly signed it into law.
The struggle was a harbinger of coming NFIB battles with the new administration.
But Mr. Motley says he doesn't pick the battles himself, stressing that he abides by one rule: Before he acts, he asks.
Under his direction, the federation spends $600,000 a year to poll members on policy matters every eight weeks.
It then sends the results, business by business, to all 535 congressional offices.
Laying out the views of tens of thousands of entrepreneurs is "one of the most effective ways anybody could lobby," says Rep. Charles Stenholm, a Democrat from Texas.
Yet critics contend many of the surveys are slanted.
For instance, in a brief poll the Gallup Organization conducted for the NFIB in September to measure members' initial, general response to the health-care plan, 84% of those questioned opposed a requirement that they pay the bulk of the cost of their workers' health coverage.
Among that 84%, only one-third said they would lessen their opposition if they got a government subsidy.
But Robert Blendon, a polling expert at the Harvard School of Public Health, says the survey didn't give respondents enough detail on how generous the subsidies would be.
"They're not playing fair ball here," says Mr. Blendon, who reviewed the polling material for this newspaper.
"Small-business people don't like mandates in general; I agree with them.
But . . . when those business owners see the size of the subsidy you're talking about, it changes their minds."
Under the Clinton plan, the smallest, lowest-wage firms would spend no more than 3.5% of payroll for all of their workers to receive guaranteed medical coverage.
Once the subsidies are figured in, the rise in health-care costs for many small firms would be the equivalent of an increase in the minimum wage of 15 cents to 35 cents an hour.
Despite the NFIB's polling, Mr. Eller of the Clinton health-care team contends that "Mr. Motley and the leadership of the NFIB have become very out of touch with their membership."
Mr. Eller says that when the Small Business Administration helps owners figure what their medical costs would be under the Clinton plan, many are surprised at how well they would do.
"Their reaction often is, `I didn't know that.
The NFIB didn't tell me that,' " Mr. Eller says.
Mr. Motley isn't backing down.
"I don't care what the subsidy scheme is," he says.
"This is the government taking total and complete control."
And Mr. Eller's comments notwithstanding, it is clear that many of Mr. Motley's constituents agree with his stance.
"I have no choice but to start contacting Congress," says Brian Pinney, the owner of Corporate Cleaning Inc., an Arizona office-maintenance company.
"This thing would radically change the way I do business."
Although Mr. Motley's strength comes from outside the beltway, he knows his way around the inside.
On Capitol Hill, he is "as good a vote counter as I've ever seen," Rep. McKevitt says.
Perhaps most important in Washington terms, he has access.
In June, Mr. Motley and NFIB President Jackson Faris were ushered into the Oval Office for a few minutes with Mr. Clinton to discuss NFIB opposition to the Clinton economic plan.
Mr. Motley also has been trying to forge alliances with other groups.
In November, he met with James Todd, executive vice president of the American Medical Association, which had been in favor of an employer mandate.
"We didn't want to go to war with the NFIB over the mandate," Mr. Todd says.
In December, responding to pressure from its own membership, the AMA announced it would be open to other financing ideas.
Meantime, the NFIB is throwing its support behind alternative health-care plans, including those by Democratic Rep. Jim Cooper of Tennessee and GOP Sen. John Chafee of Rhode Island, that don't include an employer mandate.
Mr. Motley was so impassioned about a mandate that earlier this year he turned down an invitation to even appear before Hillary Rodham Clinton's health-care task force.
In August, New York Rep. John LaFalce, chairman of the House Small Business Committee, finally got Mr. Motley and Mrs. Clinton together for a chat.
It was pleasant enough -- Mr. Motley even recommended a couple of restaurants to her -- but they didn't make much headway on resolving their sharp differences.
Weeks later, Mr. Motley got a signed photograph from the meeting showing him, Rep. LaFalce and Mrs. Clinton standing huddled together, hands clasped.
As he read the inscription, he couldn't help but be taken aback.
"With best wishes that we will solve the health-care challenge together," Mrs. Clinton wrote.
"I thought I should verify the handwriting," Mr. Motley says.
"I thought maybe LaFalce was playing a joke on me."
