The Senate Finance Committee began two days of bipartisan meetings on health-care reform, amid increased signs that the Republican leadership will resist anything more than a voluntary approach to paying for insurance coverage.
The Clinton administration wants all employers to help pay for their workers' insurance, while moderate Republicans favor a mix of subsidies and mandates that put the burden on individuals to acquire some minimal coverage.
Between the two camps, a majority of the finance panel supports such a requirement to achieve the goal of universal coverage for all Americans.
But yesterday, Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole stepped back from that view and said health legislation this year will be "without mandates" entirely.
"If a voluntary approach doesn't work, we could come back and maybe have to do some of this mandatory stuff in five or six years," the Kansas Republican said on NBC News's "Meet the Press."
The Republican leader's comments reflect his increased skittishness over the "individual mandate" espoused by GOP moderates who would use the tax code to require all persons to pay for some coverage.
The idea won early support partly because it gave Republicans a means to appease business and to counter the Clinton plan.
But Mr. Dole's political instincts are that the individual vs. employer distinction is a hard sell with voters, who are accustomed to having their employers pick up part of the cost of coverage.
The safer political course, and one appealing to conservatives, is to resist the mandate debate entirely and instead go to the lowest common denominator of a more incremental, voluntary approach.
Democrats are already moving toward a more phased-in version of the Clinton plan and a hybrid of mandates to lessen the burden on small business.
But a purely voluntary approach would be criticized as a retreat from the president's goal of universal coverage.
Some Democrats fear Mr. Dole's true purpose is to prevent any legislative triumph that would help the majority party going into the midterm elections this fall.
Like few other committees in Congress, the Senate Finance Committee is a forum for this maneuvering.
Many observers believe it is still the most logical place where a compromise can be struck on legislation this year.
And the Senate could break custom and take its bill to the floor before the House acts.
Mr. Dole and Majority Leader George Mitchell each have seats on the Finance Committee, and the 20-member panel is a power base for those Republicans, such as John Chafee of Rhode Island and Bob Packwood of Oregon, who have espoused some type of mandate.
Chairman Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D., N.Y.), whose neo-conservative days included a stint in the Nixon administration when it attempted health-care reform decades ago, walks a fine line, reaching out to Mr. Dole to gain some leverage against liberals in his own party.
While faithful to the goal of universal coverage, Mr. Moynihan appears sympathetic to a more gradual, market-oriented approach than that of the White House.
Despite past alliances, there are periodic tensions between the chairman and Mr. Mitchell, who is more aggressive in advancing the president's case and seems to welcome Labor and Human Resources Committee Chairman Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.) as a liberal counterweight to Mr. Moynihan.
Conventional wisdom says Mr. Mitchell is weaker, since he announced he will retire at the end of this year.
But the often cautious Maine Democrat may in fact feel less encumbered in using his position to force the issue.
"He has the power of process.
You don't go home Fridays if the majority leader doesn't want you, {to}" said Sen. Jay Rockefeller (D., W.Va.), a Finance Committee member.
As if to underscore Mr. Mitchell's continued role, the White House was careful to include him when the president met with Mr. Moynihan on the health issue last week.
Asked about his role, Mr. Mitchell shuns the title of "broker" but is eager to have a part.
"I'm determined to get it done," Mr. Mitchell said in an interview.
"I hope to be very active."
Few expect any resolution to come out of the committee's meetings yesterday and today, which Mr. Rockefeller described as "20 white males in blue jeans."
But the West Virginian said himself that the event, held at a conference center in suburban Virginia, could help all sides come out "from behind our pulpits."
The structure lives up to its billing as a seminar, with academic visitors, but is also enough of a retreat to allow members time to talk without feeling forced to do so.
Hilary Stout contributed to this article.
