MAKING A DEAL with the IRS grows easier but may depend on where you live.
IRS officials are increasingly willing to compromise with taxpayers in financial distress.
A study by the General Accounting Office shows a surge in the number of compromise offers the IRS has accepted since it began emphasizing this program two years ago.
In the 10 months ended July 31, the IRS accepted 13,997 compromises totaling $165.9 million, the GAO says.
That was up sharply from 1,995 offers for $37.1 million the IRS accepted in all of fiscal 1991.
But the congressional-watchdog agency and a separate report by the National Taxpayers Union also found wide variations in acceptance rates among the IRS's 63 districts.
Tax advisers say this indicates some IRS districts are far more lenient than others.
IRS officials disagree, saying the data merely reflect variations in the quality of taxpayer offers in different regions.
But the IRS does agree more data are needed to gauge the program's overall effectiveness as a tax-collection tool.
HOMEOWNERS, check that form showing your mortgage-interest payments.
Form 1098 is used by lenders to report how much mortgage interest borrowers pay, and homeowners typically rely on these forms in claiming mortgage-interest deductions.
But these forms often contain significant errors that can cost you large amounts of time, aggravation and money, warns Ginger M. Broderick, a certified public accountant in New York City.
"Make sure your form is correct or be prepared for lengthy correspondence with the IRS," warns Edward Harris, a San Diego tax adviser.
A common problem occurs when homeowners mail checks in late December for payments due Jan. 1, says Robert J. Garner of Ernst & Young.
Some lenders may not receive these payments in time to include on Form 1098.
If that happens, you may deduct the amount you actually paid but attach a statement to your return explaining the difference, Mr. Garner says.
MORE TAX DEADBEATS feel the heat from their own colleagues.
More law and accounting firms are trying to ensure that all their partners file tax returns, says Carr Ferguson, a lawyer at Davis Polk & Wardwell and head of the American Bar Association's tax section.
Some big firms ask partners to sign forms confirming they have filed returns or to provide evidence of filing.
Others ask for a signed consent form allowing the firm to find out directly from the IRS if a person filed a return in recent years.
"While some firms may regard the IRS program as too intrusive, every professional firm should take some steps to assure itself all partners are current filers," says Mr. Ferguson.
The IRS says its program has turned up very few nonfilers thus far.
But Shirley D. Peterson, a Washington lawyer at Steptoe & Johnson and the former IRS commissioner, says an IRS study several years ago uncovered a surprisingly large number of professional preparers who hadn't filed returns.
Many firms refuse to check on employees, fearing violating their privacy or alienating valued colleagues.
COME CLEAN: There are about 7.5 million people who should be filing tax returns but aren't, IRS officials say.
Results of the IRS's campaign to persuade more nonfilers to step forward will be released Tuesday at a meeting of the IRS Commissioner's 24-member Advisory Group.
DUELING FORECASTS: State and local governments will issue $178.6 billion of new long-term tax-free bonds this year, predicts the Public Securities Association, a trade group.
No, it will be $240 billion, says a poll of 830 government-finance directors by Municipal Bond Investors Assurance Corp.
Says a PSA official: "We sure hope we're wrong."
A TINY GROUP of companies paid most of New York City's general corporate taxes in 1990.
The city says the top 10% of corporate filers represented 85% of the total.
The top 1% accounted for 57% of the total.
AN IRS CRACKDOWN BEGINS on lawyers who won't identify certain clients.
The IRS, fulfilling a pledge it made last month, has launched a campaign to force more lawyers to disclose the names of clients who pay them cash fees of more than $10,000 in one transaction, or in two or more related transactions.
The IRS recently sent letters to numerous lawyers imposing hefty fines for failing to provide detailed information about clients on Form 8300.
Of the 796 lawyers who filed this form in the first eight months of 1993, 465 filed incomplete forms, the IRS says.
Fines can range from $25,000 to $100,000 for each transaction.
But some lawyers plan to fight back.
They say reporting this data would violate lawyer-client privilege.
The National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers met recently with IRS and Justice Department officials.
John Henry Hingson III, an Oregon lawyer and head of the criminal-defense lawyers group, says a recent Kansas case underscores the need for the IRS to reconsider its position.
The penalties place lawyers "in an impossible position," he says.
But Hingson acknowledges "we're not too hopeful" of persuading the IRS to change its mind anytime soon.
BRIEFS: Leniency, IRS-style: The IRS says California earthquake victims who didn't file their estimated taxes by Jan. 18 are entitled to an extension -- until Friday. . . .
Buzzwords: Washington lobbyists search for a "tax vehicle."
Translation: a noncontroversial tax bill they can persuade lawmakers to amend.
