International Business Machines Corp., bruised by disappointing sales and profits and massive job cuts, is looking to the Winter Olympics next month to burnish its image.
IBM will be a major sponsor of the Winter Games in Lillehammer, Norway, during the 120 hours of televised coverage from Feb. 12 to Feb 27.
The Armonk, N.Y., computer giant and one of its advertising agencies, Wells Rich Greene BDDP, produced four corporate ads, each stressing how IBM is integral to the operation of the Olympics.
Although IBM won't say specifically how much it is spending on the campaign blitz, the company acknowledges it is in the same ballpark as Coca-Cola Co., which is planning to air about 150 spots during the Games.
(CBS sold each 30-second spot for $250,000 to $350,000.)
The campaign is another phase of Big Blue's corporate advertising, which features the slogan, "There's Never Been a Better Time to Do Business with IBM."
The objective of the image ads is to show how IBM can aid individual businesses.
For the Olympic ads, IBM will change its slogan to "Gold, Silver, Bronze.
And Blue."
Telling IBM's Story "We're trying to tell the story of IBM's unique involvement with the Olympics," says Abby Kohnstamm, vice president of corporate marketing at IBM.
"We're different than any other sponsor."
Adds Jed Bernstein, executive vice president and account group head at Wells Rich: "Unlike an official soft drink or official candy bar, IBM was selected to help make the Olympics run."
That is reflected in the two 60-second spots, both of which are narrated by actor Roy Scheider.
In one, black and white footage is used to recall 1952, the last time the Winter Games were held in Norway.
Back then, scores and statistics weren't kept on analog or digital equipment, the viewer is told.
Instead, they were monitored and recorded by "Ulf."
Ulf Sorum, Mr. Scheider says, used to painstakingly write down the minutes and seconds of each athlete's events and place them in the window of a local shop.
The scene changes to color and the viewer learns Mr. Sorum is now IBM operations manager handling "the same thousands of results in less than a second" because of IBM equipment.
The ad includes shots of downhill skiing, among other events.
All the while, Mr. Sorum is cheering as statisticians work at IBM computers.
The idea for the spots is "to take the behind-the-scene people and make their performances as exciting as the events themselves," says Charlie Moss, vice chairman and corporate creative director at Wells Rich.
Another spot boasts that far ahead of the athletes descending upon the Olympic Village, IBM employees "plan and design every event. . . .
To actually help and manage the Winter Games is the equivalent of two Super Bowls a day for 16 days."
"The ad campaign is a way to demonstrate IBM's capabilities," says Ms. Kohnstamm.
A new post-Olympics corporate campaign may be produced, she says, but those plans haven't been put in motion.
Perhaps the next new advertising from IBM is the most anticipated: the personal computer campaign from Merkley Newman Harty, which won the coveted domestic advertising account last year from Interpublic Group's Lintas:New York.
