With an uncanny knack for predicting the needs of his compatriots, Silvio Berlusconi has built a $7 billion business empire by bringing commercial television, American-style housing and discount retailing to Italy.
Now he has spotted a new gap in the market that he is rushing to fill: political leadership.
Using advertising and sales techniques he perfected in business, Mr. Berlusconi has in four months created a new-look right-wing party that seems set to play a major role in Italian politics following national elections this Sunday.
His campaign slogan promises "a new Italian miracle," and his party, he told a big rally in Palermo, stands for "an Italy that produces, not an Italy that chatters."
His rise has electrified a nation confused and demoralized by two years of convulsive political scandal.
But it is also raising serious questions about Mr. Berlusconi himself, the most prominent Italian entrepreneur to have escaped the corruption charges that have ensnared hundreds of others, including his brother.
Is he getting into politics to "save Italy," as he claims -- or because he is trying to save his heavily indebted business empire, as his critics charge?
Would the political victory of a man who controls 90% of the nation's commercial TV, as well as newspapers, magazines and a publishing house, concentrate too much power in one pair of hands?
And could someone whose business benefited from political connections tackle the issue at the root of Italy's woes -- the incestuous, largely corrupt relationship between politics and business?
Such questions are dominating the election campaign, overshadowing debate about the pressing political and economic issues the next government must address.
At the same time, even Mr. Berlusconi's detractors acknowledge he has tapped a deep-seated need in Italian society.
In a country that only a few months ago looked set to steer a leftist political course, Mr. Berlusconi, 57 years old, is suddenly offering a free-market alternative never before seen in Italy.
His policy proposals, largely aimed at the middle class, include tax cuts, privatization of the health and school systems and an end to miles of red tape.
For many, he is not Italy's answer to Ross Perot so much as a cross between Donald Trump and Margaret Thatcher, a flashy self-made showman who vows he will break with Italy's statist past.
"I wouldn't bet much money on the altruism of Mr. Berlusconi," says Riccardo Levi, a Milan political analyst.
Still, his move into politics "does respond to a real need of Italian society.
He is more than just a media creation."
Adds Roberto Lasagna, the former head of the Saatchi & Saatchi advertising agency in Italy who is Mr. Berlusconi's campaign manager: "Berlusconi is filling what was the most horrendous market gap you have ever seen in your life."
The emergence of Mr. Berlusconi's Forza Italia movement has certainly turned politics upside down.
The last polls published before voting show his rightwing alliance -- which includes neo-fascists and northern separatists -- will lead the voting with a third of the ballots.
Just behind is a leftist alliance headed by former Communists and, behind them, what remains of discredited centrist parties.
Mr. Berlusconi has railed against the foreign press, and he declined to be interviewed.
But former executives of Fininvest SpA, the holding company he owns, describe him as a restless pioneer with abundant charm -- and more than a touch of vanity.
One says Mr. Berlusconi almost canceled a British TV interview a few years ago because he feared the camera might focus on his paunch.
Another time, he pressured an Italian magazine to stop the print run of an issue that featured his picture on the cover, because of an unflattering shadow.
People who know him say he is touchy about his thinning hair and moderate height.
Above all, say former associates, Mr. Berlusconi is eager to please and quick to take offense.
When his company acquired a big Italian retail chain in 1988, he sent flowers to every woman on the staff.
But Italian journalists covering his campaign complain about a bunker mentality: Mr. Berlusconi won't give them interviews if he doesn't like the questions, which have to be submitted in advance.
His two loves, soccer and show business, play a big part in his politics.
Mr. Berlusconi owns Italy's most successful soccer team, AC Milan, and the name of his political movement, Forza Italia, is a soccer chant that roughly translates as "Go, Italy!"
The entire structure of Forza Italia models that of soccer fan clubs -- and fans are an important bloc of its voters.
Mr. Berlusconi "has the King Midas touch; he turns everything he touches into gold," says Pietro Ferrari, a former canteen director.
"Imagine if this happened with state finances!"
Mr. Berlusconi's campaign also owes a lot to TV game shows.
At the Palermo rally, giant screens in the hall and other locations throughout the nation alternated his speech with tourist-brochure footage of pretty Italian towns.
The rally ended like an oversized karaoke party, with everyone rising to sing the Forza Italia song.
Its upbeat words -- "It's time to believe" -- were flashed on the screens.
Mr. Berlusconi's vision of the future is most evident in Milano 3, a suburban satellite city he built a half-hour's drive from Milan.
With its orange-brown apartment blocks laid out around an artificial lake and well-tended flower beds, Milano 3 wouldn't be out of place in Florida.
For Italy, though, it's a brand new concept.
With its emphasis on safety, convenience and middle-class comfort, it embodies Mr. Berlusconi's promise of clean living.
The 3,300 apartments are protected by a computer security system and private guards.
In contrast to the hurly-burly of most Italian towns, there is no litter, no hawking and little noise, apart from the splash of a waterfall in the central area, where quaint stores and restaurants are located.
While some call Milano 3 sterile and soulless, most residents seem to like it -- and the man who created it.
"We need the American dream here.
Why should only America have it?" asks Riccardo Pistoia, an aerobics instructor.
Others have doubts.
While no one can argue with Forza Italia's calls for "more wealth, more joy, more solidarity and more happiness," wrote parish priest Franco Cecchin in his newsletter, "life is more complex than an ad."
Milano 3, in fact, isn't as squeaky-clean as Mr. Berlusconi would like.
His brother Paolo was charged in February with paying $680,000 in bribes to smooth the sale of three buildings to a pension fund run by Italy's main state-owned savings bank.
Paolo Berlusconi denies any wrongdoing, saying it was just a commission payment.
Silvio Berlusconi dismisses speculation about his own affairs, and all other criticism, as "lies" put out by political foes.
To stress how clean his movement is, he picked people with no political experience as Forza Italia candidates.
A Fininvest public-relations company trained the chosen 267 in public speaking.
One of the chief criticisms of Mr. Berlusconi is how he has used his business empire to further his political aims.
To avoid conflicts of interest, he has stepped down as head of Fininvest.
But the company is still playing a key role in the campaign.
When Mr. Berlusconi announced his entry into politics, his TV stations showed the entire 80-minute speech.
Forza Italia works out of the Milan office of a Fininvest marketing firm, and relies on other parts of the group for everything from polling data to campaign advertising.
"The Berlusconi phenomenon is the culmination of a process that's been going on for 30 years in Italy, where the distinction between public and private has become increasingly blurred," says Patrick McCarthy, professor of political science at the Johns Hopkins Center in Bologna.
"Now you have a businessman bidding for the whole public lot himself."
The intertwining of Mr. Berlusconi's business and political interests isn't unlawful.
But his left-wing opponents have promised to curb his media power if they win office, taking away one of his three TV stations and breaking his hold on the TV advertising market.
That would deal a severe blow to Fininvest's finances.
As it is, former executives say, Mr. Berlusconi is paying the price for rapid expansion financed heavily by debt.
During the 1980s, Mr. Berlusconi built what had started out as a real-estate firm into a mammoth corporation with sales of $7 billion that includes financial-services companies, Italy's biggest advertising agency, its largest publisher, the Standa supermarket chain and the stations.
Detailed accounts of Fininvest's finances aren't publicly available.
But it says its net debt in 1993 totaled about $2.2 billion -- 10 times the amount in 1988.
The group hasn't given details of its cash flow in 1993, but in 1992 it amounted to just over one third of its debt.
There are two recent indications that the group may be in difficulty.
Fininvest's auditors, Arthur Andersen & Co., had several major reservations when it signed off on the company's 1992 accounts, complaining about accounting methods used in respect to hundreds of billions of lire listed as tax gains and assets.
Plans to take part of the company public last year were canceled.
One former manager familiar with the affair says the investment bank involved, Goldman Sachs International, got cold feet at the last minute.
A Goldman spokesman in London declines comment.
Mr. Berlusconi has reacted angrily to talk about his finances, accusing political opponents of spreading lies.
And asked about the conflict-of-interest issue, Mr. Lasagna, his campaign manager, replies: "The game is Italy.
It isn't, `Does he want another TV station?'"
Mr. Berlusconi's political friends are another gray area.
While he now crusades as a free-marketeer, his connections with Bettino Craxi, a former Socialist prime minister, were crucial to his business in the early 1980s.
Mr. Craxi, according to former Fininvest executives, helped Mr. Berlusconi break the state TV monopoly, a decisive moment that enabled him to establish his commercial-TV empire.
For all the sniping, Mr. Berlusconi has a lot of supporters, including Mariella Scirea.
The widow of Italian soccer star Gaetano Scirea, who was killed in a car crash in 1989, she is typical of the new faces Mr. Berlusconi is trying to bring to Italian politics.
"Berlusconi didn't need to get into politics to save his interests," she says.
"I think he's very courageous."
Mr. Berlusconi contacted her personally to ask if she wanted to be a candidate, and she jumped at the chance.
"He's very sincere.
He said we need new people who have a clean face," Mrs. Scirea says, her voice croaky from campaigning.
On the wall of her office is a framed poster of John F. Kennedy in 1959, titled: "The loneliness of a presidential campaign."
Mrs. Scirea is running in a working-class district outside Turin against a wellknown anti-Mafia campaigner, and is often put on the defensive by questions about her boss.
Although her answers are firm, the issue won't go away.
One evening, she and a fellow candidate, Angelo Burzi, hold a cocktail reception in a cafe for about 50 potential supporters, most of them local business people.
"Play the devil's advocate," Mr. Burzi urges them.
The first questioner, a middle-aged shopkeeper, needs no prompting.
"Berlusconi obviously entered into politics to save his empire," he says flatly, setting off a big argument that lasts 15 minutes -- and is never resolved.
