Boston Chicken, the hottest initial public offering of 1993, received a much cooler reception when it sold convertible debt yesterday.
Just two months after its wildly successful IPO soared 143% the first day, the rotisserie-chicken chain yesterday tapped the public markets again with a $130 million convertible-note offering.
Some traditional convertible-note buyers steered clear of the offering, which carried junk-credit ratings.
Others sold their securities as soon as they got them.
And underwriter Merrill Lynch apparently wound up stuck with some of the securities, which were quoted late in the day on the Nasdaq SmallCap Market at 99 1/4.
They had been priced at par or 100, so initial investors in effect lost $7.50 for each $1,000 face amount of securities they bought yesterday.
Yesterday's lukewarm offering suggests that a hot IPO's radiance won't necessarily extend to every securities offering by the same company.
Boston Chicken's common is trading at 348 times its past year's per-share earnings, and 75 times the most optimistic estimates for this year.
Reasons one convertibles trader: "You can't ring the bell every time."
"It's an excellent company but difficult to value at this stage of development," says Daniel Pine, co-manager of Vanguard Group's $200 million Convertible Fund.
Mr. Pine says he didn't buy any of yesterday's offering, even though he is generally bullish on the convertible bonds of growth companies.
"If I thought it was going to be a blowout, I would have bought some."
Boston Chicken's stock price of 45 1/4, up 1/2 yesterday, and more than double the IPO offering price of $20 a share, is "hard to justify," he says.
Not that the Naperville, Ill., company is crying.
After all, the comparatively young company, which had years of losses before turning a profit last year, did manage to raise $130 million by selling some of the lowest-rated convertibles to hit the market recently.
Moody's Investors Service Inc. rated the notes single-B-3 and Standard & Poor's Corp. tagged them triple-C-plus, both squarely in the junk category.
S&P warned of Boston Chicken's "high-risk, rapid-growth strategy within an industry that already is considered to have above-average risk characteristics."
Mark Stephens, Boston Chicken's chief financial officer, says of yesterday's offering: "We feel good about it."
He suggests investors shouldn't read too much into the debt's price performance, just as the performance of the IPO was an aberration going the opposite direction.
"The experience of the IPO, where it skyrocketed, that phenomenon didn't necessarily indicate the history of our experience in the market, nor does the first day of trading in these bonds," says Mr. Stephens.
He was speaking from Denver, where Boston Chicken just opened two more outlets, bringing the ever-increasing total to 238.
The proceeds from yesterday's offering will help finance what Boston Chicken calls its "accelerating" expansion plans, which now call for 450 stores nationwide by year's end.
Mr. Stephens concedes that November's IPO was "a little bit crazy."
But he emphasizes that management is in for the long haul, saying: "None of the officers are selling their Boston Chicken stock or are going to."
Mr. Stephens says another securities offering is "not likely" in 1994.
What hurt yesterday's offering?
The common stock price has risen 20% since the convertible offering was announced Jan. 7.
That turned off investors, especially because the notes are convertible into common at a rate of one share for each $55.938 of notes, or a higher-than-expected 25% above the stock price.
(In other words, the stock would have to rise about 25% from the current level before a note investor could convert his holdings to stock and break even doing so.)
And the annual interest on the notes was set at just 4.5%, through 2004, which isn't that appetizing for a junk offering.
One market veteran says yesterday's offering actually went quite well, considering the deal's junk rating and terms.
Mark Hunt, head of convertibles research at Smith Barney Shearson, suggests that the big thing yesterday's offering had going for it was Boston Chicken's popular name on the prospectus.
"If you put a blindfold over people's eyes, you couldn't have sold it," he says.
Thomas T. Vogel Jr. contributed to this article.
