Talk about hot air.
All that a supervisor at Education Loan Services Inc. was trying to do yesterday was unlock a file cabinet.
But while removing a key chain from her handbag, she accidentally sprayed a small canister of red-pepper gas she normally carries for protection.
As it happened, the file cabinet was near an air-circulation vent that connects to the second floor.
The result: She and 20 other employees were rushed to the hospital, where they were treated for nausea, throat irritation and dizziness.
The fire department, health department and gas company were called in.
And more than 300 other employees were sent home for the day, with the student-loan services company declaring an unscheduled paid holiday.
Makers of the spray, which generally sells for between $10 and $16 a canister and contains a potent but nontoxic extract of hot pepper, say there have been numerous similar episodes, including many in public schools.
Not all of them were mishaps.
"Kids in the South have put it in the air-conditioning system," says Kelly Gannon, spokeswoman for Mace Security International, a Bennington, Vt., firm that sells red-pepper spray, Mace and other personal-security products.
Manufacturers say there is no point in reducing the potency of red-pepper spray because it would defeat its purpose -- deterring muggers.
"We make it to save people's lives," says Karl Scholz, vice president of production at Guardian Security Products Inc. in Phoenix.
"You can't really go halfway."
And although the canisters do have safety latches, manufacturers deliberately try not to make the devices too tricky to use quickly.
"Keep in mind this is a weapon and you don't want to go through 10 different procedures prior to using it on a mugger," Mr. Scholz says.
Education Loan Services spokeswoman Diane Saunders says the company plans to reopen today with a new policy regarding personal-safety devices.
"I think our policy is going to be if you are carrying something like this, don't put it on something that you're going to be using in your normal working day," she says.
"If it's in your purse, fine, but it should be in a safe place."
