Apple Computer Inc. said it has sold about 80,000 of its hand-held Newton MessagePads, a number that analysts say confirms the product has floundered after a big launch last August.
For MessagePad to have been a big hit, analysts said it should have sold "in the hundreds of thousands" by now.
But at an industry conference, Gaston Bastiaens, an Apple vice president and general manager, said the company had sold about 80,000 through early this month.
Although the Cupertino, Calif., company did not give a breakdown on sales, the 80,000 number would indicate a sharp falloff from the 50,000 sales it previously had announced as of mid-September, to about 7,500 per month since then.
"It dropped with a thud on the market," said John J. Girton, vice president of research for Van Kasper & Co.
While Apple officials said they were not disappointed because sales of new products typically decline after a strong start, MessagePad's plunge raises fresh concerns about how long it will take for this new class of computers, which Apple calls personal digital assistants, to take off.
The MessagePad sold strongly at first, mostly to adopters of early technology, but user complaints over such things as its limited ability to recognize handwriting as well as its relatively high price have choked off sales.
MessagePad is the first product based on Apple's Newton technology for mobile communications, which the company wants to license widely to build a reliable revenue stream as a measure, in part, to counteract declining profit margins in its flagship line of Macintosh personal computers.
The technology holds great promise, and in fact has drawn some 2,000 developers of software programs to consider creating various applications for it.
But the MessagePad was introduced with only a few functions and still doesn't possess features like access to electronic mail that analysts say are essential to mass sales.
The MessagePad's price of about $1,000, fully configured, also all but kills any appeal the product would have to the mass consumer market, where analysts say a price of under $500 is more in line.
To be sure, though, MessagePad is only the first generation of its kind, and already Apple is working on an updated replacement that is expected to be introduced later this year.
To try to bolster the current product's marketability, Apple has recently added a number of new Newton applications, including a computerized travel guide, a paging card and forms to fill out health-care applications while traveling.
In all, MessagePad has gained about 40 applications, and soon will also be outfitted with electronic mail.
"We're sort of in the early phase of Newton, but that doesn't mean it's all over with Newton," Mr. Girton said.
"It's just getting started."
Bruce Lupatkin, director of technology research at securities firm Hambrecht & Quist, said the next-generation MessagePad should sell much better than this one.
Bolstering that product's prospects, indeed, was yesterday's disclosure by Japanese electronics company Toshiba Corp. that it is considering a tie-up with Apple to develop next-generation personal digital assistants based on the Newton technology.
Toshiba licensed the Newton operating system late last year, a Toshiba spokesman said, though he declined to say when company officials might reach a decision on the proposed link.
If it decides to proceed, Toshiba would become the second Japanese company to manufacture such machines based on Apple's technology.
Besides Apple, the MessagePad is also manufactured by Sharp Corp., which has introduced its own version of the MessagePad in the U.S. and Japan.
By having both Sharp and Toshiba manufacturing the product, analysts say the competition would help force MessagePad's prices down into the range of the consumer market.
