Looking for stars in a dim firmament, the World Bank has studied sub-Saharan Africa and come up with handful of fragile successes and a bounty of failures.
The difference, the bank suggests in an extensive report, is that the hopeful spots -- like Ghana, Tanzania and Gambia -- adopted sound macroeconomic policies, while the failures -- like Benin, Ivory Coast and Zambia -- stuck to ruinous ones.
The conclusion, which seems obvious, supports the bank's push for structural adjustment, a mix of steps like setting realistic exchange rates, freeing up markets and opening the economy to international trade.
The bank's study argues that such adjustments pay off quickly in higher per-capita growth.
This part of the message defies conventional wisdom that policy adjustment is a recipe for economic misery in the near term, and promises better times only in the distant future.
The bank backs up its point, though.
The countries that set their macroeconomic houses in relative order saw per-capita growth rates increase by two percentage points between the periods 1981-1986 and 1987-1991; half-hearted reformers saw increases of 1.6 percentage points; and those whose policies deteriorated saw a median decline of 2.6 percentage points.
But the World Bank message belies the huge size of Africa's development task.
There's no credible argument against the reforms that the bank and its sister institution, the International Monetary Fund, are pushing around the world.
However, the amount of growth that African states can generate by sound macroeconomic policies alone is too paltry to relieve signicantly the wretched poverty of the continent.
Africa, the one region where the total number of poor people is rising, also needs to battle illiteracy, provide contraception, deal with high levels of malaria and AIDS, and create enough roads, telephones and electrical plants to support economic expansion.
Government ministries, which often are inefficient and corrupt, need to be overhauled.
While price controls and inflated exchange-rates -- two main targets of macroeconomic reform -- can be eliminated with the stroke of a pen, these other, equally crucial, development challenges require years of effort.
Until recently, the international financial institutions single-mindedly pushed macroeconomic reform using the philosophy advanced in the film "Field of Dreams" -- "build it and they'll come."
In economic terms, that translates: "Get the macroeconomic framework right, and the multinational corporations, domestic entrepreneurs and wealthy expatriates will pour in."
To date, the African states, including the reform-minded ones, are still waiting.
Miguel Kiguel, who co-authored the bank report, concedes that "macroeconomic stability is necessary but not sufficient," and that the other tasks must be pursued if Africa's living standards are to improve discernibly.
The bank shows the costs of misguided policies.
Oil-rich Nigeria provides a good illustration.
The surge in energy prices between 1973 and 1981 handed the country a windfall equal to 20% of its gross domestic product.
Nigeria poured money into relatively unproductive urban projects, including a new capital city, and into building an inefficient iron and steel industry.
It ignored the underdeveloped rural areas and, to a large extent, the agricultural sector.
By contrast Indonesia, also rich in oil, directed much of its windfall to rural areas, and to improved education and roads.
When oil prices plummeted in the early 1980s, Indonesia continued to invest in development, while Nigeria halted programs.
Indonesia's growth continued after a slight pause, while Nigeria's faltered.
Though macroeconomic reforms provide clear benefits, the "politics haven't made it possible to adopt them in many countries," says Thomas M. Callaghy, professor of political science at the University of Pennsylvania.
"Most African elites have no understanding of how far down the continent has gone and how hard it will be to come back."
The World Bank reforms tend to damage Africa's urban elites, who work as civil servants, buy imported goods, and send their children to subsidized universities.
Calls to shrink bureaucracies, lower exchange rates -- and reduce the power to import -- or cut subsidies are fiercely resisted.
Ghana's much-praised macroeconomic reforms wobbled last year, after government workers surrounded the finance ministry and extracted a 60% pay increase.
Kwesi Botchwey, Ghana's finance minister, conceded in a recent interview that the pay raise set the government back in its battle against inflation -- now running about 20% a year -- but he added, "Nurses went on strike and left babies in incubators to die, so to salvage social conditions, we agreed."
