As Chrysler racks up a string of profitable quarters and new-product launches, one fact has almost been lost: The No. 3 auto maker has the worst quality record of Detroit's Big Three, as determined by J.D. Power & Associates' annual initial quality survey.
And as determined by Andrea Smith, a 33-year-old manager at Border's bookstores in Ann Arbor, Mich.
When it was new, Ms. Smith's 1988 Plymouth Sundance stalled on the highway.
And the engine of the Sundance, made by Chrysler Corp., quit three or four more times before she sold the car this year and bought a Honda Civic.
Chrysler's new Neon is similar to the four-door Civic but costs about $1,600 less.
But Ms. Smith didn't even look at the Neon when she went shopping for a new car.
"I thought about the Neon for a hot second," she says, "but then I realized I couldn't care less about the price unless they're giving it away for free.
I'm interested in a good car."
This devastating assessment comes at a crucial time for Chrysler, which is trying to change its image from a builder of clunky K-cars such as the Plymouth Reliant to, as Chairman Robert J. Eaton puts it, the world's "premier" auto company.
The company also is attempting to entice more buyers of Japanese cars into its dealerships this year as it launches first the Neon, a car aimed squarely at the Civic, and then the Cirrus and Stratus, which are Honda Accord fighters.
To win buyers away from Honda and Toyota, Chrysler has made an all-out effort to make certain that the Neon launch is as flawless as possible.
The company has forced suppliers to explain precisely how they will ensure delivery of flawless parts.
Even so, Chrysler last week discovered that a leaky seal in 1,100 of the 10,000 Neons built so far could lead to brake loss.
Chrysler and AlliedSignal Inc.'s automotive division, supplier of the brakes, are now fixing the cars, including some 60 already in customer hands.
J.D. Power tracks initial defects on cars -- flaws ranging from a loose knob to an engine that won't start.
The firm, which depends on auto makers for its revenues, won't release the names of car companies that perform worse than the industry average (1.07 defects per car in its last survey).
But the numbers are widely available within the industry, and they show that on average Chrysler vehicles have 1.35 defects per car.
Dodge, Chrysler's volume brand, has 1.48 defects per car, twice Toyota's 0.74 defect rate.
Big Three cars and trucks as a group have more defects than the best of the Japanese -- Toyota Motor Corp. and Honda Motor Co.
That is one reason why, even as Japanese cars became more expensive last year as the yen rose in value, consumers still bought plenty of Japanese cars.
Together, Chrysler, Ford Motor Co. and General Motors Corp. gained only 1.5 points of market share, despite a $2,000 to $3,000 price advantage.
But Chrysler is trying with considerable urgency to ensure that its newest products perform better than some of its recent launches, including the Chrysler Concorde and the Jeep Grand Cherokee.
Both the Concorde and the Cherokee were designed for a low defect rate, Chrysler says.
They are relatively simple to build, and Chrysler says that a teamwork approach to the new vehicles meant that workers and suppliers helped engineers anticipate problems.
But after the Concorde launch in 1992, Chrysler announced two separate recalls.
One was to fix a defective washer that could affect steering.
Then there was an engine part that could cause piston wear.
Last April, Chrysler announced two Grand Cherokee recalls affecting 65% of the vehicles it had built so far.
The Jeeps had problems with the rear tailgate latch mechanism and with front suspensions.
The Grand Cherokee's Power quality rating is below that of the Ford Explorer and came in at twice the defect rate of a comparable Toyota, the 4-Runner.
But Chrysler argues that its new vehicles are extraordinarily popular with those who buy them and that the J.D. Power quality rating doesn't adequately reflect this strong customer enthusiasm.
Chrysler's president, Robert A. Lutz, says further that the auto makers give the customers higher quality than they demand.
"In the old days," he says, "the Big Three were four times as bad as the Japanese.
It was eight American defects to two Japanese defects per car.
But now that everyone is around one it just doesn't matter."
He may be right.
Consumer Reports, a frequent critic of the Big Three, recently named the Dodge Intrepid ES, the Concorde's mechanical twin, the best family sedan in the U.S. -- the first time in a dozen years that the magazine picked a Big Three product over a Japanese car.
And it said its owner survey indicates the car's reliability is "better than average."
But internally, Chrysler is far from satisfied with its quality ratings.
In addition to its new demands on suppliers, it is building prototypes earlier.
With the Neon, for example, it built a precise version of the car a year before launch and flew some 1,500 workers from Illinois to a prototype assembly plant in Michigan.
Workers there cooperated with engineers to perfect the vehicles and the assembly process with the goal of making both as simple as possible.
The company also has begun to test drive every single vehicle that rolls off the production line.
Mr. Eaton, Chrysler's chairman, has made quality improvement a top priority.
In late 1992, to improve consistency, he changed the way vehicle audits were conducted at Chrysler.
He also has stretched the time Chrysler spends to launch a vehicle to allow more time to correct quality problems, and he appointed Thomas W. Sidlick to the newly created post of vice president customer satisfaction and vehicle quality.
At Chrysler's Belvidere , Ill., plant, where the Neon is produced, the goal is to put the Neon on J.D. Power's top-10 list of the most defect-free cars.
Every 20 yards or so on the assembly line is a bulletin board with charts detailing quality audits performed on the car.
In producing the Neon, Chrysler learned from its performance on its LH midsize cars (such as the Concorde) and the Grand Cherokee.
The interiors of early LH prototypes didn't precisely match the final car.
That made it hard to check how parts would work together inside the car.
Neon prototypes matched the final version both inside and outside, and they were completed almost a year before launch -- months earlier than the LH prototypes were.
Employees drove 50 early Neons 16 hours a day in an attempt to uncover defects before the customer did, and Chrysler demanded that suppliers institute rigorous quality-control checks.
But despite all the precautions, problems cropped up.
Chrysler stopped adding roof racks onto Neons at one point because they didn't fit properly.
The company also discovered that the car's plastic radiator supports would snap when the cars were driven over back roads near the plant; the supports were replaced with metal parts.
And in October, early production runs were slowed because internal audits indicated defect rates were well above Chrysler's goals.
Mr. Sidlick concedes Chrysler has had difficulty reducing the number of defects as quickly as it would like.
But he believes Chrysler will show substantial improvement when the next survey is released this spring.
"Ford's been doing this since 1979," he says.
"We started late."
