The New York Stock Exchange announced four new listings including two initial public offerings.
The National Association of Securities Dealers announced 10 new listings including seven initial offerings.
The Big Board began trading the following initial offerings: Morgan Stanley Africa Investment Fund Inc., New York, a closed-end fund, under AFF, and Walden Residential Properties Inc., Dallas, a real estate investment trust, WDN.
The Big Board also began trading the Class A common stock of Health Systems International Inc., Woodland Hills, Calif., under MQ, a managed health-care company formed by the merger of QualMed Inc. and HN Management Holdings Inc.; and the American depositary shares of Empresas La Moderna SA, Monterrey, Mexico, a cigarette maker, ELM.
The company's shares also trade on the Mexican Stock Exchange.
The Nasdaq began trading the following initial offerings on its national market system: Digital Link Corp., Sunnyvale, Calif., a maker of high-speed digital access products, DLNK; Equity Marketing Inc., New York, a toy and gift maker, EMAK; Esmor Correctional Services Inc., Melville, N.Y., an operator of correctional and detention facilities, ESMR; IGEN Inc., Rockville, Md., a maker of diagnostic systems based on electrochemiluminescence, IGEN; MapInfo Corp., Troy, N.Y., a maker of desktop mapping software and other products, MAPS; ParcPlace Systems Inc., Sunnyvale, Calif., a maker of object-oriented application development tools, PARQ; and USA Mobile Communications Holdings Inc., Cincinnati, a paging services company, USAM.
Nasdaq also began trading warrants of Ecogen Inc., Langhorne, Pa., under EECNW; Class B warrants of HealthCare Imaging Services Inc., Middletown, N.J., HISSZ; and common shares of Roanoke Gas Co., Roanoke, Va., RGCO, a natural gas distribution and sales company.
The American Stock Exchange will begin trading options on the American depositary receipts of Empresa Nacional de Electricidad SA and Repsol SA tomorrow.
Amex also listed Bear, Stearns & Cos. equity-linked term notes.
Amex will also begin trading options on Continental Airlines Inc. and Winnebago Industries Inc. tomorrow.
Amex's Emerging Company Marketplace began trading WIZ Technology Inc.
The stock previously traded over the counter.
The Chicago Board Options Exchange will begin trading options on the ADR's of Empresa Nacional de Electricidad SA and on the ADR's of Repsol SA tomorrow.
The CBOE began trading options on the following stocks: Alias Research Inc., Carl Karcher Enterprises Inc., Gupta Corp., Health Systems International Inc., MicroAge Inc., Millicom International Cellular SA and Westcott Communications Inc.
Tomorrow, the CBOE will begin trading options on Continental Airlines, class B and Winnebago Industries Inc.
Today, the CBOE will list options on the Nasdaq 100 Index.
