Taking another step to restart a portion of its failed catalog operations, Sears, Roebuck & Co. is planning to launch a toy catalog later this year.
The giant retailer is planning a 130-page catalog that would be mailed to a portion of the 25 million consumers who formerly purchased from its "Big Book" catalog, according to sources close to the arrangements.
Sears executives haven't given final approval to the catalog, but officials are working quickly to coordinate arrangements with toy manufacturers and to assemble a list of prospective customers.
A spokeswoman said Sears has "no firm plans" to issue a toy catalog.
In the past year, Sears has followed a policy of not talking about its catalog projects until it formally launches them.
Sears closed its 97-year-old Big Book catalog last year, after losing $480 million in three years.
The closing was part of a vast overhaul of the nation's third-largest retailer, which included the elimination of some 50,000 jobs.
But Sears has sought to revive the segments of the catalog operations that it believes can be profitable, primarily by outsourcing many of the catalog functions.
Previously Sears began a joint venture with Hanover Direct Inc., which has issued three specialty catalogs, selling kitchen accessories, bed-and-bath merchandise, and large-size women's apparel.
Under the arrangement, Sears supplies its customer list and information about their buying habits.
Hanover composes the catalog, processes and fills orders and pays Sears a fee on the orders it receives.
Sears also is issuing catalogs that sell its Craftsman tools and health-care products, but those operate through independent vendors that take and fill orders.
Sears would operate its children's toys catalog similarly.
One driving force behind the toy catalog has been Sears customers, who in focus groups indicated they have fond childhood memories of the retailer's Christmas "Wish Book" catalog.
Catalog-industry observers say a toy catalog could prove Sears's most challenging venture because few companies have had success selling toys via catalog.
Catalogs succeed when they offer products not readily available in retail stores.
But many toys are available through giant toy retailers such as Toys "R" Us Inc., and fierce price competition among toy sellers makes Sears's challenge difficult.
"Why they're doing this after the serious bloodbath they've had in the Big Book catalog over the past few years is intriguing," says Arnold Fishman, a catalog consultant.
