Copper-futures prices continued to tumble on stock market weakness, indications of increasing U.S. supplies and concerns about Japan's economic health.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, copper for March delivery was down 1.25 cents to 85.60 cents a pound.
Since Feb. 2, when the March contract reached a high of 91.30 cents a pound, the price has fallen about 6%.
Copper's price had been supported in prior weeks by a spate of positive U.S. economic reports and persistent declines in the warehouse stocks of copper maintained by the world's two main copper markets, the Comex and the London Metal Exchange.
But the Fed's tightening of interest rates last Friday and the subsequent weakness of the U.S. stock market have been seen as negative signs for copper, which is an economically sensitive industrial commodity.
"It was getting a little overbought on the upside," said Fred Demler, metals economist for E, D & F Man.
Moreover, Mr. Demler said, rumors are circulating in the market that copper from LME warehouse stocks may soon be shipped to the U.S., where copper supplies are currently tight.
Increases in U.S. supplies would likely continue to exert downward pressure on prices.
William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch, said worries about the state of U.S. trade negotiations with Japan are also pulling copper prices lower.
"Any threat to the Japanese economy would be a negative to copper market," Mr. O'Neill said.
"Japan is a big producer and user of copper, a big element of the copper market."
The steadiness of copper's plunge in the past nine days has attracted commodity funds, which are managed pools of investors' money that trade on the basis of their own mathematical price projections rather than supply-and-demand fundamentals.
Analysts say these funds have helped to pressure prices lower by selling futures contracts at the Comex.
In part because of the selling pressure in the market, Mr. O'Neill predicts that prices will decline an additional two to three cents a pound "in the short term."
ENERGY: Additional cold weather in the U.S. Northeast boosted the prices of heating-oil futures contracts while prices for crude and gasoline contracts declined in moderate trading volume.
Although a rally late in yesterday's trading session gave a boost to energy prices, most market participants believe that crude-oil prices are set for a decline.
Heating-oil purchases, sparked by the recent cold weather, have helped to prop up oil prices across the board.
But as it becomes later in the heating season, interest in buying heating oil will wane, they say.
And market participants remain skeptical that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries will reach an agreement to cut production for the second quarter, when all the estimates indicate world-wide demand will fall.
Oil ministers of some OPEC nations are currently touring the Middle East in an attempt to gain support for a production cut by the organization, but they appear to be stirring up little more than rhetoric so far.
LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Pork-belly futures prices fell on expectations of increased hog slaughter next week.
At the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, pork bellies for March delivery were down 1.90 cents to 55.72 cents a pound.
Only about 1.2 million hogs have been slaughtered so far this week, down about 10% from the same week a year ago.
"People are looking for a rebound in slaughter next week," said Dan Vaught, livestock analyst for A.G. Edwards & Sons.
"Hogs held up by this winter storm that just passed have to come to market."
