As more and more foreign investors jostle their way into Asia's capital markets, three of the region's most powerful central banks are struggling to keep the doors from opening too fast.
Over the past month, Malaysia's Bank Negara has imposed a series of restrictions on foreigners' bank deposits, and Taiwan's central bank has helped block proposals to let foreigners buy more shares on the local stock exchange.
Bank of Korea, meanwhile, shows no sign of loosening strict limits on foreigners' stock purchases, despite frenzied demand from abroad.
The specifics of each central bank's dilemma are different, but all face the same basic challenge: Keeping some of Asia's hottest economies growing without unleashing inflation.
Central bankers fear that sudden blasts of foreign cash will blow them off that tightrope.
Some also fret that inflows of foreign money will push up their currencies, making exports less competitive.
Asia still wants foreign money, of course.
Most Asian countries are counting on huge dollops of foreign funds to finance desperately needed infrastructure projects and other investment over the next decade.
China, the Philippines, Malaysia and Thailand all have offered government bonds overseas.
Family companies that once shunned outside investors now are listing shares on foreign stock exchanges.
But some central bankers, trying to craft policies to fight inflation, worry that the whole process is going too quickly.
The balancing act between controlling inflation and attracting foreign funds has proved particularly tricky in Malaysia.
That country's central bank, Bank Negara, has been battling to keep foreign speculators from bidding up the Malaysian dollar, or ringgit.
The problem is that Bank Negara also has boosted interest rates in an effort to restrain money-supply growth and choke off inflation.
Sixth-month interbank rates in Malaysia now stand at around 5.6%, compared with the 3.5% in Singapore's interbank market.
So foreigners have been snapping up Malaysian-dollar investments to lock in high interest rates and bet on a big rise in the currency.
Bank Negara "committed a very big mistake," said Alfred Wong, chief economist at Wardley Investment Services (Hong Kong) Ltd.
"A central bank cannot control a country's exchange rate and its money supply.
They can only control one" of those things.
Undaunted, Bank Negara has taken to fighting foreign demand for its currency any way it can.
Last month, it dumped ringgits on the foreign-exchange markets.
It also hit foreign investors by limiting banks' holdings of foreign funds that aren't trade-related and barring Malaysians from selling short-term monetary instruments to foreigners.
For now, Bank Negara seems to be prevailing.
The ringgit has declined about 7% against the U.S. dollar so far this year.
But many economists think the speculators will have it their way eventually.
Morgan Stanley Asia Ltd. has told clients that "the Malaysian currency is likely to appreciate this year."
Taiwan's determination to keep the New Taiwan dollar relatively cheap has pitted its central bank against foreign stock investors.
Many investors and brokerage firms blame the central bank's stand for leaving one of Asia's most industrialized countries with a stock market that has become a pariah.
Even mainland China's stock markets allow investments by any foreign individual; Taiwan allows only authorized foreign institutions to buy shares.
Last month, Taiwan's central bank persuaded the government to maintain a $5 billion ceiling on foreign holdings of listed Taiwanese shares.
If all the current investment applications from foreigners were approved, foreign holdings would vastly exceed that ceiling, brokers say; the country's Securities and Exchange Commission recently suggested that the cap be raised to $12 billion.
