Investors in cable-television stocks recoiled as if somebody had bombed the information highway.
That was a mistake, in the eye of some big holders of cable-TV shares who see no good reason to flee the group in the wake of the scuttling of Bell Atlantic's planned takeover of Tele-Communications.
The Dow Jones broadcast-industry stock group, which includes TCI, sank 4.5%.
"Obviously, this is a psychological blow, {but} we're hanging on," said Scott Billeadeau, a portfolio manager with BA Capital Management in San Diego, which has 5% of its $425 million under management in cable stocks, including Comcast and Tele-Communications.
"I think you're going to see continuing takeovers and joint ventures," he said.
James Engle, another big holder of Tele-Communications, said: "We'll probably be buying" some more today.
Mr. Engle, chief investment officer of New York's Wood, Struthers & Winthrop, a unit of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, owns about one million shares and was one of several money managers impressed with a conference call given by John C. Malone, TeleCommunications' chief executive officer.
Mr. Malone put large investors at ease with his pledge that "strategic ventures" for his company are still possible, including maybe with Bell Atlantic.
"There'll be other deals down the pike.
John Malone is a resourceful person," Mr. Engle says confidently.
Such investors remained convinced that the future revolves around "interactive" sound and video finding their way into the American living room.
Cable and telecommunications companies will still find ways to merge or ally themselves to wire up the nation for it all, the bulls insist.
The scuttling of the Tele-Communications deal is just a bump in the road.
Admittedly, that's a pretty optimistic way to look at the yanking of one of the biggest proposed acquisitions in Wall Street history.
Yet investment bankers say there is no stopping the inevitable marriage of cable firms and phone companies.
"There's too much desire on both sides to get together," says John Waller of Waller Capital in New York, an investment-banking firm involved with several cable deals, including helping Chronicle Publishing sell its cable company.
"We're sitting here with a lot of companies for sale and a lot of companies that want to buy them."
Some big investors saw a buying opportunity in the sell-off, which spilled over to such cable-equipment stocks as General Instrument (down 12%) and Scientific-Atlanta (down 8%) as well as Time Warner, which owns a large cable company.
Mutual-fund manager Mario Gabelli said: "I'm taking some of my Paramount money and am going to be buying some stocks like Time Warner that have a multilane highway to the future."
Time Warner closed at 37 5/8, off 5/8.
Similar optimism emanated from Omaha, Neb., where fund manager Wallace Weitz called the cable carnage "not the end of the world."
Some 15% of the nearly $400 million he manages is in cable-related stocks, and he said he sat still without reaching for his Maalox.
"I'd love to see them get cheaper and I'd buy some more," he says.
The Dow Jones broadcasting index, helped by cable stocks, soared 36% last year.
But cable shares started falling late in the year because of uncertainty about how far the Federal Communications Commission would cut the rates cable companies charge.
The FCC's additional rollback this week of rates the companies can charge was one of the things that torpedoed the Bell Atlantic/TCI pact.
Cable viewers don't mind lower rates, of course, but cable-stock investors were livid.
The FCC rate reduction "really hurt.
It was stupid.
It was unnecessary by government," fumed Mr. Gabelli, adding: "Notwithstanding that, I think the cable companies will do quite well in 1995-96 in terms of new technologies . . . {and} I see the opportunity for TCI and Bell Atlantic to come back and revisit each other."
Indeed, it appeared that bargain-hunting investors were already snapping up Tele-Communications shares in the afternoon.
The stock, which had fallen as low as 21 1/4, closed at 22 3/8, down 1 7/8, on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
Early in the day, Melissa Cook, Prudential Securities' broadcasting, publishing and cable analyst, went so far as to upgrade Tele-Communications to "buy" from "hold."
She already had a buy on Comcast.
She emphasized that the buy recommendation was only a "value call" on the stock, suggesting things could still be rocky for Tele-Communications for a while.
Still, "smart companies like TCI and Comcast are going to find a way to get the capital they need long term," the analyst said.
The logic behind cable-industry mergers remains sound, argues Oren Cohen, a media-bond analyst at Salomon Brothers.
Yesterday's sell-off in cable bonds -- similar to the declines in the stock market -- prompted Salomon to announce "a good buying opportunity" for bond investors.
The most attractive candidates for merger, Mr. Cohen says, are Adelphia Communications, Cablevision Industries, Cablevision Systems, Comcast and Continential Cablevision.
Neither the stocks nor bonds of cable companies are for the queasy, however.
Cable companies are valued by cash flow, and their stocks can gyrate quickly on the slightest news.
The shelving of the Bell Atlantic deal, on top of the FCC's rate-rollback efforts, scare off some analysts and investors.
They say that even if the vaunted information highway does indeed get built, it might take longer than optimists think.
Ed Hatch, an analyst at UBS Securities, said his cash-flow assumptions and buy ratings on Comcast, Time Warner and the smaller TCA Cable TV are "under review."
"The FCC ruling to cut basic rates 7%, coupled with what will likely be a long and protracted period of regulation in the industry, will prevent cable stocks from rebounding significantly even from these reduced levels, "Mr. Hatch said in a morning report to clients.
He added that the benchmark for mergers of 11.75 times cash flow -- set by the proposed Bell Atlantic/TCI accord -- will also probably be reduced.
Because exact terms of the FCC rules are still unclear, the uncertainty could linger for months beyond the mid-May period, when cable operators begin to implement rate cuts, Mr. Hatch said.
And telephone companies "will be reticent to renew merger talks with prospective cable partners until the impact on cash flows from rate cuts becomes clear."
Still, Jessica Reif of Oppenheimer & Co. insists that no matter how bleak a picture anyone paints, she still believes that cable/phone company deals will occur "as technology converges."
She notes that Tele-Communications is trading at the "low end of historical norms" -- less than eight times estimated 1994 cash flow, compared with the trading range for cable shares of seven to 13 times.
Her price target for the stock this year is 32.
That's 43% above yesterday's close.
"Cable stocks could be volatile," she concedes, "but I'm very, very comfortable" with buying Tele-Communications.
Mark Robichaux contributed to this article.
