Patients who want to go to elite out-of-state doctors and hospitals could still get insurance coverage under President Clinton's health plan -- but not cheaply.
For decades, many Americans have traveled to renowned centers such as the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., and the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York without exceeding the limits of their insurance coverage.
Those options aren't being closed off entirely, but they are getting tough scrutiny from both insurers and health-system reformers.
Administration officials say most of the curbs are coming from the insurance industry, as insurers try to channel patients into low-cost networks of doctors and hospitals.
One architect of the Clinton plan, White House aide Walter Zelman, contends that if it is enacted, "people will actually have more opportunity to go out of network than they do today."
Although it's far from certain that the Clinton plan will be passed in its current form, the 1,300-page proposal provides the most detailed gauge yet of what may lie ahead as Washington takes up the issue.
Under the proposal, people would pick a health plan from a menu of choices offered by a regional alliance.
At least one of the options would be a fee-for-service plan allowing patients to be treated by any doctor or hospital they wanted.
Another option would let patients go outside their regular care network as long as they paid more of the bill themselves.
Those provisions sound reasonable but may not work as well as the White House hopes, says Robert Smoldt, head of planning at the Mayo Clinic.
People wanting to use nonnetwork hospitals could face sizable extra premiums and copayments, he contends, perhaps to the point that they would exceed budget targets set by the health alliances.
"We don't think it should be up to the alliances to decide what can be offered to people," Mr. Smoldt adds.
A California precedent suggests that an out-of-network option wouldn't be cheap.
The state's Public Employees' Retirement System offers a variety of health plans, much like the menu of choices the White House is proposing.
The main plan that lets members go outside their network charges $637 a month for family coverage, about 30% more than the more restrictive plans do.
The flexible plan also requires members to pay 40% of the cost of out-of-network hospitalization, compared with zero or 10% copayments for in-network care.
Most of the best-known medical centers currently count on long-distance referrals for a lot of their patients.
The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center says it gets 25% of its patients from outside its local Houston county and 5% from out of state.
The Cleveland Clinic says it gets 20% to 30% from outside Ohio.
The Clinton initiatives "would be a serious problem for patients who rely on us for services that aren't readily available elsewhere," says David Hohn, M.D. Anderson's vice president for patient care.
He notes that his cancer center was one of the first places in the U.S. to offer patients a new drug, taxol, for ovarian cancer; now, the drug is widely regarded as promising.
At the Cleveland Clinic, however, officials think that price cutting will keep their center accessible to out-of-state patients, regardless of how the health-reform debate is resolved.
Lately, the Cleveland Clinic has been offering a package of 70 specialized services, ranging from lung transplants to heart surgeries, to budget-minded health plans around the U.S.
To get business, the Cleveland center has cut prices enough to win customers such as Delta Air Lines and Kaiser Permanente, the large health-maintenance organization.
They send some out-of-state patients to Cleveland, finding it cheaper than trying to provide high-tech care locally.
"It would be more difficult, but we could come up with a mechanism to keep doing this under the Clinton plan," says John Clough, chairman of the clinic's health-affairs department.
