Chemical makers, especially those with big exposure to the recession-wracked European marketplace, are expected to show sluggish results for the fourth quarter, as they endure continued low prices on bulk plastics and chemicals.
While unit volume perked up for many commodity chemical products, particularly in North America, prices remain under pressure because of excess global capacity.
"Pure commodity chemical companies are generating razor-thin profits because of the lack of pricing power," says Wertheim Schroder & Co. analyst Christopher H. Willis.
One bit of good news for makers of commodity chemicals and plastics: Many observers feel that the long price downturn may have hit bottom in the latter part of 1993.
It's widely expected, however, that the industry could bump along at low levels for some time, and that the climb out will be slow.
While Europe's economy is expected to strengthen only slowly, domestic demand is showing more zip, helped by increased activity in the U.S. construction and automotive sectors.
Boosted by lower interest rates, improvement in the U.S. housing industry has increased demand for such products as plumbing pipes made of polyvinyl chloride, coatings for electrical wire, and adhesives.
Lehman Brothers analyst Theodore S. Semegran notes that the industry is becoming more "consumer-sensitive."
The housing upturn, including increased turnover in existing homes, also boosts demand for carpet fibers, plastic for consumer durables and the like, he says.
"What actually has become the market for chemicals are appliances, home furnishings, as well as what you might call the slightly more cyclical areas such as housing or autos," Mr. Semegran says.
For petrochemical makers -- who use petroleum products as feedstock -- declining oil prices might be expected to help.
But analysts say that current pricing for such mainstays as ethylene and propylene makes any such benefit modest.
Cost-cutting efforts will strengthen margins at the increasing number of companies that instituted them.
DuPont Co., in Wilmington, Del., will need the margin boost.
While some segments of its U.S. operations enjoyed increased volume in the just-ended fourth period, earnings at the Conoco energy unit are under pressure from declining oil prices and a recently settled coal strike.
Analysts estimate that DuPont's earnings will hit about 46 cents a share.
Dow Chemical Co.'s cost reductions will also provide some payoff for the Midland, Mich., concern, analysts predict.
But negatives include its big exposure in the European marketplace and in the commodity sector, as well as continued softness at its 71%-owned Marion Merrell Dow Inc. drug subsidiary.
Analysts expect Dow to earn about 32 cents a share.
That excludes the $192 million, or 70-cent-a-share, fourth-quarter charge the chemical maker will take as its portion of a charge planned by its 50%-owned Dow Corning joint venture.
Dow Chemical's latest quarter is also expected to reflect approximately a $100 million pretax gain linked to a Canadian unit's asset disposition.
Geon Co., now completely independent of former parent B.F. Goodrich Co., expects to report better than break-even earnings for the seasonally slow fourth quarter.
That marks a substantial improvement over the big operating loss the Independence, Ohio, company reported as a Goodrich unit a year ago.
Wertheim Schroder's Mr. Willis, who recently raised his earnings projection to five cents a share from break-even, noted that a "fourth-quarter profit for Geon speaks volumes for the major turnaround that management has engineered in the past two years."
Analysts estimate nine cents a share.
Analysts had expected Union Carbide Corp. to report per-share earnings of about 18 cents, but yesterday the company said it anticipates earnings of about 25 cents.
The Danbury, Conn., concern said that while margins for some of its major products were down from the year-ago period, fourth-quarter earnings benefited from continued reductions in fixed costs and interest, as well as "strong performance from its partnerships and corporate joint ventures."
Monsanto Co., which, because of seasonal factors, doesn't get the big push in the fourth period from its agricultural division that it does in some other quarters, is still expected to show solid improvement over the year-ago period.
That's in part because of stronger sales to domestic auto makers, modest profits from the company's Searle pharmaceuticals unit and cost reductions.
Analysts expect earnings of about 40 cents a share.
Companies that produce value-added or specialized chemicals will likely enjoy brighter results.
Such products, which typically command a higher margin, aren't as subject to the oversupply that is plaguing the commodities sector.
