The yen's continuing strength and a slide by the Swiss franc mobilized currency markets yesterday.
The dollar was abandoned to drift quietly lower.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7450 marks, down from 1.7496 marks late Tuesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 110.05 yen, off from 110.90 yen.
Sterling was trading unchanged at $1.4945.
About midday Thursday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 109.65 yen and at 1.7450 marks.
There was little interest Wednesday in the dollar, which generated almost no reaction when it fell through a longstanding support level at 1.7480 marks.
But even the U.S. currency looked tough against the Swiss franc, with the dollar up to 1.4710 francs late in New York, compared with 1.4670 francs late Tuesday.
The Swiss currency, usually bought as a haven from problems elsewhere in Europe, has received a free ride higher for most of the past 12 months on turmoil in Russia and in the European Monetary System.
Yesterday, investors focused instead on Switzerland's own economic fundamentals.
An article in The Wall Street Journal Europe highlighted Switzerland's sagging industrial output and retail sales, and increasing unemployment; later in the day, the Swiss government released an International Monetary Fund report that noted the need to get the country's budget deficit under control.
The effect was a Swiss franc selloff, particularly against the mark, which has fallen 9% against the franc during the past 12 months.
The mark was trading at 0.8430 franc late yesterday in New York, compared with 0.8379 franc late Tuesday.
The Swiss franc fell to 74.81 yen from 75.04 yen late Tuesday, following the market's rush toward the Japanese currency.
The yen first jumped during Australian trading, when senior U.S. trade officials told reporters that negotiations on autos and auto parts were at an impasse.
Currency markets are concerned that if Japan won't act to open markets and cut its trade surplus, the U.S. will resort to public calls for a higher yen.
Then, during Asian trading, reports emerged that economist C. Fred Bergsten wants to see the dollar trading in a significantly lower range against the yen.
Mr. Bergsten, an adviser to former President Carter, is thought by some players to have the ear of President Clinton.
Mr. Bergsten's office later confirmed that the economist wants to see the dollar in a range between 90 yen and 110 yen, well below current market levels.
News-starved markets jumped on the initial reports of Mr. Bergsten's views, sending the yen higher against most major currencies.
"The yen got a little starter with the breakdown of talks and the Bergsten comments made people take notice," said Carl Forcheski, a trader at Chemical Bank in New York.
"I don't know if he has any direct input into the administration, but some people feel that he does."
Mr. Forcheski added that if the dollar falls through support at 109.80 yen, players will begin to doubt the yen downtrend under way since the Federal Reserve's massive intervention in August.
A break of 1.7350 marks also would be significant, he said, though traders are likely to want to buy dollars on any dip against the mark, Mr. Forcheski added.
