U.S. Surgical Corp., in the sharpest acknowledgement yet of its eroding financial position, said it is renegotiating loan agreements with its banks and is retaining investment bankers to look for equity investors.
The surprise announcement followed a jury's decision in U.S. district court in Hartford, Conn., that archrival Johnson & Johnson didn't infringe on a U.S. Surgical patent for a popular device used in endoscopic or "band-aid" surgery procedures.
Trading in U.S. Surgical's shares was halted on the New York Stock Exchange for several hours, but when trading resumed, the stock price plunged and closed down 21%, or $5.625 a share, at $21.50.
The Norwalk, Conn., maker of surgical staples and equipment used in minimally invasive surgery was one of the top growth stocks in the early 1990s, and traded as high as $134 a share in early 1992.
One analyst said the company may have been hoping for a hefty financial award in the patent-infringement case to improve its financial position.
But the court decision is hardly the worst of the company's problems.
Continued heavy competition and swollen hospital inventories have damped sales and choked cash flow.
U.S. Surgical said it expects to report fourth-quarter sales of $244 million and a loss of 26 cents a share, not including a previously reported $130 million restructuring charge.
In the year-earlier quarter, the company posted earnings of $37.9 million, or 64 cents a share, on sales of $322 million.
The company said it has retained Kidder, Peabody & Co. and Bear, Stearns & Co. to, among other things, "seek equity investments to improve the company's financial position."
"Our preference would be to have a cash infusion by an equity investment," said Marianne Scipione, vice president, corporate communications.
"At this point, we've got to look at every option and look at what's in the best interests of the company and its shareholders."
The estimated loss for the fourth period would be the company's third consecutive quarterly loss.
Cash flow was negative during last year's second half.
As of last Sept. 30, the company had $476 million of long-term debt, in the form of bank loans and capitalized leases from insurance companies.
It had credit lines of $650 million.
The restructuring steps the company announced in October and December, including the sale of assets and layoffs, have led to a violation of some of its loan covenants, Ms. Scipione said.
In a statement, the company said it "has been operating under waivers with the insurance companies," including one that was "just reissued until March 1."
The company isn't "in default of its banking agreements," the statement added, "but it is precluded from additional borrowings."
The company said it has "adequate funds and anticipates sufficient cash flow to preclude the necessity for additional borrowing until negotiations are concluded."
Glenn Reicin, an analyst at Morgan Stanley & Co., said the company's troubles partly reflect that it "has built too much infrastructure for its present sales volume, and financed almost all of it with bank debt."
Ms. Scipione described the company as being in "a Catch-22."
She said the restructuring, which included scrapping plans to centralize some European operations at a 380,000-square-foot facility near Paris, and writing down the value of that facility, was "the most beneficial and prudent thing to do."
But in writing down or shedding investments, the company failed to meet certain financial ratios in its loan agreements.
"On paper, it triggers a default," she said.
Earlier this year, the company announced it was postponing announcement of its fourth-period results, pending the jury's decision in the patent-infringement case.
That prompted some speculation among analysts that the company expected a favorable decision.
But Ms. Scipione said yesterday that the company delayed the announcement so, among other things, it could conclude its talks with lenders before making required year-end filings on its earnings to the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Nothing in the loan negotiations will affect fourth-quarter results, she said, "but we have to have all of our lending arrangements intact to report our 10-K" filing.
The company will report its fourth-quarter and year-end results no later than March 31, she said.
The court decision was a disappointment for the company, which has maintained that Johnson & Johnson's Ethicon unit has made inroads in its market leadership in minimally-invasive surgical gear in part by copying its technology.
The jury denied the company's claim that Ethicon had infringed on U.S. Surgical's patent for a device called a clip applier used in procedures such as laparoscopic gall-bladder surgery.
U.S. Surgical said it will appeal the decision.
"I think what the company was banking on was if they won the lawsuit, they would get a large cash infusion if they proved treble damages," said Morgan Stanley's Mr. Reicin.
That would have helped the company to pay some of the debt, he added.
Kenneth S. Abramowitz, analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. said Wall Street expectations on the outcome of the court case were "overstated."
He predicted that the company will either sell equity or strike a strategic alliance with a corporate partner to rebuild its financial position.
"It's an innovative, creative company that has to work itself out of the hole it dug for itself, and that takes some time," he said.
Robin Goldwyn Blumenthal and Anne Newman contributed to this article.
U.S. SURGICAL Corp. said it isn't in violation of any loan covenant and isn't in default under any loan.
An article yesterday incorrectly said restructuring steps at the company had led to a violation of its loan covenants.
(WSJ Feb. 18, 1994)
