Lost in the debate over electric vehicles is an ugly truth that may ultimately wind up on "Oprah."
Electric vehicles can be bad for your love life.
So says Clare Bell of San Francisco.
Ms. Bell edits Current Events, a national newsletter for electric-vehicle enthusiasts.
Inspired by her own rocky relationship, Ms. Bell wrote a column in the February issue entitled "Ways to Keep Your EV and Your Lover."
"If having an EV in your life is important to you, explain why, without getting on a soapbox," suggests Ms. Bell.
"Even if your partner doesn't agree, he or she can empathize and understand."
Well, maybe, says Coleman Easton, Ms. Bell's lover of 12 years.
After all, electric vehicles can be expensive and time consuming, he says.
Ms. Bell herself has spent more than $20,000 to get a dilapidated Volkswagen Beetle chassis and a worn-out Porsche 914 sports car to run on electricity -- projects that kept her in the garage many nights.
Today, even she admits that some of those nights might have been better spent elsewhere.
And there are all those nights away from home at Electric Auto Association meetings.
"There were times she couldn't get back," Mr. Easton recalls.
"She had to stay somewhere else because the car needed to be recharged."
Of course, some couples say they get a charge out of electric vehicles.
Mary Ann Chapman of Tucson, Ariz., says she and her husband spent weeks working together on vehicles they were converting into "electrics."
Indeed, within four months of their first ride together in an electric vehicle, they married.
"We're an 80-hours-a-week, electric-vehicle couple," says Ms. Chapman, who operates her own electric-vehicle business.
Fortunately, counseling has helped Mr. Easton to better cope with Ms. Bell's fascination with electric vehicles.
Ms. Bell also follows some of her own advice, budgeting more quality time with Mr. Easton.
In fact, the two often collaborate on romance novels.
But Mr. Easton, who sticks to driving his 1989 gasoline-powered Honda Accord, says he may also pursue a project of his own.
"I was thinking about a romance novel about a couple who squabble over an electric vehicle," he says.
