At the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo this year, some lucky visitors were treated to more than the usual dances, cocktail parties and tours of local ranches.
Diplomats from China, France and elsewhere also got an earful from the Texas Department of Agriculture about their countries' restrictions on imports of Texas cattle because of bluetongue virus.
The virus infects many animals in the Southern U.S. but almost never causes health problems, officials say.
Where better to lobby on bluetongue than the festive setting of the rodeo?
"It's a relaxed environment that brings people of like minds together," says Mark Ellison, Texas' assistant agriculture commissioner.
"This is a good time to try to undo some prejudices."
In the rodeo's "international room," Mr. Ellison handed visitors copies of a 17-page essay that argues for easing restrictions on cattle imports from bluetongue areas.
The essay, by a Texas A&M University professor, argues not only that the virus is usually harmless to cattle, but also that it spreads only through certain kinds of gnats -- which many countries don't have.
Texas does a thriving cattle business with Thailand, the Philippines and Mexico, but loses millions of dollars a year in sales to other countries that won't import cattle from bluetongue areas, Mr. Ellison says.
Texas breeders say the virus is an excuse for protectionism.
"It's a political disease, and it makes my blood boil," says Orvan Muelker, a breeder from Cost, Texas.
The result of the lobbying was mixed.
The French and Chinese consuls listened politely and agreed to keep the dialogue open.
But Russia, which wants to start breeding beef cattle near Moscow, seemed ready to talk business.
After gobbling up ice cream during a tour of the Blue Bell creamery in Brenham, a Russian official told her hosts she will look into what her country's rules are, and whether they need changing to do business with Texas breeders.
"It seemed to go well," Mr. Ellison said.
"But we didn't want to push too hard at the first meeting."
