Two Duke University researchers charged that insurance companies can be "arbitrary and capricious" when they deny coverage of a costly therapy for breast cancer patients even though the companies approve 77% of initial requests for coverage.
The Duke physicians said they examined the insurance coverage of 533 patients who were candidates for high-dose chemotherapy followed by bone-marrow transplants.
The doctors, William Peters and Mark Rogers, specialize in cancer and bone-marrow transplants.
Their findings are published in this week's edition of the New England Journal of Medicine.
The question of who will pay for bone-marrow transplants has become one of the biggest controversies in medical ethics.
Such treatment for breast-cancer patients often costs more than $100,000.
The procedure is still in clinical trials to determine whether it works better than standard care.
Many doctors regard the treatment as promising but some insurance carriers view it as still experimental.
Patients and their lawyers have pressed hard for insurers to cover the procedure.
Duke's Dr. Peters has been an especially spirited advocate of wider insurance coverage of pioneering care-frequently pitting him against health insurers.
In an interview, he stepped up his criticism of the carriers' practices, saying the practices often amount to "barriers to care."
Several big insurers disputed the Duke researchers' claim that coverage decisions are arbitrary.
"I don't know how we could be more systematic and formal about it," said William McGivney, director of technology assessment at Aetna Life & Casualty Co.
Mr. McGivney said Aetna relies on independent cancer specialists at leading research centers to assess its cases.
Aetna then follows these doctors' recommendations on whether bone-marrow therapy is warranted.
Still, the Duke study found wide variances in the ways that different insurers handled requests to cover the breast-cancer therapy.
Of the 20 largest insurers providing coverage in the study, four approved 100% of initial requests, and another 12 approved at least two-thirds of requests.
But three insurers denied more than half the requests.
The insurers weren't identified.
When coverage was denied, Drs. Peters and Rogers said, the decision didn't seem to have much to do with the health status of the patient.
The doctors said they checked to see if denial rates were higher for sicker patients or ones who hadn't responded to prior chemotherapy.
But, Dr. Peters said, the odds of denial "appeared to bear little relation to available medical or scientific information."
Thomas Spitzer, head of bone-marrow transplants at Massachusetts General Hospital, said insurers lately have seemed more willing to pay for bone-marrow transplants for breast-cancer patients.
That may reflect a greater concern about lawsuits.
Late last year, Health Net, a Woodland Hills, Calif., health-maintenance organization, was ordered by a California jury to pay $89 million to the estate of a 37-year-old woman whose request for a bone-marrow transplant had been rebuffed.
For the period covered by the Duke study, however, Drs. Peters and Rogers said they didn't find a statistically significant change in insurers' willingness to cover bone-marrow transplants.
They looked at data from 1989 to 1992.
The Duke doctors found that 77% of patients got insurers' approval of their initial requests for coverage of bone-marrow therapy.
Of the 121 patients who initially were denied coverage, 62 nonetheless received transplants.
In 39 of those cases, insurers ultimately did pay, sometimes after patients hired attorneys.
In the other 23 cases, patients got the treatment either as charity care or by paying the bills themselves.
Even though suits and appeals help more patients get insurance coverage, Dr. Peters said such challenges are a less-than-ideal way to pay for care.
"It's terrible that patients who already are facing a life-threatening illness have to worry about having their lives dragged through court," he remarked.
Accompanying the Duke study was a guest editorial in the New England Journal that further rebuked insurers.
In that editorial, Donald Light, a professor at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, charged that insurers use a host of "standard practices to delay or deny payments to doctors, clinics, hospitals, medical suppliers and patients for legitimate medical services."
