I read your Jan. 26 article on mutual funds ("Texas Mutual Funds: Returns Are In"), and I wondered which American Capital Asset Management Inc. you were reviewing.
The day before, I had received the 1993 survey of brokers who recommend various fund groups to their clients.
American Capital ranked No. 1 in four of six categories, and No. 3 and No. 4 in the other two.
Since 1987 when Don Powell, chairman of American Capital, and Don McMullen, president, came to Houston with the mission of making American Capital the premier mutual-fund company in the country, their turnaround has been a success story.
As rated by the brokers, it is currently rated No. 1 in overall service quality, marketing support, problem resolution/error correction and wholesaler support.
I have, as an independent broker, followed all major mutual-fund companies throughout my 26-year career, and can attest to the success my clients who own American Capital products have enjoyed.
Recently, I ran an analysis for many of my customers who, upon my recommendation, purchased American Capital Emerging Growth "A" fund three years ago.
Their accounts had compounded at a rate of 35.5% a year, or 148.96% from Sept. 30, 1990, through Sept. 30, 1993.
And the track record of many American Capital funds since this time has been impressive.
The issue is this: Ten-year past performance does not predict the future, nor does it accurately reflect the past, if a major change in management investment style or objective is included in that 10-year number.
Honesty, integrity, quality service, commitment to excellence, accuracy -- who develops numbers for these qualities?
Unless you've personally recommended any of the funds and have witnessed people retire with dignity, children grow up and receive diplomas from college, seen the peace of mind when a widow receives a monthly check like clockwork from her nest egg and realizes it was because you recommended a world-class manager, it is virtually impossible to feel how people respond when they read an article in The Wall Street Journal whose overall conclusion is that Texas mutual funds' returns are "lousy."
Gary E. Battenberg
