Carol Shields's novel "The Stone Diaries" (Viking, 361 pages, $21.95) does not actually follow the form of a diary, but its detached, mildly dissociated narrative, interspersed with letters, "snapshots" and other "documents," underscores its theme of a life that doesn't quite cohere.
The narrator and subject is Daisy Stone Goodwill, who likes to write about herself in the third person, as if anatomizing the behavior of an alien species.
"Daisy Goodwill," she warns at one point, "has a little trouble with getting things straight; with the truth, that is."
At first glance, Daisy seems to be leading the well-ordered, "normal" life of a middle-class white native of North America, safely sheltered from the major upheavals of the century.
But on a deeper level, she is as rootless and disconnected as any postmodern antihero.
Daisy's life begins when her mother dies giving birth to her one hot July afternoon in Manitoba in 1905.
Her grief-stricken father, a limestone worker, allows her to be raised by an eccentric yet well-intentioned neighbor woman with three grown sons of her own.
At age 11, Daisy is reclaimed by her father, who's on his way to accept a lucrative position with a limestone company in Indiana.
Daisy's all-American '20s girlhood is capped by her marriage to the town's mother-dominated Mr. Perfect: handsome, athletic, rich Harold Hoad.
The honeymoon is a disaster.
Unwilling or unable to consummate the marriage, the groom leaps to his death from a window.
A decade later, Daisy returns to Canada and weds the oldest son of her adoptive mother, a confirmed bachelor who's been waiting for her all these years.
Motherhood, widowhood, grandchildren, a midlife career as a gardening columnist, severe depression following the end of that career, recovery, retirement, Florida and death are further milestones in Daisy's saga.
Throughout it all, Daisy is never quite sure if she is living her life or only watching herself go through the motions.
The watery, insubstantial quality of Daisy's life is Ms. Shields's way of reminding us that the apparent "solidness" of past generations may be something of an optical illusion: "Those who went before us," reflects Daisy, thinking of her own forebears, "were every bit as wayward and unaccountable and unsteady in their longings as people today."
Ms. Shields, a versatile and accomplished Canadian writer who's not yet received the attention accorded her compatriots Margaret Atwood and Alice Munro, manages to pull off the rather tricky enterprise of describing apathy without provoking it in the reader.
In "Diary of a Lost Boy" (Knopf, 183 pages, $20), playwright and poet Harry Kondoleon offers a brilliantly comic yet unflinching victim's-eye view of postmodern life in the age of AIDS.
Already in the late stages of the disease, the novel's diarist-hero, Hector Diaz, is reading the medieval mystic Meister Eckhart in the hope of cultivating a sense of detachment about his approaching demise.
Yet he also feels a need to attach what is left of his attention to the foundering marriage of his two best friends, the ironically named Bill and Susan Ded.
Spoiled, neurotic New Yorkers, the Deds are nonetheless quite devoted to Hector, and can't imagine why their fatally ill friend should be worrying about their trivial problems.
But for Hector, watching their story takes his mind off himself.
Hector accompanies Bill to meetings of the Philandering Husbands Support Group, unable to tell if this is "a group to help curtail sexually compulsive behavior, or . . . a club for husbands who wanted to be supported in their philandering?"
He tags along with Susan on a blind date with the prospective new man in her life: "You didn't think it peculiar that I was invited along?"
Hector asks the fellow.
"No," he replies with admirable aplomb, "I found it charming.
Things were arranged so that I was meeting not one but two interesting people."
Mr. Kondoleon's satirical thrusts are often outrageous but never cruel.
He has hit upon precisely the right tone for conveying his hero's state -- or changing states -- of mind.
The problems confronting Alice Hammond, the 33-year-old heroine of Sara Lewis's engaging first novel, "Heart Conditions" (Harcourt Brace, 276 pages, $21.95), are hardly as dire as Hector's: She's stuck in a dead-end publishing job, her boyfriend's walked out, she's pregnant, and has little choice but to move in as an unpaid nursemaid to her imperious ailing grandma on Long Island.
Friends criticize Alice's lack of backbone, but her attempts at self-assertion tend to backfire.
Some elements of the plot may seem a bit too familiar: the charming, unreliable boyfriend is an actor; the difficult grandmother proves more supportive than had been supposed; and Alice, of course, decides to have the baby.
(Abortions seem to occur far less often in fiction than in real life.)
But Ms. Lewis's wry sense of humor and genuine affection for her bumbling characters help carry the day and make this book a standout among contemporary chronicles of low-self-esteem heroines learning to survive in the big city.
