A burning oil tanker left the Bosporus closed for a second day, stalling about 100 ships in the trade route that links the Black Sea and the Mediterranean.
The fire began Sunday night when a freighter collided with the tanker, killing 17 sailors; a dozen others were missing.
Authorities in Turkey said the Bosporus, a narrow, 20-mile-long strait, wouldn't reopen until the fire was put out.
Dutch firefighters and pollution-control specialists were helping to douse the fire and clean up the oil spill, the extent of which hadn't been determined.
The tanker was carrying about 16 million gallons of crude oil from Russia to Italy.
The accident prompted renewed calls for tighter rules for the waterway that runs through Istanbul.
A Turkish official appealed again for construction of pipelines across Turkey to carry oil from the former Soviet Union, allowing a ban on tankers in the Bosporus.
Kazakhstan will hold its first privatization auction April 29, offering 51% stakes in 50 of the former Soviet republic's enterprises.
To become stockholders of the midsize companies, ranging from construction firms to textile and food plants, citizens must submit vouchers to any of more than 100 investment funds.
The government will retain 39% stakes for subsequent sales to foreign and domestic investors.
Managers and workers will own the remaining 10% of each company.
The government plans to privatize 850 enterprises by year end in weekly auctions.
Russia plans to auction stakes in 89 big industrial companies by June.
In the accelerated privatization program, holdings will be offered in the oil, aluminum and other sectors.
Though Russia has been turning state enterprises over to private owners since late 1992, it has put its industrial giants up for sale only recently at the auctions, in which citizens bid for shares with privatization vouchers.
Once these vouchers expire June 30, stakes will be sold in competitive tenders.
Japanese industries' capital spending in the year ending March 31 is expected to drop 5.6% from a year earlier, a survey by the Japan Development Bank found.
The decline would mark the first time since the surveys began in 1956 that the outlays fell for three years in a row.
The electrical machinery sector expects to expand its investment 3%, its first climb in four years, but construction spending could slump 32%.
Separately, a Federation of Economic Organizations survey found companies increasingly feel that a Japanese economic recovery won't occur until late this year.
Violent crimes are increasing in China, the government's top prosecutor, Zhang Siqing, told the legislature.
Last year, 574,176 people were charged with criminal offenses and 79% of them were convicted.
China typically doesn't specify details on crime, but an official newspaper has reported that violent crime rose 18% in last year's first 10 months.
Mr. Zhang said crime is growing in rural as well as urban areas, and Chinese increasingly feel unsafe.
He said the situation could worsen, blaming economic reforms that also foster official corruption and business disputes.
The European Union Commission declined to extend minimum prices for fish in France, rejecting the government's demand for continued protection of its embattled fishing industry.
The EU viewed the price measure, begun Feb. 4, as a short-term solution to problems in the French sector, which complained that it was being hurt by inexpensive imports.
EU fisheries ministers will meet April 12 to examine long-term solutions for French fishermen.
France has lifted strict inspection procedures that had curtailed shipments from abroad.
Though it has boosted personal incomes, China's surging economy has caused water and air pollution to worsen, and waste in most cities isn't treated properly, an environmental official said.
But China's growth pace, which topped 13% last year, must quicken to produce more government revenue to pay for efforts to cut pollution, said Qu Geping, chairman of the legislature's environmental protection panel.
Meanwhile, he said China would enact tough new laws and impose higher fines for polluters.
Economic losses in China linked to pollution total $11.5 billion a year, Mr. Qu estimated, but said this didn't take into account harm to people who live and work in rapidly deteriorating conditions.
China's cities record some of the world's highest levels of air pollution, while soil erosion and fast-dropping water tables are increasingly apparent.
Mr. Qu said that many local leaders emphasized economic growth at the expense of environmental protection.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Russian industrial output last month plunged 24% from a year earlier, the sharpest drop since economic reforms began in 1992, but rose 2.3% from January. . . .
Two researchers in the Scottish Highlands said the 1934 photograph of the Loch Ness monster, with a hump back and long neck, is a fake, and depicts a model made from a toy submarine fitted to resemble a sea serpent.
The legend of the monster, now a $37 million-a-year tourist attraction, dates from the year 565.
