WILLIAM PERRY WAS NOMINATED by Clinton to be secretary of defense.
The president nominated the deputy defense secretary to succeed Aspin in the top Pentagon job.
Perry, 66, a low-key mathematician and military technologist who is held in high regard on Capitol Hill, is expected to win Senate confirmation easily.
He lacks extensive foreign-policy experience, and his views are strongest on the need for an activist defense industrial policy.
He talked yesterday of the need to reform the system of buying weapons and other goods.
Bobby Inman proposed having Perry replace him as the nominee last week when Inman withdrew his name, people close to the situation said.
THE HIGH COURT RULED that abortion protesters can be sued under RICO.
Abortion-rights forces won a procedural victory as the Supreme Court said they may use the federal racketeering law as a weapon against protesters who try to shut down abortion clinics.
The unanimous ruling will allow the National Organization for Women to proceed with a civil lawsuit alleging that Operation Rescue and other groups engaged in a nationwide conspiracy to use harassment and violence to force clinics to close.
The court's decision could imperil militant antiabortion groups because RICO allows plaintiffs to seek damages equal to triple their actual harm.
The president wants to submit a welfare-overhaul proposal to Congress quickly, maybe as early as late February.
The president will emphasize the need for changing the welfare system in his State of the Union address tonight.
He also will stress health-care reform, anticrime measures and worker retraining.
About $4 billion will be requested in congressional appropriations to help California cope with last week's earthquake, according to Laura Tyson, the head of the White House Council of Economic Advisers.
Clinton's top adviser on Russia warned that any backsliding there could lead to hyperinflation and political chaos.
Talbott said that "slowing the pace of reform will not ease the social pain of economic transition."
His warning contrasted with his earlier suggestion that Russia needed "less shock and more therapy."
Russia's new economics minister lashed out at reformers for refusing to join the cabinet and predicted high inflation in January.
Meanwhile, Yeltsin didn't accept Finance Minister Fyodorov's resignation.
The future of Europe is at stake in Bosnia and only swift, retaliatory air strikes will end aggression by the warring factions, the U.N. commander in the former Yugoslavia said.
The commander, Gen. Jean Cot, is being recalled by U.N. chief Boutros-Ghali because of his public comments concerning their dispute over the need for air strikes.
Boutros-Ghali questioned NATO's willingness to use force in Bosnia and he urged more diplomacy.
Meanwhile, the U.S. rejected a French suggestion to impose borders on the warring factions.
Clinton said there were limits to how much other nations can do.
Medical planes evacuated two young brothers hurt in a Sarajevo mortar attack.
Sen. Packwood must turn over his diaries to the Senate Ethics Committee, which is investigating allegations of sexual misconduct, a federal judge ruled.
The judge said the panel will respect the Oregon Republican's "expectations of privacy."
The EPA will require that new cars and trucks include a device that captures gasoline vapors that otherwise would escape into the atmosphere during refueling.
The device is an enlarged version of the charcoal-filled canister required on current-model autos.
Japan's prime minister sought to save his political reform package by negotiating a compromise with opponents.
But prospects were dim that any accord could be reached on the reforms.
The Navy Inspector General's office said that 133 midshipmen may have cheated on an electrical-engineering exam taken in 1992 at the Naval Academy.
Eighty-one midshipmen have admitted cheating.
Israel resumed Washington peace talks with representatives of Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and the PLO amid unusual secrecy.
The PLO's Arafat made his first visit to Saudi Arabia since the Gulf War.
