"You wake up every morning and the papers say you're a fascist.
Just imagine what kind of a state you would be in."
That's how one lawmaker in Russia's new parliament, Alexander Nevzorov, explains the latest outbursts of his fellow deputy, Vladimir Zhirinovsky.
In the two weeks since Russia's new legislature convened, Mr. Zhirinovsky has landed in a fist fight in the parliamentary lunch line, tried to shout down his political opponents at the microphone, threatened to jail them and told some of them they belong in psychiatric hospitals.
This follows a one-month stretch between the December elections and the opening of parliament in which Mr. Zhirinovsky, among other things, called for the president of Bulgaria to resign, said Russia had a secret weapon -- the "Elipton" -- stronger than the atomic bomb and threatened Germany with World War III.
The hope among Mr. Zhirinovsky's critics is that he might spin so far out of control that he will destroy himself politically before he wrecks anything else.
"He's an idiot.
When you're watching television it doesn't make any difference whether you're watching clowns and circuses or Zhirinovsky," says an out-of-work driver from the city of Tambov, Volodya Stepanov.
But Russia is a country where good manners don't top the list of prized political credentials.
And though many Russians disapprove of both Mr. Zhirinovsky's behavior and his ideas, to others he offers a brand of jackboot burlesque that suits the mood of the times.
He articulates the brute anger swelling among people faced with high inflation, chronic uncertainty and the humiliating sense that they inhabit a scarred and shrunken nation.
In Mr. Zhirinovsky's electoral district of Schelkovo, on the outskirts of Moscow, a pensioner, Anna Koshaleva, says she likes Mr. Zhirinovsky because though all other politicians look alike to her, "he stands out."
At the shoe counter of the nearby Olympia Salon, saleslady Nina Laputin says, "Where I live, they're all for Zhirinovsky . . . maybe because he wants to open the road for the young."
Not all the young agree.
"From what I've heard, he's a mental case," says 16-year-old Yevgeny Gordeyev, strolling by outside, who asks "How can you like a person who says you can sell vodka for three rubles -- one-fifth of a cent -- a bottle?"
Some deputies in Mr. Zhirinovsky's Liberal Democratic Party say his behavior is simply what any normal person might do when provoked.
"We are normal people, we react normally to the aggressiveness of others," asserts LDP member Sergei Abeltsev, a sturdy, bald deputy whom Mr. Zhirinovsky has annointed as security minister of the cabinet he intends to appoint if he's elected president.
Asked about the fist fight in which a liberal deputy, Mark Goryachev, started brawling with Mr. Zhirinovsky after an exchange of insults at the parliamentary lunch counter, Mr. Abeltsev says Mr. Zhirinovsky and his party followers should have been praised for treating their enemies with restraint: "If Zhirinovsky would tell us to do so, we would kill them like flies."
Mr. Zhirinovsky, asked in an interview in the halls of parliament last week whether he thought he might have gone too far in some of his recent actions, replied that the problem isn't what he does, but how it's reported.
He would like to correct this: "If you say I'm a fascist, I'll sue you for 10 million marks or $10 million, and your paper will go out of business and your editor in chief will kill himself."
Crowded around him, a score of LDP deputies clapped and cheered.
In the interview, Mr. Zhirinovsky offered a further sample of his style, explaining that he stands for national pride.
"Belgium," he said, "is just a little country next to Germany, and all they have in Belgium is beer and hot dogs. . . .
I don't want Russia to be just a little country next to something else.
In Russia we won't have beer and hot dogs, but we will have our great fatherland."
Among many parliamentarians outside the LDP's 64-seat block in the 450-seat chamber, Mr. Zhirinovsky's theatrics play less well.
Lyubov Olyenik of the Communist Party noted "he should control himself.
He's doing badly with those manners."
Mr. Zhirinovsky's bluster in the lower house of parliament, the State Duma, didn't get him elected speaker, which at one point he had wanted.
Neither did it get him the chairmanship of the Foreign Relations Committee, which he had also wanted.
"I think he will discredit himself," says an aide to President Boris Yeltsin, Theodore Shelov-Kovedyaev, smoking a cigar just outside the parliamentary chamber.
"But," adds Mr. Shelov-Kovedyaev, "We need to make a strong effort to help him in doing that.
One should not underestimate the danger in Zhirinovsky."
One effort to help in the discrediting of Mr. Zhirinovsky came last week from the mayor of St. Petersburg, Anataloy Sobchak.
Mr. Sobchak told the Russian newspaper Literaturnaya Gazeta that he had "trustworthy facts" showing that Mr. Zhirinovsky had been a KGB agent, and that the KGB had set up Mr. Zhirinovsky's LDP in 1989.
But Mr. Sobchak has yet to substantiate his allegations.
Mr. Nevzorov, who is an independent deputy from St. Petersburg, sums up the enthusiasm that Mr. Zhirinovsky seems to impart to his supporters: "For me, Zhirinovsky resembles a fighter plane with full gas tanks, whereas Yeltsin's gas tanks are empty."
