Motorola Inc. and International Business Machines Corp. are in discussions about restructuring their joint ownership of Ardis, a radio-data network used with portable communications devices.
Several industry executives predicted that IBM will buy out Motorola's stake in the 50-50 joint venture, which is based in Lincolnshire, Ill.
But that is only one of three options being considered, said Frank Wapole, Ardis' president.
He said it is equally possible that Motorola will purchase IBM's stake, or that the companies will both remain owners, but modify their relationship in some way.
"One of those three is going to be right, but I'm assuming it's going to take months," Mr. Wapole said.
A Motorola spokeswoman said the company would not comment on any talks or whether it wanted to sell its Ardis stake, a notion she dismissed as speculative.
A spokesman for IBM confirmed that the talks are taking place, but would not disclose details.
Ardis, announced with considerable fanfare in 1990, sprung from an internal IBM communications network that the company's computer service technicians use to send wireless messages from the field.
It originally required proprietary hand-held terminals, though new radio modems for Ardis are being developed for standard notebook computers and other devices.
But Ardis is unprofitable and is not being used by many of the mobile professionals it covets, market analysts say.
Though the service leads the new market with about 40,000 users, most of those are blue-collar service or sales personnel for large companies such as Pitney Bowes Inc. and Otis Elevator Co.
It already has one serious rival in RAM Mobile Data, a venture of BellSouth Corp. and RAM Broadcasting Corp.
"Last year Ardis' growth was flat," said Alan Reiter, editor of Mobile Data Report, a newsletter in Alexandria, Va.
"In an industry that is considered one of the hottest in telecommunications, one of the major players didn't experience any net growth."
That could change as smaller communications devices arrive, and assuming Ardis continues with plans to boost the transmission speed of its network.
Mr. Wapole of Ardis said IBM is most concerned about serving large corporate customers, while Motorola wants to use Envoy and other products to reach a broader audience of mobile users.
"That's what we are down to -- is where do you expand to serve the two different types of customers," he said.
