Lawyers for American Tobacco Co. are seeking access to the membership list of a computer network used by antismoking groups to plot strategies against the tobacco industry.
The legal action is believed to be the first time a network's records have been pursued.
The case could have a chilling effect on the development and use of networks, communications law specialists say.
Legal battles over the protection of electronic communications are expected to become increasingly common as the so-called information superhighway develops.
The subpoena for the membership list was issued earlier this month after the network was mentioned in a deposition in a wrongful-death lawsuit filed by a smoker's widow against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. and American Tobacco.
The subpoena is part of the pretrial fact-finding process in the case.
Yesterday, attorneys for the Advocacy Institute, which helped organize the antismoking movement, filed papers seeking to quash the subpoena on the grounds that the information sought is protected by the First Amendment and that its disclosure could lead to harassment of the network's members.
Attorneys for American Tobacco agreed to postpone pursuing the subpoena until next month, after a U.S. District Court judge rules on whether the wrongful-death case should go forward.
The cigarette companies declined to comment.
The private network, called SCARCNet, or the Smoking Control Advocacy Resource Network, has been a thorn in the industry's side since it was established in 1990.
It holds daily strategy sessions on the latest tobacco news, complete with suggested sound bites for the media.
It also provides its 200 members -- who include health officials -- with a rich array of resources, including copies of antismoking legislation to propose in their cities and the biographies and likely arguments of tobacco industry lobbyists.
When Philip Morris Cos. sponsored a tour of the original Bill of Rights in 1990, antismoking advocates used the network to dog the tour at every stop, with suggested protests and slogans.
"It's like a bothersome gnat on a summer evening," says Walker Merryman, a Tobacco Institute spokesman.
"It serves a very vital function" for the opposition.
Based on SCARCNet's success in knitting the antismoking movement into a unified force, alcohol-control activists recently set up ALCNet; gun-control proponents also are considering a network.
Operators of SCARCNet say the network would be jeopardized if forced to divulge the information sought.
"It's clearly a fundamental challenge to the integrity of the network," says Michael Pertschuk, co-director of the Advocacy Institute.
"It is very threatening."
Mr. Pertschuk, a former Federal Trade Commission chairman, said, "It will be very hard for us to open up a dialogue with folks working on issues like gun control if it appears that the National Rifle Association could gain access to their communication system."
Legal experts say many networks would suffer setbacks if SCARCNet operators are forced to comply with the far-reaching subpoena, which also demands the names of those funding the network and copies of all posted strategy sessions.
"If this subpoena is not quashed, the prospects for confidential private networks are diminished," said Marc Rotenberg, a law professor at Georgetown University Law Center and the director of Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility.
"If these new computer networks are going to develop and permit the type of frank discussion that SCARCNet is trying to encourage, then we need to ensure that the underlying constitutional principles are going to be carried forward into the information age."
C. Thomas Dienes, professor of law at the National Law Center at George Washington University, said, "Suppose you had a forum on homosexuality and had to turn over everyone who participated.
People would be much more reluctant to participate."
Prof. Dienes says new rules are needed each time a new medium of communication develops, such as cable television.
"Now that we have this electronic superhighway, we will have to craft new rules about how the First Amendment should be applied," he said.
Lawyers for the American Tobacco wouldn't discuss why they were seeking information on the computer network.
Tobacco industry executives speculated that the network exchanges would be helpful if they included discussions of medical research that was inconclusive about the health consequences of smoking.
David C. Vladeck, director of the Public Citizen Litigation Group, who is representing the Advocacy Institute in the case, said the Supreme Court ruled in 1958 that there are constitutional guarantees covering the freedom of association that protect advocacy groups from having to turn over membership lists.
In that case, Alabama tried to force the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People to turn over its list of members in the state.
"Our submission is that our deliberations as they take place on-line and the identity of the members are no different than the membership list of the NAACP," said Mr. Vladeck.
This legal challenge comes as activists are becoming increasingly enamored of on-line communications.
In California, for instance, a foundation recently financed a project on reducing violence that included grants to buy computers and modems for up to 300 people to establish a violence-prevention computer network.
"The other side uses it," says Andrew McGuire, executive director of the Pacific Center for Violence Prevention, the group working to establish the network.
The NRA's Institute for Legislative Action runs GUN-TALK, an on-line service that updates its members on pending legislation.
"We think it's valuable," says Tanya K. Metaksa, executive director of the NRA's institute.
"We see computer networking as a very powerful tool for leveling the playing field in policy conflicts, which pit institutions with substantial resources against grass-roots citizens groups," said Mr. Pertschuk of the Advocacy Institute.
"Until SCARCNet came along, the tobacco control movement resembled a very unruly flock of geese flying into each other and biting each other's tail."
Now, "they tend to take off in the same general direction and land in the same place."
A New Jersey court held that so-called rent-to-own transactions are a form of credit sale subject to tough consumer-lending laws, in a blow to companies that rent goods to consumers with the option to buy.
The trial-court ruling, which is expected to be appealed, would subject rent-to-own operators in New Jersey to new regulations, including state usury laws that regulate consumer interest rates.
It follows a similar decision by Wisconsin's highest court earlier this month.
Courts in some other states have reached the opposite conclusion.
The rent-to-own industry has been criticized by various consumer groups across the country who contend that its business practices take advantage of the poor.
Under a typical rent-to-own transaction, renters who make weekly or monthly payments -- usually for a year and a half -- become owners.
Customers who make every installment may end up paying several times the item's retail value.
In the New Jersey case, the plaintiffs had alleged that the defendant, Continental Rentals, had charged effective interest rates ranging from 71% to 148%, and that one of the plaintiffs had made rental payments of $3,335.86 covering merchandise with a cash price of $2,785.12 -- and still had her furnishings repossessed by the company.
"It is appropriate to penetrate the technique and reach the economic verity of the transaction," Passaic County Superior Court Judge Herbert Alterman held in a decision released yesterday.
"The substance of these agreements requires that they be viewed as sales agreements, not leases."
In ruling on motions for summary judgment in the case, Judge Alterman held that various consumer credit laws, including the federal Truth-in-Lending Act, the New Jersey Retail Installment Sales Act and the New Jersey Consumer Fraud Act, all applied to the defendant in the case, Continental Rentals.
The judge also held that the company had charged interest that was in excess of the state limit of 30% a year, and that the interest charged represented an "unconscionable practice."
"Obviously, we aren't too happy with it," Victor Rabbat, a Totowa, N.J., lawyer for Continental, said of the ruling.
Mr. Rabbat said the company, a locally owned concern with offices in Patterson and Passaic, N.J., would appeal.
Bill Keese, executive director of the Association of Progressive Rental Organizations, an Austin, Texas, trade group for rent-to-own companies, said, "This ruling flies in the face of 36 state legislatures and several court decisions."
The industry has backed laws in that number of states that impose certain rules on operators and which recognize rent-to-own transactions as distinct from sales.
The industry position is that rent-to-own deals aren't credit sales -- and therefore aren't subject to interest-rate regulations -- because most customers don't ultimately buy the product and can cancel at any time.
(Green vs. Continental Rentals, N.J. Superior Court, Passaic County, No.
L 3182-90.)
DNA "fingerprinting" can be used as evidence in criminal cases, New York's highest court ruled.
The ruling endorses the use of genetic profiles -- taken from blood or hair samples, for instance -- to link a defendant to evidence taken at a crime scene.
Although each person has a unique genetic makeup, critics of the process argue that false matches occur because of lab errors and individuals' similar genetic patterns.
In its first ruling on DNA evidence in criminal cases, New York's high court said, "DNA profiling evidence is generally accepted as reliable by the relevant scientific community."
The case before the Court of Appeals involved the 1989 murder and rape conviction of George Wesley in one of the first cases in the nation that cited DNA evidence.
The high court, in a 3-2 decision, also found that DNA evidence met sufficient scientific standards at the time of the trial.
In a separate opinion, two of the high court's judges, including Chief Judge Judith Kaye, affirmed the conviction based on other evidence while finding that DNA evidence at the time hadn't gained general acceptance in the scientific community.
But the concurring opinion said that such evidence "is today generally accepted as reliable."
A growing focus in the debate over DNA evidence concerns what standards to use in evaluating the evidence.
Prof. Barry Scheck, a professor at Cardozo Law School, said the high courts of several states have recommended that tougher standards be adopted to protect against potential errors.
(The People vs. George Wesley, New York Court of Appeals, 3 No. 18.)
Law Notes . . . .
NOTED: Former U.S. Trade Representative Carla Anderson Hills and her husband, former Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Roderick Hills, will become partners in the Washington office of the 300-attorney New York law firm Mudge, Rose, Guthrie, Alexander & Ferdon, effective April 1.
They were partners at the New York law firm Shea & Gould, which decided in January to disband.
Ms. Hills will remain head of the international consulting group Hills & Co., which will "work closely with Mudge Rose on international matters," the law firm said.
Richard B. Schmitt and Wade Lambert contributed to this article.
