The Small Business Administration is moving to curb abuses in its venture-capital program.
But it wants more help from Congress.
SBA officials say they will press lawmakers to pass legislation to bar failing small business investment companies, or SBICs, from escaping debts owed to the government by declaring bankruptcy.
"We want Congress to act because we've found ourselves waiting at the gate too many times when licensees rushed to bankruptcy court," Robert Stillman, the SBA's new associate administrator for investment, said in an interview.
The Senate plans to consider legislation this year to close the bankruptcy loophole, but so far there isn't any matching bill in the House.
Meanwhile, SBA officials say, the agency plans to begin a revamped SBIC program, including closer scrutiny of applicants, under reforms passed by Congress in 1992.
The reforms had been delayed because of the impasse over the bankruptcy legislation.
Under the SBIC program, privately owned firms use a combination of federally guaranteed debt and private capital to help finance small businesses.
Problems arose in the program in the late 1980s when scores of SBICs failed because of the recession and poor management.
Although the SBA sold companies' remaining assets, taxpayers were left holding the bag for hundreds of millions of dollars of failed SBIC investments, leading Congress to pass a program reform law in 1992.
But in 14 of the cases, fast-moving entrepreneurs filed for bankruptcy before the SBA could claim any assets.
Because the government is a subordinate debtor according to the law that established the program, more than $70 million of federal debt owed by the investment firms is likely to be wiped out.
In one of the most serious cases, River Capital Corp. of Springfield, Va., spent $28 million in government funds on bad investments and filed for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code.
The court eliminated its debt.
The Senate passed legislation last year to bar SBICs from seeking bankruptcy protection from government debts, but a companion measure died in the House.
Sen. Dale Bumpers, the Arkansas Democrat who heads the Small Business Committee, says he plans to try again to pass the bill.
But the outlook is uncertain in the House, where legislation last year failed to win the backing of Rep. Jack Brooks, the House Judiciary Committee chairman.
Congressional aides won't speculate on why the provision didn't pass muster with Mr. Brooks or whether he will back a measure this year.
But other industry and government officials believe the Texas Democrat may propose and back the bankruptcy ban this year because the ban would technically add a bit of revenue to the federal budget.
Regardless of how the legislative differences are worked out, the SBA is now preparing to upgrade standards for licensing SBIC applicants.
"We're going to license very hard," SBA Administrator Erskine Bowles said in an interview.
"We'll only license highly experienced venture capitalists, and we'll make sure those people bring enough private capital into the companies."
A new licensing unit in the SBA's investment division will be responsible for the more intense scrutiny of applicants.
The agency already has received preliminary applications for the reformed SBIC program, but Mr. Stillman said he is returning them until the final regulations are published so applicants can carefully scrutinize the new rules.
In a speech to a group of SBIC executives earlier this month, Mr. Stillman, who spent more than 30 years as a principal with Wall Street investment firms, said that quality of management will be a key to an SBIC's future success.
"I like to say I've only made one mistake in my entire career, and that was the serious one of sometimes investing in the wrong people," he added in the interview.
Under the reforms passed by Congress in 1992, the SBIC program is now attracting increased interest because of a change in how the federal support is structured.
In the original program, created in 1958 to encourage financial backing for high-risk ventures, investment companies got government funds through debentures which, like loans, require regular interest payments.
Thus, the licensees often borrowed additional money to make interest payments while waiting for their basic investments to mature.
Venture-capital investments typically take years to produce dividends or profits for their financial backers.
The new program will allow investors to use a new debt instrument called a participating security that some believe is better suited to long-term investments.
The government, through the SBA, will hold a participating-security interest in the SBICs.
That means the government won't be repaid until the investment company has retained earnings from its investments and is paying dividends to all its investors.
Uncle Sam will also get a small share of profits from the SBIC's investments.
Fixing the SBIC program's remaining problems has taken on new importance.
As reported, the Clinton administration's proposed budget for fiscal year 1995, which begins next Oct. 1, would more than double the loan funds available to the investment firms.
The SBA expects to license about 200 new SBICs, raising the total to 480 from 280 currently, with a combined total of private investment capital of $2.3 billion.
Because those companies can gain double their private capital in government investment funds, Mr. Stillman said the companies will have access to about $4.5 billion in government investment dollars.
That nearly $7 billion in new venture-capital money available in fiscal 1995 would be in addition to the $3 billion now in the program, meaning the total capital available through the program would jump to $10 billion from $3 billion.
