Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, appeared on state television for the first time in more than a year, advocating even faster growth for Shanghai's booming economy.
Mr. Deng, now 89 years old, appeared frail and at times unaware as he toured sites in Shanghai.
But television showed him walking and shaking hands with party and government officials, indicating that last year's scattered reports of his imminent demise were premature.
Chinese and many foreign investors in China pay close attention to reports of Mr. Deng's health because the authoritarian regime has no clear or popularly sanctioned plan of succession.
Some believe the stability of the country and the future of China's economic reforms depend on his personal control of the Communist Party and the military.
Mr. Deng no longer makes public appearances, and even shots of him on television now come no more than once a year.
State television showed the senior leader meeting with Shanghai Mayor Huang Ju, Wu Bangguo, Shanghai's Communist Party chief and other local officials.
In comments attributed to him by an announcer, he said, "The Shanghai people have a special quality and character.
I think Shanghai has good conditions to be developed faster."
In 1993, Shanghai's economy grew at the breakneck rate of 15%, slightly above the national average.
Mr. Deng has been quoted consistently as recommending faster economic growth, even as other Chinese leaders fret about rising inflation, structural imbalances, a growing trade deficit and currency reform, all of which they say are difficult to solve unless China returns to a more even and sustainable rate of growth.
China watchers have suggested that Mr. Deng, thinking of his legacy, is eager to develop China as quickly as possible before his death.
As evidence of the division within China on the issue of economic reform, Mr. Deng's appearance on the broadcast was juxtaposed with another senior leader, Chen Yun, who greeted the same Shanghai officials.
The 88-year-old Mr. Chen, a veteran economist, is known for his theory of "bird-cage" economics, in which market reforms take place only within the "cage" of a central plan.
That contrasts with Mr. Deng's heartier embrace of a free market.
In his comments, Mr. Chen praised Shanghai's development, but had words of caution.
"Special attention should be paid to keeping the scale of construction compatible with the country's economic capability," Mr. Chen was quoted as saying.
Communist elders regularly are shown on television during the Lunar New Year to pass along their greetings.
Mr. Deng, however, has visited Shanghai during the holiday each year since 1988 and normally receives exclusive coverage on New Year's Eve.
This time, not only did he share the TV time, but Mr. Chen's words of advice on the economy were quoted more extensively than Mr. Deng's.
Mr. Deng retired from his last official government post in 1990 and now spends most of his time in seclusion.
But his trip through southern China and Shanghai in 1992, when he praised China's fastest growing regions and openly scorned conservative leaders in other areas, unleashed a frantic round of domestic and foreign investment that has kept economic growth above 13% to this day.
Day-to-day economic management is now in the hands of Executive Vice Premier Zhu Rongji, who is viewed as favoring fast and thorough reform.
