Offering a minimally reassuring progress report, German conglomerate Metallgesellschaft AG said losses from its oil-trading positions shouldn't exceed the 1.5 billion marks ($859.8 million) previously estimated.
Metallgesellschaft, which was pulled from the brink of bankruptcy earlier this month by a 3.4 billion-mark rescue plan, indicated yesterday that it was making headway in reducing its exposure to oil markets -- one of the main factors in the company's crisis.
In a terse seven-line statement, Metallgesellschaft said that the unwinding of accumulated oil positions was "proceeding more smoothly than originally expected and that losses had now stabilized at the level initially assumed."
That statement was based on a report by Karl von der Heyden, president of the U.S.-based subsidiary Metallgesellschaft Corp., who came to Frankfurt to update the company's supervisory board.
The troublesome oil contracts had been taken out through the U.S. unit of the company.
Metallgesellschaft spokesman Hans Schreiber declined to say whether Mr. Heyden's statement indicated that losses might be less than originally foreseen.
The statements weren't enough to restore investor confidence in the stock.
Shares in Metallgesellschaft continued their downward spiral, shedding seven marks ($4.01) yesterday to end Frankfurt trading at 232 marks.
Moreover, with management seeking shareholder approval Feb. 22 for a 1.4 billion-mark capital increase through issuing new shares at 250 marks a share, there is an effective technical cap on the shares at that level.
The new management board under Kajo Neukirchen, the turnaround expert who was installed after former Chairman Heinz Schimmelbusch was ousted, has a good deal of credibility with the German business community.
The supervisory board's failure to spot and prevent the company's problems earlier, however, continues to spur debate in German industry circles about whether corporate supervisory bodies -- normally made up of prominent industrialists and bankers -- actually are fulfilling their responsibility of protecting shareholder interests.
People close to the supervisory board confirmed reports that the parent company's auditors, KPMG Deutsche Treuhandgesellschaft, had been asked last fall to carry out a special audit of the U.S. operations.
This request, however, was in response to a routine recommendation by KPMG and, contrary to some published reports, wasn't an indication that the supervisory board knew of possible problems but failed to act decisively enough to head off the crisis, the individuals emphasized.
The KPMG report wasn't completed before the Nov. 19 supervisory board meeting, when Mr. Schimmelbusch's contract was renewed for five years, these people said.
