Songpol Sukchan thought he had figured out a way to cope with Bangkok's legendary traffic jams.
The 32-year-old Foreign Ministry official early last year found a house near his children's schools, sparing them a grueling commute.
He thought he and his wife would be able to cover the 40 kilometers (about 25 miles) between home and their offices in a little more than an hour each way.
What Mr. Songpol didn't count on was that traffic would get worse: Now his 18-kilometer commute has stretched to two hours and 45 minutes in the evening -- though he can make the morning trip in a relatively zippy two hours by leaving the house at 7:30 a.m., after the worst of the morning crush.
"The solution for this is to get up early and leave at 5 a.m. or 5:30 a.m. and leave for home after 7 p.m.," Mr. Songpol sighs as he inches his Honda Civic down an eight-lane thoroughfare.
"But it means I can never see my kids.
Or we can move and the kids have to go on a long bus ride."
Traffic jams in Bangkok have been bad since the 1970s, but after years of steadily worsening congestion even the remarkably patient Thais are finally getting fed up.
Traffic speed averages just eight kilometers an hour, according to a study by the Bangkok government.
Commutes of two or three hours each way are common.
Prosperity is a big part of the problem.
As more and more Thais join the middle class, car sales are booming; an average of around 600 additional vehicles rolled onto the streets of Bangkok each day in last year's fourth quarter.
Politicians also deserve much of the blame.
Although traffic jams have become a big political issue -- and even King Bhumipol pleaded for action last year -- Thai politicians still haven't come up with a clear plan to unclog the streets.
Several mass-transit projects and road-improvement programs continue to languish.
Everyone seems to have a pet horror story about traffic.
Apicharn Wonglert, a 31-year-old bank clerk, says his mother and brother allowed 90 minutes to drive 30 kilometers to his wedding last year.
Even so, they arrived more than two hours late.
The groom arrived on time only by jumping out of a decorated Mercedes and onto a motorcycle taxi -- exposing his tuxedo to swirls of grit and auto exhaust.
On July 31, 1992, a day that has become infamous in Bangkok traffic lore, a rainstorm just before rush hour flooded the streets.
Some children spent 10 hours on school buses to get home.
An American banker recalls waiting an hour just to emerge from a parking lot.
Many drivers now carry food and drink in the car in case of emergency.
To deal with another type of emergency, entrepreneurs have come up with plastic pouches that serve as disposable car toilets -- one of them called E-Z-Pee.
Some executives equip their cars with mobile phones and personal computers so they can work from the car.
For all the moaning, few Thais say they would consider giving up their cars.
Public transportation consists of a battered fleet of buses (mostly without air conditioning) and a few hundred noisy long-tail boats plying the river and canals that weave through the city.
The bus network is extensive and relatively cheap -- about 30 cents a ride -- but taking the bus would add about an hour to Mr. Songpol's commute each way.
Cabinet officials insist that a master plan for Bangkok traffic, promised as early as 1975, will be ready this year.
Meanwhile, often-delayed plans to build elevated rail systems have become a joke.
One project, led by Hong Kong's Hopewell Holdings Ltd., is nicknamed "Hopeless."
That leaves Mr. Songpol stuck in his car.
Bangkok's baffling one-way road system forces him to cover more than twice the distance a crow would fly between his office and home.
He bides his time listening to music or to Thailand's most popular radio broadcast: Kor Jor 100, the traffic-information station.
Some of his friends have given up suburban life and moved to small apartments closer to work.
But Mr. Songpol and his wife feel they need to live near their parents, so they drive on.
On particularly bad nights, they sometimes pull over and dine at a roadside restaurant before making the final crawl home.
On weekends, they stay put.
"We don't see our friends," says Mr. Songpol's wife, Piyachanid.
"If we go to a party, it would mean being out half the night."
