When Liza Dalby was younger and learning to be an anthropologist, she lived among the geisha of Kyoto, for a time working as one herself.
She wrote a book about her experiences called "Geisha," and developed a convenient obsession that has led to "Kimono" (Yale University Press, 384 pages, $30).
Once again Ms. Dalby has a great deal to tell, starting with her contention that clothing and wearer merge in Japan more than in most places.
The kimono remains an important symbol in the debate over Japaneseness that lingers like a bad tooth to be probed by intellectuals, television programs and scholarly journals.
To be sure, many middle-class women seem to take to the role of cultural custodians and are content to wrap themselves in a kimono as an expression of national pride, cultural continuity and conspicuous consumption.
In modern Japan, carrying tradition doesn't come cheaply: A proper kimono with accouterments can cost $6,500; a ready-to-wear ensemble, in polyester, runs about $1,200.
What is it about the kimono that makes Japanese either love it or loathe it?
From its hazy origins in the flowing robes of seventh-century China to its fixed and frozen contemporary version, the kimono has served as a central prop in the saga of defining Japaneseness.
Ms. Dalby, cast as the scholar-story-teller, narrates a still-unfolding drama in which clothes serve as emblems of identity.
Ms. Dalby as storyteller is at her best describing the era when the kimono met its competitor -- Western clothing -- around the middle of the 19th century.
"Only the shock of contrast occasioned by seeing the dress of the outlandish West forced Japanese to define what they themselves really wore," she writes of what happened once Japan's seal was broken by Commodore Perry's fleet, and then when a stream of foreigners arrived in Western garb.
It was only then that the word kimono -- ki means to wear and mono means things -- was brought into service at all: It was only with the knowledge of other ways of dressing that anyone needed a name for the home-grown style.
Not long after, in 1868, came the Meiji Restoration.
Japan embarked on such a heady, successful drive to modernize that many began to identify utterly with the West.
"Out of Asia, into the West" became a slogan and clothes became a symbol of where the wearer stood, for or against Western influence.
At first everyone seemed to embrace Western clothing, or at least a little bit of it held a lot of cachet.
On the streets of Tokyo the most wonderful confabulations were paraded: kimonos with high-button shoes, bowler hats and capes became the rage.
Women abandoned the longstanding fashion of blackening their teeth and took to wearing Gibson Girl-inspired pompadours.
"Infatuation with Western modes was so strong that Empress Haruko proclaimed the kimono a deformity and aberration arising out of Japan's Sinified imperial past," Ms. Dalby goes on.
Even the emperor issued a clothing reform, disavowing the courtly robes as, remarkably, essentially non-Japanese.
Asia's new imperialists posed for photographs in top hats and tails; the emperor donned brocade-drenched and bemedaled military uniforms, fashioned after the French, and the nation's army followed suit.
The price of this headlong infatuation was a permanent crisis of identity.
The kimono reasserted itself, mostly among women and as a sign of tradition rather than fashion.
And as Ms. Dalby makes clear, "The tensions between East and West, old and new were partly relieved by this division of cultural labor, as it were, according to which women took on the role of conservators of tradition."
By 1895, there were plenty of Japanese who had grown disillusioned with the West.
And nationalism, fueled by the Sino-Japanese war, was on the ascendancy.
School girls were re-wrapped in kimonos.
Today, the kimono is mostly dragged out for weddings and funerals, and mostly by women.
There are some, however, who are fed up with this curatorial role.
Earlier this year, around the time the brainy career woman Masako Owada agreed to marry Crown Prince Naruhito, some of the ambivalence, indeed antagonism, inspired by the kimono came to the surface.
Yoko Tajima, a well-known feminist and professor, railed at the TV images of the crown princess-to-be standing, in kimono, with downcast eyes and head cocked to one side.
"Wearing a kimono," said Ms. Tajima, "is not my version of being a Japanese woman.
It represents everything I hate" -- the demure, one-step-behind role.
Unlike Ms. Tajima, or any other Japanese for that matter, Ms. Dalby did not have to choose whether to love or loathe her subject.
Instead, she offers a tour of the cultural collisions that have become part of the fabric not just of the kimono but of modern Japan.
It is a tour well worth taking.
Ms. Scott is a Tokyo-based writer.
