I SLAVED AWAY for 15 months without pay, a former McDonald's trainee says.
Jeffrey Miller, an applicant for a fast-food franchise from McDonald's Corp., accepted what the company calls an "on-the-job evaluation" in 1991.
Mr. Miller, a Rutgers University graduate from Morris Plains, N.J., had run his own small landscaping business.
McDonald's said that if he performed well as a trainee, it "was just a matter of time" before he got a franchise, Mr. Miller recalls in a court document.
But after working as a trainee at several McDonald's units in New Jersey for 15 months, Mr. Miller was rejected for a franchise in 1992.
On top of that, he never received a dime for what he claims was more than 2,700 hours "doing the jobs of managers and crew people."
Mr. Miller, now 35 years old, retained a lawyer to seek compensation from McDonald's.
The company sued first, asking a federal court in Newark, N.J., to rule that he isn't entitled to any pay.
In a counterclaim, Mr. Miller sought unspecified damages against McDonald's, partly for what he says was his wrongful termination from the training program.
He also contends that his duties as a trainee are covered by New Jersey's minimum-wage law for employees.
A pretrial hearing in the case is expected March 28.
In court papers, Mr. Miller maintains that McDonald's gave him positive evaluations until he began complaining about cockroaches and rats at a franchiser-owned unit in New Providence, N.J.
He says he also expressed shock at "improper procedures" used to handle food there.
"However, I was looked on as a complainer trying to `rock the boat' and hurt the store's `bottom money line,'" he alleges in the court documents.
At one point, his documents say, Mr. Miller almost got a franchise when McDonald's sent a preliminary franchise agreement for him to sign and requested a $4,000 downpayment.
But the company later told him it had sent the document by mistake, Mr. Miller claims.
In Oak Brook, Ill., spokesman Charles E. Ebeling says McDonald's never pays prospective franchisees from outside the company when they undergo training.
Mr. Miller knew this all along, the spokesman adds.
Mr. Ebeling says McDonald's determined that Mr. Miller wasn't qualified to operate a franchise but declines to explain further.
McDonald's says the New Providence unit meets health standards and always has done so.
It says Mr. Miller's complaints about the unit involved matters that he was responsible for handling as a trainee.
A LICENSING ISSUE fires up some FireMaster franchisees.
James K. Reynolds, an Emeryville, Calif., franchisee of Master Protection Corp.'s FireMaster fire-protection chain, says he complained to California's Contractor State License Board last November that many FireMaster franchisees were operating without required licenses to service sprinkler systems.
He says these franchisees thought they didn't need separate licenses as long as the franchiser had one.
Mr. Reynolds says he also raised the issue with the franchiser -- but got nowhere.
Last month, Mr. Reynolds and San Jose franchisee Donald R. Corral began soliciting support for their complaint by writing to other California franchisees.
It's all a false alarm, insists Master Protection, based in Los Angeles.
"We are diligently working with the state to make sure we are in compliance," says Robert L. Wiles, the firm's president.
A state official confirms only that he has discussed the issue with the company.
The chain has about 400 franchisees -- including more than 80 in California (although only a minority work on sprinklers).
Meanwhile, Mr. Corral says he has obtained the required license for his own company, named FirElectric.
But the license requires him to do business under that name rather than FireMaster's.
Mr. Corral says he has dropped the FireMaster name from his truck and his business cards.
Though many other franchise chains would blanch at the erosion of their names, Mr. Wiles says he doesn't mind if franchisees now switch business names.
But the implications could be more serious.
Mr. Corral, for instance, plans to terminate his franchise next month -- saying it now makes sense for him to be completely independent.
Long disgruntled with the chain, he says the licensing flap catalyzed his decision to leave.
Legal experts say some franchisers wrongly assume that their own business licenses also cover similar activities by franchisees.
LIONS AND LAMBS?
A franchiser group wants more franchisees.
The International Franchise Association, the lobbying group for more than 700 franchisers, began to enroll franchisee groups and individual franchisees as members last November.
It now claims to represent nearly 6,500 franchisees.
Last month, the IFA announced an even more ambitious goal: to represent 200,000 franchisees by the year 2000.
"We're going to promote the franchising business in general, not just from the franchiser perspective," says Andy Trincia, an IFA spokesman in Washington, D.C.
But will the IFA dilute its ability to lobby on behalf of franchisers?
The National Restaurant Association avoids taking positions on franchising issues because both franchisers and franchisees belong.
"If we took any position, we'd inevitably alienate and offend either the franchisers or the franchisees among our members," says spokeswoman Wendy Webster.
The IFA says it's too early to tell how its recruitment of franchisees will affect its lobbying positions.
SYNERGY DEPT.: To help attract children to its sports-apparel chain, Pro Image Inc., a Bountiful, Utah, unit of Rentrak Corp., plans to test soft-drink bars in about a dozen U.S. stores.
Rentrak says bar TV sets will show only special sports shows provided free by ABC Sports.
The Capital Cities/ABC Inc. unit also will provide a line of apparel sold in the stores.
BRIEFS: Beginning next month, Little Gym International Inc., Kirkland, Wash., plans to offer mobile gymnastics franchises, with start-up costs of about $35,000, compared with $100,000 for regular franchises. . . .
On average, 297 U.S.-based franchisers expect 8.5% growth this year in the numbers of units in their chains, concludes an industry survey conducted by the University of Louisville.
