Deloitte & Touche, an accounting firm, is close to an agreement with federal regulators to pay more than $300 million to resolve charges related to its work for failed thrifts, people familiar with the discussions say.
If an agreement becomes final, it will be the second-largest settlement the government has secured in its efforts to punish professionals who provided services to savings and loans that later collapsed.
The only larger settlement was a November 1992 accord with Ernst & Young, the nation's second-largest accounting firm, which paid $400 million to resolve government claims.
Deloitte through its predecessor firms, Deloitte, Haskins & Sells and Touche Ross & Co., performed auditing services for institutions that became some of the costliest S&L failures, including Western Savings & Loan Association, formerly of Phoenix, Ariz., and Miami-based CenTrust Bank.
The Resolution Trust Corp. has 15 lawsuits pending against the firm, while the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. has three suits pending against it, including an action arising from the 1986 failure of FirstSouth Savings & Loan Association of Pine Bluff, Ark.
In all, claims against Deloitte by the two agencies total more than $1.4 billion.
The claims generally allege various counts of malpractice, including allegations that Deloitte, the nation's third-largest accounting firm, issued clean audit opinions to deeply insolvent institutions.
The proposed $300 million agreement would resolve the lawsuits as part of an umbrella settlement, according to the people familiar with the talks.
They also said it was likely that the federal Office of Thrift Supervision would be party to the agreement.
In previous suits against professionals, the OTS has obtained various agreements that require firms to improve training and supervision of partners in the handling of bank and thrift work.
The three federal agencies declined to comment, saying there wasn't any agreement to be announced at this time.
J. Michael Cook, Deloitte chairman, and Howard Krongard, general counsel, said reports of a settlement aren't accurate.
The two sides have been in on-again, off-again negotiations about resolving the litigation for more than a year, and some people close to the transaction said the talks could still break down.
Nonetheless, people familiar with the talks say, Deloitte and the regulators are hoping to complete an accord as soon as next week, with the primary obstacle being the accounting firm's ability to complete an agreement with its insurers over funding the settlement.
In addition, Deloitte is under some pressure to resolve the huge claim because of concerns that the cloud of liability is frightening away potential audit clients.
While the bulk of the agreement would be covered by insurance, such a settlement probably would still be costly to Deloitte's more than 1,400 partners.
Like most of the other Big Six accounting firms, the major portion of Deloitte's liability coverage is provided by Lloyd's of London, which last year sharply limited such coverage because of huge losses.
Under the new limits, accounting firms must pay the first $50 million of each claim themselves.
Previously, the $50 million deductible covered all malpractice claims against any one firm in a single year.
Deloitte has partnership capital of more than $450 million.
Moreover, Deloitte faces some other legal liabilities.
In November, the firm was hit with a $77 million punitive-damage verdict in a Texas court.
In that case, a jury found that the firm had been grossly negligent in helping prepare tax returns for a cattle partnership that claimed certain questionable deductions on grazing pastures.
Deloitte officials declined comment on this case.
Arthur Andersen & Co., the biggest U.S. accounting firm, in August paid $65 million to settle government charges of professional negligence in its audits of failed financial institutions.
KPMG Peat Marwick, the fourth-biggest U.S. acounting firm, is still trying to negotiate with the government a settlement of similar claims.
