A federal jury handed a victory to Advanced Micro Devices Inc. in the retrial of a copyright battle with Intel Corp., a ruling that could accelerate price-cutting on microprocessor chips and personal computers.
The jury unanimously upheld AMD's contention that a 1976 technology-sharing agreement between the companies allows AMD to make chips by copying Intel microcode, a form of software that is embedded in microprocessors.
The ruling reverses a 1992 jury verdict in Intel's favor in the same copyright-infringement case, which was filed by Intel in 1990 over AMD's version of a mathematics accessory chip called the 287.
AMD's victory removes a major legal cloud over its later 386 and 486 clones of Intel's chip technology, which is the standard for about 85% of all personal computers sold.
Though AMD was already selling those chips, many potential customers were awaiting a verdict before buying from the company.
The ruling is also likely to encourage chip manufacturers to build 486 chips to order for AMD, which has been hobbled by a shortage of manufacturing capacity, analysts said.
After a temporary halt in trading yesterday, AMD rose $6.125, or 27%, to $28.875 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Intel fell $1.50, or 2.1%, to $70.125 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
"This is the first time in 9 1/2 years that we feel we are free to pursue our business with only minimal harassment from Intel," said W.J. Sanders, AMD chief executive.
"It took nine people only 9 1/2 hours to bring in a verdict that will change the entire personal-computer market."
Intel said it would immediately appeal the verdict, and press ahead with three remaining cases that focus on AMD's chips.
Intel could have been awarded hundreds of millions of dollars in damages if it had prevailed.
"There was a big upside potential for Intel, and I'm sorry we lost," said F. Thomas Dunlap, Intel general counsel.
But he argued that the case has limited immediate effect on the market.
"They were shipping their products when I woke up this morning and they are still shipping them now."
Among the unsettled issues: Intel contends AMD's rights to use Intel's copyrighted microcode only last until the end of 1995, when the accord expires.
AMD argues that it owns permanent rights to copyrights awarded Intel until that date.
As a result, Mr. Sanders said AMD will continue to sell 486 chips with Intel's internal software.
"We are absolutely going to be selling Intel microcode and we will do that forever," he said.
But the company also will keep developing its own microcode for 486 versions and other chips so that it can further differentiate its products in the future.
Mr. Sanders said the first purely AMD-designed chip will be the K5, a competitor to Intel's Pentium chip that is expected to ship in sample quantities by the end of the year.
In addition, Mr. Sanders said the company is experiencing better-than-expected production yields on 486 chips, and so will be able to ship more than 900,000 of them in the quarter, up from an earlier prediction of 700,000 units.
With an average selling price of $200 each, the increased production schedule would bring in about $40 million in added revenue.
Eli Sayegh, an analyst at Hancock Institutional Equity Services, expects the verdict will inspire at least one manufacturing partner to sign up with AMD, probably a large Japanese company.
With greater price competition from AMD, Mr. Sayegh predicted that Intel's gross profit margins would decline from their lofty level of 60.9% in the fourth quarter.
Analysts said the ruling could have an unintended positive effect for Intel, by adding price competition that will make its technology more attractive against the new PowerPC chip from International Business Machines Corp., Motorola Inc. and Apple Computer Inc.
The verdict ends a key round of Silicon Valley's nastiest legal brawl, which began in 1987 when a longtime partnership between the companies collapsed amid recriminations.
Mr. Sanders charged that Intel has abused the legal process by filing suits against competitors that have drained their coffers, even though Intel has ultimately lost most of them.
He estimated AMD spent more than $100 million defending the 287 case alone.
Mr. Dunlap responded that the company will continue to protect its rights when competitors take its intellectual property, rather than compete fairly by using their own technology.
"They don't have to copy our microcode."
The 1976 technology-sharing agreement gave AMD the right to use "microcodes contained in Intel microcomputers and peripheral products."
That phrase became the crux of the copyright infringement case: Intel argued that "microcomputers" and "peripherals" referred to Intel computer systems used to help develop software at that time; AMD claims the term referred to microprocessors and companion chips, such as the 287.
Intel won over a jury the first time around.
But U.S. District Judge William Ingram threw out that verdict in the spring of 1993, ruling that Intel had withheld internal documents that could be seen as corporate admissions that AMD's rights extended to microchips.
More battles remain.
In addition to appealing the current verdict, Intel has filed suits over AMD's 386 and 486 microprocessors.
Microcode is the key issue in those cases as well, though Intel included some other copyright infringement claims that AMD must confront.
AMD is also appealing an arbitration ruling involving the 386 chip to the California Supreme Court.
Analysts differ about Intel's chances on the remaining litigation.
Mr. Sayegh said the 287 verdict makes the other cases moot, but others aren't so sure.
"I don't think we'll see a final resolution for years," said Michael Slater, publisher of Microprocessor Report, an industry newsletter.
