World oil prices plunged as a result of the weekend decision by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to leave production levels unchanged.
A price drop had been expected, although the fall of more than $1 a barrel for some crudes yesterday was sharper than generally anticipated by many analysts and traders.
Still, the declines came as no surprise to most of the oil ministers.
"We expected a temporary drop of as much as $1 or $2," Ali Ahmad Al-Baghli, Kuwait's oil minister, said in an interview late yesterday.
He and several other oil ministers maintain that rising oil demand should firm up prices later this year.
Yesterday marked the first day oil markets could react to the meeting that ended here Saturday night, freezing OPEC output at the current rate of nearly 25 million barrels a day for the rest of the year.
Several oil ministers as well as many in the oil industry had wanted OPEC output cuts at least for the second quarter, normally the year's low period for oil demand.
Among oil traders, as a result, "there was the usual disappointment for those who had taken the view OPEC would cut production," said Peter Gignoux, senior vice president for the Smith Barney Shearson petroleum desk in London.
Whatever the reason, a sell-off in world oil markets was clearly under way as soon as trading opened yesterday.
As prices dropped, they broke through psychologically important levels, triggering further declines.
At the close of trading on London's International Petroleum Exchange, futures prices for North Sea Brent blend crudes were down 65 cents to $1.08 a barrel.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, where prices had jumped slightly Friday on reports that OPEC was discussing production cuts of as much as 6%, the sell-off was even more severe.
In heavy trading, the futures price for crude oil for May delivery fell below the psychologically important level of $14 a barrel and near the five-year low of $13.75 before recovering somewhat.
The May crude settled at $14.08 a barrel, down $1.05 for the day.
Victor Yu, an analyst with Nikkhah Energy Group of Refco Inc., New York, said that until the Friday reports the consensus had been that OPEC wouldn't reduce production.
But now there are fears of another oil glut.
"It looks like OPEC will overproduce one million barrels a day in the second quarter," he said.
Although most of the oil ministers had departed Geneva by yesterday, Abdullah bin Hamad Al-Attiyah, Qatar's oil minister who is also OPEC's president, was still here.
He said there wasn't any chance of OPEC convening an emergency meeting even if oil prices fell further.
What's more, he said he would attempt to keep the issue of production quotas off the agenda at the OPEC midyear conference that begins June 15 in Vienna.
In Tehran, meanwhile, Gholamreza Aghazadeh, the Iranian oil minister, blamed Saudi Arabia for OPEC's "unrealistic" decision.
Saudi Arabia's oil minister, Hisham Nazer, had made clear from the start of the Geneva meeting that the kingdom wouldn't reduce its output regardless of what the others did.
GRAINS AND LIVESTOCK: Grain prices rose amid continuing dry weather in the Southern Plains wheat belt and signs that hogs will have a big appetite for corn this year.
In trading at the Kansas City Board of Trade, the wheat contract for May delivery rose 5.75 cents a bushel to settle at $3.3525.
Prices rose because anticipated rain didn't generate as much moisture over the weekend as expected.
Dry weather in Kansas, the biggest wheat producing state, is a concern because the hard red winter wheat crop there demands more water as it comes out of winter dormancy.
"We're hurting for moisture," said Jim Bosley, vice president of Wolcott & Lincoln Inc., a grain handler and brokerage concern.
Some traders said they will begin to trim their Kansas wheat harvest forecasts in mid-April if significant moisture doesn't materialize by then.
Corn and soybean prices rose in the wake of the release Friday of a government survey that found a bigger-than-expected hog population.
Swine eat much of the Midwest corn crop.
The Agriculture Department said the U.S. hog inventory on March 1 was down 2% from the year-earlier date.
Traders had expected hog numbers to drop 3% or more in the wake of the big winter rally in grain prices, which increased the expense of feeding livestock.
The Agriculture Department said there were 55.6 million hogs on U.S. farms on March 1.
