Stepping up pressure to force a closing of its $5 billion buyout agreement, UAL Corp. said it planned to withhold promised severance payments to some members of its machinists union, which last week threw a wrench in the big transaction.
Last Tuesday, the two parties, along with the pilots union, failed to meet a deadline for signing a definitive agreement on the concession-for-equity transaction.
That was because the machinists balked, claiming that United Airlines' management and noncontract employees weren't equitably contributing concessions.
In exchange for wage cuts and work-rule changes, union and noncontract employees of United Airlines would receive a majority stake in UAL, the airline's parent company.
Because the deadline had passed, UAL had the right to cancel parts of the preliminary buyout agreement the parties agreed to last December.
One of those parts involved the payment of about $50 million in severance and other employee benefits, according to a recent filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The payments were to have been made to more than 5,000 catering-service employees, who are machinists union members and who are losing their jobs at United because their division has been sold.
Even after subtracting those employees, the International Association of Machinists will remain United's largest union, with roughly 22,000 members in jobs ranging from mechanics to ground crews.
The buyout measure has been broadly unpopular among that union's members, who only narrowly ratified it, with 56% voting in favor.
UAL's stock fell $1.50 to $127.625 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange Friday.
For months, the stock has stayed well below the value of the buyout price, which offers a package of cash and securities the unions value at $173 a share.
That reflects continued skepticism about whether this employee buyout at United will succeed, when several previous ones failed, and the fact that any deal, and potential investor return, isn't expected until late summer.
United's reversal on the severance-payment issue was viewed by the machinists as a first step in a campaign to pressure them into finalizing the buyout agreement.
Other controversial moves United has previously said it might make, and which it is now free to pursue, include the sale of engine-maintenance operations, and contracting out jobs.
The machinists and pilots unions worked hard to complete the initial buyout agreement last December precisely to prevent UAL from proceeding with those kind of job-threatening actions.
The machinists and United wouldn't comment on the severance-payment issue.
Before they consent to a deal, the machinists want United's current employees to take bigger paycuts, and to rely less on a new program that pays new hires lower wages and benefits.
The company has suggested it plans to use both those programs to generate the $509 million in concessions that the nonunion employees have pledged in the buyout.
