Who's running H.J. Heinz Co.?
A very busy global publishing tycoon, that's who.
Anthony J.F. O'Reilly, Heinz's chairman, president and chief executive, has expanded his private newspaper empire in recent weeks with major acquisitions in England and South Africa.
Meanwhile, back in Pittsburgh, Heinz is struggling.
The $7 billion food company is stuck with a collection of mature, slow-growth brands, including ketchup, Ore-Ida frozen potatoes, 9 Lives pet food and Weight Watchers frozen foods.
Bad weather and the Los Angeles earthquake have hurt its Weight Watchers food and diet-class businesses, frustrating an expensive marketing campaign.
Heinz is also being pummeled by adverse foreign currency translations -- last year, 43% of its sales came from outside the U.S. -- and it will have fewer overseas tax credits this year.
Many analysts are lowering earnings estimates for the fiscal third quarter -- results will be reported next Tuesday -- and expect operating profit for the fiscal year that ends in April to be at least 8% lower than the year before.
"They should take more costs out of the system and decide whether they should stay in some of the businesses they're in," says Steve Galbraith, an analyst with Sanford Bernstein & Co.
"Perhaps O'Reilly's efforts should be focused exclusively on the company."
But the 57-year-old Mr. O'Reilly is the largest newspaper publisher in Ireland, his homeland, where he first made his name as a rugby star.
And a lot has been happening recently at the Dublin newspaper company, Independent Newspapers PLC, in which he has a 27% stake.
Last month, the company acquired 24.99% of England's Newspaper Publishing PLC and agreed to buy 31% of Argus Newspapers, the largest newspaper group in South Africa.
It also gobbled up a company that publishes 14 weekly newspapers in north London, adding to its collection of nine urban weeklies.
Liam Healy, Independent Newspapers' chief executive, says the company wants to expand in Australia, where it owns 25% of Australian Provincial Newspapers, the country's fourth-largest newspaper publisher.
(The O'Reilly family trust owns 30% of APN, and Mr. O'Reilly's son, Cameron, is a top executive of the company.)
Mr. O'Reilly, who joined Heinz's U.K. unit in 1969 and was named chief executive of the company in 1979, acknowledges that Independent's recent ventures represent "a big piece of change for the good doctor."
(Mr. O'Reilly has a doctorate in agricultural marketing from Bradford University in England.)
But he says that even though he's involved in Independent as its chairman and major shareholder, he leaves operating decisions to his lieutenants.
While these executives were negotiating with Newspaper Publishing in London, Mr. O'Reilly says, he was flying on Heinz business between Nassau in the Bahamas; Tokyo; Sydney, Australia; and Pittsburgh.
"I have not been in London since before Christmas," he says.
Still, the newspaper transactions were complex, particularly in South Africa, where Mr. O'Reilly has nurtured relationships with top political figures.
Over the Christmas holidays, he played host to African National Congress leader Nelson Mandela at his Caribbean vacation home.
And when the South Africa deal was announced, he visited the Star, in Johannesburg, to assure the staff he wouldn't influence editorial policy.
(While in South Africa, he also visited food companies Heinz might acquire, says a spokesman.)
John Glerum, former chief executive of Ore-Ida, argues that the current flurry of newspaper acquisitions "must dilute his focus and efforts on Heinz."
Says Mr. Glerum, now president of Equity Investments Inc., of Boise, Idaho, "It takes time, and you can only do so many things."
Mr. O'Reilly, an executive who's known as a high-energy workaholic, maintains that he's constantly in touch with Heinz executives by fax and phone.
But some subordinates say that reaching him can be difficult because of changing time zones when he travels, and they recall that he often juggles Heinz meetings with meetings involving employees of his various private businesses.
(A Heinz spokesman responds that Mr. O'Reilly "does his Heinz business, and he might do some other, but he doesn't juggle.")
Analysts worry about Mr. O'Reilly's busy schedule too.
John Maxwell, an analyst with Wheat First Securities, says, "I'd like to see him focus more on Heinz and less on his personal portfolio, because I think Heinz has got a lot of problems.
It's a company that has no growth."
Another problem: lack of a second in command.
Mr. O'Reilly holds both top management posts at Heinz.
"There isn't a No. 2 guy, so he doesn't have a strong president to back him up while he's globetrotting around the world," says William Leach of Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette.
But Mr. O'Reilly brushes aside these concerns.
"I'm absolutely convinced that my managerial reputation is 100% invested in Heinz, not in my investments elsewhere," he says.
With a 1.8% stake, he is, in fact, Heinz's largest individual shareholder, having acquired large amounts of stock by exercising options.
He calls Heinz "a breakout company ready to make its move," with its largest category, food service, growing 5% a year and representing nearly 20% of total sales.
The company is also looking at acquisitions in baby food, its second largest category, and "will be making a move in the baby-food business within the next two or three months," he says.
Mr. O'Reilly's contract with Heinz expires in two years, but "if he wants to stay on, I think the board will urge him to do so," says Richard Cyert, a director.
He says the board isn't bothered by the chairman's newspaper buying spree.
Mr. O'Reilly has a longstanding agreement with the board that he can pursue outside investment interests, a Heinz spokesman adds.
In addition to publishing, those interests include a controlling stake in Arcon, a minerals concern; and shares in Waterford Wedgewood luxury tableware brands, the Wellworth retail chain in northern Ireland and two Irish castles that have been converted into luxury hotels.
As for Mr. O'Reilly, he's keeping his options open.
While he's certain he'll stay at Heinz until the end of fiscal 1996, beyond that "depends on how the company is . . . and on how the succession is.
That's a shifting game.
There are two or three very good guys."
Insiders say the top candidates to succeed him are senior vice presidents David Sculley, William Springer and William Johnson.
