The computer industry shipped 3,370,000 PCs in Europe during the fourth quarter, down 2.4% from a booming quarter a year earlier, according to a quarterly PC-market report by The Wall Street Journal/Europe and the Dataquest Inc. unit of Dun & Bradstreet Corp.
Because of falling prices and a rising dollar, revenue tumbled even faster by 14% to $6.29 billion.
The results, partly a product of recession in Germany, Spain and Italy, add a sour note to a generally sweet year for many PC makers in Europe; earlier in the year, quarterly unit sales had been climbing as fast as 18.7%.
Overall for the year, unit sales rose 8.8% to 10,320,000 PCs -- though the industry's price war helped deflate revenue by 9.9% to $20.3 billion, as measured in dollars.
After adjustment for currency fluctuations, revenue rose 1.2%.
Within such broad numbers, performance by individual companies varied wildly.
Generally, most of the industry's blue-chip vendors gained market share as their PCs attracted bargain hunters, following steep price cuts over the past 18 months.
Compaq Computer Corp. raised its market share to 9.4% from 6.6% a year earlier, while Apple Computer Inc., Hewlett-Packard Co. and AST Research Inc. also gained share.
Their success came at the expense of some vendors of "no-name" clones and non-standard PCs.
By far the biggest loser for the quarter was Commodore International, a West Chester, Pa., company best known for its "Amiga" line of games-playing PCs.
Until a few years ago Commodore sold more PCs in Europe than any other company.
But last August it discontinued its unprofitable line of IBM-compatible PCs.
And lately its non-compatible Amigas have come under increasing attack from television-games console makers on one hand, and mainstream IBM-compatible PC makers on the other.
Between the two forces, says Dataquest's head PC analyst, Christopher Fell, "Commodore has been sitting right in the middle."
Commodore doesn't dispute that its market share has fallen, but it and Dataquest disagree on the exact numbers.
Alwin Stumpf, head of Commodore's operations in Germany, Austria, Switzerland and eastern Europe, says European sales fell in the quarter to about 300,000 units, from 410,000 to 420,000 a year earlier.
Dataquest, based on its own research, counts 167,000 PCs sold, or a 4.9% market share-compared with 470,000 units, or 13.6%, a year earlier.
Mr. Stumpf says Commodore's drop in market share stemmed mainly from the discontinuation of its IBM-compatible line.
But he says Commodore's mainstay Amiga range has maintained or increased sales in many European countries.
To focus on Amiga, Mr. Stumpf says, Commodore cut its European work force by half in the past 12 months.
It plans new Amiga models this year.
Compared with the abandoned IBM-compatible line, Mr. Stumpf says, the Amiga "business is a lot better.
It's smaller revenues but much better profit margins."
By contrast, the big winner in the quarter was Compaq, which recently reported a 30% jump in revenue during the quarter to $797 million.
If Commodore's results are ignored, the rest of the PC industry looks a lot healthier with unit sales rising 9.8%-a moderate performance by the standards of the PC industry.
Andreas Barth, Compaq's senior vice president for European operations, like most industry executives, says most signs point to faster growth in shipments and revenue for the European market overall this year.
He says he expects the British market to continue pulling out of recession, while France and Germany may see an economic upturn in the second half of the year.
Likewise, Dataquest forecasts industry growth will revive this year, with units rising 13.5% and revenue by 5% to 6%.
