Dollar sentiment likely will remain bullish this week, as the currency benefits from more signs of a strengthening U.S. economy and expectations of declining interest rates in other major nations.
The U.S. currency is expected to gain more ground against the mark -- especially if the Bundesbank's policy-making panel trims important interest rates at its scheduled meeting Thursday.
Some economists also expect the dollar to climb against the yen, citing possible disappointment over economic stimulus measures to be unveiled by the Japanese government and the potential for a decline in interest rates.
"The U.S. economy will continue to experience strong growth, and, despite the modest recovery the yen staged from its extreme lows, a further easing is still likely in Japan," says John Lipsky, chief economist at Salomon Brothers Inc.
Late Friday in New York, the dollar was trading at 1.7495 marks and 111.06 yen, compared with 1.7505 marks and 111.76 yen late Thursday.
About midday Monday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 111.35 yen and at 1.7505 marks.
Mr. Lipsky and others say the dominant factor in currencies trading in the weeks ahead will be the continued strength of the U.S. economy.
Last week, a barrage of positive economic data confirmed what many economists have been saying -- that U.S. gross domestic product growth may have topped 5% in the fourth quarter and that a significant slowing of activity in the first quarter isn't necessarily in the cards.
Manufacturing activity, in particular, seems poised for sustainable gains.
Most economists see U.S. interest rates as stable or climbing, while rate cuts are probable in many stagnating European economies.
Rising rates make dollar-denominated deposits more attractive to investors.
The U.S. economy also appears to be drawing momentum from a rebound in the housing industry.
The pace of housing starts in December is scheduled to be released Thursday.
Developments in Europe also will be important.
Market watchers continue to play the guessing game of when, not if, cuts in important interest rates will take place in Germany.
Most doubt that the Bundesbank will alter policy at Thursday's meeting, although an easing does seem likely before the end of February, they add.
However, the Bundesbank's hand could be forced sooner should the mark decline sharply, says Salomon's Mr. Lipsky.
"The recent weakness of the Deutsche mark against the dollar reflects growing pessimism about the outlook for Germany's recovery," he notes.
"With the recent strength of the dollar and in the face of a weakening mark, the Bundesbank doesn't want to ease monetary policy now," says Sandy Batten, senior economist with Citibank.
With the markets anticipating interest rates to fall, "no one will hold the mark in anticipation of a cut; they'll hold it after."
Analysts believe cuts could take place at the council's Feb. 3 session, after release of January inflationary data.
Earl Johnson, vice president of Harris Trust & Savings Bank, expects German Central bankers to cut the discount and Lombard rates by as much as 50 basis points, or 1/2 a percentage point.
A cut in these rates would bolster the dollar against the mark, he says.
After a rate cut by the Bundesbank, Austria, Belgium and France will likely follow suit, analysts add.
The Bank of England also is expected to cut its base rate by 1/2 percentage point, though not immediately.
