In response to Jonathan Macey's Dec. 29 editorial-page piece "Mutual Banks Take Your Money and Run":
Mr. Macey is confused, and wrong, about the difference between "property" rights, either in Russia or the U.S., and the rights of depositors in mutual savings banks.
Mutual depositors receive a guaranteed return of principal, and earned interest, up to the limits set forth under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
They are not at risk, and thus they are neither "owners" nor have "property" rights (except arguably in a solvent liquidation), as those terms are traditionally understood under U.S. law.
Nonetheless, a thrift desiring to convert to stock form must receive the approval of depositors under New York law, and if its conversion is approved, depositors may invest in the stock to be offered.
Mr. Macey wrongly claims that a "decision . . . to convert is left solely to . . . management."
That explains his erroneous thesis that "control of mutual banks should be determined by market forces."
State and federal laws do not require mutual thrifts to convert to stock form, nor can they be compelled to do so.
Market forces are thus less important in the context of a mutual to stock conversion than they would be in a sale of a stock institution.
If mutuals cannot be forced to convert, subjecting them to hostile changes in control if they try to convert would discourage most from trying.
Thus, state and federal laws leave the decision whether to initiate a conversion to management, but the ultimate decision whether to convert is not left to management.
In New York, the superintendent of banks must approve a conversion plan, based upon exacting requirements designed to protect the public interest and the interests of depositors; then depositors must approve the actual conversion proposal -- by at least 75% of the votes cast on the issue.
Mr. Macey's fear that an underpriced conversion can lead to undercapitalization is real.
He omits to state, however, that that is an issue into which the superintendent currently is inquiring, and that Green Point Saving Bank's conversion plan is deferred pending a determination of the facts surrounding the appraisal process employed.
Mr. Macey's statement that the superintendent of banks "sent a letter to Republic New York Corp. saying that its proposed special interest payment would not be legal if offered to influence the votes of depositors" is inaccurate.
The superintendent did not "send" a letter to Republic; a legal opinion on the subject was requested by Republic.
Mr. Macey also does not disclose that, unlike our understanding of the rule in other states, and under federal law, the superintendent outlined circumstances in which a special interest payment to depositors could be made: (i) if there is a legitimate business purpose for the payment; (ii) if the primary purpose of the payment is not to induce a favorable vote of depositors; and (iii) if the payment does not raise safety or soundness concerns.
The impact of the letter was to allow a payment to depositors that heretofore might have been impermissible, not to prohibit or limit such a payment as Mr. Macey implies.
Under federal law and under the laws of the states of which we are familiar, no such payment is permissible under any circumstances.
Republic never deigned to meet any of these standards, so it is unclear on what basis (if any) Mr. Macey states that "the payment was not made solely to influence votes."
Indeed, contrary to Mr. Macey's assertion, the payment was never "made."
Mr. Macey states that the superintendent's press release advising that Republic's offer was "illegal and improper" was issued without prior notice to Republic of the superintendent's views, and was not accompanied by any citation of legal authority.
Both assertions are false.
Republic's representatives were informed of the superintendent's views before they took the action that prompted his release; moreover, the basis for the superintendent's position was disclosed to Republic.
Mr. Macey asserts that the superintendent "then launched an investigation of Republic."
This is untrue.
On Nov. 18, the superintendent merely requested of both Republic and Green Point that they provide the department with certain additional background material and information.
CLARE E. SYKES
