New York -- Not many people spend their lives hoping their best work will not draw attention to itself.
Helen Milsted Eisenman, one of the U.S.'s leading film subtitlers, does.
"The whole point of subtitles is to get the feeling, the sense, the emotions of the picture across in English or whatever language without being obtrusive.
You want to be not noticed," she says.
Ms. Eisenman, 65 and semiretired, has subtitled and dubbed over 300 dramatic and documentary films in her 30-year career, many for Sony Pictures Classics and Miramax.
She has worked on such Oscar winners as "Babette's Feast" and "The Official Story," as well as last year's hit "Like Water for Chocolate."
Of the nine films she did last year, Spain's "Belle Epoque" is up for an Oscar next month.
But don't look for her at the Academy Awards, or film openings for that matter.
Despite the significance of a subtitler's work, it is credited only, and appropriately, by a subtitle at the end of a movie's credits.
The limited audience of foreign films effectively limits a subtitler's renown as well, since non-English-based films are rarely released outside of "art house" theaters.
And the argument over why this is so raged during the final stages of the GATT trade accord late last year.
European filmmakers asserted that because their films are subtitled, rather than dubbed, they cannot succeed in wide release in the U.S. Hollywood loyalists countered that the films themselves are at fault for their unpopularity; whether they are subtitled or dubbed would make little difference in their appeal.
In this argument, Ms. Eisenman lands with her feet squarely on this side of the Atlantic, despite her own passion for foreign movies.
She states that although "dubbing could make a movie more widespread in terms of acceptance, the subject has to be something that appeals to a wider audience, which is not always the case."
She agrees that most people who see art-house films prefer subtitled movies to dubbed ones, but she does think that they are rejecting dubbing on the basis of experiences with poor examples.
"Dubbing is a lost art," she says.
"It is so expensive to dub a movie well.
You have to have good actors and well-written dialogue, and you have to get in the studio and make sure the actors can see where their dialogue has to go and that it is recorded properly.
It's not easy, it takes a long time, and it's not cheap."
Ms. Eisenman points to her dubbed version of "The Official Story," the 1985 Argentinian movie that won an Oscar for best foreign-language film, as an example of the few successful dubbed movies in recent years.
Less skillfully dubbed movies, in her view, do not offer any advantages over subtitling: Only good actors well-deployed can convey nuances of intonation and verbal signals.
Of course, these are refinements that even the best subtitler is hard pressed to include in a few printed words at the bottom of a frame.
But the audience still gets some of this information visually, from seeing the way a character looks or speaks -- and with subtitles, there's no distraction from badly spoken, badly synched dubbed lines.
In a subtitled film, you have the thing itself with the real rhythm of its real sound.
The subtitles decode the meaning of that sound, as literally as possible.
That, at any rate, is Ms. Eisenman's approach: no artistic license.
Aside from leaving out background conversation and a few words in a long, quickly delivered section of dialogue, a subtitler should always hew to the original: "The life in this is getting as close as possible to the meaning of the original.
A lot of people will remove themselves so far from it that they lose the texture or they simplify it for the American audience.
I don't believe in doing that."
It may sound simple, but it has to be done in the tiniest amount of time and space.
Ms. Eisenman estimates that a viewer can read only one-and-a-half words a second, and she says that more than one line of dialogue on a screen will confuse a viewer, although that is common practice in Europe.
The audience "should not have to figure out the subtitles.
If they do, you've lost your audience.
They should be able to think about what's being said."
For Ms. Eisenman's purposes, the ideal film would have a single actor on screen at any given time, speaking a few words at a time with ample pauses between sentences.
That way a line of subtitled dialogue could be on the screen during the relevant shot.
But film reality does not offer the subtitler a trouble-free life.
For example, an actor often spits out a line immediately before the film switches to another scene.
Should the subtitler flash all of the dialogue and risk confusing the audience or condense it and risk losing some of the meaning?
Ms. Eisenman speaks English, German, French, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish, but she does not normally translate a script herself.
For an American production company to consider a foreign film for release in the U.S., the script must already be translated into English, because few U.S. producers know foreign languages well enough to judge them without a ready-made translation.
Then she works with that, correcting what is often a sloppy translation and completing the technical process of putting the subtitle onto the film itself.
Now that she is semiretired, Ms. Eisenman uses her midtown Manhattan office only for the machines required to put the subtitles on the film, and does the rest of the work out of her cluttered Upper West Side apartment, which she swears she does not have time to vacuum.
In the summers, it's off to Long Island with her computer, fax machine, fishing gear and her enormous dog Max, who dwarfs his owner, practically dragging her down the street on his walks: "My knees are always wounded, you know, he goes so fast," she laughs, in a laugh made raspy from her near-constant smoking.
What recent foreign films does she recommend?
"Mediterraneo," an acclaimed 1992 Italian film about Italian soldiers occupying a lonely Greek island, tops her list of favorite comedies, and she has recently finished the subtitles to "Sud," another Italian comedy also directed by Gabriele Salvatores.
But as much as she enjoys good comedies, it's hard not to notice that a good part of her work centers on the tragedy of the Holocaust and war, such as "Au Revoir Les Enfants," "Europa, Europa" and many documentaries on World War II.
"These movies really strike a chord in me because of my personal experience," she states quietly.
Born in Austria to a long line of shoemakers, she fled with her Jewish family in the mid-1930s.
As they moved all over Europe, first to Italy, then to France and Portugal before immigrating to New York City in 1940, Ms. Eisenman picked up the many languages she now puts to use professionally.
All her grandparents, who refused to leave Austria, died in concentration camps.
Ms. Eisenman says she usually takes about a month to finish a film, sometimes longer, during which time she sometimes spends days on a difficult sentence.
"You are so close to them when you're working through them.
With good movies you can just feel how gorgeous and how well-acted they are.
`Like Water for Chocolate,' for example, you could just feel the miracle and the mystery of the whole thing."
And then you could enjoy watching it and tell yourself you just might deserve a bit of the credit.
Ms. Bray works for AP-Dow Jones in New York.
