A former Prudential Securities Inc. manager implicated the firm's legal department in potential partnership wrongdoing as part of a criminal investigation, people familiar with the case said.
The former executive, a partnership product manager, told federal prosecutors that the firm's legal department approved internal sales documents and other marketing materials Prudential brokers used in selling partnerships, the people said.
The information provided by the product manager is the first that ties Prudential's legal department directly to the partnership scandal at the firm.
As reported, prosecutors are examining what role the 87-member legal department had in evaluating and sanctioning prospectuses, sales documents and other marketing materials involved in peddling about $8 billion of partnerships in the 1980s.
Prudential, the nation's fourth-largest brokerage firm, is a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
The sales documents helped brokers sell the partnerships, most of which have soured.
Many of the documents urged brokers to emphasize high returns and low risk to investors who actually were seeking safety.
The former product manager has told prosecutors that Robert Brunton, a Prudential lawyer on staff at the firm, reviewed and approved some of the sales materials, the people said.
Mr. Brunton also was the liaison between the law department and partnership group, these people said.
Mr. Brunton reported to Loren Schechter, Prudential's general counsel who was relieved of his legal duties last month amid the unfolding criminal investigation.
Mr. Brunton, now a regional Prudential counsel, referred questions to a Prudential spokesman, who declined to comment.
Kenneth Vianale, an assistant U.S. attorney, declined to comment.
Product managers were key contacts for Prudential brokers and others in selling the partnerships; they were the executives who gave brokers, branch managers and regional directors current marketing materials and updates on the partnerships.
Sales materials that went to investors, particularly prospectuses, typically were reviewed by outside counsel, the people said.
Some internal sales materials, particularly national sales scripts, were approved by Prudential's internal law department.
Federal and state regulators in October accused Prudential in a civil case of misstating the risks and returns of the partnerships.
Under a settlement with regulators, Prudential has set up a $330 million reparations fund for investors.
At the heart of many improper sales were internal documents that urged brokers to aggressively push risky partnerships on investors with certificates of deposit that were approaching maturity, and others who were seeking safe investments.
The Securities and Exchange Commission, in a continuing investigation of the matter, is considering filing civil administrative proceedings against as many as 15 current and former Prudential employees.
Separately, the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan has launched a broad criminal investigation into the firm's partnership practices.
As reported, several current and former Prudential employees will begin receiving subpoenas during the next few days in the criminal case.
Prudential executives, for their part, believe that the firm ultimately will be exonerated in the criminal investigation.
The U.S. attorney's investigation "relates to events that happened many years ago, and that have been the subject of not only extensive litigation, but also form the basis of our settlement with the SEC and states," a senior Prudential executive said.
"We have been fully cooperating with the investigation, and we're confident that when it is completed, the U.S. attorney will conclude that no further action concerning the firm is warranted," he added.
