Continental Airlines will nearly triple the number of short, low-fare flights it flies every day, making the Houston-based company the only airline to operate half its flights with cheap, frequent service and the rest with more traditional, long-haul flights.
Continental is expected to announce today that it will expand its low-fare CALite service as of March 9 to about 875 daily flights from the current 300.
That is the same day the airline is eliminating about a third of its service out of its Denver hub.
Continental now has about 1,400 flights a day.
People familiar with the company say Continental eventually is likely to make still more of its flights part of the CALite operation.
Among the cities to receive CALite service in March will be Indianapolis; Cleveland and Dayton, Ohio; San Antonio; Pensacola, Fla.; and Continental's big hub, Houston.
CALite service also will be initiated to Chicago's Midway Airport, where Southwest Airlines has most of the flights.
While most of the CALite destinations are cities Continental already serves, several of them are markets where Dallas-based Southwest is a powerful competitor.
Southwest is the industry's only consistently profitable airline, and its continued success has made it the carrier dozens of other airlines seek to emulate.
It's too soon to say whether CALite will operate profitably.
Last fall, the company said CALite operations were ahead of its forecasts but weren't yet in the black.
Nevertheless, almost every U.S. airline is trying to remake itself in Southwest's low-fare image.
A pivotal part of UAL Corp.'s United Airlines employee buyout, approved by the company's unions last week, hinges on the development of a low-cost operation.
Delta Air Lines also has appointed a committee to look into a similar service.
Dozens of tiny start-ups, ranging from Kiwi Airlines in Newark, N.J., to Valujet Airlines in Atlanta, model themselves on Southwest.
Having emerged from Chapter 11 bankruptcy-court protection last April with vastly less debt, and having looser union restrictions than its big-carrier rivals, Continental has been able to plunge ahead with CALite while its rivals merely make plans.
CALite started up last October with several dozen daily flights and gradually increased the number to slightly more than 300, primarily in the Southeast and Middle Atlantic states, where Southwest doesn't fly and where high-cost USAir Group Inc. was a target waiting for competition.
What all these airlines are trying to do is keep costs low, as Southwest does.
The carrier, which is unionized and has wage rates roughly comparable to other airlines, is able to control costs because its work rules are far more liberal than those at other airlines and because it eschews the hub-and-spoke system.
Southwest flights also are turned around, loaded and boarded within 15 minutes of landing, and thus spend more time in the air, ferrying passengers.
