On the eve of his visit tomorrow to the U.S., Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk leads a country wracked by political struggle and a mounting economic crisis.
Inflation in 1993 stood at 6,500%, topped only by that of rump Yugoslavia.
An energy crisis has led to a sharp curtailment in industrial output, the furloughing of hundreds of thousands of workers, and the closing down of universities for part of the winter.
Meanwhile, Mr. Kravchuk, who only a few weeks ago agreed to give up Ukraine's entire nuclear arsenal, is beginning to look like a political corpse.
On Feb. 24, Ukraine's parliament -- the Rada -- rebuffed Mr. Kravchuk by a vote of 253 to 1, rejecting his call to postpone a presidential election now set for June 26.
It is uncertain whether Mr. Kravchuk will run for re-election (he has said he will not).
If he runs, he is all but certain to be rejected by Ukraine's electorate.
President Clinton is likely meeting with a lame duck.
With Mr. Kravchuk in a weak position, a sharp political struggle has erupted within what is called by Ukrainians the "Party of Power."
Made up of ex-communist apparatchiks, the ruling elite is divided into four factions: the dwindling forces of the president; a bloc of agrarian bosses and local government leaders who back the nationalist Parliamentary Speaker Ivan Plyushch; a bloc of corrupt "Red Directors" from Ukraine's Russian-speaking east, headed by Acting Prime Minister Yukhym Zvyahilsky; and economic reformers headed by the popular ex-Prime Minister Leonid Kuchma.
The struggle at the top has created a power vacuum.
With March 27 parliamentary elections approaching, hard-line forces appear to have launched a wave of political terror directed at Rukh, Ukraine's largest democratic party.
Rukh's campaign manager, Mykhaylo Boychyshyn, has not been seen since his abduction on Jan. 15.
There have been break-ins and vandalizations of four Rukh party offices around the country, beatings of candidates for Parliament, bombings directed at the property of Rukh activists, and an attempted abduction of the daughter of a Rukh leader.
On a recent trip to Kiev, I too encountered Ukraine's chilly political atmosphere.
Officials at the Ministry of Internal Affairs confiscated my passport and hauled me into their offices for a two-hour "discussion."
What made the episode notable was that the authorities had come looking for me by name at a place I was temporarily visiting and about which they could have learned only through informants, wiretapping or surveillance.
In surveying Ukraine's unsettled political waters, Mr. Clinton and his advisers might be tempted to conclude that little can be done to reverse these worrying trends.
Even the CIA, the Washington Post reports, is telling them that Ukraine might break up into several parts.
But the CIA's dire predictions are off-base.
Reliable public opinion polls show little enthusiasm for the economically distressed experiment with statehood, but they also reveal no sentiment for domination by Moscow.
Moreover, political leaders in Ukraine's Russian-speaking east believe they have a better chance of advancing their interests in nearby Kiev than in remote Moscow.
Even ethnic Russians -- who have lived in Ukraine's east for generations -- consider themselves to be citizens of Ukraine, not Russia.
The greatest threat to Ukraine's territorial integrity does not come from instability within -- it comes from Russia.
Ukrainian officials assert that Russia's Foreign Intelligence Service is engaged in active measures to support regional separatist groups.
The major trouble spot is Crimea, where a majority Russian population seeks an exit from Ukraine.
As Deputy Foreign Minister Boris Tarasyuk told me in Kiev, "If Russia moves to take Crimea, Ukraine will remain a nuclear state."
He and other Ukrainian leaders seek an enhanced U.S. role in pressing Russia to forgo any territorial claims.
Anyone surveying the uncertain state of Ukraine's political and economic life might conclude that the country is a basket case.
Yet Ukraine's tumultuous political climate presents a rare opportunity to promote fundamental change.
Indeed, with elections for Parliament later this month and for president this summer, there is a distinct opportunity for Ukraine to break free from the shackles of the old nomenklatura -- especially since polls show the reformist Mr. Kuchma leading in the presidential stakes.
When Mr. Clinton hosts Mr. Kravchuk on Friday, he must make clear to him that the U.S.-Ukraine relationship -- and any hope for substantial Western aid -- is based as much on Ukraine's adherence to democracy and economic reform as on the dismantling of Soviet-era nuclear weapons.
Coming at this uncertain time in Kiev, the message must be loud and clear.
In the end, no matter how bad things may look in Ukraine, Mr. Clinton and his foreign-policy team must bear in mind events in Russia, where foreign policy is turning assertively anti-Western, where hard-line neo-communists and neo-fascists dominate the Parliament, and where economic reform has stalled.
As Russia reverts to an imperial stance, Ukraine, a pro-Western country with 52 million citizens and Europe's second-largest military force, is likely to become an increasingly important factor in the peace and stability of Europe.
More important, poor and conflict-ridden Ukraine still has a chance to emerge as a normal, democratic country at a time when Russia's course looks increasingly in doubt.
Mr. Karatnycky is executive director of Freedom House.
