Federated Department Stores Inc. told analysts it is determined to pursue a merger with R.H. Macy & Co., but left them unimpressed with its estimates for its own sales and earnings.
The Cincinnati-based company is working on a "conceptual" plan for a merger of the two department-store chains, but hasn't yet worked out details, Chairman Allen Questrom told analysts at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel here.
Federated recently paid $449.3 million to acquire half of Prudential Insurance Co. of America's claim in Macy's Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization and said it wants to merge with Macy.
But on March 15, Macy management is expected to ask the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in New York to extend for at least another three months its exclusive right to file a plan of reorganization.
New York-based Macy has said it wishes to remain independent.
Separately, Macy said it will build a new Bullock's store to replace one at a mall in Northridge, Calif., which sustained major damage in the Los Angeles earthquake.
The company said its Sherman Oaks Bullock's store also sustained significant damage and may be closed for months.
Two other Bullock's stores closed by the earthquake will reopen within a week, while one of Macy's I. Magnin stores will remain closed for several weeks.
Macy executives wouldn't comment on the cost of the damage.
Asked about Mr. Questrom's comments, Carol Sanger, a Federated vice president, said, "Our preference is to submit a plan with Macy.
But at some point, it will become appropriate for the court and creditors to look at a plan that may be an alternative to Macy's plan, and that's what we are preparing now."
Mr. Questrom told analysts that an alliance with Macy would give a combined company lower operating expenses that would lead to more competitive pricing.
Federated officials also said they expect same-store sales to grow 2% to 3% in 1994 and total sales to rise about 5%.
They said they expect earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization to be in the range of 11% to 13% of total sales by the 1995/1997 period.
For the fiscal year ended Jan. 31, 1993, Federated's earnings on that basis amounted to 9.3% of sales.
Federated also said it would open nine stores in 1994.
"It's clear Federated is a good operator and determined to merge with Macy, but they won't set the world on fire with these numbers," said Peter N. Schaeffer, a partner with Johnson Redbook Service.
Federated shares climbed 37.5 cents to $22.125 in composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.
