Yes, the Japanese Upper House's rejection of political reform is a blow to the Youngish Turks who got it that far, but it isn't over 'til it's over.
We don't think it's over.
The rotation of prime ministers is probably going to continue until a genuine effort is made to clean up Nagatacho.
For one thing, regardless of Friday's vote, the breakup of the party system is proceeding apace.
The Liberal Democrats and the Social Democrats both have a lot to lose.
The LDP has been hemorrhaging members since the big July crackup, and the SDP can't survive its internal contradictions much longer.
Second, the long recession is forcing many of those once closely associated with the notion of Japan Inc. to rethink the way the economy functions.
The economy has slumped for most of the '90s, and all the usual cures have failed.
The Economic Planning Agency says recovery may not occur until mid-1995.
Nor, given international political constraints, can Japan export its way out of recession.
The only option, as even the mandarins at the Ministry of Finance now grudgingly agree, is for domestic consumption to lift Japan out of the doldrums.
To do so requires tax cuts and deregulation.
We doubt that the old political system is up to this.
Another reason to believe that reform isn't dead is that the most trenchant analysis of the Japanese political system has come from people who know every cranny of the system and have decided it's rotten.
We are thinking here of former LDP loyalists like Ichiro Ozawa, Tsutomu Hata and Kazuo Aichi.
Some have likened Mr. Ozawa's position on reform to having a fox guard the henhouse.
We would note that thinking like a fox makes it possible to build a more secure henhouse.
Prime Minister Hosokawa and his associates deserve great credit for getting this close.
The prime minister has done something unusual in the Diet -- enunciated a principle and stuck to it.
Even if he is tossed out, he has left a distinctive legacy.
We don't think any previous Japanese government could have opened (albeit marginally) the hallowed rice market.
Mr. Hosokawa did, an action so striking in its symbolism that some Japanese refer to it as the "third opening" -- after the 19th-century Meiji Restoration and the postwar economic miracle.
In its unfamiliar role as political opposition, the Liberal Democratic Party played the largest part in killing this legislation (with an able assist from SDP defectors).
Having run this effort off the rails, we'd say the LDP now has a responsibility to get the process back on track, perhaps by working out compromise legislation with the Hosokawa coalition before the Diet goes home January 29.
Perhaps the best course is for the Japanese to hold the LDP to its own words of 1989: "Of course, it is not so easy to reform the long-preserved system.
But in order to recover the people's confidence in politics, it is time for the party to display morality and a sense of responsibility of politicians."
