Florida's string of highly publicized attacks on foreign tourists last year, as well as surging competition from other destinations, appear to have hit the state's huge travel industry even harder than expected.
The number of visitors to Florida fell 7.6% in December from a year earlier, according to figures released Friday by the state Department of Commerce.
In the fourth quarter, visits were off nearly 3% from the year-earlier period.
The downturns didn't prevent the state's $32 billion travel industry from showing a gain of 1.2% for all of 1993, to 41 million visitors from 40.5 million in 1992.
But that figure was significantly off state economists' original annual growth estimate of 4.1%, as well as their revised growth estimate of 1.9% as of November.
"It's a source of real concern," said Charles Dusseau, secretary of the Florida Department of Commerce.
The data prompted Gov. Lawton Chiles on Friday to call for an emergency allocation of $2 million to beef up the state's depleted tourism advertising budget.
A cadre of industry associations and corporations have pledged to match any state funding.
The Florida Legislature, which controls the funds, declined a similar call for funds by the governor last fall.
Nearly all of the $6.7 million earmarked for Florida's yearly ad campaign was spent early to counteract the effects of nine murders of foreign tourists, the most recent of which occurred in September.
Florida's fiscal year ends June 30.
The decline in Florida tourism began in earnest last August, when visitation dropped 12.1% to 3.2 million people from 3.7 million, pushing the third quarter's tourism figures down 3.2% overall.
Despite optimism about cold weather in the Northeast and Midwest pushing travelers southward, state tourism officials aren't certain when they'll see a turnaround.
"I certainly don't expect any kind of upturn for January," Mr. Dusseau said.
Crime isn't the only factor dragging down Florida tourism, according to industry officials.
Heightened competition from other destinations has begun siphoning off a significant number of travelers who might otherwise have chosen Florida, according to John E. Evans, president of the Florida Tourism Association.
Mr. Evans points to the many new dockside gambling resorts along the Mississippi River and elsewhere as tough new competitors.
Mr. Dusseau believes Florida is also being hurt by the likes of other sunny sites such as Las Vegas, which now pitches itself as a family destination, and Mexico, which he said is spending about $15 million this year in the U.S. to advertise its attractions.
Also hurting Florida tourism are recessions in Europe and Canada.
International travelers have represented the fastestgrowing segment of Florida's tourism industry in recent years, with the majority of Miami's visitors, for instance, now coming from abroad.
While the fortunes of the travel industry are critical to Florida's economy, the state has been receiving a boost of late from strong increases in construction and a growing population.
Unemployment is down to 5.7% for February, compared with 6.9% in the year-earlier month, according to Daniel Friel, senior economic analyst for NationsBank Corp., Charlotte, N.C.
"Even though the tourism business didn't look that good, the rest of the state appears to be faring very well," he said.
