An antitrust consent decree dating from 1956 has come back to haunt International Business Machines Corp. in a court battle over its activities in the market for upgrading mainframe computers.
Lawyers for high-tech service companies and dealers are closely watching the case to see how much control the computer giant will be allowed to exert over parts and services for its mainframes.
They say they fear that a victory for IBM could make it harder for leasing and repair companies to compete in the multibillion-dollar market for upgrading mainframe computers.
Companies that lease and service telecommunications equipment say the case also could set a precedent affecting their ability to compete with manufacturers.
The complex case before the federal appeals court in Philadelphia, which heard oral arguments last month, has been simmering quietly for nine years.
Central to the litigation is the landmark 38-year-old settlement with the federal government, which required IBM to offer customers the opportunity to buy, not just rent, data-processing machines and parts.
The consent decree opened the way for a new market in which independent dealers could purchase IBM machines and lease them to users.
The agreement also barred IBM from making the purchase of a machine conditional on other sales or services, thereby creating business for service companies.
But computer-leasing and service companies claim in the case that IBM violated the consent decree by squeezing out competitors in the business of upgrading mainframes, among the most powerful and most expensive computers.
Because a mainframe can cost as much as $6 million, many owners prefer to upgrade their machines rather than buy new models.
Leasing companies in particular rely on upgrades, which enable them to keep their stock up-to-date without buying the latest models.
In the early 1980s, IBM allegedly changed the way it priced some of the parts needed to upgrade mainframes.
The new pricing policy, according to the lawsuit, made it prohibitively expensive for any company other than IBM to upgrade a mainframe.
Under the pricing policy, it was cheaper to return parts to IBM -- and have IBM do the work -- than to buy the parts separately and have them installed.
Allen-Myland Inc., the service company that brought the suit in 1985, claims that IBM's pricing policy amounted to an illegal scheme to prevent competition.
The Computer Dealers and Lessors Association, a trade group, has lined up in support of Allen-Myland, warning that the very industries that the consent decree produced could be jeopardized.
IBM maintains that the pricing policy isn't anticompetitive and isn't at odds with the consent decree.
The trial judge in the case ruled in IBM's favor six years ago, citing IBM's business justifications for the policy.
For instance, the judge said the policy is "a legitimate and reasonable way to ensure the prompt and proper return" of parts used in IBM's mainframe business.
It is this ruling that is under appeal.
IBM also says that because new technology has made upgrades much simpler to perform, the services offered by Allen-Myland are obsolete.
"In the early 1980s, the technology was so different," said Evan Chesler, an attorney for IBM at New York law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore.
Allen-Myland's services were "once a very lucrative business.
It would take days to do one of these reconfigurations."
Now, Mr. Chesler said, the labor accounts for less than 1% of the cost of an upgrade, leaving "no viable business opportunity" for Allen-Myland.
The need for maintenance services also has shrunk as mainframe models have improved, said David Frankel, a Minneapolis computer consultant.
A decade ago, "the maintenance side of the business was more important. . . .
It could cost thousands of dollars a day for service," Mr. Frankel said.
In many cases, he said, it has become cheaper to buy a new mainframe than to maintain and upgrade an out-of-date model.
Allen-Myland, though, says the mainframe-upgrade market remains a potential gold mine; an industry study estimated that potential IBM upgrades from 1991 to 1996 total more than $30 billion.
The Broomall, Pa., company says that if it weren't for the pricing policy, it would be able to win upgrade business away from IBM.
"Improvements in technology have reduced the time needed for some upgrades, but not all," said Robert G. Levy, an attorney for Allen-Myland in the Washington office of Sutherland, Asbill & Brennan.
And Mr. Levy said that although upgrades today take less time, the demand for the service has increased.
Mr. Levy also argues that the lower-court ruling should be reconsidered in light of a 1992 U.S. Supreme Court decision against Eastman Kodak Co. in a dispute over the servicing of that company's photocopying machines.
In that case, the Supreme Court said large manufacturers could be sued for shutting out small companies seeking to sell parts and services.
Like the Kodak case, IBM's pricing policy made it too expensive to get the service from independent companies, Mr. Levy said.
"You're locked in," said Mr. Levy.
"Customers can't afford to get out -- that's the exerting of market power."
Mr. Chesler, the IBM attorney, said the trial judge's ruling was in line with the Supreme Court's Kodak decision.
Only about one-third of federal district courts have adopted a new pretrial discovery rule aimed at speeding up the early stages of a lawsuit.
The rule requires parties to lawsuits to voluntarily disclose to each other certain basic documents and data.
The federal measure went into effect Dec. 1, 1993, but gave local federal courts the power to reject the rule or take other action.
So far, only 32 of the 94 federal judicial districts have put into practice Rule 26 (a)(1) as written, according to a survey by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts.
The office found that most courts are still studying the idea or have adopted alternatives.
"I think it is too early to tell about the impact.
People are feeling their way," said William Schwarzer, the director of the Federal Judicial Center, the U.S. courts' research arm.
"It is like any rule.
It takes a few years before people get used to it.
Lawyers and judges are slow to change their customs and ways."
The rule, which was developed by the judiciary, was opposed by most of the organized bar, which lobbied hard to kill the measure last year.
Critics say the rule is too vague and could end up spawning additional unintended litigation.
"I think it is creating a lot of confusion," said Alfred W. Cortese Jr., a partner in the Washington office of Kirkland & Ellis, who led opposition to the rule.
Mr. Cortese predicted that there may be an effort later this year to revive legislation in Congress to defer enactment of the rule.
NOTED: The jury in the World Trade Center bombing trial in Manhattan began deliberations late yesterday.
The panel of eight women and four men received the conspiracy case against the four defendants charged in the Feb. 26, 1993, attack after U.S. District Judge Kevin T. Duffy instructed them in the relevant law.
Deliberations are expected to be lengthy, given the abundance of evidence presented during the 19-week trial and the fact that the jurors, half of whom live in New York suburbs, aren't expected to be sequestered or to meet on weekends.
Richard B. Schmitt and Margaret A. Jacobs contributed to this article.
