A rift has opened between Laurence Tisch and other members of the R.H. Macy & Co. board that may threaten Macy's efforts to remain independent, people familiar with the board's discussions say.
At issue is the valuation the company intends to place on itself, which will be critical in determining who ends up controlling the New York-based retailer, mired in Chapter 11 bankruptcy-court proceedings since January 1992.
Mr. Tisch is pushing for a higher valuation than some other directors want.
If Mr. Tisch wins over Macy's board, some senior creditors are threatening to line up behind Macy's unwelcome suitor, Federated Department Stores Inc.
Daniel Harmetz, the Fidelity Investments mutual-fund manager who has been negotiating with Macy's management on a reorganization plan that would allow the company to remain independent, said, "Our plan is premised on valuations that are at the high-end of those determined by Macy's advisers.
If the board chooses to ignore those valuations, Fidelity will not support a stand-alone plan."
The Macy board today is scheduled to approve an outline for a reorganization plan and present that outline this afternoon to Cyrus R. Vance, the court-appointed mediator.
The company will present the outline to creditors Wednesday.
The valuation that Macy's board approves today will establish how much Macy's creditors, who are owed $6 billion in all, will recover, and more important, how much stock each class of creditors will end up with once the company emerges from bankruptcy court.
Senior creditors are owed more than $3.1 billion in principal and interest, including a $1.1 billion claim jointly owned by Federated and Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
GE Capital is also a senior creditor.
Next in line are public bondholders including Mr. Tisch, owed more than $1.2 billion, followed by trade creditors.
According to people familiar with the talks, Mr. Tisch surprised fellow board members by endorsing a higher-than-expected valuation of the company following a March 10 presentation by representatives of the bondholders to Macy's finance committee, of which he is chairman.
Mr. Tisch didn't return phone calls requesting comment.
Mr. Tisch is expected to argue in today's board meeting for a plan that values Macy at $3.8 billion.
That figure differs radically from the plan that the company's management, led by Macy's Chief Executive Officer Myron E. Ullman III, has been negotiating with GE Capital, a unit of General Electric Co., and Fidelity since mid-January.
The Macy-GE-Fidelity plan would value the company at $3.5 billion.
Mutual funds of Fidelity, the Boston-based mutual fund company, own $490 million of senior bank debt.
GE Capital's CEO Gary Wendt and Mr. Ullman -- both members of the board's five-man finance committee -- are expected to oppose Mr. Tisch.
The prospect of a valuation above $3.5 billion has already caused consternation among Macy's senior creditors, who stand to wind up with a smaller stake in Macy if the higher-value plan prevails.
One lawyer for senior creditors said his clients would back Macy's suitor Federated in a reorganization plan if the board proposes any valuation above $3.5 billion.
In addition, Mr. Harmetz told others he would be "on the first flight to Cincinnati," where Federated is based, should the valuation exceed $3.5 billion.
Under Mr. Tisch's $3.8 billion valuation, public bondholders would receive a more-generous recovery for their claims and a far greater share of the company's new stock.
Holders of 14.5% bonds due in 1998 could get as much as 60 cents on the dollar and as much as 15% of the company's stock.
Under the joint plan favored by Mr. Wendt and Mr. Ullman, those bondholders would receive only about 15 cents on the dollar and a 5% equity stake.
Fidelity would end up with as much as 40% of the company's new stock.
The higher valuation Mr. Tisch favors is at odds with recommendations to the board from both of the company's financial advisers, Blackstone Group and Merrill Lynch.
Merrill Lynch was hired by the board following Federated's appearance as a Macy creditor in January.
Both advisers have told board members that the company's value is between $3.2 billion and $3.5 billion, according to several people familiar with the board's talks.
Some creditors expressed concern that Mr. Tisch may be inclined to a more-generous valuation because of his holdings of Macy securities.
Last week, Joel Zweibel, an attorney for some of Macy's senior bank creditors, demanded that board members disclose their securities holdings, in a letter to Macy's lawyer, Harvey Miller.
The request was forwarded to Mr. Vance at Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, who has requested this information from board members.
The issue of bond ownership by board members could become a focal point for Mr. Vance in mediating the reorganization process, some creditors believe.
Any inquiry would look into trading by GE Capital and other board members who have owned Macy's bonds.
Through Loews Corp. and its insurance-company affiliate CNA, Mr. Tisch controls about $52 million of Macy's junior bonds due in 2001.
Those bonds would receive nothing under the joint plan with GE Capital and Fidelity.
In addition to the bonds, Mr. Tisch also owns a 15.6% stake in the company in common and preferred stock, much of it bought during Macy's ill-fated recapitalization in 1990 and 1991.
Mr. Tisch isn't the only board member with a potential conflict of interest.
GE Capital, which became a substantial shareholder in Macy's 1986 leveraged buyout and participated in the recapitalization, is also owed $53.5 million by Macy.
In 1991, GE Capital bought Macy's lucrative credit-card business, which it is trying to safeguard by participating in the joint reorganization plan.
GE Capital executives didn't return calls seeking comment.
Patrick M. Reilly contributed to this article.
