YOU THOUGHT YOU had survived everything: the mergers of the 1980s; the layoffs of the 1990s.
Now, you have been unfairly accused of sexual harassment at work.
Is this the end of your career?
Not necessarily.
Your job and your reputation can survive even a crisis of this magnitude, career advisers say.
But you must take immediate action to protect yourself, maneuvering tactfully among superiors and subordinates.
Above all, you should keep a cool head.
"You don't want to do or say anything that can leave a bad impression or damage your reputation" any further, explains H. Rad Eanes III, a New York senior consultant with Personnel Decisions Inc., a Minneapolis consulting firm that specializes in assessment and development.
"You want to be beyond reproach."
A successful senior manager at a major manufacturer in the Southeast torpedoed his career because he didn't keep cool after his secretary falsely accused him of sexual harassment.
He launched an angry, expletive-filled tirade when his boss told him about the allegations.
The $275,000-a-year executive repeated his tantrum to colleagues and subordinates, and then unsuccessfully tried to get his secretary fired.
Company officials quickly cleared the accused manager.
But that didn't help him much.
He had lost the respect and confidence of nearly everyone, Mr. Eanes recalls.
Six months later, the executive quit to take a lower-paying job at a smaller business.
Angry outbursts give your accuser more credibility and undermine your management authority, notes Adele Scheele, a New York career strategist.
"Rage too often is associated with guilt," she adds.
Instead, Dr. Scheele advises, you should restrict your emotional displays to astonishment, hurt, disbelief and even grief.
But don't ignore or scoff at unfounded sexual-harassment charges.
WASHINGTON, D.C., aerospace executive D.T. Hamilton says that he landed in the unemployment line last year because he didn't take a disgruntled underling's allegations very seriously.
The female professional vowed to charge the executive with sexual harassment after he rejected her for a promotion.
"I just shrugged off the threat and kept it to myself," the 50-year-old Mr. Hamilton remembers.
Sexual-harassment rumors soon spread, however.
When a colleague questioned Mr. Hamilton about them, he says he responded with a joke about his "irresistible charisma."
A few days later, Mr. Hamilton confronted his accuser in the hall and attempted to break the ice with a fatherly pat on her back.
Instead, he says, she whirled around and yelled, "Don't ever touch me!"
To safeguard your job in such a ticklish situation, you should avoid face-to-face confrontations with your accuser, experts say.
These usually turn ugly and could distort your true intentions.
"Remember, the die has been cast," says Mr. Eanes of Personnel Decisions, who helps companies to investigate sexual-harassment charges.
"Nothing you can say will make accusers change their minds now."
Mr. Hamilton made another serious mistake.
He failed to inform his boss about the allegation.
Unable to decipher the truth, the company asked both staff members to resign.
Mr. Hamilton, now a part-time consultant, says he is still looking for another full-time job.
As soon as you learn you have been unfairly accused of sexual harassment, you should inform your superior and solicit his or her support, suggests Cheryl Heisler, a Chicago career counselor.
Explain possible motives for the charge.
If necessary, hire an attorney.
"Don't wait for a formal complaint," Ms. Heisler urges.
"By that time, it may be too late to save your career."
WHEN YOU GO INTO your boss's office, bring a detailed written log and other evidence of your case.
Try to reconstruct relevant meetings and prior disagreements with your accuser, including any performance problems and turf battles, counsels Cliff Palefsky, a plaintiffs attorney in San Francisco.
"If you want to save your job, document everything," he says.
Shoddy documentation forced the president and founder of one New York executive-search firm to settle a sexual-harassment case last year.
She says that one of her recruiters sued her after she had fired him for poor performance.
The business owner recollects that she hadn't kept track of her verbal warnings, had never given him a written reprimand and couldn't even find copies of his sloppy work.
She decided to settle out of court -- even though her decision caused her to lose some clients and to move to smaller quarters.
Once someone formally accuses you of sexual harassment, you should discuss the charges frankly with everyone you know at your workplace.
Willard Thompson says that approach kept him from being fired over false sexual-harassment charges.
Public Service Co. of Colorado suspended Mr. Thompson, a maintenance man, for a month because he allegedly had verbally bothered a customer's female employees.
Mr. Thompson, now retired, says that he notified every Public Service higher-up he knew and then relayed his dilemma to his colleagues.
As a result, he says, both senior executives and co-workers vouched for his character during the company's internal investigation.
"I had several people who were willing to stand up for me," he notes.
