After months of negotiations, House chairmen John Dingell and Jack Brooks late last year reached a tentative compromise on a sweeping new telecommunications policy.
But one key player hadn't signed off.
As Congress raced toward adjournment, Mr. Dingell tracked down Raymond L. "Mickey" McGuire, the blunt-spoken lobbyist for the "Baby Bell" telephone companies, as he was having a drink at Marrocco's restaurant about 4 p.m.
Mr. McGuire rejected the deal, seeking better terms for the Bells' entry into new markets.
And after midnight, when a new compromise emerged, he had them.
More than any other player in the telecommunications battle before Congress, the Bells have clout.
And now they are on the verge of making it pay off big.
Responding to Vice President Al Gore's call for an "information superhighway," the House Commerce and Judiciary committees are expected this week to send to the floor two bills that would be a giant step toward the Bells' fondest dream -- loosening the court-imposed shackles that have curbed their business moves since the old Bell System broke up a decade ago.
"Everyone needs to understand," says Mr. McGuire, that "this is about markets and who's going to be in 'em."
But it's also about political power.
The seven companies -- Ameritech Corp., Bell Atlantic Corp., BellSouth Corp., Nynex Corp., Pacific Telesis Group, Southwestern Bell Corp. and U S West Inc. -- field a lobbying army as pervasive as the dial tone on every telephone.
In 1992 alone, Federal Communications Commission records show, the Bells' telephone operations poured $40 million into lobbying, a sum that the Bells' long-distance rivals claim is two to three times as much as they collectively spend.
To win friends on Capitol Hill, the Bells' political action committees have handed out $9.7 million in the past decade -- overshadowing every other part of the industry, according to an analysis by Common Cause.
The Bells have hired scores of former federal officials, including two likely candidates for the 1996 Republican presidential nomination.
They don't mind slapping those who cross them, either.
After Democratic Rep. Mike Synar of Oklahoma backed restrictions on the Bells' entry into new businesses, Southwestern Bell executives sought to rally local opposition and pumped tens of thousands of dollars into his challenger's unsuccessful 1992 campaign.
"These guys will go to any lengths to win," says Mr. Synar, a member of two telecommunications subcommittees.
The Bells don't just work Washington.
With a presence in nearly every major community -- and some $95 million to bestow upon "grass-roots" causes in 1992 alone, according to FCC records -- they have wired the system from top to bottom.
Competitors also can't help but worry about the phone companies' ties to state utility regulators.
When a member of the Florida Public Service Commission reported a burglary last year, the missing items included the clothes of his girlfriend -- an employee of a BellSouth subsidiary whom he met through a company lobbyist at a conference in the Florida Keys.
(Though the commissioner said they didn't discuss regulatory matters, he resigned under a cloud; the two have since married.)
Of course, forces beyond politics are pushing the nation to overhaul a telecommunications policy designed more than half a century ago.
Technological changes extend the promise of tantalizing new services for consumers and business alike.
Lobbying "doesn't shape the fundamentals" of the debate, asserts Ronald Stowe, Pacific Telesis' Washington vice president.
"All of these efforts influence on the margins."
Moreover, the pending legislation contains benefits for the Bells' rivals as well.
While the phone companies are slated to win permission to move into cable TV, manufacturing and long-distance services, their local networks would be opened to competition.
And in many cases they would still have to show the Justice Department -- if not the courts -- that they weren't violating antitrust guidelines.
Still, the Bells make a huge target for their critics, including consumer groups fearful that the Bells will retain the economic leverage to crush competitors and eventually gouge the public.
Leading this chorus is their former parent, American Telephone & Telegraph Co.
AT&T controls 60% of the long-distance market, boasting its own blue-chip lobbying force and running the nation's wealthiest corporate PAC.
"This is a quarrel between the very wealthy and the very rich," Rep. Dingell says.
But AT&T has gotten poorer in the past year, in political terms.
After the courts lifted bans on the Bells offering information services, they picked off crucial AT&T allies by negotiating separate compromises with newspaper publishers and burglar-alarm companies.
"Of course AT&T felt like they got left out," crows Rep. Billy Tauzin, a Louisiana Democrat who is a champion of the Bells.
"That's precisely what the strategy was."
The phone companies don't apologize for their muscle.
"You can't be a shrinking violet in this town.
It just doesn't work," says Roy Neel, a former top aide to both President Clinton and Vice President Gore who recently took a reported $500,000-a-year post as head of the U.S. Telephone Association, which represents the Bells, GTE Corp. and smaller independents.
After Democrat Jim Cooper of Tennessee proposed restrictions on the phone companies' entry into information services in 1991, he and his co-sponsors were hit by a multimedia lobbying barrage.
Southwestern Bell ran radio ads in Rep. John Bryant's Texas district casting him as a tool of big-city publishers.
U S West used a toll-free line to steer protesting calls to the office of Rep. Dan Schaefer.
But the phone companies don't always play hardball.
The telephone association -- which gets more than half of its $8 million in dues from the seven Bells -- hosts lawmakers at conferences in such warmweather sites as Key West and Orlando, Fla.
During Washington's steamy summer recess, San Francisco-based Pacific Telesis flies congressional staffers to the West Coast for a conference that typically includes a tour of wine country.
Participants attend two days of seminars, then it is off to the Napa Valley.
"It would be kind of philistine not to offer" some reward for the work, says PacTel's Mr. Stowe.
He notes that AT&T invites lawmakers to an annual golf tournament at Pebble Beach, Calif.
The Bells' political talents haven't been lost on other multimedia trailblazers.
Before Tele-Communications Inc.'s merger with Bell Atlantic collapsed, TCI's John Malone confessed that he sought the deal partly because "we don't have the political skills necessary . . . to pursue this future on our own."
The Bells aren't monolithic.
The phone companies vow to compete with one another for local customers, and some of the Bells disagree over provisions of the legislation before Congress.
But in their attempt to cast off the line-of-business restrictions, they speak with one voice: Mickey McGuire's Mississippi drawl.
Before going to work last year for all seven Bells, Mr. McGuire was a BellSouth executive making more than $450,000 a year.
He owns a 185-acre spread in Virginia, has an office car and driver at his disposal and operates from behind a beautiful desk that was a gift from his previous employer and current nemesis: AT&T.
Away from Capitol Hill, the beefy former college basketball player schmoozes with lawmakers at various events, whether it's joining Democratic Sen. John Breaux of Louisiana at Mardi Gras or taking in a Redskins game with Rep. Michael Oxley, an Ohio Republican.
He also has a good relationship with Mr. Gore.
But above all, he talks tough -- even to friends.
When Rep. Tauzin hosted a Cajun crawfish boil last year, Mr. McGuire pressed him to write legislation unchaining the Bells.
After he demurred, in deference to the Brooks-Dingell negotiations, his office was peppered with calls from Bell officials questioning his allegiance.
"He's got a hard edge," Mr. Tauzin says of Mr. McGuire.
One subject of fierce dispute is who will regulate the Bells' entry into the $15 billion long-distance market within individual states.
The Bells want state regulation.
The long-distance companies fear the Bells hold too much sway in the states.
Besides the Florida scandal, the anti-Bell coalition points to an Oklahoma regulator who last year was charged with accepting a bribe from a Southwestern Bell lobbyist to influence a 1989 rate case.
The company, which hasn't been charged, denies any wrongdoing.
Mr. McGuire's take-no-prisoners attitude may already have backfired on the issue.
Senate Commerce Committee Chairman Ernest Hollings was an ally of the Bells, backing legislation to let them manufacture equipment.
BellSouth executives have been kind to him, too, sending thousands of dollars in campaign contributions.
But a few weeks ago the South Carolina Democrat proposed a bill to require the Bells to get federal approval to offer in-state long distance.
"I have been their boy . . . and they had me coached pretty good," Mr. Hollings said recently.
But he expressed impatience that the Bells have pressed too hard.
The long-distance companies recently started their own coalition, which has signed up Robert Beckel, once Walter Mondale's presidential campaign manager, to rustle the "grass roots."
But they can't hope to match the Bells' reach at the local level: an alliance with the influential Communications Workers of America, 450,000 employees spread across the country, and on-the-ground presence in virtually every congressional district.
Each year, the Bells hand out tens of millions of dollars to chambers of commerce, rotary clubs and the like.
In turn, the phone companies often find support for their legislative agenda in the form of resolutions, letters and phone calls to Capitol Hill.
"They nurture the grass roots one blade at a time," says an admiring AT&T lobbyist, Mike Baudhuin.
The Bells' message -- often directed at minority, education, elderly and disabled groups -- is appealing: Lifting line-of-business restrictions would usher in an age in which inner-city residents receive multimedia job training, rural schoolchildren can tap into the Library of Congress, and the infirm are diagnosed through home health-monitoring systems.
One group that backs the Bells' vision is the Alliance for Public Technology, an umbrella organization that includes the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the National Education Association and the World Institute on Disability.
"We're talking about the collective social good," says Barbara O'Connor, a communications professor who runs APT with former Federal Trade Commission member Mary Gardiner Jones.
APT acknowledges getting 40% of its $500,000 budget from the Bells.
And critics contend that, as a result, APT isn't asking the tough questions: How costly are these new services the Bells trumpet?
Who will pay for them?
Does anybody need them in the first place?
APT is "kind of irresponsible for a so-called public-interest organization," asserts Tony Pharr, of the United Church of Christ, an advocate for the poor.
Ralph Nader fears that APT won't address the "grim realities of oligopolies and greed and concentrations of power."
But the Bells know how to fight such arguments.
They recently enlisted a former Nader protege, Sam Simon, to help whip up support through a new "Campaign to Advance America's Telecommunications Future."
The campaign is urging community groups to press the Bells' case on Capitol Hill.
Compuware Corp., a software developer, said it completed a merger with Computer People Unlimited Inc., an information-technology services company headquartered in Milwaukee.
Terms weren't disclosed.
