The U.S. is preparing a two-front trade battle with Japan, which is trying to head off a fight on a third front.
The actions follow the collapse of the U.S.-Japan trade summit last week.
In the wake of that failure, the yen soared against the dollar yesterday.
Despite market speculation that the U.S. will try to boost the yen to make Japanese exports relatively more expensive, administration officials have said that isn't their intention.
They argue that broader market forces that could push down the yen, primarily the weakness of the Japanese economy, are too strong to counteract unilaterally.
The Clinton administration didn't act to stop the yen's rise during New York trading yesterday.
But last night, hoping to calm the foreign-exchange market, the U.S. Treasury issued a statement, attributed to a senior Treasury official and released just in time for the opening of the Tokyo markets.
It said, "Our exchange-rate policy is unchanged from that already articulated by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen: We do not believe in artificially manipulating exchange rates."
The U.S. hopes that its tough trade tactics will force Japan to retreat and adopt import goals that it dismissed last week.
To launch its campaign, the administration has decided to renew a tough trade provision, known as Super 301, that singles out countries for retaliation and is aimed at Japan.
Congressional staffers said the renewal would come as early as today, but Clinton officials said it might be several days later.
At the same time, the administration plans to launch trade-sanction proceedings today over a dispute with Japan over cellular telephones.
"We're looking at several options," President Clinton said, "but I'm not ruling anything out."
As prospects for conflict heightened, Japanese officials moved to calm yet another trade dispute, this one over supercomputers.
A Japanese government research institute announced yesterday that it would buy machines for a super-computer center from several American companies led by International Business Machines Corp.
Next month, the U.S. is scheduled to complete a special review and determine whether the Japanese government unfairly favors domestic super-computer makers.
"We're making a transition into a new way of doing business with Japan," said U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor.
"There's no more status quo," he said.
The administration's initial thrust features the renewal of Super 301 as a get-tough signal to Japan.
Under that provision, the U.S. targets countries engaged in a pattern of "unfair" trade practices and negotiates to end those practices.
If no agreement is reached within 18 months, the U.S. would retaliate, generally by imposing punitive tariffs on imports from the targeted country.
Congress passed Super 301 in 1988 to force the Bush administration to adopt a more militant trade policy.
In 1989, the U.S. targeted Japan, Brazil and India -- and eventually won concessions from the first two before the law expired in 1990.
Trade experts said the Clinton administration already has legal authority to go after countries without Super 301.
But by adopting the provision through executive order, the administration would clearly signal to Japan that it plans a confrontational strategy -- and doesn't need to be egged on by Congress.
The risk, said I.M. Destler, a Japan specialist at the University of Maryland, is that "you generate a nationalistic reaction in Japan and undercut the goals you seek."
Along with Super 301, the U.S. plans to elevate a fight over cellular telephones in order to highlight the closed nature of the Japanese market.
Motorola Inc. complains of being denied "comparable" access to the Japanese cellular-telephone market despite a trade agreement promising Motorola an open market.
The dispute centers on an area south of Tokyo, where the telecommunications ministry paired Motorola with a company that also represents Motorola's major Japanese rival, Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp.
Motorola has said that its partner spends most of its time pushing NTT's technology.
Now, Motorola wants the company to pledge to promote Motorola's system, and for the telecommunications ministry to police those pledges.
U.S. officials said that the ministry didn't make any move yesterday to resolve the controversy.
As a result, they expect to announce today that Tokyo violated the cellular deal -- the first step in imposing sanctions.
Under U.S. trade law, the administration would announce 30 days later a preliminary list of products on which the U.S. would impose punitive tariffs.
Trade officials look for products that are important to Japan's trade, and are also available from U.S. sources.
For instance, the U.S. wouldn't propose tariffs on videocassette recorders -- which aren't produced domestically -- but on items such as computers and power tools, which are.
In a dispute over cellular telephones, the U.S. probably would try to slap tariffs on Japanese exports of those goods.
After the preliminary list is published, the U.S. will hold a hearing on the items chosen, in order to give domestic industries a chance to say whether the tariffs would harm them.
Later on, the U.S. would publish a final list of sanction targets, then finally impose the tariffs.
The whole process can take more than three months.
That's on purpose.
The idea of trade sanctions isn't to impose tariffs, but to force a country to eliminate practices the U.S. finds objectionable.
Similarly, Super 301 envisions an 18-month investigation to give the U.S. time to twist the arms of its trade adversaries.
Japanese government officials declined to say yesterday whether they will offer last-minute concessions to stave off the U.S. threat on cellular phones.
But some officials said that Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa will meet soon with his advisers to try to craft a new response to U.S. trade complaints.
"We will continue our voluntary path to deregulate and open up markets," an official said.
U.S. trade officials said they are targeting the Motorola case because they have a strong case there.
Indeed, the Clinton administration moved up the date when it would announce a finding by six weeks, until just after the trade summit, so it could make it a test case of U.S.-Japanese trade relations.
With the super-computer dispute, which Tokyo tried to defuse yesterday, the U.S. case is much weaker.
Japanese officials say yesterday's contract award to the IBM group means six of the past 11 public super-computer bids have gone to U.S. makers.
"If this can be called `not fair,' there is no such thing as a fair process," said an official at Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry.
U.S. trade officials complain that Japan is simply trying to buy off the U.S. industry with the awards.
U.S. companies haven't won head-to-head competition with Japanese companies, Washington complains.
But the U.S. position on supercomputers in Japan is undercut by government practices at home.
U.S. agencies rarely, if ever, buy foreign supercomputers, partly because they know such purchases will cause them political grief.
In addition, Cray Research Inc., the biggest U.S. super-computer maker, said it doesn't want the U.S. to impose trade sanctions, which could lead to punitive tariffs on Cray's imports.
Cray buys $100 million annually in computer chips and other critical components from Japanese suppliers, a spokesman estimated.
"I doubt our suppliers want to see sanctions," he said.
Quentin Hardy in Tokyo contributed to this article.
