Gold and silver futures prices plummeted on waves of technical selling and an absence of the physical demand for precious metals that has supported these markets in recent months.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery was down $7.20 to $379.50 an ounce, while the actively traded March silver futures contract fell 16 cents to $4.98 an ounce.
Traders said heavy selling by a large New York investment bank helped to instigate the rout during the last half of the trading day.
As the afternoon wore on, the absence of Middle Eastern and Indian investors who lately have supported the market accelerated the pace of the price decline.
"Despite the bullish charts and euphoria by futures funds, the key is that physical demand has dried up in recent weeks," said Bernard Savaiko, senior analyst at PaineWebber Inc.
"The markets have been overbought, and the cash guys who bought at lower levels have started taking profits."
For weeks, gold prices have fluctuated in a range between roughly $380 and $395 an ounce, but prices fell below the bottom of that range yesterday, largely because of the absence of physical demand.
The price of silver seemed to follow gold's lead, analysts said.
Last year, heavy buying of silver bullion by Saudi investors, who worried about a possible devaluation of their currency, helped lend strength to both silver and gold prices.
Not so yesterday, however.
"I was disappointed in the physical demand," said Denise Giordano, director of bullion trading at Swiss Bank Corp.
"The guys in the Middle East seem quite content to let the market come to them."
Most of the buying of silver by Middle Eastern investors occurred last fall in the range from $4.40 to $4.50 an ounce.
As prices rose above $4.50 an ounce, commodity funds, which are managed pools of investors' money, jumped on the buying bandwagon.
Since then, however, the upward momentum of both the gold and silver markets has stalled -- and may be destined for further erosion.
In gold, Ms. Giordano said, "if we open today under $377, $370-to-$372 is the next level of support.
I think that level will hold."
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Wheat futures prices fell after the International Wheat Council forecast that foreign wheat imports would tumble this year and U.S. exporters would bear the brunt of the decline.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, wheat for March delivery was down 4 1/2 cents to $3.685 a bushel.
The wheat council estimates wheat imports by Russia will slide to six million metric tons in the 1993-94 season from 11.1 million tons a year ago.
Asian imports, including China, will fall to 29.4 million tons in 1994 from 33.4 million in 1993, the council said.
Russian imports will decline mainly because it is more difficult to obtain foreign borrowing credits -- not because Russia doesn't need the wheat.
In fact, wheat production in Russia is down to 43 million tons from 46.2 million a year ago, and the Russian government plans to lend farmers about $9 billion to buy fertilizers and equipment.
Asian purchases will be lower as a result of better crops in China, India and Pakistan, the council said.
ENERGY: The latest cold spell in much of the northern half of the country, particularly the Northeast, boosted prices for heating oil.
In the past five sessions on the New York Mercantile Exchange, February heating oil has surged more than five cents a gallon.
The contract settled yesterday at 53.06 cents a gallon, up 0.75 cent.
The cold weather has spurred demand for heating oil and depleted inventories at the same time.
Market participants pointed to an Energy Department report released Wednesday after trading ended in New York, which showed inventories fell by 8.9 million barrels in the week ended Dec. 21.
Nearly eight million barrels of the decline was on the East Coast, the world's largest heating-oil market.
Natural gas futures also rose because of the cold weather and a sharp decline in the level of gas in storage.
Gas for March delivery gained 5.8 cents per million British thermal units to settle at $2.417.
Meanwhile, traders took profits in crude oil futures.
The March contract settled at $15.42 a barrel, down five cents.
ALUMINUM: The price of aluminum soared to a six-month high of $1,244 a metric ton on expectations that producers would reach an agreement to slash aluminum output.
The price is up 20% from the commodity's low point last November.
Aluminum futures contracts are traded on the London Metal Exchange.
"The market is expecting an accord," said William Adams, analyst at Rudolf Wolff & Co., members of the London Metal Exchange.
Most analysts expect an annual cut of 1.5 to 2 million metric tons of aluminum -- including 500,000 tons less output from the Commonwealth of Independent States, Mr. Adams said.
