David B. Mathis has spent the past two years cleaning up Kemper Corp., but now it's possible he'll be clearing out.
GE Capital Corp.'s $2.2 billion bid for the Long Grove, Ill., money management, brokerage and insurance company comes just as the Kemper chairman and chief executive officer was beginning to see the payoff from his widely praised restructuring efforts.
Since taking charge in March 1992, Mr. Mathis has focused on making the company more attractive to investors through a rapid-fire divestiture of three long-standing businesses, and by dealing with knotty real-estate problems.
The revamping apparently worked, at least enough to attract the huge General Electric Co. financial-services unit, which has bid $55 a share for Kemper.
Mr. Mathis initially rebuffed the proposal as "not in the best interest of our stockholders," but the board is scheduled to formally review the GE Capital plan tomorrow at a regularly scheduled board meeting.
Mr. Mathis and Kemper officials have kept mum in the wake of the takeover bid.
But a person close to the 55-year-old career Kemper executive says Mr. Mathis wasn't surprised that an offer surfaced.
"When you go through the kind of restructuring Kemper's gone through," the person says, "you show up on every investment banker's screen in the country."
Mr. Mathis is said to have been surprised at the low price and the hostile stance GE adopted.
GE's bid comes at a time when Mr. Mathis, and Wall Street, had expected Kemper to show increased earnings momentum.
In particular, the company has drastically reduced its exposure to problem real-estate loans, which in the past three years generated about $1 billion in reserves, write-downs and joint-venture operating losses.
Such losses are expected to be negligible in 1994, in part because of the intense management resources the company has applied.
"Kemper finally seems to have its real-estate problems under control," said Merrill Lynch analyst Allen Nadler in a recently issued report praising management's "success in revitalizing the company."
He figures profit can grow at a 15% average annual rate over the next five years.
Soft-spoken and low-key, Mr. Mathis is considered a methodical and deliberate manager, not easily deflected from the goals he sets.
Indeed, his makeover of Kemper included divestiture of the reinsurance operation he once headed, sale of the property-casualty lines that were the company's historic centerpiece, and testing the waters to determine whether the company's brokerage business might fetch a satisfactory price.
Mr. Mathis's links with Kemper and its predecessor date back to his late teens, when he attended Lake Forest College in suburban Chicago as a "Kemper Scholar," a program that helps students with tuition and provides them with summer jobs at the insurance company.
After graduating in 1960, he joined the company's San Francisco office and handled insurance underwriting.
Later jobs took him to Belgium as part of Kemper's overseas expansion, and in 1982 he was named head of the company's reinsurance operation.
In 1989, he was named executive vice president for the insurance services group.
The following year, he became president and chief operating officer at Kemper Corp., working under Joseph E. Luecke, former chairman and chief executive.
He assumed the top Kemper Corp. jobs in 1992, when his predecessor retired.
He then set to work revamping Kemper.
A year ago, in one of his biggest restructuring moves, Kemper Corp. surprised observers by swapping its reinsurance unit to former parent Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co., in exchange for Kemper shares Lumbermens still held.
The move trimmed Lumbermens' Kemper holding to about 4% from 38%.
Kemper separately sold off its two profitable regional property-casualty businesses last year.
Mr. Mathis has also sought to realign the slimmed-down company so that the once-sprawling Kemper "speaks with one voice."
With that work largely done, he's also known to be interested in filling gaps in the company's asset-management business, and perhaps making an acquisition of a value-style asset manager that would complement Kemper's own growth-oriented investment style.
