As the ethics of personal stock trades stir up a ruckus in the mutual-fund industry, one thing is becoming clear: Personal trading by fund managers is widespread and sometimes feverish.
After Invesco Funds Group fired star manager John Kaweske for his alleged failure to report 10 or 20 personal trades, this newspaper asked some leading mutual-fund companies about the level of personal trading at their firms.
The answers: Baltimore's T. Rowe Price Associates says its most-active fund manager had 21 personal stock trades during the past 12 months.
In New York, Scudder, Stevens & Clark says that some of its portfolio managers do two or three trades a month.
More than half of Pioneer Group's portfolio managers had no trades in 1993, but one manager notched up 33 transactions, according to a spokeswoman for the Boston-based company.
The most active investor in Keystone Group's investment department in Boston did six personal trades in the last quarter of 1993.
Putnam Investments in Boston looked at a sampling of its mutual-fund managers; the most prolific trader had 48 buys and sells in 1993, with an average value of $2,500.
The heaviest trader at Denver-based Invesco clocked some 30 transactions during the past year.
But the busiest traders are believed to be at Fidelity Investments, the country's largest mutual-fund group.
Some managers at the Boston fund giant rack up as many as 200 personal trades in a year, according to knowledgeable people.
Fidelity declined to comment on that figure.
Former Fidelity employees say the firm's tradition of personal trading is closely associated with celebrated fund manager Peter Lynch, who ran Fidelity Magellan Fund for 13 hugely successful years before stepping down in 1990.
He now works part-time for the firm.
Mr. Lynch took out a personal loan in the 1970s so he would have more money to trade with in his personal account, according to a Fidelity spokeswoman.
Mr. Lynch also used to buy stocks on margin, which involves borrowing part of a stock's purchase price from a brokerage firm.
"Even prior to Peter, it was part of the culture to say `we're looking for people who trade for their own account,' " says William Hayes, a Fidelity managing director.
"If managers have money at risk, they more fully appreciate what it's like for shareholders to have money at risk."
Mr. Hayes says Fidelity looks to hire managers who "love the market.
It's a natural outgrowth that they'll occasionally want to trade for themselves.
In the long run, that makes them better managers and helps the shareholders -- and that shows in the funds' results."
Not all fund groups encourage their fund managers to trade.
Many feel, however, they have no choice but to allow managers to trade on their own -- a perfectly legal practice, when done within federal rules -- because banning personal trades might prompt talented money managers to quit.
"Anybody who's any good invests for their own account," says Donna Calder, a former Oppenheimer Management fund manager who now runs a New York-based hedge fund.
"It's one of the perks of the job, and a great one."
But personal trading also raises a slew of thorny issues.
It is illegal for managers to "front-run," by buying or selling a particular stock ahead of their firm's mutual funds.
Fund companies have strict rules to guard against front-running.
As a result, fund company executives and fund managers say they are more concerned about other abuses that are harder to detect.
Is a manager, for instance, spending too much time working on his personal account?
Is he choosing not to buy a stock for his fund so that he can buy it instead for his personal account?
Is a manager getting a special favor from a stock promoter, such as participation in a private placement or an initial public offering, as an inducement to buy other deals for his fund?
"Any time a manager trades for his own account, there's the potential for a conflict of interest," says William Keithler, who left Invesco to become manager of Berger Small Company Growth Fund.
"I don't do . . . a lot of trading for myself.
And when I do, I buy something I deem too speculative for my own fund.
Most of the time, it doesn't work out.
The stock certificates end up as wallpaper."
Mr. Keithler notes that he can no longer trade for his own account.
His new employer, Berger Associates, recently barred portfolio managers from owning individual stocks in their personal accounts, following the firing of Invesco's Mr. Kaweske.
There's been no rush to follow Berger's move, though many firms have said they are reviewing their policies.
Richard Fontaine, manager of Fontaine Capital Appreciation Fund, says personal trading is less prevalent now than it was in the early 1980s, when he entered the money-management business.
Back then, "this wasn't a high-paying business," says Mr. Fontaine.
"There were guys who told you they only made $100,000 in salary, but they made another $100,000 in their personal account.
But these days, everybody's making a lot of money" from managing funds, so personal trading is less important.
Senior fund managers now make an average $170,000, according to New York's Buck Consultants.
But total compensation for top managers at a few funds can run to $2 million and more, says Richard Lannamann, a managing director with executive recruiters Russell Reynolds Associates.
If money isn't the issue, why do managers trade for their own accounts rather than simply investing their money in their own and other mutual funds?
For the best managers, investing is "not only their profession, it's their hobby," says Steven Somes, a fund manager with Boston's State Street Research & Management.
"They love the markets.
That love is what separates the really good managers from the rest."
Mr. Somes says he buys 10 to 20 stocks a year in his personal account.
Managers insist personal trading doesn't detract from efforts they put into managing their funds.
"There's this idea that fund mangers spend half or three-quarters of their time investing for their own account," says Ms. Calder, the former manager with Oppenheimer Management, which isn't related to Oppenheimer & Co.
"That's not the case.
I didn't spend a lot of time on my own account."
She says that, in any one year as a fund manager, she never bought more than 12 to 15 stocks for her personal account.
Should fund investors worry about those personal trades?
"I don't think it has anything to do with the mutual-fund investor," Ms. Calder responds.
"Mutual-fund investors are there to make a positive return on their investment, and that's all they should be concerned about."
