Ronaldo Cunha Lima, the governor of the northeastern state of Paraiba, was upset.
His predecessor, Tarcisio Burity, had accused Mr. Lima's son of corruption.
So, last November, Mr. Lima went to a restaurant where Mr. Burity was having lunch, pulled out a gun and shot him twice.
"In the northeast, you wash your honor with a shot in the mouth," Mr. Lima explained two days later.
By then, he was already out of jail, and he soon resumed his functions.
Meanwhile, words of sympathy poured in from all over Brazil -- not for the victim, who miraculously survived, but for his assailant.
"The governor adopted a dignified posture because he was the one who shot," said the speaker of Brazil's Senate, Humberto Lucena.
"Had he adopted a less dignified posture, he would have sent someone else to do it."
The municipal council of Campina Grande, Mr. Lima's political redoubt, voted to grant him a medal.
And Paraiba's state legislature overwhelmingly voted against a Supreme Court request to try Mr. Lima before his term expires at year end.
This odd tale may help answer a vexing question: Why is Brazil, Latin America's giant, mired in crisis while the rest of the continent is taking off?
Part of the answer, many say, may lie in Brazil's ethics.
Just as many Brazilians failed to see anything gravely wrong with Gov. Lima's actions, they have long been complacent about runaway inflation, systemic corruption and frightening violence.
Rather than confront problems head-on, Brazilians find ways to avoid them, justify them or even benefit from them.
And just as politicians rallied around Gov. Lima, so do other entrenched groups close ranks when threatened, allowing personal or parochial interests to override collective ones and impeding reforms.
Former Finance Minister Mailson da Nobrega calls this ethos a "culture of accommodation."
Congressman Roberto Campos calls it "collective stupidity."
Economist Antonio Kandir calls it "a pact of mediocrity."
But whatever the name, Brazilians are increasingly realizing that it blocks the country's turnaround and that Brazil needs more than structural adjustment.
It needs moral adjustment.
"The fundamental reason we can't get our act together is we're an amoral society," says Lawrence Pih, a Sao Paulo businessman.
This creates big problems for the government.
A constitutional revision to remove some inflationary requirements is bogged down in Congress.
So are efforts to fight inflation through an income-tax increase and suspension of a few constitutionally mandated transfers of tax revenue to states and municipalities.
"The political class doesn't have the civic grandeur to stop the countdown to a social implosion," writes Joelmir Betting, a newspaper columnist.
Such is Brazil's reluctance to see its problems that Jose Augusto Assumpcao Brito, president of a trade group for small companies, calls it a case for an ophthalmologist.
"What Brazil needs is a pair of eyeglasses," he says.
Brazil's deep-seated problems have long been masked by the size and dynamism of its economy.
In 1993, coming off a recession, it grew by about 4.5%.
But the uneven distribution of this growth makes it ever harder to ignore the consequences of Brazil's anything-goes mentality.
The same Congress that ousted President Fernando Collor de Mello on corruption charges last year now is engulfed in a huge graft scandal of its own.
Judges, lawyers and officials are accused of colluding in a $1.2 billion scheme to defraud the social-security system through inflated labor-court settlements.
Dozens of policemen and even a Rio de Janeiro state deputy have been charged with involvement in death-squad massacres.
And per-capita income, adjusted for inflation, has fallen 9.5% since 1990.
Studies show that 32 million Brazilians -- 20% of the population -- live below the poverty line.
"The national crisis has exceeded all limits," former President Jose Sarney, who himself is battling allegations of illicit enrichment, wrote recently.
"Heroic decisions are needed."
Some say Brazil is hurtling toward hyperinflation, a social explosion or even a coup.
Inflation is so intractable that Arnaldo Jabor, a movie director and columnist, sees only one explanation: "We desire hyperinflation.
We want to see how life is after death."
But others believe Brazil is nearing a cathartic break with its culture of accommodation and the political system that sustains it.
Just as a wave of scandals finally led Italy to start dismantling the entrenched alliance of corruption between business and politics, so Brazil's crisis is triggering an ethical backlash and calls for a Brazilian version of Italy's "Clean Hands" crackdown.
"We're on the verge of a big bang," says Mario Garnero, a prominent banker.
"The whole system is unsustainable."
Starting with the ouster of Mr. Collor, Brazil has begun reversing what has long been its own version of Clean Hands: washing its hands of glaring problems.
Such as inflation, which Marcio Moreira Alves, a political scientist, calls "the mother of almost all other crises."
Since 1960, Brazilian prices have multiplied a staggering 22 billion times, according to economist Celso Martone.
Brazil changes currencies "like a baby changes diapers," says Gustavo Franco, a central banker: four times in seven years, lopping off three zeros nearly every time.
Except for 1986, when a long price freeze limited inflation to a mere 65%, the annual rate in the past decade has never been under 211%.
The 1993 rate of 2,567% set a record.
And yet, Valentino Rizzioli, chief executive of two machinery companies owned by Italy's Fiat SpA, contends that "inflation doesn't exist in Brazil."
He isn't crazy.
Prices rise daily for him, too.
But, as with millions of Brazilians, so does his income, thanks to sophisticated indexation.
Rather than attack inflation, Brazil lives with it through a mechanism that adjusts wages and assets to it, in some cases daily.
As a result, Congressman Campos says, "people are more preoccupied with having a good indexator than a low inflation rate" -- even though indexation perpetuates inflation.
Thus have many Brazilians learned to tolerate, even like, inflation.
For some, it brings big gains.
At Mr. Pih's flour-milling company, Moinho Pacifico SA, it turned an operating loss equivalent to $1.8 million into a $3.6 million profit in 1992.
How did he do it?
He buys flour abroad and has 180 days to pay for it.
But he mills the flour as soon as it is delivered and sells it for immediate payment.
He puts the money into financial instruments that pay two percentage points above inflation per month -- the price that banks have to pay to attract deposits.
"After six months, I've earned 12%," Mr. Pih says.
"So, if I owe 100, I have 112.
That 12 is profit that more than offsets my operating loss.
This, generalized, makes business unwilling to attack inflation."
The government, too, is "married to inflation," says Edmar Bacha, senior adviser at the Finance Ministry.
Its revenue -- tax receipts -- is indexed.
Income tax, paid monthly, isn't calculated in Brazil's currency, the cruzeiro real, but in a unit of account, the ufir, whose value rises in step with inflation.
But the government's expenditures are largely unindexed, so the longer it waits to spend money on programs, the less it actually needs to spend.
The higher the inflation, the lower the deficit.
"The government depends on superinflation to balance its accounts," Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso said recently -- though he admits that this can't go on much longer.
The flip side of this system, however, is a collapse in public services and a steady worsening of daily life for the majority of Brazilians, who lack protection from inflation.
Their voices have long been drowned out by the proinflation lobby and ignored by the political system.
"The ruling class looks at inflation and the poverty created by it with the same nonchalance with which it contemplated slavery last century," says Mr. Jabor, the movie director.
Political scientist Bolivar Lamounier, writing in the newspaper Folha de Sao Paulo, describes the gulf between those whose income is indexed and those who feel inflation as "monetary apartheid."
Inflation's destructive effects can be seen in Jacarezinho, a favela, or shantytown, north of Rio where about 180,000 people live in cramped brick buildings in a maze of winding lanes.
This slum has a medical dispensary, but no doctor has worked there for three years because the salaries are so low.
Recently, half the favela went without running water for two weeks.
The favela has no public schools.
There are a couple of private ones, but with tuition running nearly half the minimum wage of about $70 a month, few can afford it.
"We have hundreds of kids here who don't go to school and stay in the streets alone all day while their parents are at work," says Jose Thomaz da Conceicao, president of the residents' association.
At night, armed people roam the streets, and sometimes drug gangs do battle in firefights.
"You're in constant danger here," says Jose Carlos Peixoto, a young lawyer who lives in Jacarezinho.
"There's a complete inversion of values: Those who work and study are bums.
Those who count here are the ones who rob and have guns."
That is because many who work earn the minimum wage, which is raised only once every four months and is nearly worthless by the second month.
Laetitia Constancia da Silva, a slight 29-year-old, depends on the minimum wage that her husband earns at a supermarket, plus her occasional income as a cleaning lady, to feed her husband, daughter, two sisters and five young nephews.
The children have no shoes.
Mrs. da Silva's daughter doesn't go to school.
One nephew goes to a public school in a nearby favela -- walking there because the bus fare costs too much.
The family mostly eats rice and beans.
Sometimes, cooking gas runs out before the month does; "we can't afford more than one bottle," Mrs. da Silva says.
People in Jacarezinho are outraged -- but mostly resigned to their fate.
"What's my voice compared to that of the powerful?" asks Eliane Marques dos Santos, a 42-year-old nurse.
"The powerful aren't even blind to our problems, because the blind might not see but they feel their way around.
Here, the powerful just crash through our problems as if they didn't exist."
In fact, some in the elite are starting to take note.
"There's nothing more anti-ethical than inflation at its current level," Emerson Kapaz said recently as he accepted Brazil's Businessman-of-the-Year award.
"The time has more than come for us businessmen to become indignant about our own passivity . . . .
Inflation will drop only when we become aware, as a society, of how evil it is."
The politicians haven't woken up, however.
"Every economic team that comes to power makes the same diagnosis: The state is bankrupt, we have to do a tax reform, we have to privatize," says Francisco Gros, a former central-bank president.
"But you can't convince the politicians of the gravity of the situation."
It is a problem of personal vs. collective interests.
In Brazil's pork-barrel politics, a good politician is one who brings public works and public-sector jobs to his power base and votes for generous social measures.
"Congress is like a big town council," former Finance Minister da Nobrega says.
"They want money for a soccer field or a square.
They vote generous wage bills, sing the national anthem and then send the bill for it all elsewhere."
Moreover, Brazil's electoral system is heavily weighted in favor of the poorest states, which "want to maintain the status quo because they rely on state transfers from Brasilia," says Eduardo Giannetti da Fonseca, an economist.
Brazil's 1988 constitution required the government to transfer a significant part of tax revenue to states and municipalities but didn't withdraw corresponding responsibilities from Brasilia.
The result of all this is a seemingly unstoppable inflationary machine.
"We see the reforms happening in Chile, Argentina or Mexico, but it doesn't translate into pressure to do the same here because Congress's logic is different," Mr. da Nobrega says.
"Brazil's Congress has a high degree of social irresponsibility."
Nowhere is this more evident than in the current congressional scandal.
While social services collapsed, a group of deputies funneled funds reserved for philanthropic institutions into shell charities they controlled -- and thus into their own pockets, according to a congressional investigative committee.
Several deputies also included budgetary amendments authorizing overpriced, and in part unneeded, public works in return for kickbacks from contractors.
The committee found that the budget included funds to build already-built or phantom hospitals.
Meanwhile, the Hospital da Posse, the biggest public hospital in Baixada Fluminense, the huge sprawl of poor suburbs north of Rio where more than five million people live, is an empty shell.
Almost out of money, the hospital has closed its emergency unit as well as its surgical, pediatric and obstetrics wards.
It no longer takes in patients because it has no food or medicine.
When its two cases of X-ray film run out, it will close that department, too, just as it stopped doing ultrasound tests when the machine broke down.
All it still does is outpatient consultations, which require just a pen and paper.
Where do sick people go?
"A lot of them go to the cemetery," says Thales Cardoso de Mattos, the director.
"They have to go to Rio, which is over an hour's drive away, and many die on the way.
There's international attention when 10 street kids are massacred, but here 20 people die a day in a silent massacre."
Such stuff undermines democracy.
Dr. de Mattos says it makes him "want to take up arms."
Mrs. dos Santos pines for the days when the military ran things.
Yet both, like many others, say that if Brazil's economy grows despite all this, its problems aren't as intractable as they seem.
"It's not money that's lacking in Brazil," Mrs. dos Santos says.
"It's shame."
