The mortars that the IRA fired at Heathrow Airport beginning last week didn't explode.
No one was hurt.
And foreign tourists aren't canceling trips here.
So far, anyway.
But the shelling of Heathrow indicates that the Irish Republican Army, by stepping up attacks on economic targets, hopes to find a crack in Britain's determination -- a determination that previous attacks on political targets failed to dent.
Still, many experts are skeptical that this tactic, clearly aimed at undermining Britain's huge tourism industry, will work.
After all, even the high-profile, destructive bombings of the City of London's financial district in 1992 and 1993 failed to materially disrupt business operations there.
And the official British government view is that the bombs had no impact on the government's position toward what is known euphemistically here as the "Irish question."
Seen as strategy, though, "I support the theory that the IRA moves from one economically sensitive target to another," says Michael Cassidy, policy chairman for the Corporation of London, which runs the City.
"The City of London was clearly vulnerable and had high-value properties.
Heathrow is another one."
Nonetheless, he maintains that, despite one death and #1 billion ($1.5 billion) in damages, the City didn't lose "a single business."
Still, if the IRA can succeed in scaring off tourists, the impact could be significant.
Some 19.3 million tourists -- including 3.3 million from the U.S. and Canada -- visited Britain from abroad last year and spent #9.1 billion.
North American tourists are particularly skittish about overseas travel when the specter of terrorism raises its head.
The number of North Americans traveling to Britain dropped 26% in 1986 after U.S. planes bombed Libya.
The number plummeted again by 22% in 1991 because of the Persian Gulf War.
"Traditionally, the American market is insular," notes Paul Allan, chairman of the Guild of Business Travel Agents.
"They say, `Oh God, something's going on at Heathrow.'"
Thus, if the IRA can keep disrupting the airport, the number of American visitors could shrink, he says.
But doing sufficient damage to scare off tourists poses risks for the IRA as well.
For one, a handful of unexploded homemade mortars -- while generating world-wide publicity -- may not be enough.
Fundamentalist Muslim terrorists have crippled the tourist industry in Egypt, which the government says cut income to $1.3 billion last year from $2.1 billion in 1992.
But they have done so by directly attacking tourists -- killing three Westerners in luxury hotels last fall, for example.
Although some IRA attacks have killed civilians and bystanders, the organization can ill afford to kill foreign tourists, even if by accident, say those who monitor the group.
"The IRA depends on international opinion in a way that Egyptian fundamentalists don't," notes Steve Bruce, an expert on terrorism at University of Aberdeen.
"Does the IRA seriously want a large number of dead American tourists?"
Moreover, even if the IRA does succeed in scaring away tourists without killing them, that might not help it achieve its goal of forcing the British out of Northern Ireland.
For all their success in targeting tourists, and hurting Egypt's economy, Islamic fundamentalists haven't won any major policy changes from the government of President Hosni Mubarak.
Algerian fundamentalists, while damaging their nation's economy by targeting foreign businesses, haven't fared any better.
"There's no evidence that these tactics work . . . because all of these countries are quite determined to resist the agenda of these groups," says Philip Zelikow, a Harvard University assistant professor and former National Security Council member during the Bush administration.
Indeed, as Mr. Cassidy notes, last year's bombing of the City of London is viewed as a ripple that has largely disappeared.
No corporations have pulled out, even though the IRA underscored its actions by writing threatening letters to top foreign financial companies (except American ones).
Paul Wilkinson, an expert on terrorism at the University of St. Andrews, says that IRA violence -- economic or political -- won't make the British government budge.
"When you remember what Londoners went through in the blitz during World War II, the massive destruction, it's pretty clear that terrorism as a weapon won't have an effect," he argues.
Adds Prof. Bruce, "The British government have already spent squillions over 25 years" fighting IRA violence, "so a few more years won't bother them that much."
But others say that terrorism may be more effective than the government and some experts acknowledge.
Protestants in Northern Ireland have said publicly that the joint declaration between British and Irish governments signed last December as a framework for peace was evidence that the IRA's campaign of violence is paying off.
Moreover, secret contacts between the IRA and the British government last spring, some Protestants note, occurred around the time of the second City bombing.
In the declaration, Britain agreed that Northern Ireland's future should be decided by a majority of its population, even if it decides to leave the U.K. and become part of the Irish Republic; although this isn't likely currently because Protestants are in the majority, this could happen in the future.
Sinn Fein, the IRA's political arm, maintains that all of Ireland should decide the north's future.
Sinn Fein has yet to agree to negotiate under the peace framework, arguing that the British government must make more concessions.
Even if the increased security at Heathrow prevents further IRA attacks that scare off tourists, the mortars will have served another purpose.
"What the IRA was doing with Heathrow was proving how bloody good they are at causing maximum disruption," notes Prof. Bruce.
"To be able to have that kind of impact on lives of so many people is a major show of competence."
