The Senate defeated a proposal to make Medicare bear the brunt of new budget cuts, raising the prospect of a tighter squeeze on the defense budget and President Clinton's domestic spending initiatives.
The proposal, offered by a bipartisan group of senators hoping to protect the Pentagon, lost 63-35 after top Democrats warned that its Medicare reductions would damage prospects for health-care reform.
Even so, the Senate's version of a 1995 budget resolution, which the lawmakers are expected to pass today , would still leave Congress and the administration with the task of identifying other programs to absorb $26 billion in additional cuts over the next five years.
The extra cuts, which deficit-minded senators made in the Budget Committee last week and administration allies couldn't overturn on the floor, were the most significant change that either house of Congress has made in Mr. Clinton's $1.5 trillion spending plan for the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1.
Democratic leaders still hope to scuttle or dilute the cuts in compromise negotiations with the House, which didn't include them in the version it passed earlier this month.
"We're going to have to fight to maintain" the cuts, said Sen. Charles Grassley (R., Iowa), who pushed for the additional deficit reduction along with Sen. James Exon (D., Neb.).
The two Midwesterners hope election-year pressures will help a similar bipartisan group in the House overcome objections of Democratic leaders there as well.
The Senate version of the budget resolution envisions a 1995 deficit of $174 billion, some $52 billion less than the current fiscal year as a result of the improving economy and last year's deficit-reduction program.
Democratic leaders have warned that additional austerity measures this year could damp the economic recovery.
Decisions on specific programs to be cut would come later this year as Congress passes annual appropriations bills.
Senate Appropriations Chairman Robert Byrd (D., W.Va.) has warned that much of the money would come from defense, but any extra cuts are certain to increase pressure on the education, infrastructure, and job-training "investments" that Mr. Clinton says are essential for long-term economic growth.
The toughest choices wouldn't come immediately, however, since only $1.6 billion of the extra cuts are slated for the 1995 budget.
Already, spending caps in the $500 billion deficit-reduction program Congress passed last year prohibit increases in overall discretionary spending, even for inflation, for the next five years.
That has touched off intense competition for funds among defense, Mr. Clinton's investments and existing domestic programs with powerful defenders on Capitol Hill.
That squeeze on discretionary programs -- the ones for which Congress sets spending levels each year -- led to yesterday's proposal to shift $18.4 billion of the extra cuts to Medicare, one of the so-called "entitlement" programs for which the government must provide benefits to anyone who qualifies.
Republican Pete Domenici of New Mexico and Democrat Sam Nunn of Georgia, who heads the Armed Services Committee, argued that entitlements were a better target for cuts because they're the principal reason the budget deficit is projected to shoot up again by the end of the decade.
But Senate Finance Committee Chairman Daniel Patrick Moynihan cast the choice as "a fateful decision" for Mr. Clinton's troubled health-care plan, which depends on Medicare savings for its financing scheme.
That argument helped Mr. Domenici's opponents patch together an odd coalition including Democratic liberals concerned with health care and Republican conservatives eager to lock in cuts in other domestic programs.
