Two of the nation's largest pension funds have joined a nonprofit builder and three of California's biggest financial institutions to launch an affordable-housing initiative that its backers tout as a model for the country.
The effort, which is expected to provide $340 million of construction loans to finance building up to 5,000 housing units in California over the next three years, represents the first foray by pension funds into affordable housing lending.
Spearheaded by Bridge Housing Corp., a nonprofit builder of low-income housing based here, and World Savings & Loan Association of Oakland, Calif., the deal provides a revolving line of credit that its supporters say could inspire other such undertakings between nonprofit agencies and the private sector.
"It might develop into billions and more billions, and we can begin to make a dent in the need for affordable housing," said Herbert M. Sandler, chairman and chief executive of World Savings, a unit of Golden West Financial Corp.
Henry G. Cisneros, secretary of Housing and Urban Development, who participated in a news conference via satellite, called the project "an historic innovation" and added, "The model has tremendous application across the country."
Mr. Cisneros said HUD is asking for $500 million in federal funds to expand a pilot program in which $100 million of government money was leveraged into a $1.2 billion fund to build low-income housing in 25 cities.
About half the money came from an AFL-CIO pension trust earmarked for affordable housing.
Until recently, pension funds have been very skittish about wading into residential construction lending, especially multifamily or low-income dwellings.
The new initiative is hailed as the largest private-sector deal of its kind.
The California Public Employees' Retirement System, known as Calpers, is footing $150 million for construction loans and taking a 60% interest in each project.
The California Teachers' Retirement System, or Calsters, is putting up $75 million in credit enhancements.
In the past 18 months, Calpers has ventured into lending money and taking an equity interest in single-family home construction in California, but that financing has been targeted at selected builders and brings 20% or better returns, high rates reflective of the credit scarcity for the home-building industry in a state that's slowly climbing out of a recessionary hole.
By contrast, the Calpers affordable-housing loans fetch prime interest rates plus one percentage point, or about 7%.
Calpers was willing to accept lower returns because the project offered much less risk, Mr. Sandler said.
World Savings started the ball rolling a year ago with a no-interest $15 million contribution.
Mr. Sandler said he had been moved to tears at the ribbon-cutting ceremony for a Bridge Housing project where 3,000 applicants drew lots for 108 apartments on San Francisco's waterfront.
"The reality hit me of how much needed to be done," Mr. Sandler said.
Bridge Housing, one of the nation's biggest builders of low-income housing, has put up 5,000 units in the past decade, about as many as it expects to build under the new deal in a third of the time.
The initiative also involves Wells Fargo & Co. and BankAmerica Corp., which are underwriting the loans and together kicking in more than $100 million for the same returns as the pension funds.
The Ford Foundation is adding grants and loans that work out to an interest-free commitment of $3.75 million.
The first two projects to break ground will be 344 family apartments in Carlsbad, near San Diego, and 34 townhomes for first-time homebuyers in Richmond, across the bay from San Francisco.
The Richmond homes, which will sell for about $83,000, are aimed at families earning $25,000 to $29,000.
"In the Bay Area, generally people in that income range are renters for life," said Donald Terner, president of Bridge Housing.
