Mescalero Apache Tribe leaders tentatively agreed to allow a Minnesota utility to store spent nuclear fuel on its reservation, in an initial step toward establishing a privately operated nuclear-waste storage site.
Under the pact, tribal leaders conditionally agreed to let Minneapolis-based Northern States Power Co. store used fuel rods from its nuclear power plant in above-ground sealed metal casks on the tribe's reservation in southern New Mexico.
"In order to make this a viable project, we need more than the spent fuel from NSP," James J. Howard, the utility's chairman and chief executive officer, said in an interview.
He added that the company will now begin contacting other utilities to determine whether they're interested in joining the venture.
The pact is sure to spark controversy, and any final contract must be approved by a vote of the tribe membership -- about 3,200 people.
Late yesterday, New Mexico's governor vowed to "resist any effort to locate such a facility in New Mexico," while conceding that the Mescalero Apaches, as a self-governing tribe, have the right to enter into such a deal.
The federal government is obligated to begin accepting spent rods from utilities in future years, and it's been seeking to establish a so-called "Monitored Retrievable Storage" facility.
Such a facility would allow the radioactive fuel to be stored on an interim basis until a permanent disposal site is developed sometime in the next century.
But the government's effort is bogged down, and the Mescalero Apaches decided to "explore a private venture" as a result of delays.
Terms of the tentative agreement, which one tribal official described as "another step along our road to self-sufficiency," are still subject to negotiation, NSP said.
The business-oriented Mescalero Apaches already operate a ski resort, a large cattle herd, and a logging operation on the reservation.
Like other utilities with nuclear plants, Northern States now stores many years' worth of used-up, but still radioactive, fuel rods underwater, in swimming-pool-like structures on the site of its plant.
The pools were intended to be only a temporary holding point for rods that would be shipped to reprocessing sites, or expected disposal.
But plans to establish reprocessing facilities were canceled in the 1970s and the rods the plants continue to produce are still put in the "temporary" pools.
NSP is seeking clearance by the end of April from Minnesota officials to store the older rods from its Prairie Island plant in above-ground casks on site.
The company hopes to store the casks at the Minnesota nuclear facility until about the year 2001 or 2002, by which time the New Mexico facility would be able to receive them.
If the utility doesn't get additional spent-fuel storage facilities, the company says it will have to begin shutting the plant, beginning in 1995.
The facility represents 20% of the company's total generating capacity.
Under the agreement with the tribe, the utilities that make use of its storage site will assume responsibility and liability for transporting the spent fuel to the facility, and will retain ownership of the fuel while it's stored there.
