Shearson, one of the biggest names on Wall Street for nearly a century, may soon bite the dust.
A planning committee of Travelers Inc., parent of brokerage giant Smith Barney Shearson Inc., recently voted to consider dropping the Shearson name on May 1, people familiar with the matter said.
The Travelers unit was formed in July by combining Shearson's brokerage operations with Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co.
It's likely the Shearson name will indeed be shelved, the people said.
The problem with Shearson, it seems, it that it doesn't have much cache anymore.
Before its merger with Smith Barney, Shearson had been mired in red ink for several years -- including a 1990 loss of $966 million, a record for the brokerage business.
"With all the baggage, people will be just as happy that it's gone," says Theodore A. Krebsbach, Shearson's former litigation chief who is now with Kittay Gold & Krebsbach, a New York law firm.
"But I have a tough time believing that the Smith Barney name is much better."
The likelihood of dropping Shearson surprised some brokerage executives.
That's because Travelers Chairman Sanford I. Weill, who made his mark on Wall Street by cobbling together Shearson in the 1970s and 1980s, has always kept the Shearson signature throughout a series of mergers and acquisitions.
"Obviously he loves Shearson, but he's willing to go the way" of the committee, a person familiar with the matter said.
Mr. Weill was out of the country and unavailable for comment.
The Shearson talks are part of a broader review of the Travelers name and its relationship with various units.
One matter under review, for instance, is not using the Travelers name in connection with its brokerage unit, because of the insurance connotation that the Travelers name and its famous red-umbrella logo brings.
Shearson has been among Wall Street's longest running names since it was founded in 1902 as Shearson Hammill & Co. by Ed Shearson, a Canadian brokerage executive.
Shearson Hammill's name stayed the same for 72 years before Hayden Stone bought it in 1974 and called it Shearson Hayden Stone.
Since then, the firm has been called Shearson Loeb Rhoades (1979); Shearson/American Express (1981); Shearson Lehman/American Express (1984); Shearson Lehman Brothers (1985) and Shearson Lehman Hutton (1988).
It reverted to the name Shearson Lehman Brothers in 1990 before last year's change to Smith Barney Shearson -- when for the first time the Shearson name didn't get top billing.
There's still a chance that the Shearson name will remain for selected divisions of Smith Barney.
Some Smith Barney mutual funds, for instance, may retain the Shearson moniker, the people said.
And, "Shearson may carry more weight in international and investment-banking circles," a person familiar with the matter said.
