Neither a purebred bank nor a traditional finance institution, Surety Capital has carved a niche as a specialty lender that finances insurance premiums, offers secured credit cards, and makes a market buying insurance claims owed to doctors' offices.
Surety has built itself one of the banking world's most enviable interest-rate spreads -- the difference between the rate paid on deposits and the rate imposed for loans -- a key measure of a bank's profitability.
Surety's average spread of 7.27 percentage points in 1993 ranks as one of the best among the roughly 1,200 banks in Texas, and is in the top 10% nationally.
Even more amazing is its return on assets, a staggering 12%, in an industry where 1% is considered healthy.
Problem is, few outside of the company even know this company exists.
No analysts who track Surety's exploits could be found.
The company's stock, a Nasdaq small-capitalization issue, basically trades by appointment only, with a scant 4,160 shares-a-day average trading volume.
But the meager band of fans familiar with Surety say this $50 million-in-assets banking concern is poised for growth that, within the year, could triple the value of its shares, which currently trade at around $3.25, its yearly low.
"They are masters at niche banking, and growing aggressively," says Jeffrey Stone, president of Stone Asset Management in Dallas.
"At this price, they certainly warrant a buy."
Buying, however, isn't what most have been doing with Surety's shares.
Despite strong earnings for 1993 -- 19 cents a share compared with zero earnings the year before -- and estimates that the company will double its per-share profit this year, short sellers have been hounding Surety stock, helping to drive the price down in the past year from a high approaching $11, adjusted for a 1-for-10 reverse stock split last summer.
Traders say the shorts -- who borrow shares and immediately sell them, hoping to replace them later at a lower price and, thus, pocket the difference -- are banking that Surety's insurance-premium financing business, which accounts for about one-third of the company's revenue, could be hard hit by the Clinton health-care system, which hopes to implement universal coverage, a concept that would mean fewer individuals financing their insurance premiums.
But there's a huge flaw in that reasoning: Surety doesn't finance health-care premiums for individuals; it finances property and casualty-insurance premiums for businesses.
"Because there's no one following the company, a lot of people have a misconstrued notion of what Surety does," says Laurel Miller, a broker at Dallas Research & Trading, a market maker for Surety's stock.
The company's insurance premium-loan portfolio has grown to more than $16 million from $1 million in 1987.
Those loans carry big annual interest rates of 6% to 31%, with the average yield topping 13%.
Yearly losses have been less than 0.5%.
In its medical-factoring business, Surety buys insurance claims owed to medical offices and hospitals, typically advancing 50% of the claim value.
When the insurance company pays off, usually within 30 to 60 days, Surety takes its fee of 2%, then forwards the balance to the medical office.
Since Surety only buys claims already approved for payment by insurance firms, the company says, it has never experienced a credit loss.
Yields have exceeded 25% annually.
Health-care reform, which many argue will result in even longer processing times for claims, "just means an increase in business for us," says Surety Chairman and Chief Executive Officer C. Jack Bean.
Surety also has had zero losses on the secured credit cards it offers, which carry an annual rate of 17.9% and are backed by a mandatory savings account at one of the company's Surety Bank branches.
Surety, with single branches in Hurst, Chester, Lufkin and Wells, also makes traditional consumer and commercial loans, which generate about one-third of its revenue.
The two problems Surety faces are interest rates inching back up, and lack of adequate capital to continue growing.
Interest rates, Mr. Stone contends, don't pose a serious threat, though the specter of inflation would buffet the stock market, particularly small-capitalization issues such as Surety.
But Surety has something of a secret weapon: Where its peers hold loans that mature years hence, Surety's insurance-premium financing loans extend for eight or nine months, maximum.
Medical-factoring loans are outstanding for one or two months.
Thus, Surety can quickly adjust to interest-rate increases.
As for growth, the company is constrained by a lack of assets.
"Fifty million," Mr. Bean concedes, "only goes so far."
But Surety is in the midst of an aggressive program to expand its assets to $500 million by 1998.
The company currently has in its sights three small country banks it wants to buy in 1994; those acquisitions would boost assets to $75 million.
Surety targets small banks with tiny loan-to-deposit ratios; that allows the company to funnel the surplus assets into its niche-banking services.
Surety Capital Corp.
Year ended Dec. 31, 1993:
Fourth quarter ended Dec. 31, 1993:
*Includes a gain of $80,000, or four cents a share, on recovery of a prior loan loss.
January was a good month for Tesoro Petroleum.
Shares of the San Antonio company lead the list of Texas stocks with the largest year-to-date gain, up more than 88% to $10.375.
Last week, the company reported net income of $16.6 million, or $1 a share, for the fourth quarter, compared with a loss of $24.9 million, or $1.93 a share, in the year-earlier period.
Tesoro's stock price began rising in mid-January on news that broker/dealers Loeb Partners and Loeb Arbitrage Fund of New York acquired a 5.4% stake in the company.
CNBC financial correspondent Dan Dorfman also noted last week that Tesoro is ripe for an "earnings blowout."
Shares of La Quinta Motor Inns, San Antonio, increased 11.6% to $34.75 and traded more than four times their average daily volume, after the company said its board authorized a repurchase of as much as $10 million in common stock.
Vtel of Austin dropped 24% to $5.625 on news that the company expects per-share losses of 26 cents to 29 cents for 1993's fourth quarter, primarily because of lower-than-anticipated revenue and gross profit margins.
Vtel posted profit of $6.9 million, or one cent a share, the same quarter a year ago.
Landry's, the Houston-based seafood chain, traded triple its average volume, losing $3.125 a share, after posting stronger earnings than analysts estimated for the fourth quarter.
Landry's reported net income of $518,000, or 9 cents a share, compared with analysts' estimates of 8 cents a share.
A year ago, Landry's reported earnings of $272,000, or 6 cents a share, excluding a gain for early retirement of debt.
SURETY CAPITAL Corp.'s return on assets was 0.76% in 1993.
Because of incorrect information provided by the company, Surety's return on assets was misstated as 12% in a Texas Journal article last Wednesday.
(WSJ Feb. 16, 1994)
