New cost estimates for health-care reform legislation in Congress are causing some lawmakers to look at general tax provisions as means to reduce the burden on employers.
Estimates released over the weekend by the House Ways and Means health subcommittee show that under a pending Democratic-backed bill the basic benefit package would cost employers an estimated $2,000 for each worker in annual premiums.
That works out to 96 cents an hour.
While some companies pay more than that now, many don't, and a lot of smaller companies don't provide any coverage at all.
The estimates underscore the burden facing many small businesses.
And Democrats must come up with some other source of funds if they are to offset these costs.
One option being considered is eliminating or capping the current income-tax exclusion that individuals get for health benefits paid for by their employers.
The exclusion amounts to a subsidy valued at billions of dollars a year for higher-income individuals, and conservative critics argue it encourages higher health expenditures.
While organized labor opposes taxing such fringe benefits, some Democratic and Republican policy experts have long said the lost revenue would better serve to finance a tax credit to help lower-wage workers pay for health insurance.
At this stage in the health debate in Congress, few on the Democratic side are prepared to go that far.
But a future compromise could combine a credit for workers at small companies and a lesser mandate on their employers, perhaps requiring them to pay a 50% share of the premium.
"When we're 50 votes short, we start going down a penny an hour," said Rep. Fortney "Pete" Stark, chairman of the health subcommittee.
Back-to-back minimum wage increases early in this decade were about equal to the 96 cents an hour figure, said the California Democrat.
But among his own colleagues, there is considerable nervousness.
"It would be nice if it would be less, but it is what it is," Mr. Stark said.
"If we're going to subsidize small business, we're going to have to have a tax to do it."
Release of the estimates came as Mr. Stark's panel prepares to begin voting this week on the bill, which would create a program similar to Medicare to cover people without private insurance.
Employers would pay 80% of the premiums for their workers, and the government would finance subsidies to help poor and working class families pay their 20%.
Medicaid would be folded into the same program.
The net cost to the federal government would be about $33 billion in additional spending in the year 2000 to help cover the uninsured and extend new assistance to low-income elderly beneficiaries of Medicare as well.
An additional $14 billion would pay for a new prescription drug benefit under Medicare, bringing total new expenditures to about $47 billion according to the estimates prepared in consultation with staff of the Congressional Budget Office.
To keep the bill from adding to the federal deficit, subcommittee Democrats claim Medicare savings of about $23 billion in 2000.
The remaining $24 billion budget gap would be filled by increased taxes on tobacco, and a temporary payroll tax of 0.8% on employers.
The Medicare savings are $14 billion less than what the administration claims for the same year, according to prior CBO estimates.
And even with the payroll tax, the net revenue increase in the House bill is almost $10 billion less than that for the Clinton plan in 2000.
This difference stems not from taxes per se but from the fact that the Clinton plan is much more aggressive in holding down total health expenditures.
Lower expenditures have the indirect effect of, for example, reducing corporate tax deductions for health benefits, and so tax revenue could climb.
