It's no fun being a bond investor these days, especially after the pummeling the market took yesterday, pushing yields to their highest levels in more than a year.
Bond prices plunged as a bearish malaise continued to plague investors, more of whom are unwilling to bet when the selling will end.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dropped more than a point, or more than $10 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 89 28/32, to yield 7.06%, the highest yield since February of last year.
News of greater consumer confidence provided an excuse to unload holdings yesterday but traders were quick to say that there was more behind the sell-off than that one report.
Besides, commodity prices dropped again yesterday and that should be good news for bond investors.
Falling commodity prices are supposed to be a sign of falling inflation, and bond investors hate inflation because it reduces the value of investments with a fixed rate of return.
"It's a Catch-22, the market will not stabilize and begin to rebound until the buyers come in and no buyers will come in until the market begins to stabilize and rebound," said John Canavan, an analyst at Stone & McCarthy Research Associates of Princeton, N.J.
"The market is just extremely bearish," said Mr. Canavan, even though "inflation remains well in check at the moment."
Efforts by the Federal Reserve to calm the markets by announcing its decision to raise short-term interest rates and nip inflationary pressures in the bud seem to have been for naught.
Last week the Fed raised the federal funds rate, which banks charge each other for overnight loans, to 3.5% from 3.25%.
Bond prices rallied for a day and then started dropping again.
This followed a Fed move to hike the funds rate to 3.25% from 3% on Feb. 4, a decision which started the sell-off in the bond markets.
The stock market was also hit hard yesterday.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 63.33 points to finish at 3699.02.
Another sign of sinking confidence in the stock and bond markets and the Fed's ability to soothe fears of inflationary pressures was the decision yesterday by Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., a subsidiary of Dean Witter, Discover & Co., and Smith Barney Shearson Inc. to trim stock and bond holdings and increase cash positions.
Smith Barney recommended that investors cut their stock holdings to 50% of their investments from 55% while cutting bond holdings to 25% from 30% and increasing cash holdings to 25% from 15%.
Dean Witter recommended that investors cut their bond holdings to 25% from 35% and cut their stock holdings to 50% from 60% while increasing cash holdings to 25% from just 5%.
Dean Witter had raised its bond allocation earlier this month, in anticipation of recovery.
"The market has divorced itself from reality," said Jerry Zukowski, economist at PaineWebber Inc.
Traders said selling tied to end-of-quarter balance sheet adjustments added to the weight on the bond market yesterday.
No single report caused the sell-off, although some traders pointed to a solid reading on consumer confidence.
The Conference Board reported its consumer sentiment index rose to 86.7 in March from 79.9 in February.
But participants said the confidence data simply provided an excuse for selling.
"It just speaks to how weak the market is and how bad sentiment is," said Frank Riccardi, portfolio manager at Society Asset Management Inc.
A second consecutive day of declining commodity prices did little to support bond prices.
In fact, players said the bond market's tepid response to steep declines in commodities Monday planted the seeds for yesterday's drop.
Adding to the weight on the bond market were pressures tied to the end of the first quarter.
"Portfolio managers want to have a good-looking portfolio for quarter end," said John Kallis, a senior vice president at State Street Research & Management Co.
This time around, that means selling of longer-dated Treasurys, in part because of the impact that rising interest rates had on the mortgage-backed securities market, portfolio managers said.
As long-term yields have risen, prepayments have slowed and as a result, the effective maturities on many mortgage-backed securities have risen.
In a bear market, that poses a problem for portfolio managers who are trying to shorten the duration of their holdings.
"Mortgages have been extending their durations but at quarter end people want to have a shorter duration," Mr. Kallis said.
"So they sell what's liquid and what's liquid is Treasurys."
Dealers, meanwhile, don't want to show huge exposures to the market as the quarter winds down.
As soon as they buy securities from an investor they either try to unload the issue back into the market or attempt to hedge by selling Treasurys.
The end result is the type of downward spiral in prices that took place yesterday, players said.
"The dealers are trying to keep their inventories down . . . so it creates a game of hot potato in the bond market," said Mr. Zukowski of PaineWebber.
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year.
Both issues are dated March 31.
The 13-week bills mature June 30, 1994, and the 26-week bills mature Sept. 29, 1994.
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year.
The bills are dated March 31 and mature April 21, 1994.
One casualty of soaring yields yesterday was a planned bond offering from Northwest Airlines.
Late yesterday, the company said it had delayed its $350 million offering of 10-year junk bonds, which had originally been scheduled for last Friday, before being delayed until early this week.
"Market conditions have deteriorated substantially since the Northwest offering was registered Feb. 2," the company said in a statement.
"Recent concerns about the economy have forced up interest rates.
The market has seen a net outflow of capital from bond funds and with some $2.5 billion in high-yield issues coming to market in the near future we have decided that this is not the best time to sell bonds in what has become a difficult market environment."
The company did not specify in its statement when it would return to the market.
It did say it would "continue to monitor the market and proceed when conditions are appropriate."
Prices of many junk bonds dropped by more than a point yesterday and demand for the long list of new issues scheduled to come to market this weak remained weak.
In order to attract sufficient demand to complete a deal in such an unfavorable environment, underwriters often have to boost yields.
Thrifty Payless Inc., a subsidiary of TPH Corp., was expected to sell $600 million of junk bonds yesterday.
Instead, the company boosted the expected yield on its $600 million, two-part offering through lead manager Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp.
Thrifty Payless is marketing $200 million of nine-year senior notes with an 11% yield.
Originally, the yield was expected to be between 10% to 10.25%, according to syndicate officials.
The yield on the second tranche of Thrifty's offering, $400 million of 10-year senior subordinated notes, was raised to 12%, up from an expected 10.75% to 11%.
Prices in the investment-grade market fell by nearly a point in moderate trading.
Few new issues were priced in the investment-grade market as issuers made last minute changes to their deals.
Another day of selling in municipal bonds sliced 3/4 point or more off prices of secondary market issues and forced underwriters to raise yields for several new issues to attract buyers.
With demand running low, underwriters had to sweeten yields for new issues including New York State Environmental Facilities Corp.'s $717 million Series 1994A state water pollution control revolving fund revenue bonds.
The issue was priced by a Goldman Sachs group.
Following repricing, at which yields were raised five to 10 basis points, yields ranged from 3.55% in 1995 to 6.19% in 2014 and 2015.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.
Goldman Sachs raised yields as much as eight basis points for another issue it was lead manager on yesterday, the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority's $109.8 million Series 1994A local government loan program revenue bonds.
In other new-issue activity, a Merrill Lynch group priced Honolulu's $150 million Series 1994A general obligation bonds with yields that ranged from 4.60% in 1998 to 5.90% in 2013 and 2014.
Prices of mortgage securities dropped.
"We're seeing consistent, steady selling with all coupons getting hit," said Christopher Flanagan, co-head of mortgage research at Merrill Lynch & Co.
The yield on the 7.5% coupon from Government National Mortgage Association ended 107 basis points above comparable Treasurys and the 7% coupon's yield was 108 points above Treasurys.
Federal National Mortgage Assocition's 7.5% yield ended 93 basis points above that of the benchmark 10-year Treasury note, somewhat tighter than Monday's 106 basis point spread.
Lauren Young contributed to this article.
