ISRAEL-PLO TALKS APPEARED to clear hurdles on Palestinian self-rule.
Israel and the PLO will reach a final agreement "very soon" for Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and Jericho, PLO Chairman Arafat said after marathon talks with Israeli Foreign Minister Peres in Davos, Switzerland.
But the two men failed to break a deadlock in their negotiations on implementing Palestinian autonomy in the occupied territories, saying they would need to meet again in Cairo next week.
Egypt's foreign minister said the major hurdles had been cleared.
Neither Arafat nor Peres would say which matters were unresolved.
One remaining issue, according to the Egyptian foreign minister, is the size of the West Bank town of Jericho.
JAPAN'S HOSOKAWA WON provisional approval for sweeping electoral reforms.
The prime minister's weekend victory capped an intense week of negotiations in which he put his political future at risk.
The reform proposals were adopted only after a last-minute bargain with the reluctant opposition.
The date of implementation hasn't yet been set, however, with formal legislative approval of the compromise plan still required.
Washington officials cheered Hosokawa's victory, hoping he now can turn his attention to the stalled U.S.-Japan trade talks.
Japanese newspapers reported that the cabinet would approve as soon as this week an economic package that would include income-tax cuts.
A Bosnian Serb commander warned the West not to use force to open the Muslim airport at Tuzla, saying any plane that landed there wouldn't be allowed to leave.
In Belgrade, Russian ultranationalist Zhirinovsky said his party would consider any NATO air strikes against Bosnian Serbs to be a declaration of war against Russia.
Russia's prime minister vowed that efforts to fight inflation were his government's top priority.
"Financial stabilization is at the center of our entire policy," Chernomyrdin told world business leaders at the annual World Economic Forum in Switzerland.
Madison Guaranty employees contend that an executive of the S&L promised they would be reimbursed for contributions made at an April 1985 fund-raiser for then-Arkansas Gov. Clinton.
The event was intended to help Clinton pay off a 1984 campaign debt.
North Korea denounced U.S. plans to send Patriot air-defense missile batteries to South Korea, declaring that such a step would be a warlike move.
Pyongyang said the U.S. would have to scrap its plans if Washington hopes to reach an accord to permit inspections of the North's nuclear sites.
Irish activist Gerry Adams was granted a U.S. visa to attend a New York conference on Northern Ireland tomorrow, the White House said.
Adams is head of the political wing of the Irish Republican Army.
A pro-Russian secessionist appeared to be the victor in a presidential runoff election in Ukraine's autonomous republic of Crimea.
With vote counting still under way, the apparent victor was Yuri Meshkov, who campaigned on a pledge for Crimea to rejoin Russia.
The African National Congress offered to let South Africa's pro-apartheid whites vote for their own homeland -- but said a black government would retain the power to veto results of any such vote.
An army-backed committee chose Algeria's hard-line defense minister to be president, tightening the military's control over Algeria.
Lamine Zeroual, named to succeed an unelected five-man group, is supposed to lead the nation back to democracy.
The Dallas Cowboys won the National Football League's Super Bowl in Atlanta, defeating the Buffalo Bills, 30 to 13.
Pete Sampras of the U.S. won the Australian Open men's singles tennis title, defeating fellow American Todd Martin in straight sets.
On Saturday, Steffi Graf of Germany won the women's title by beating Arantxa Sanchez Vicario of Spain in straight sets.
Died: William J. Levitt, 86, New York developer who pioneered the idea of affordable suburban houses with the construction of Levittown on Long Island, Friday, in Manhasset, N.Y., of kidney failure.
