Presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio was shot and killed last night during a political rally at a hillside slum here.
Mr. Colosio, the candidate of the ruling party, the PRI, was shot in the torso and the head and was carried away to a hospital.
Almost no one heard the shots, which apparently came at close range, so the commotion surrounding Mr. Colosio shocked the crowd of about 4,000 in the neighborhood of Lomas Taurinas.
Dozens seized at least one suspect, beating him bloody with a plank and stoning him while the crowd shouted, "Kill him!
Kill him!
Kill him!"
Hundreds of others in the crowd began crying.
A spokesman for the PRI, or Institutional Revolutionary Party, Liebano Saenz, said on national television that one of the bullets entered the 44-year-old Mr. Colosio's skull near the ear and exited his cranium.
The Mexican Office of the Presidency reported that Mr. Colosio died late last night.
Authorities said that they had two suspects in custody, but they didn't release any names or say what their motivation might have been for shooting Mr. Colosio.
Televisa, the television monopoly that often acts as an unofficial spokesman for the government, broadcast pictures of the two alleged gunmen and said one of them was about 25 years old while the other was in his 40s.
The assassination comes just as things had finally appeared to be settling down in the Mexican presidential race, apparently clearing the way for Mr. Colosio to record a solid victory in the August elections.
The biggest obstacle to a Colosio win had appeared to disappear on Tuesday when Manuel Camacho Solis, the popular negotiator of peace in Chiapas, said he wouldn't run for the presidency.
But the shooting of Mr. Colosio is sure to convulse Mexico once again.
The stock market had recovered almost 7% in the past two days and the peso had stabilized against the dollar, following heavy declines that stemmed from reports of slower-than-expected economic growth and the uprising in Chiapas.
The prospect of a Colosio win had reassured investors, who saw him continuing the free-market economic policies of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.
But the stock market and peso are certain to tumble again today as investors, on top of everything else, start to worry about spreading political violence.
Almost all of President Salinas's top advisers gathered last night at Los Pinos, his official residence, to talk about contingency plans.
Among other things they were discussing the naming of another presidential candidate, or even that the Mexican constitution might allow President Salinas to remain in office beyond the end of his term late this year because of the crisis here.
There are, however, complications.
Several possible candidates, such as Finance Minister Pedro Aspe, apparently can't run at least for the moment because the Mexican constitution provides that someone needs to be out of political office for 90 days before becoming a candidate, analysts said.
And if President Salinas tries to stay in office, the political opposition will try to accuse him of empire building.
In the midst of the meeting, President Salinas emerged to issue a brief statement calling the assassination attempt on his close friend and protege "a cowardly act" that hurts all of Mexico.
When Mr. Colosio was shot, he had just finished giving one of the best speeches of a campaign that had been lackluster.
Mr. Colosio had been criticized during his campaign for not appearing to care enough about the many poor people in Mexico, but last night he ventured into one of the worst neighborhoods of Tijuana, a city known for its drug-related violence, to give a forceful speech on poverty.
"How good it is to be here," Mr. Colosio said in his powerful baritone, speaking at a site just across a bridge so rickety that authorities allowed only four or five people to cross at one time.
"I want to be president of Mexico so that I can be close to the whole population of Tijuana and the state of Baja California.
I know what it is to live the life of all of you in the factory."
As soon as he finished speaking, music blasted out over the loudspeakers -- so loudly that almost no one heard the gunshots.
When the one suspect was mobbed by the crowd, he was beaten until he was covered with blood.
He was finally pushed into a security van, but even then the crowd stoned the van and tried to prevent it from leaving.
The gunman was a stocky, poorly dressed man, but nothing more could be immediately learned about him.
Security is generally lax in Mexican politics, at least by U.S. standards.
An aide to President Salinas, asked why only one security guard was in evidence at a rally a months ago, said with a straight face that "the love of the people is his protection."
In the past, security hasn't been a problem, because, since the revolution ended in 1920, Mexico hasn't had the tradition of political assassinations that the U.S. has.
Concerns over Chiapas had appeared to make some people in the Colosio campaign nervous, and security was much tighter than normal for the rally in Tijuana.
A group of presidential bodyguards known as the Estado Mayor were with Mr. Colosio, even though Mexican law apparently provides that they can protect only the president.
In addition, there were two truckloads of federal police present to protect the PRI candidate.
Tijuana is an especially sensitive area because of the history of drug-related violence in this border city.
A Tijuana-based drug gang was apparently one of those involved in the assassination of a cardinal in Guadalajara last May.
