Tellabs Inc., after four years of sales growth in North America, is focusing on European markets for the next fiscal year, said President and Chief Executive Officer Michael J. Birck.
In an interview, Mr. Birck said the telecommunications concern's domestic business "has gone through most of its growth."
He said, "What we want now is to be involved in the global marketplace and move towards becoming a billion-dollar company."
Tellabs, a maker of voice and data equipment for phone companies, has already impressed Wall Street with its steady growth over the past year.
It has profited primarily from the telecommunications industry's trend toward cross-connect systems, which enable fiber-optic networks to carry voice and data transmissions.
In 1993, Tellabs posted a 90% increase in earnings to $32 million, or $1.45 a share, on sales of $320.5 million.
After introducing its flagship Titan digital cross-connect system in 1991, the company added to sales in 1993 with various Titan-based hardware and software packages.
Titan sales, originally projected by analysts to be $60 million last year, topped $80 million.
Surprisingly strong demand for echo-cancelers also added $50 million to the company's sales.
But with Tellabs' domestic growth starting to ease, Mr. Birck now sees Central and Eastern Europe as the important sites for expansion.
North America has slowed down, he said, "but the rest of the world isn't in that situation.
We're planning on going in and leapfrogging over a lot of Europe's outdated technology."
Last year, Tellabs acquired Martis Oy, a closely held Finnish maker of telecommunications networking equipment, in a deal valued at $70 million.
The acquisition was aimed at providing a major European business center when combined with its existing facility in Shannon, Ireland.
At the same time, Tellabs has expanded its ties to a Swedish distributor and improved its Canadian research facility.
Mr. Birck wants Tellabs' international business, which currently accounts for 30% of total revenue, to grow to 50% of revenue by the end of the year.
"That's going to be a challenge since I don't think our domestic numbers are going to sit still," he said.
"International sales are going to have to hit a moving target."
The push toward Europe is crucial for Tellabs to "avoid being stepped on" by giant competitors Northern Telecom Ltd. and American Telephone & Telegraph Co. -- companies the executive calls "elephants."
Moreover, the expansion could serve to reinforce the company's credibility among its customers.
"This industry doesn't take to newcomers very easily," said Mr. Birck.
"Customers have to have some confidence that we're up to the task of serving them."
Mr. Birck, a 56-year-old former engineer, helped start Tellabs 20 years ago and has been widely praised as a manager who pays close attention to the design and research of his company's products.
Tellabs spent five years developing Titan, and last year allocated 16% of total revenue to long-term research.
"He's not afraid to invest shareholders' dollars in research when he believes there's a big payoff," said Steven D. Levy, an analyst with Hambrecht & Quist.
"With the Titan, it has paid off in spades."
Mr. Birck acknowledges that "when discussions here return to design and product, that's when I get the most energized."
Despite the promising picture in Europe and Tellabs' steady earnings growth, the company's stock has declined since last October.
After the stock rallied to an October high of $54.375 from a split-adjusted $12.625 in April, Tellabs' third-quarter results met analysts' expectations but disappointed Wall Street observers who had been hoping for more.
"People set these estimates and you're supposed to beat them every time," said Mr. Birck.
"It really doesn't happen that way."
In late Nasdaq Stock Market trading on Friday, Tellabs shares were quoted at $51.75, up $2.25.
For the current first quarter, Birck expects earnings in the range of 23 to 26 cents a share, reflecting a 3-for-2 stock split in November.
The company earned an adjusted 26 cents a share in 1993's first quarter, including a gain of seven cents for an accounting adjustment.
