In a rare use of the constitutional ban on state laws interfering with contracts, a federal court struck down a Minnesota law that retroactively changed the terms of a workers' compensation insurance fund.
The decision by Judge James Rosenbaum in Minneapolis is significant, because courts rarely invoke the so-called contracts clause of the U.S. Constitution to invalidate legislation.
If adopted elsewhere, the judge's reasoning could be used to challenge a wide range of regulations, such as laws changing the terms of state-sponsored retirement funds or establishing new rights that alter existing franchise agreements.
"The message of this case is that the government must uphold its side of the bargain and that you can't change the contract after the fact for some politically expedient purpose," said James Shafley, a lawyer with the Minneapolis law firm Robins, Kaplan, Miller & Ciresi, which represented some of the plaintiffs in the case.
The case arose when the Minnesota Legislature passed a law changing the way excess funds in the workers' compensation system were to be distributed.
In 1979, the state began requiring insurance companies and self-insured employers to contribute money to a pool that provides reinsurance for workers' compensation claims.
Such reinsurance is designed to provide extra coverage for unusually large claims.
Under the original terms of the fund, which the judge defined as a contract, insurers and other companies that contributed money were entitled to refunds if the pool accumulated a surplus.
As it turned out, the fund amassed a sizable surplus: about $402 million over a period of about 13 years.
But last year, hoping to reduce workers' compensation costs of employers, the Minnesota Legislature decided to distribute the excess money to employers rather than insurance companies.
That decision, Judge Rosenbaum ruled, was unconstitutional, because it interfered with the contractual relationship between the state and the insurance companies.
"The Minnesota Legislature has annihilated these settled contractual expectations," the judge wrote.
"It simply awards the windfall to different, legislatively preferred recipients."
By relying on the contracts clause, the opinion resurrects a theory that "was a staple of federal constitutional litigation back in the 1920s and '30s" but is now used "much more sparingly," said John Jeffries, a professor of constitutional law at the University of Virginia.
Jocelyn Olson, a Minnesota assistant attorney general, said state officials haven't made a decision about whether to appeal.
(In Re: Workers' Compensation Refund, U.S. District Court, District of Minnesota, 4th Div., No. 4-93-CV-515)
After three brief days of defense testimony, prosecutors in the World Trade Center bombing trial began presenting closing arguments to the jury.
Assistant U.S. Attorney Henry J. DePippo said evidence from the 18-week trial clearly showed the four defendants had a single goal uniting all of their actions: "to bomb something in the United States."
The plot commenced, he contended, in the summer of 1992, when defendant Ahmad Ajaj took a course in weapons and explosives training in the Middle East and then returned to the U.S. bearing a "terrorist kit," including anti-Jewish hate literature and bomb-making notes in his handwriting.
The defendants are all charged with conspiracy in the Feb. 26, 1993, blast that killed six people.
Prosecutors are expected to continue their summation today.
The case is expected to go to the jury as early as the end of this week.
Margaret A. Jacobs contributed to this article.
