Will Syntex's dividend go under the knife?
Yield-starved investors have been snapping up shares of the Palo Alto, Calif., drug company, which offers a dividend yield of 6.8% . . . for now.
Analysts say there's a strong chance the mouth-watering yield won't last.
"I think they'll probably cut their dividend sometime over the next year or so," says Jack Lamberton, a drug analyst with NatWest Securities.
"We would argue that the chance of a dividend cut is 50-50," says Wertheim Schroder analyst Jonathan Gelles.
Even fans of the stock don't hold out a lot of hope.
"There's every possibility that the dividend will be reduced," says Warren Isabelle, manager of the Pioneer Capital Growth Fund, with $230 million in assets.
The company itself won't say whether the dividend is safe.
At a recent meeting with analysts, Syntex Chairman Paul Freiman declined to speculate about future dividend declarations, saying that "the dividend is the responsibility of the board of directors."
Syntex isn't the only drug company that some think may cut its dividend.
Analysts speculate that Marion Merrell Dow and Upjohn could also trim their quarterly payouts.
"We don't ever speculate on future decisions of that sort," responds Richard Johnson, a spokesman for Marion Merrell Dow."
Enhancing shareholder value through a combination of stock-price appreciation and dividend yield will remain one of our top priorities," says Upjohn spokesman John Lambrechts.
But among health-care companies, Syntex is the most vulnerable to a dividend cut, say analysts.
That doesn't augur happy times for the yield-hungry small investors who have been buying Syntex shares.
"I think there are plenty of people who own the stock who don't think there's going to be a dividend cut and just aren't paying attention," says NatWest's Mr. Lamberton.
"And when they cut the dividend, I think they'll cut it so aggressively that they may surprise even those who are expecting a cut."
Mr. Lamberton thinks the company might cut the $1.04 annual dividend in half, so that it gets all the bad news out of the way in one fell swoop.
"The worst thing would be to have to make two dividend cuts," he says.
"If they had a 50% dividend cut, I think you'd have a $13 stock" and maybe lower.
Syntex closed yesterday at 15 3/8, unchanged.
Mr. Lamberton concedes that Syntex could maintain its dividend, by dipping into the company's cash reserves and drawing heavily on its cash flow.
But that strategy would carry a steep price in terms of Syntex's future growth.
"They do have the money to cover the dividend, if they really want to," says Mr. Lamberton.
"The question is, what are their priorities?
They could maintain their dividend, but they'd be underinvesting in the rest of the business."
Mr. Lamberton figures that Syntex has enough cash flow to cover its dividend in the fiscal year ending in July.
But he forecasts that cash flow will fall short over the next two fiscal years, before recovering in the fiscal year ending July 1997.
He attributes the cash-flow crunch to declining sales of Naprosyn and Anaprox, Syntex's two arthritic-pain relievers that lost patent protection on Dec. 21.
Mr. Lamberton estimates that U.S. sales of these two products, which now face competition from generic alternatives, accounted for half of Syntex's earnings in the 1993 fiscal year.
"It's very unlikely that the stock will rise of its own accord," Mr. Lamberton says.
"The risk in not owning Syntex is that they get taken over by another company.
I think that's unlikely."
But a takeover is what some bulls are betting on.
"The reason we bought the stock is not for its long-term prospects," says Pioneer's Mr. Isabelle.
"We were clearly looking for a consolidation play here.
I don't think this is a company whose name you'll see as a stand-alone name five years from now."
Analyst David Saks, however, isn't willing to bet on a takeover.
"For 10 years I've heard that story," says Mr. Saks of Gruntal & Co.
"The reason why you buy a company is because you like what you see.
Why buy a company that's got a clear-cut downward financial outlook?"
Because Syntex's future earnings are likely to be weak, Mr. Saks reckons the stock is a poor investment, whether or not the dividend is cut.
"I think the yield is tempting to some," he says.
"But if the stock goes down 5%, what's the worth of a 6.8% dividend?"
Sales: $2.12 billion
Net income: $287.2 million; $1.29 a share*
First quarter, Oct. 31, 1993:
Net income: 57 cents vs. net loss: 3 cents a share**
