Cereals and snacks led the list of last year's most successful new food brands.
Many of the best-selling new items aren't entirely new, which probably helps explain their success.
While consumers seek variety in their diets, they are often leery of unfamiliar flavors.
What's more, during the recent economic slump, they have grown even less willing to gamble on something new.
For example, Kellogg Co.'s Rice Krispies Treats cereal, which racked up sales of $85 million last year, certainly had a familiar ring to it.
The cereal is based on the 50-year-old recipe for marshmallow snack bars that still appears on boxes of Rice Krispies cereal, and it turned out to be the year's top-selling new food brand, according to Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.
It was so popular, in fact, Kellogg had to apologize in newspaper ads for skimpy supplies, a situation it hadn't encountered since it launched Corn Flakes in 1907.
Post Banana Nut Crunch, Quaker Toasted Oatmeal cereal and several other new cereals also found a place in many consumers' shopping carts.
Because more than 90% of U.S. households keep cereal in their cupboards, marketers say there is plenty of opportunity to lure shoppers with a new flavor.
And cereal fans, who typically keep several varieties on hand, are usually willing to experiment.
"The cereal consumer loves variety," says Robert E. Lowe, director of new business for Post, a unit of Philip Morris Cos.
"To be competitive, you need to be a player in new products."
Many other marketers played it safe by whipping up slight variations of existing brands, such as a thinner Doritos tortilla chips or a pulpier version of Tropicana orange juice called Pure Premium Grovestand.
And Keebler Co., a unit of United Biscuits PLC, scored a hit when it repackaged its line of graham crackers, added such new flavors as chocolate and apple cinnamon, and dubbed them Graham Selects old-fashioned graham crackers.
Compiled exclusively for The Wall Street Journal, the list of best-selling new food products is based on sales data from supermarket scanners.
Information Resources defined new products as new brands or significant extensions of existing brands that were available in fewer than 5% of U.S. supermarkets during the last four weeks of 1992, and that reached national distribution during 1993.
The new items are ranked by dollar sales during the 52 weeks ended Jan. 2.
Overall, though, marketing experts say 1993 was a lackluster year for the nation's test kitchens.
Some 8,077 new food items hit retailers' shelves, a slight decline from 1992, according to Marketing Intelligence Ltd., a Naples, N.Y., company that tracks new products.
Of those new items, only about 5% represent truly new brands.
As many as 75% are merely new varieties, sizes or reformulations of existing products, up from about 67% in 1992.
Supermarket shoppers continued to sample healthful fare last year, such as Pet Inc.'s Progresso Healthy Classics soups and Nabisco's Fat Free Cranberry Newtons, made by a unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.
Others, however, yielded to temptation with Hershey Foods Corp.'s Hugs, a white-chocolate version of its kisses or extra chocolatey Chips Ahoy! cookies.
"This is very much of an indulgence product," says Jerry Noonan, vice president of marketing for Nabisco Biscuit Co.
"It's 40% chocolate and made with real butter."
Several new snacks caught consumers' attention last year, most notably Keebler Co.'s Chacho's tortilla chips, one of the few truly new brands on the list.
The flour tortilla chips, which come in such flavors as Cheesy Quesadilla and Cinnamon Crispana, are milder-tasting than traditional corn-based tortilla chips.
Other marketers set out to lure new customers by repackaging existing products and pitching them differently.
Nestle SA aimed its Stouffer's and Lean Cuisine Lunch Express at the brown-bag set.
Similar in size to the dinner entrees, the new items can all be microwaved in less than five minutes and are meant to be eaten directly from the package.
Television ads for the lunch products feature harried office workers who take a break with a steaming lunch.
Some marketers, though, seemed to succeed by flouting conventional marketing wisdom.
Jeno Paulucci, the 76-year-old chairman of Luigino's Inc., says good taste and low prices turned his Michelina's International Recipes entrees into a hit.
The frozen entrees, which cost about $1, feature such dishes as Swedish meatballs and tuna noodle casserole.
Luigino's is planning its first-ever ad for Michelina's, a full page in Parade magazine, for April.
"We didn't spend a dime on media," Mr. Paulucci says.
"We didn't coupon.
We didn't do nothing."
