The dollar retreated against the mark yesterday after the Bundesbank again declined to cut its key interest rates and sent strong signals it isn't likely to do so any time soon.
Recent dollar euphoria also eased sharply following release of disappointing weekly jobless numbers that indicated a slowing of the U.S. economic recovery.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7380 marks, down from 1.7460 marks late Wednesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 111.40 yen, up slightly from 111.35 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4970, up from $1.4925.
About midday Friday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 111.25 yen and at 1.7373 marks.
Yesterday, the German central bank announced its discount rate would remain at 5.75% while its Lombard rate would hold at 6.75%, setting off aggressive buying of the mark.
The bank later said it also froze the rate for securities-repurchase agreements, or repos, at 6% at least through early February.
Repos are the mechanism used by the Bundesbank to nudge money market rates up or down.
Although both decisions were widely expected, traders noted that signs that the U.S. economy may be less robust than thought then prompted dollar bulls to liquidate their positions.
The U.S. Labor Department said jobless claims rose by 23,000 to 380,000 in the week ended Jan. 15; this compared with economists' forecasts of a 14,000 decline.
Dollar jitters were increased by yet a third Bundesbank announcement -- that its reserve requirements for German banks would be reduced, effective March 1.
To some analysts that indicated the central bank remains concerned about overly high money-supply growth in the near term and thus will be reluctant to cut official rates in February.
The dollar hit its intraday high of 1.7512 marks just before the first Bundesbank announcement that it decided against any change in its benchmark interest rates.
The successive Bundesbank announcements and the U.S. economic data then knocked down the currency to its low of 1.7345 marks four hours later.
The Bundesbank said it would ease reserve requirements in part by unifying sight deposits for both domestic and foreign investors at 5%, from a range of 6.5% to 12.1%.
The move is expected to help the competitiveness of German banks -- a longstanding Bundesbank goal -- and follows a similar easing of reserve requirements last year.
The central bank said the liquidity effects of the move would be offset by a reduction in the amounts available through securities-repurchase arrangements.
However, the decision to defer the reserve easing to March 1 indicated to many traders that the bank remains nervous about the effect any added liquidity would have on German money-supply growth, and thus will be less likely to cut its interest rates.
"What this means is that the interestrate environment isn't going to change in the near term," said Eric Nickerson, senior economist at the Bank of America in San Francisco.
"The fact that the U.S. jobless-claims numbers were weaker than expected sort of left people thinking it will be longer before interest-rate differentials begin to narrow" between the U.S. and Germany, he said.
"It takes a lot of the steam out of the dollar."
Higher interest rates are seen as a lure for investors and generally have the effect of supporting currencies.
