Grumman Corp.'s stock fell 2.3%, reflecting traders' uncertainty over whether rivals Martin Marietta Corp. and Northrop Corp. would submit higher offers under auction rules set by Grumman.
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Grumman shares fell $1.50 to close at $63.375.
The decline came in a stock market that was also sharply off, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average tumbling 1.68%.
Grumman's stock price still topped Northrop's current offer of $60 a share, or a total of $2.04 billion.
But Wall Street appeared concerned about how the auction would work-and especially about Northrop's sharp criticism of the rules the Bethpage, N.Y., defense-electronics and tactical-aircraft producer had established.
The offer from Los Angeles-based Northrop exceeds by $5 a share the $1.93 billion that Martin Marietta agreed to pay in an acquisition pact announced March 7.
Some traders figured that Northrop Chairman Kent Kresa's attack on Grumman's bidding rules meant Northrop wouldn't submit another bid before the deadline of 5 p.m. EST tomorrow, and might instead challenge a sale to Martin Marietta in court.
Other traders dismissed the existence of an auction altogether, noting, as one said, that investors "will tender to the highest offer," even if it comes after the official deadline.
Grumman plans to announce a winner Monday at 9 a.m. EDT.
In inviting final offers from Northrop and Martin Marietta, or any other parties, Grumman said a prolonged bidding war presented the danger of "disruption to the company's business and overall uncertainty among the company's constituencies" about Grumman's future.
Northrop, maker of the B-2 bomber and components for other aerospace products, reiterated that it is "keeping our options open."
But investors took note of the vehemence in Mr. Kresa's response to Grumman's plan.
He said Grumman was perpetuating an "unlevel playing field" advantageous to Martin Marietta's bid.
In what some observers saw as establishing grounds for legal action, he said not letting the suitors battle it out past tomorrow would "prematurely cut off potential bidding" and thus hurt Grumman shareholders.
Grumman stock traded around $40 a share prior to the Martin Marietta agreement, but surged $14.25 the day of the agreement, and more than $8 when Northrop made its hostile offer on March 10.
Martin Marietta, a Bethesda, Md., concern whose acquisitions have made it one of the nation's largest defense contractors, reiterated that it is reviewing Grumman's rules.
One person familiar with the bidding suggested that Northrop's opposition to the auction rules indicated suspicion that Martin Marietta would get favorable treatment after the deadline.
Grumman has said the long weekend would be used for completing an acquisition agreement.
But Northrop, having had its year-long acquisition talks with Grumman abruptly broken off just before the Martin Marietta agreement was announced, fears a situation where it "plays by a set of rules, and the other side gets a wink, a nod or a phone call," this person said.
Greg Steinmetz contributed to this article.
