Japan's merchandise trade surplus swelled to $12.93 billion in December, a 16% rise from a year earlier, defying expectations that the imbalance had finally peaked.
The December figure compared with a surplus of $11.20 billion a year earlier and a $7.42 billion surplus in November.
For all of 1993, the surplus set a record, jumping to $120.40 billion -- 13% above the previous high of $106.63 billion in 1992.
At a time of rising U.S.-Japan trade tensions, Japan's surplus with the U.S. grew 17% in December from a year earlier.
For the year, the bilateral imbalance was $50.19 billion, up 15% from the year earlier.
That's the third highest level on record.
The figures "were surprisingly high," said Peter J. Morgan, Merrill Lynch & Co. economist.
He, like other economists, had forecast that the strong yen was starting to curb Japan's trade surplus.
A strengthening yen makes Japan's exports more expensive, while making imports into Japan cheaper.
Still, most economists dismissed Friday's report as a fluke.
"All the trends are still in place," said Chris Calderwood, an economist at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities Ltd.
Even though Barclays' forecast for the December surplus was low by more than 10%, he said the firm stands by its "overall projections of a gradually decreasing surplus."
A main reason for the surprise was the sharp drop in the price of oil, one of Japan's major imports.
World oil prices have softened lately, and the dollar price for Japanese buyers has dropped even further because of the strength of the yen.
The yen was 12% stronger in December than in the previous year.
"It's not so much that exports were strong but that imports were weak or just about flat," Mr. Morgan said.
The growth in the surplus with the U.S. was fueled in part by Japanese electronics companies' jacking up prices in response to the high yen, according to Dresdner ABD Securities economist Kunji Okue.
Because Japanese companies are the sole makers of many electronics goods, raising prices of those products doesn't necessarily cut sales, and instead boosts the size of the surplus.
"I'm expecting the yen's depreciation over the next few months," Mr. Okue added.
"When that happens, it will trigger the electronics firms to stop hiking prices."
Japan's annual surplus with Asia surpassed that with the U.S. for the first time ever, a Finance Ministry official said.
Japan's surplus with Asia totaled $53.59 billion for 1993, a 29% rise.
Analysts said Japanese companies were unloading excess inventories in the region.
Japan's December surplus with the European Union increased 9.7% to $2.22 billion.
But in contrast to the situation with the U.S. and Asia, the full-year surplus fell for the first time in three years -- by 16% to $26.32 billion.
Adjusting for seasonal factors, the December trade surplus was $8.83 billion, up 26% from November.
