President Clinton calmly defended the propriety of his conduct in the Whitewater real-estate investment.
The president's defense, made during a televised news conference last evening, came just hours after a Republican congressman made the harshest charge yet in the Whitewater affair: that federal officials tried to cover up evidence suggesting that the Clintons' Whitewater investment had benefited from savings-and-loan fraud.
Mr. Clinton said he knew nothing about the charges, by Rep. Jim Leach of Iowa, and denied in great detail that he and his wife had done anything wrong.
Specifically, he said he didn't think he owed any more taxes and that he was unaware of any diversion of funds to him or his campaigns by the savings and loan.
The only concession he made was that the nearly $69,000 loss that an aide of his once said he incurred in the investment was overstated by $22,200, making the actual loss $46,800.
He said he would prove the point by releasing his tax returns today going back to 1977 and asking his personal attorney, David Kendall, to brief reporters about them.
Mr. Clinton's willingness last night to answer a barrage of questions about Whitewater and its ties to Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan contrasted with his testy reaction in previous weeks to reporters' queries about the investment.
Mr. Clinton said he hoped the news conference and additional disclosures would help put Whitewater behind him and allow him and his administration to move forward with its many policy initiatives, ranging from health care to anti-crime legislation.
"What matters is we're changing people's lives," he asserted.
But the questions at the session repeatedly returned to Whitewater, a failed real-estate development in northern Arkansas.
Despite the swirling controversy, Mr. Clinton refused to say it was a mistake to go into a 50-50 investment with James McDougal, who later owned Madison, even though Mr. McDougal put up most of the money.
He called it "a perfectly honorable thing to do."
-- Hillary Rodham Clinton has been wrongly accused of a conflict of interest when she represented Madison before an Arkansas state regulator.
"She believed there was nothing unethical about it," he said, and also cited expert testimony saying "she is getting a bum rap."
-- Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman checked with his agency's counsel before briefing White House aides about the investigation by the Resolution Trust Corp. into Whitewater and Madison Guaranty.
But he added, "I think that we weren't as sensitive as we should have been" to the appearance of meddling into the actions of an independent agency.
-- Associate White House Counsel William Kennedy had made a mistake when he failed to pay Social Security taxes on a nanny, and has been reassigned as a result.
But he also praised his friend from Arkansas for being a valuable employee.
During the 38-minute news conference, Mr. Clinton fielded 17 questions, only three of which weren't about matters related to Whitewater.
The event, which was only the president's second prime-time news conference, came after Rep. Leach took to the House floor for nearly an hour.
Mr. Leach charged that senior regulatory officials earlier this year urged investigators to soften a case asserting that the Clintons' Whitewater partnership contributed to the insolvency of Madison Guaranty.
But later, one of the primary people Mr. Leach said had pressured the investigators categorically denied the charge.
The lawmaker said officials in RTC headquarters here took steps to influence the investigation being conducted in the RTC's Kansas City office.
He highlighted one conversation between Washington and the field office that occurred last Feb. 2, the same day that Deputy Treasury Secretary Altman, who is the acting RTC chief, briefed White House officials about the case involving the Little Rock thrift.
To support his charges, Mr. Leach released notes made by Jean Lewis, a senior criminal investigator in the RTC's Kansas City office, of a Feb. 2 conversation with April Breslaw, an RTC attorney from Washington.
"April stated very clearly that Deputy RTC CEO Jack Ryan and RTC General Counsel Ellen Kulka, the 'head people', would like to be able to say that Whitewater did not cause a loss to Madison, but the problem is that so far no one has been able to say that to them," according to the memo.
"She felt like they wanted to be able to provide an `honest answer', but that there were certain answers that they would be happier about, because it would get them off the hook."
Reached last night, Ms. Breslaw said, "I categorically deny the statements that I am accused of making.
I never said to anyone in Kansas City that Washington would like any particular factual or legal result."
She dismissed Ms. Lewis's account as a "complete fabrication."
Ms. Lewis couldn't be reached for comment last night.
In his speech, Mr. Leach said that Whitewater was "used to skim, directly or indirectly, federal insured deposits" from Madison.
In her notes on the conversation, Ms. Lewis said that "it is my belief that the losses to Madison from the Whitewater account alone would easily exceed $100,000" because she had been able to document $70,000 of losses during just one six-month period.
Mr. Clinton got most animated when he was asked if the Whitewater controversy was eroding the moral authority of himself and his wife.
"Absolutely not.
Absolutely not," he insisted.
"People should not be able to raise questions and erode people's moral authority in this country . . .
I know what the facts are, and I'm giving you the facts on this."
