Ian Martin, passed over last year for the chief executive officer's job at Grand Metropolitan PLC, has resigned to form an investment partnership with New York-based financiers Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co.
The new firm, called Glenisla Group, will become KKR's first partnership to focus exclusively on European ventures, something the New York firm has long been interested in but heretofore unsuccessful in doing.
Glenisla expects to buy or invest in companies in the U.K. and Western Europe.
But Mr. Martin, who had been vice chairman of Grand Met, said Glenisla initially won't invest in the food and drinks industry, partly because of a contractual agreement with Grand Met.
The 58-year-old Mr. Martin, once widely expected to become CEO of the British food and drinks conglomerate, was denied the job when Grand Met's board instead chose George Bull last September.
Grand Met Chairman Sir Allen Sheppard, who was also chief executive at the time, said Mr. Bull was selected because of his expertise in marketing and brand management.
Mr. Martin's background is in finance.
After Mr. Bull's appointment, Mr. Martin resigned his position as group managing director and chief operating officer to become nonexecutive deputy chairman.
He then made no secret of his desire to move on.
"I wanted something with intellectual stimulation and equity participation," Mr. Martin said.
"I have a lot of gas left in my tank, and this fits in completely with the kind of entrepreneurial project I wanted."
Grand Met declined to comment on Mr. Martin's departure.
A KKR spokeswoman confirmed the details of its participation in the new company, but its executives weren't available for comment.
KKR is expected to fully finance the working capital of Glenisla, and its director will make specific investment decisions jointly with Mr. Martin.
Including money from its clients, the New York firm currently has about $2 billion available for investment, some of which will be used for Glenisla projects.
The company is named after a valley in central Scotland that is Mr. Martin's favorite area for salmon fishing.
