Prudential Securities Inc.'s limited-partnership woes aren't over for at least one broker at the firm.
In an unusual action, the New York Stock Exchange barred a Prudential broker from selling limited partnerships for three years for allegedly making unsuitable trades for customers.
The censure of Stephen Ziomek, 43 years old, comes as the Prudential Insurance Co. of America unit seeks to get past its partnership problems.
Prudential, the nation's fourth-largest brokerage firm, in October agreed to pay at least $371 million in restitution and fines to settle partnership fraud charges brought by federal and state regulators.
The Big Board typically doesn't handle partnership cases, exchange officials say.
Those disputes often are heard by the Securities and Exchange Commission or the National Association of Securities Dealers, because many of the partnerships were sold over-the-counter.
"This is just one that came our way," a Big Board official said.
The Big Board hearing panel found that Mr. Ziomek made unsuitable purchases of partnerships on behalf of four customers.
"In one instance, Ziomek was advised by the customer that she had both an annual salary and liquid assets of less than $20,000," the exchange said.
Mr. Ziomek, who has a nonpublished telephone number in Scottsdale, Ariz., couldn't be reached for comment.
He consented to the Big Board findings without admitting or denying guilt.
Mr. Ziomek "isn't currently in our branch office," Prudential said in a statement.
"We're examining the situation closely."
Mr. Ziomek was barred from doing business for four weeks, in addition to the three-year bar on partnership purchases or sales.
In entering the order, the exchange said it "considered Ziomek's agreement to personally reimburse two customers $5,000 each to cover the losses" in their partnership accounts.
Separately, Prudential has agreed to reimburse brokers in Texas following an accord with Texas regulators that temporarily bars the firm from opening new brokerage accounts in the state.
As reported, Prudential agreed under the settlement to be suspended from soliciting or accepting new brokerage business for five business days; Prudential's North Dallas office won't be allowed to engage in the same activities for 20 business days.
Prudential said the two periods will run concurrently, starting Jan. 31.
Prudential said it will pay its Texas brokers 5% of their average monthly compensation for the past 12 months.
This means that a $120,000 producer will receive a $500 check for the lost time, Prudential says.
Brokers in Prudential's North Dallas office will receive 20% of their average monthly compensation.
"It was unfair to put the burden of sanctions on brokers," most of whom weren't at the firm when the partnership abuses occurred, a Prudential spokesman said.
