Southern Pacific Rail Corp. restructured its 25 million common stock offering after the anticipated $240 million sale of a California rail line failed to close on time.
The company had planned to issue 15 million new shares plus a secondary offering of about 10 million shares to be sold by certain Southern Pacific shareholders.
Under the new plan, all 25 million shares in the offering will be new shares.
"They were counting on receiving $240 million from the sale of the Alameda corridor," said Burton Strauss Jr., an analyst at Lehman Brothers Inc.
"Instead they will sell an additional 10 million shares to raise an alternative source of cash the company needs to go ahead with its programs to rebuild the railroad."
The San Francisco-based rail holding company insisted it's not having cash problems.
But the market seemed to view the announcement negatively.
Southern Pacific shares closed in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange Friday at $21.50, down 62.5 cents.
Southern Pacific also reported that fourth-quarter net income fell to $3.9 million, or three cents a share, from $52.2 million, or 50 cents a share, a year earlier.
The company said the latest results include additional operating expenses from the 1993 Midwest floods and a $10.5 million pretax charge to cover the costs of centralizing crew dispatching and crew calling and elimination of unnecessary facilities.
The company said fourth-quarter rail traffic was up 8%, while revenues rose 4.4% to $742.8 million from $711.3 million.
The company said its average freight rates declined in the quarter as it moved more lower-rated commodities such as coal and containers and less higher-rated shipments of new autos and auto parts.
Southern Pacific said fourth-quarter net also was affected by lower real estate sales.
Gains from sale of real estate were $7.2 million compared with $87.8 million a year earlier.
In announcing the amended public offering, Southern Pacific said it had expected to sell its 20-mile rail line between Long Beach and downtown Los Angeles by Jan. 31.
The track would have become the Alameda Corridor, which is planned to be an expedited rail route for Southern Pacific and other railroads to move freight shipments to and from the ports.
But Southern Pacific said it appears that the ports of Long Beach and Los Angeles won't complete the purchase of the line, because Union Pacific Corp. has "refused" to execute a memorandum of understanding with the ports covering operations on the proposed rail facility.
Robert Starzel, Southern Pacific's vice chairman, said the "pressure is on the Union Pacific" to reach an agreement.
Union Pacific said it continues to bargain with the ports but that proposed fees to the railroad for use of the line are "excessive."
