But thanks to a pioneering spirit and aggressive marketing, Crested Butte Mountain Resort is doing just fine.
The resort's owners have been "very gutsy," says Jerry Jones, a ski-area consultant based in Vail, Colo.
"They've taken risks and been ahead of their time."
In an industry in the throes of consolidation, small, family-owned resorts such as Crested Butte are endangered species.
Big resort operators such as Vail Associates Inc., Aspen Skiing Co., S-K-I Ltd. and Ralston Purina Corp. continue to buy up resorts.
Meanwhile, more than 200 small ski areas, or about 25% of all areas, have closed in the past decade.
And industry experts expect the trend to continue.
Ten years ago, Crested Butte seemed an ideal candidate for extinction.
It was a little-known ski hill with only 450 acres of routine ski trails and an annual deficit of $2 million.
Crested Butte's survival shows that even a small resort on a shoestring budget can hire talented people and capture national attention with innovative marketing.
Georgians Howard "Bo" Callaway and Ralph O. Walton, who are related by marriage, bought Crested Butte in 1970 after both were chewed out -- in separate incidents -- by Aspen lift-ticket salespeople.
"This is no way to run a railroad," Mr. Walton remembers thinking.
Soon, Mr. Walton had quit his job at Westinghouse to run Crested Butte, with advice from Mr. Callaway, who already owned a garden resort in Georgia.
For the next 14 years, the company lost money on skiing but survived through land sales.
Then, in 1984, land sales plummeted, losses mushroomed to $1.5 million, and Mr. Walton needed solutions.
First, he hired a professional manager for the resort, turning to Mr. Callaway's son, Edward, a McKinsey & Co. consultant.
Then, studying a report about similar problems at Sun Valley Ski Resort in Idaho, he zeroed in on Crested Butte's biggest shortcoming -- access.
Crested Butte wasn't likely to make a fortune off surrounding Gunnison County, a rugged ranching and mining area with only 10,000 residents.
And the remote resort is a five-hour drive from Denver.
So in mid-1985, Crested Butte went to American Airlines and begged for direct air service from major cities.
To get it, the resort had to guarantee American a 15% profit.
"We were confident," says Edward Callaway.
"We were also wrong."
By January 1986, American was losing money on the flights.
Mr. Callaway promptly canceled money-losing routes from Los Angeles and Houston -- even though his wife and children were booked on one of them that day.
To fill flights from Dallas and Chicago, he sent a letter to past customers there that started "HELP."
The letter offered one-week packages with airfare, lodging and lift tickets for only $199.
Most of the money went directly to the airline for the seats, but the offer brought in enough responses -- a 10% acceptance rate -- to keep American interested in flights for the next season.
That first year, the resort lost about $1 million on the flight guarantees -- increasing the resort's total losses to about $2 million.
But it plunged ahead, signing up with American for another year.
In the meantime, Mr. Callaway created a system to track reservations for 12 different periods of the year in 64 separate markets.
If reservations from Tulsa for the week before Christmas fell below expectations, a promotion could be targeted at Tulsa skiers through direct mail and radio ads.
If sales were up, the resort could raise package prices in that market.
Mr. Callaway also strengthened the resort's marketing efforts by hiring John Norton, an old school buddy, away from Proctor & Gamble to run marketing, forming a group sales unit and sending salesmen to talk to travel agencies.
The new marketing effort focused on Crested Butte's "funky" character and real Western setting.
"Heaven Forbid We Should Ever Become Like Aspen or Vail," the ads said, and "Crested Butte -- What Aspen Used to Be and Vail Never Was."
But lack of capital still strained the resort's ability to attract new skiers.
While Vail, Aspen and Keystone opened their seasons bragging about new lifts, new restaurants and new terrain, Bob Gillen, Crested Butte's new public relations director, says he had nothing to talk about "but a new Hobart cheese slicer for the kitchen."
In 1987, he went to Edward Callaway and begged for new terrain.
The only land available had severe, rocky slopes that were classified as "extreme" and could be navigated by only about 10% of skiers.
But Mr. Gillen offered to use his own marketing budget to pay for a new, cheap-to-build surface lift for the new 400-acre area, and he got it.
The new terrain gave the resort cachet.
Huge signs were put up, warning of the slope's toughness in five languages.
New ads compared Crested Butte's huge extreme territory with much smaller extreme offerings at Aspen, Snowmass and Vail, adding a notation that Aspen's areas all had "extreme pricing."
By the 1988-89 season, the resort was making a $250,000 profit, and by 1990-91, the profit was $1.3 million.
But Crested Butte was still losing money between Thanksgiving and Christmas.
So Mr. Norton made an unusual offer: free skiing between the holidays.
If lodging and restaurant owners in Crested Butte would voluntarily give the resort some revenue from customers who came to ski free, the ski area might come out ahead, management reasoned.
Skiers responded in droves.
Lodging from Thanksgiving weekend to Christmas is now booked solid, with 9,000 skiers jamming slopes designed for about 6,500 on the busiest days.
The resort no longer loses money through the period, and overall, it made about $1.5 million in the 1992-1993 season.
Moreover, says Stephen Scott, the marketing vice president, the program has increased awareness of Crested Butte among skiers to 90% from 10%, according to the resort's surveys.
The program has also helped pay for a new, four-person chairlift, the first of three or four new lifts the resort has planned.
"We'll have a modern mountain in two years," Mr. Callaway promises.
Now, in spite of its size, Crested Butte has become one of the nation's most copied ski resorts, says Mr. Jones, the consultant.
Jackson Hole and Steamboat mimicked its airline guarantee program.
Several resorts added extreme territory -- much of it rather sedate compared with Crested Butte's.
And while Ski Free isn't catching on, several resorts now offer half-price tickets from Thanksgiving to Christmas.
Meanwhile, Crested Butte's new push will improve service, Mr. Callaway says.
He plans to use new, card-based lift-ticket technology to track customers as they ski, check into their rooms and buy dinner.
That will lead to the kind of service only a small area can give, he says.
"We have to survive as a niche player," explains Mr. Scott, the marketing vice president.
"With the mergers, the big are getting bigger.
We can market ourselves against the size of their resorts."
