Consolidated Freightways Inc. has almost recovered from an acquisition that devastated its past earnings, but the carrier still faces tough trucking ahead.
With 1993 profit of $31.6 million, the transportation company registered its best financial performance since it acquired Emery Air Freight Corp. in 1989.
Consolidated's earnings improved largely because Emery has finally turned profitable after posting 13 straight quarterly operating losses totaling more than $300 million.
"The 1993 profits are clear evidence that our 1990s strategy is succeeding and that the financial turnaround is progressing," said Donald E. Moffitt, president and chief executive officer, when the results were announced.
"We are extremely proud of Emery's accomplishment."
Mr. Moffitt led a round of managerial champagne toasts when Emery landed in the black, but he concedes it isn't time for real rejoicing.
Despite a modest rate increase recently, Consolidated's flagship business of long-haul trucking remains mired in an industrywide pricing slump.
While Emery and a regional-freight unit posted revenue gains last year, Consolidated's revenue from long-haul trucking fell to $2.11 billion from $2.18 billion in 1992.
Now turning his attention to the longhaul trucking unit's problems, Mr. Moffitt, who calls the 1993 long-haul results "unsatisfactory and below our expectations," says the company has instituted cost-cutting measures such as automating docks, closing some terminals and reducing freight handling.
But the company's stock still hasn't recovered.
While it has about doubled from last year's low, it is still trading 33% lower than at its pre-Emery peak of $37.75 a share in January 1989.
Yesterday, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, it closed at $26.625, off 12.5 cents.
Before the Emery acquisition, Consolidated rarely stumbled during six decades of expansion.
Emery appeared a good fit into Consolidated's plan to expand its transportation network globally.
But Emery was saddled with high costs and fierce competition from such giants as Federal Express Corp. and some financial analysts reacted with alarm at Consolidated's move.
When the deal finally closed, Emery was close to possible bankruptcy-law proceedings, says Paul R. Schlesinger, a transportation analyst for Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette.
Executives at the time say they didn't realize the full extent of Emery's problems until they had made the purchase for about $480 million in cash and debt.
Emery went on to make what executives today say was a string of blunders.
One of the biggest was its 4.5-cents-a-pound fuel surcharge, seeking to help offset rising aviation-fuel costs.
Customers became enraged at that as well as Emery's erratic delivery schedule, and bolted to competitors such as Federal Express.
Emery wound up losing about $100 million in 1989.
Emery sharply reduced the surcharge and improved its scheduling system, but losses piled up from its continued involvement in the overnight-envelope business, which brings high aircraft-maintenance costs and low profit margins.
Matters weren't helped when Federal Express and others cut their prices.
Consolidated's board pulled the plug on the envelope business and on then-chief executive officer Lary R. Scott in August 1990.
It named Mr. Moffitt, who had been Consolidated's chief financial officer, as his successor.
Initially, the new regime didn't prove any more adept than Mr. Scott's.
The board hired Arthur Bass, the legendary co-founder of Federal Express, to run Emery, only to force his resignation six months later.
He had insisted on staying in the overnight-envelope business.
Under Mr. Moffitt, the company enraged the work force by firing 2,000 employees during 1991, sometimes with as little as 15 minutes notice, some employees say.
And the U.S. Postal Service suspended Emery from any contracts with the service while it investigated the company's alleged overcharging of the government for shipping services during the Gulf War.
Emery submitted invoices for about $2.7 million, which auditors found included $1.9 million in overcharges.
Consolidated appealed, and the Postal Service gave Emery a new 10-year contract.
Still, most analysts credit Mr. Moffitt with pulling Consolidated back from the brink.
After helping to secure critical new financing, Mr. Moffitt moved quickly to cut costs and build morale by promising employees a share in profits.
The employees received their first profit-sharing checks in the fourth quarter of 1992.
That period ended a year in which the parent company posted a net loss of $97.7 million, its third year in a row of net losses attributable in large part to Emery's troubles.
The key to Consolidated's earnings rebound in 1993, analysts say, was its continued perseverance in turning around Emery.
The company's management did this, in part, by continuing cost-cutting efforts such as shifting Emery's emphasis to hauling freight over longer distances from the less-profitable shorter routes, says Burton M. Strauss Jr., analyst with Lehman Brothers.
Consolidated also increased Emery's operating efficiency, Mr. Strauss adds, by increasing the amount of cargo carried on each flight.
While the overall number of shipments remained fairly flat, Mr. Strauss says, Emery boosted its pounds per shipment to 155 at the end of 1993's third quarter from 121 in the 1992 first quarter; or a weight increase of 28% per shipment.
With Emery essentially back on track, some of the past troubles continue to haunt the parent company.
At Consolidated's annual meeting last April, the Teamsters union, representing some employees who hold the company's stock, marched outside to protest the directors' staggered terms, which make it difficult for shareholders to quickly change the makeup of the board.
On March 31, Consolidated and other major carriers face expiration of a Teamsters contract, and indications are the union will drive a tough bargain that could add significantly to Consolidated's labor costs.
Emery also faces fresh competition from rival trucker Roadway Services Inc., which recently launched its own air-freight service.
Meanwhile, trucking rates are expected to remain flat this year, because of heated competition.
Still, analysts anticipate that an overall upturn in long-haul shipments will be sufficient to boost Consolidated's profit moderately on that business.
And analysts expect another strong year by Emery and Consolidated's regional trucking carrier, Con-Way Transportation Services.
Consolidated's net income is expected to rise to about $1.60 a share this year, or more than double 1993's net, with an estimated 7% revenue increase to about $4.5 billion, says Lehman's Mr. Strauss.
"We're anticipating a pretty good year for Consolidated Freightways," he adds.
