At a time of anti-incumbent fever, Texas Railroad Commissioner James E. Nugent ought to be sweating bullets over Tuesday's Democratic primary.
After all, at age 71, Mr. Nugent has had one of the longest political careers in Texas; he first ran for office in the early '50s, and has been on the commission since 1979.
His reputation for political ruthlessness has won him enemies.
He long ago earned the epithet "Snake," he says, because of his skill in killing others' legislative initiatives.
Lately, he's been tagged as perhaps the state's biggest hurdle to trucking deregulation, which proponents say could give a strong boost to the Texas economy.
Challenger Robert Earley, meanwhile, is his political opposite.
The personable Mr. Earley, 33-year-old chairman of the Texas House Energy Committee, is running on a pledge to "reinvent" the Railroad Commission, which, contrary to its name, regulates oil and gas production, intrastate trucking and bus lines, natural gas utilities and open-pit mining.
In particular, Mr. Earley is demanding that the agency lift its stranglehold on intrastate trucking rates, expand the number of operating permits for minority- and women-owned trucking companies, and more aggressively promote alternative fuels.
That stance has won Mr. Earley endorsements from four of the state's largest newspapers and Democratic black and Hispanic organizations.
It all sounds pretty bleak for Mr. Nugent.
But it isn't.
Mr. Nugent remains cool -- political analysts fully expect him to trounce his younger opponent.
A recent poll gave Mr. Nugent 44% of the likely vote, compared with 10% for Mr. Earley.
Mr. Nugent boasts that he has won 29 contested elections, and that he thrashed his two most recent challengers for the post.
"Earley is coming down the same trail and doing the same things," he says.
"And he'll do about as well."
It's easy to understand why -- and the reasons say a lot about the hidebound nature of the Railroad Commission.
For despite the dwindling importance of energy to the state's economy, the agency's agenda remains dominated by independent oil and gas producers, which prefer the commission's -- and Mr. Nugent's -- conservative approach.
This is true even as natural gas eases ahead of oil in importance.
Independent gas producers praise Mr. Nugent's 10-year effort to set stricter limits on natural-gas production.
The efforts, which effectively shored up gas prices, were supported by most small and midsize independents, but were opposed by large gas producers.
Independents haven't been shy about backing up such feelings with their wallets.
So far, Mr. Nugent has amassed a campaign war chest of nearly $1 million, largely from wealthy energy barons.
Wagner & Brown Ltd. of Midland gave $2,500, and Houston oilman George P. Mitchell put up $2,000.
Prominent Republicans also came through: Unsuccessful gubernatorial candidate Clayton Williams Jr. of Midland contributed $5,000, as did Dallas oilman T. Boone Pickens.
Mr. Earley, meanwhile, has raised only $130,000.
One of his biggest financial backers is Amoco Corp.'s Texas political action committee, which contributed $10,000.
Amoco Production Co. and a dozen other major and independent oil concerns have been embroiled in a four-year fight over the commission's oil-pumping limits in the vast East Texas oil field.
Mr. Nugent favors the restrictions, while Mr. Earley says he is willing to reconsider the limits.
An Amoco spokesman says the PAC's support isn't related to the dispute.
"We knew we would have a hard time raising money," Mr. Earley says.
"But it's the effectiveness of how we spend it that counts."
He is depending on the support of black, Hispanic and urban Democrats to counteract Mr. Nugent's spending power.
Mr. Earley also has to overcome the public's weak understanding of what the Railroad Commission actually does with its 1,000 employees and $50 million budget.
Created in 1891 to defend the state's farmers from abuses by the railroads, the agency's mission later shifted mostly to oil and gas regulation.
Mr. Earley proposes changing the agency's name to the Texas Commission on Energy and Transportation.
He also calls for recording agency hearings -- the minutes of the meetings only record the actions of the commissioners.
"It's one of the least scrutinized state agencies," Mr. Earley says.
Mr. Earley is counting on the issue of trucking deregulation and its promised stimulus to the state's economy to win voters.
He calls for removing the prohibitively high barriers for companies -- especially minority-owned firms -- to get statewide, common-carrier operating licenses, counting on the increased competition to bring down rates.
Mr. Nugent has been the commission's most forceful opponent of deregulation, which he argues would allow large national companies to dominate the industry and wipe out thousands of jobs.
The cutthroat price competition that would follow deregulation, he warns, would encourage trucking companies to cut corners on safety, and raise prices and reduce services for rural areas.
Besides, he says, "if someone doesn't like the way we regulate, they can go to the Legislature and change it."
