The scene: a crowded factory auditorium in central Moscow.
Underneath a 20-foot portrait of Lenin, Gen. Yuri Kalinin shouts to the assembled faithful, "The Soviet people will be victorious!"
Red banners are hoisted high, as the crowd bursts into spirited applause.
Stalin's era?
In fact, the events took place in Boris Yeltsin's Russia -- last week.
The past is creeping up on Russia's future.
A resurgent Communist Party has nearly gained control over the new Parliament.
Foreign policy is inching back toward an expansionist, Soviet model.
And control of Russia's partly reformed economy has returned to the statist military-industrial complex.
The new mix recalls the Gorbachev era, where a cautious leadership toggled between the familiar and reform, while the economy nose-dived.
"If you liked perestroika, you'll love this," says Jeffrey Sachs, a Harvard University economist who resigned in disgust last week as an economic adviser to the Russian government.
Russia's step backward isn't altogether surprising.
For two years, a team of reformers, guided by Mr. Yeltsin, tried to move the country toward a radical vision of the future.
Russia was to be a democracy, with a flourishing free-market economy.
In short, it was to be like the West.
But in two years, the reformers couldn't deliver the goods.
Inflation soared.
Production plummeted.
A third of the population slipped below the official poverty line.
When Russians had a chance to vote last month, the verdict on radical reforms was a distinct Nyet.
President Yeltsin, wounded politically, has thrown in his lot with the government's go-slow technocrats, who now heap scorn on the Western market model.
"They tried to put an American suit on Russia," says Gennady Zyuganov, head of the Communist Party.
"But it didn't fit."
Boris Fyodorov, who quit as finance minister last week to protest the government's new conservatism, warned Mr. Yeltsin yesterday that "an economic coup is taking place in the country."
Mr. Fyodorov characterized the new government as dominated by "red industrialists."
The reformers' dashed dreams are a reminder that, despite an overwhelming desire for reform when the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, change doesn't just come overnight.
While the Soviet system can't be recreated -- few would even want that -- communism's roots still run deep, as do Russian suspicions toward the West and foreign ideas.
"The Yeltsin era is pretty much over," gloats Viktor Linnik, who edits the proCommunist daily Pravda.
"The Communists are coming back."
But just as surely as the old guard is in the ascendancy, one can't rule out another dramatic reversal.
Politics in Russia tends to be cyclical.
If Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin fails to tame the inflationary monster with his Gorbachev-era policies, reformers-in-exile like Mr. Fyodorov and Yegor Gaidar might win another chance to complete their half-finished market revolution.
For now, however, it is the old men's turn.
With their eyes on the road and a somewhat clouded rear-view mirror, they are taking Russia back -- to the future.
There is a sense of deja vu speaking with Leonid Abalkin, a prominent economist who once advised the Gorbachev government.
When the radical reformers took over in early 1992, Mr. Abalkin was unceremoniously dumped from the front line.
Today, he is back.
Teaming up with others from the perestroika period -- names like Nikolai Petrakov and Stanislav Shatalin -- Mr. Abalkin has drawn up a 120-page economic report that will soon be placed on the desks of Messrs. Yeltsin and Chernomyrdin.
Its recommendations for a new course -- calling for state-directed economic policy, increased social spending and non-monetarist means to attack inflation -- are already known; Mr. Chernomyrdin already is following his advice.
"Chernomyrdin finally gets it," says Mr. Abalkin, clearly pleased with his reemergence as a sought-after adviser.
Even more surprising is the return of the Communists to the corridors of power.
After the failed coup of 1991, the party didn't just lose its monopoly on power.
It was humiliated, branded as criminal and temporarily banned.
In a 1992 speech on Capitol Hill, Mr. Yeltsin crowed, "Communism has collapsed, never to rise again."
But in last month's election, the Communists won the biggest share of the anti-Yeltsin protest vote.
Much has been made of the success of Vladimir Zhirinovsky, the ultra-nationalist whose rantings make for excellent television.
But it was the Communists who did best in the Dec. 12 vote.
The Communist Party and its rural twin, the Agrarian Party, took 79 seats in the 444-member State Duma, Russia's powerful lower house of Parliament.
Moreover, a large share of the Duma's 135 "independents" are the Communists' natural allies.
By contrast, Russia's Choice, the main pro-reform party, won just 65 seats, the same total won by Mr. Zhirinovsky's Liberal Democratic Party.
The Communists' organizational skills already are evident.
A Communist former engineer, Ivan Rybkin, was elected speaker of the Duma.
The Communist-Agrarian alliance put 20 people onto the Duma's key committees, more than any other faction.
And the Communists have shown air-tight party discipline in their parliamentary voting.
Reflecting the reformers' frustration, parliamentarian Andrei Makarov, a pro-Yeltsin lawyer, publicly slammed Mr. Gaidar for weak leadership of Russia's Choice and called for him to step down.
But the Communist Party has one potentially lethal weakness: Its 600,000 members are drawn mainly from Russia's graying masses: the disaffected pensioners who wax nostalgic for a bygone era that no one seemed to like at the time, but many now recall as the glory days.
Martuni Srabov, a senior Communist leader in Moscow, sits at the kitchen table reminiscing about the best period of his life.
It was the late 1950s and early 1960s, an era generally dismissed as the period of stagnation.
"People were sure of themselves," says Mr. Srabov, smiling serenely at his memories.
"We were making great scientific progress.
The world loved us, respected us and feared us."
The Communists realize that their comeback might amount to a last hurrah.
The challenge is to appear relevant in the 1990s and beyond.
So they have been fiddling with the party line.
The party that once summed up its essence with the single phrase "abolition of private property" now fully embraces property ownership.
Gone, moreover, is the rigorous adherence to doctrine and slogans.
The party has evolved into a kind of Communism Lite.
"Look, we have to accept reality," says Valentin Kuptsov, the party's No. 2 leader.
"Otherwise we're not going to have any success at all."
Mr. Zyuganov, chairman of the party's central committee, is a former philosophy student and long-time party functionary.
Though working in temporary quarters that lack furniture and adequate telephones, he occupies a post formerly held by the likes of Lenin, Stalin and Gorbachev.
Still, he seems more an apologetic figure than a standard-bearer.
"The Communist Party of the Soviet Union made a major mistake in demanding a monopoly of power," says Mr. Zyuganov, a balding 49-year-old man with soft blue eyes and a polite, quiet demeanor.
"We are against all extremes.
We are searching for a balance."
The ideological inheritance also is hazy.
The new party seems content to pick and choose from the formerly sacred texts, discarding what doesn't suit it.
"Marx, Engels-they were all good people," says Mr. Zyuganov.
"But their theories came from another era that doesn't fit with the present."
What writings does Mr. Zyuganov value?
"Clever books, without ideology," he says.
"The Bible's good.
And the Koran."
Speaking at the party's chaotic headquarters, where aides and visitors troop in and out, Mr. Kuptsov tries to clarify the party's views.
"The main principles of Marxism-Leninism remain in our program," he declares.
Like what?
"Well, justice," he says after a long pause.
"And we're against exploitation."
The most important political battle is being fought over the hearts and minds of Russia's young generation.
The Communists know they face an uphill struggle.
Indeed, it takes Mr. Srabov, the Moscow party official, several days to locate a single youthful party recruit in the whole Moscow region.
The recruit, Alexander Vasiliev, turns out to be a scraggly young factory worker.
He became interested in the party in September, after Mr. Yeltsin suddenly abolished Russia's conservative Parliament.
As the tense standoff developed, Mr. Vasiliev took to the streets, brandishing a steel rod to assist in "defending the Parliament."
When things turned violent, and armed crowds tried to take over the state television tower, Mr. Vasiliev was among them.
Now he is angry and politicized.
He is fed up with Russia's economic problems.
And he wants to become a Communist.
"I worked at the factory across the street," he says.
"It stopped working.
This whole region has stopped.
I don't know how people survive."
Leading the young man's indoctrination is Viktor Kuznetsov, leader of the local party cell in the industrial Moscow suburb of Mytyshi.
Mr. Kuznetsov's badge of honor: He spent four days in jail after the violent clashes of October.
During a cell meeting, the young recruit mostly reads the newspaper.
He keeps his fur hat on even as the others, mostly retirees in their 60s, place theirs on their laps.
Still, he is this cell's hope for the future.
"The Communist Party will return to power," says Mr. Kuznetsov.
"And we need a young cadre."
By contrast, most young people -- including, Mr. Vasiliev concedes, his own friends -- seem more eager to try to take advantage of what the new world offers.
These are people who tend to support the reform policies but who, poll takers say, mostly stayed home during the election.
As the Yeltsin-Gaidar party, Russia's Choice, was getting routed at the polls on Dec. 12, Tatiana Gurina manned her downtown Moscow kiosk without a shred of concern toward politics.
Although her business -- selling mostly imported liquors and foods -- owes everything to Mr. Gaidar's reforms, she doesn't feel the need to vote.
"I don't care about all those politicians," she says.
The result: Politics has been left mainly in the hands of the disaffected.
If the Yeltsin era is winding up, the "Chernomyrdin era" has just begun.
Mr. Chernomyrdin, 55, a former member of the Communist Party central committee, generally gets high marks for his past work running Russia's gas monopoly, Gasprom.
The U.S. government, which had worked closely with the prime minister before he announced his new, conservative cabinet and declared an end to "market romanticism" last week, has portrayed him as a reformer.
Advisers to the Russian government see it differently.
"Believe me, he's a conservative," says Mr. Sachs of Harvard.
"All summer long, Chernomyrdin blocked attempts to push faster reforms."
Mr. Chernomyrdin epitomizes the goslow industrialists who now control the levers of economic power.
He wants reform -- Russians all say they favor reform -- but he also wants stability and believes that only the guiding hand of the state can protect that balance.
He favors continuing subsidies to weak industries and to the agricultural sector.
And he is discussing stepped-up state intervention, including wage and price controls.
As power and the popular mood shift to a more conservative tack, Mr. Yeltsin seems to be going along -- at least for now.
Aides say he was profoundly disappointed with Mr. Gaidar's failure to produce promised economic gains in two years.
"Yeltsin has finely tuned political instincts," says Mr. Abalkin, the economist.
"He is starting to feel that he was deceived" by the reformers.
Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev also is adjusting to the political winds.
Long criticized for being overly pro-West, Mr. Kozyrev stunned the diplomatic community last week when he called for Russia to maintain a military presence in the former Soviet republics, including the Baltics.
Moscow considers its "near abroad" to be part of a Russian sphere of influence.
In the end, Prime Minister Chernomyrdin and his go-slow team may have no more success than their predecessors.
Russia is caught between the twin crises of plummeting industrial output and the threat of hyperinflation.
That squeeze limits Mr. Chernomyrdin's policy options and perhaps dooms his political career.
Waiting in the wings to form the next government: the reformers, the ultranationalists and the new Communist Party.
