As President Clinton tries to sell his health care reform bill to lawmakers and the public this year, the American Association of Retired Persons will be watching and responding.
This is a group that Washington is afraid to ignore.
In 1958, when Ethel Percy Andrus, a retired high school principal, founded the AARP, neither she nor anyone else could have known exactly what she was starting.
In 1947, Ms. Andrus had set up the National Retired Teachers Association and sought to deal with the tax, pension and insurance problems of its members.
She was successful enough that she decided to extend the same idea to all older Americans.
Ms. Andrus worked at the AARP until she died in 1967.
And, my, how the association grew.
The AARP now has 33 million members.
As Peter Peterson, a former secretary of commerce and a critic of some AARP attitudes, writes in a recent book, its membership includes "one in every four registered U.S. voters and is bigger than any other organization in America aside from the Catholic Church."
The AARP has accumulated all of those dues-paying members in part because of the wide variety of services it offers.
To many members, the services are the chief attraction.
Mary Sargent, a resident of Brandon Wilde, a life-care community near Augusta, Ga., says, "I really appreciate their pharmacy service."
This service, providing swift delivery of drugs, vitamins and the like, is administered by Retired Persons Services, a separate firm sponsored but not owned by AARP.
Other services, arranged by AARP but provided by outside firms, include group health insurance, car and homeowners insurance, mobile-home insurance, an investment program featuring mutual funds, a Visa card program, a travel program, rental car and hotel discounts, and even emergency road service.
AARP staff members, however, say firmly that service, while it may be the beginning, is not the end for the association.
"Advocacy goes right along with the service," says Elliot Carlson, editor of the AARP Bulletin, a newspaper published every month except August.
It's the advocacy part of AARP's mission that worries Mr. Peterson and other critics of the association.
"When AARP speaks," he says, "it speaks loud and clear.
In my deficit-fighting battles of the 1980s, I learned just how much Washington listens."
Conveniently, the association is headquartered in Washington.
Between now and the year 2040, Mr. Peterson notes, the share of the population that is 65 and over is expected to grow from 13% to 20%, with a corresponding drop in the share of younger Americans.
A large part of federal spending already goes for Social Security and Medicare payments to the elderly, whether they need such payments or not, and the spending is in large part financed by younger, working people.
Mr. Peterson thinks that such payments should be gradually subjected to a means test: If you need it, you get it; if you don't need it, you don't get it.
If any member of Congress should propose such means tests, it's clear that the AARP would firmly oppose them.
CBS recently devoted a segment of "60 Minutes" to Mr. Peterson's proposal, and John Rother, the AARP legislative director, was both clear and concise.
He was asked if the association would oppose Mr. Peterson's plan, and he responded, "Sure."
The association's position is that the Peterson proposal is an attack on the whole idea of social insurance.
The AARP contends that most government entitlements go to the "near poor," who the association figures earn $10,000 or less a year.
Government figures, however, indicate that nearly half of all entitlements go to people earning $30,000 to $200,000 a year.
A full-fledged means test is unlikely to be adopted anytime soon, but the government is edging in that direction.
A new tax on Social Security payments for people beyond a certain income level has been passed and goes into effect this year.
A more imminent question is what to do about federal health care.
The AARP feels a special responsibility here, since one of Ms. Andrus's earliest problems was finding a private insurance company that would provide health insurance for retired teachers.
She succeeded, eventually, but the problem now is much bigger.
The AARP's clout stems in large part from a Washington belief that the association is pulling all, or at least most, of its 33 million members behind it.
But that may not be so.
The association hasn't endorsed Mr. Clinton's health plan, but its board of directors says it's the best that has emerged so far.
In a statement, the directors said: "We believe the president's proposal provides the strongest and most realistic blueprint to date for achieving our reform goals."
Late last year the AARP commissioned a research group to poll 1,217 scientifically selected Americans, aged 18 or older, and concluded that only 38% of adult Americans understand the plan either "very well" or "fairly well."
Nonetheless, a slim 51% majority approved the plan.
At about the same time, the AARP Bulletin asked its readers, association members all, for their "first reaction" to the plan.
Of the 25,000 readers who responded, an overwhelming 82% opposed the plan, and only 17% approved.
The Bulletin got some salty comments, too.
"Everyone will pay more for their health care and receive care that is inferior to what they now have," said Al Sinner of Estes Park, Colo.
Bob Multer of Rindge, N.H., said: "The system ain't broke, and any big government overhaul can only make things worse."
The AARP would like to be able to explain away the Bulletin's poll.
Constance Swank, the association's research director, comments: "People who take the time to write on an emerging public policy issue, as the Bulletin readers did, typically hold strong views on it.
They're probably not a true cross-section of the AARP membership."
Maybe not.
But 33 million members is a lot of members, and if you want to lead them you'd better be pretty sure where they're going.
