For better or worse, the workplace has become the eatplace.
That's made life interesting for the colleagues of David Morris, marketing director of a real-estate developer in New Jersey.
Mr. Morris likes cold spaghetti topped with sliced raw onion or a tuna sandwich doused with hot sauce.
For breakfast.
That would be fine if he were chomping in privacy.
But Mr. Morris eats the stuff in the open.
"The smell grosses me out in the morning when he eats tuna fish or chili with hot sauce," complains Julie Hoffman, a bookkeeper who asked that her desk be moved out of nose-shot.
Many employees, on tight budgets and working longer hours as a result of corporate cutbacks, are having breakfast, lunch and dinner at their desks.
National Eating Trends, a survey conducted by NPD Group, a Chicago market research concern, says the number of meals taken to offices from restaurants has risen 29% in the past decade.
And it's not just sandwiches.
In Los Angeles, a delivery service called Why Cook? recently transported $480 of sushi to 15 investment bankers working late one night.
Managers are of two minds about the phenomenon.
On the one hand, eating in is supposedly more efficient, because employees can work as they dine.
But clients who drop by are greeted between bites; memos are circulated with photocopied mustard smudges.
Leftovers rot in the refrigerator.
Trash cans leak sauces.
"The other day we had Thai food and the trash wasn't removed.
The next day it was hard to walk in the office it smelled so bad," says Kristin Hahn, an independent producer in Los Angeles.
Some companies have gone so far as to forbid employees to eat in the office.
White & Case, a New York law firm, established a no-desk-eating policy.
"For a variety of different reasons -- both office appearance and insects and rodent problems -- we'd prefer not to have them eat at their desks.
But we have a cafeteria," says Tim Goodell, administrative partner.
Janitors wouldn't mind a universal no-office eating edict.
Infestation by mice and bugs is bad enough, but almost as troublesome are the daily messes, like the popcorn and muffin crumbs ground into the carpet.
Holidays are the worst, with endless cookie trays and catered office parties.
"People eat a paper plate of rigatoni or chicken wings at their desk, throw it in the garbage can and hit the rim.
It bounces on the floor and they leave it," laments Richard Seigfreid of Arcade Maintenance Inc. in Pittsburgh.
Then there are leftovers, often stashed in the office refrigerator for a future lunch.
But invariably they are forgotten for days, even weeks, resulting in a "green, moldy, slimy, smelly" mess, says Mr. Seigfreid.
Employees concede that spending hours agonizing over takeout decisions can actually cut into their productivity.
David Bennett, a senior accountant with a New Jersey toy manufacturer, says he and his co-workers start debating restaurant choices around 11 a.m., place their orders after noon and wait until 2:30 for the food.
"By that time, we're dying of hunger," he says.
But proponents say that, when done properly, eating in the office adds to camaraderie and morale.
Susan Zigouras, a nutritionist and psychotherapist in New York, says that in many households, mealtime is still associated with family and togetherness.
Thus, sharing takeout with colleagues and bosses "can feel like a way of being nurtured," she says.
That's one reason why Ann Marie Sabath of At Ease Inc., a Cincinnati business etiquette training company, says it's very important when going out for food to make sure you ask co-workers if you can bring something back.
Ms. Sabath has more at-desk eating tips: If you have an office, close the door; if you have a cubicle, turn your back to the opening and stop eating if someone comes by; and never chew on the phone.
Not everyone lives by those rules, of course -- especially those who live on the phone.
Or on the air.
Gary Moore, who does the morning rush-hour show for a Los Angeles rock station, says when he wants to chow down, he plays extra-long songs like Led Zeppelin's Stairway To Heaven.
"I know the songs well enough that I finish up . . . but a couple times I've had to swallow pretty fast," says Mr. Moore, who usually drinks Coke and eats fruit during his four-hour daily stint.
Linda Swartz, a tax attorney with Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy, New York, has her own technique for hiding the fact that she's eating on the phone.
"You lift the mouthpiece of your phone, you pivot it on your ear so the mouthpiece is near the hairline while you chew, and you pivot it back down to speak," she says.
"If you're on a speakerphone, hit the mute button while you chew."
Actually, she confesses, she learned her noshing techniques from a colleague.
"I watched a tax partner do that when I was a junior and thought that was a good idea," she says.
Eric Hasserjian, a marketing director of a Santa Monica, Calif., office development called the Water Garden, takes this approach: "If I'm on hold, I'll take a small bite so if they come back on, I can get away with having food in my mouth."
The 29-year-old nibbles cookies, cheese and crackers all day "on top of my three meals," positioning his trash can between his knees to catch crumbs.
Preventing messy soups and salad dressings from spoiling important documents takes extra thought.
Mr. Hasserjian "spreads a newspaper on my desk, covering the paperwork.
Then I use that as my placemat.
It also entertains me because I can read it while eating."
For some, a certain level of sloppiness is unavoidable.
"I have a few documents smeared with food here," admits producer Ms. Hahn, adding quickly, "but they aren't going out" of the office.
Computer keyboards are also not eater-friendly.
Crumbs, coffee and soft drinks can make keys stick and gum up commands.
"We could open up a keyboard and live for a week off what we find in that thing," says Steve Gray, manager of the electronics department at the Omaha World-Herald.
Mr. Gray says employees rarely confess to spilling breakfast on their keyboards.
"They'll bring it in to be fixed and we'll ask them, `Did you spill something into it?'
`Oh no,' they'll say.
`Not that I know of.'
We'll open it up and you could plant potatoes in some of them."
A bigger problem may be what's creeping into the office.
"The plastic bags in the trash cans leak, and food is left on the bottom," says Dave Duffy, president of Pittsburgh's Central Maintenance & Service Co.
"You get an odor and flies come, and eventually, the janitor has to clean out the container.
Sometimes you have to treat the space with an exterminator."
But Mr. Morris of the spaghetti and onion breakfasts says he isn't about to change his eating habits -- even though he recently had such severe heartburn from a pungent spaghetti breakfast that he feared he was having a heart attack and dashed to the hospital.
"It was just indigestion," Mr. Morris says.
"The doctor advised me against eating spaghetti in the morning.
But I keep eating it for breakfast in my office.
I'm hopeless."
