Tempted to buy some of those wild-and-woolly country funds now that the world's stock markets have taken a hit?
Beware the emerging markets, which are still pricey.
Try stodgy investments in Europe instead.
That's the advice of a few market veterans who say the recent slide in foreign markets still hasn't made bargains of some of the more exotic single-country stock funds trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
"Europe isn't a sexy growth story, but this year you have a better chance of making money in the Irish Investment Fund than in the Malaysia Fund," says Michael Porter, a closed-end fund analyst at Smith Barney Shearson.
Closed-end country funds are a publicly traded type of mutual fund.
Each has a fixed number of shares, usually traded on the Big Board.
Each buys stocks of a single country or region.
And each has two prices: the per-share value of what it holds, known as the portfolio value, or net asset value; and the stock price, which can be at a premium or discount to the NAV.
"European markets have lagged Asian markets, many of which doubled last year," Mr. Porter says.
"Europe is a value play, and . . . pretty attractive.
The economies are expected to turn the corner sometime this year."
Irish Investment Fund, at 10 Friday, trades at a 4.9% discount to its NAV.
That's a better deal than Malaysia Fund, which at 21 3/8 trades at about a 2% discount as of last week, analysts say.
Ireland's stock market has risen a slight 0.48% this year and has a price-to-earnings ratio of about 20.
Malaysia's market, which has fallen 17.14% this year, is costlier, with a P/E in the high 20s, Mr. Porter says.
Closed-end fund discounts are welcomed by new investors, who are happy to pay only 90 cents or 85 cents to get a dollar's worth of foreign stocks.
Discounts and premiums to the net asset value are shown every Monday in The Wall Street Journal's Closed-End Fund listings.
Outside Europe, some analysts are skeptical.
"It's not yet the time to make a longer-term commitment to these emerging-market funds," says Thomas Herzfeld, a closed-end fund specialist in Miami.
"You'll have a chance to buy them at cheaper prices in the next couple months."
Latin American Equity Fund traded as low as 24 1/8 Wednesday, but Friday it surged 2 1/4 to 27 1/2, representing a 13.5% premium.
And on Wednesday Asia Pacific Fund dropped to 18 5/8, but Friday it finished at 20 1/8, up 1/2, for a 11.7% premium.
The barrage of initial public offerings of different types of emerging-market funds is another sign of froth, says David Tepper of Tepper Capital Management, a San Francisco investment adviser.
Last week's relaunching of Global Privatization Fund's offering went well.
After rescinding its offering the prior week, Global Privatization Fund managed to sell 70 million shares at the originally offered $15 each.
The stock ended its first day Friday still at 15; the IPO's size was shaved by just 4.5 million shares.
Analysts were astounded the deal got redone so smoothly after an almost-unheard of cancellation, due to an overstated chart in the offering document.
The fund will invest in international businesses being privatized.
"The emerging-market area is kind of shaping up to be a rerun of what happened in the European area in 1989," Mr. Tepper says.
That's when a slew of European funds were offered and zoomed to high premiums, only to come crashing down.
Now Europe is the safer bet, says George Scott, publisher of a closed-end fund newsletter in Richmond, Va.
"If I start getting scared of the world markets, I put my money in the Swiss," says George Scott.
"I like Swiss Helvetia Fund because it's like buying the highest-quality companies in the world," says Mr. Scott.
Swiss Helvetia was unchanged at 20 1/8 Friday, a 4.3% discount.
Mr. Scott also likes Growth Fund of Spain, which is trading at a 13.9% discount.
The stock edged up 1/8 to 10 5/8 Friday.
Mr. Porter likes the fund because many of its stocks, notably those in the utility and telecommunications areas, are sensitive to interest rates, which are expected to drop.
Several other European funds trade at ample discounts.
France Growth Fund closed unchanged at 11 5/8, a 9.7% discount.
New Germany Fund edged up 1/8 Friday to 12 1/8, a 13.5% discount.
As a reminder that discount and premiums don't mean everything when it comes to closed-end funds, investors only need look at Turkish Investment Fund.
A week ago it had a 55% premium.
But not too many people have made money from owning it this year.
Its NAV has sunk to about $7.50 from $13 at the beginning of this year.
The stock price also has fallen, but not as much, to 10 1/8 Friday, down from 12 7/8 earlier this year.
"The Turkish Investment Fund is a perfect example of how you can get whipped around by these country funds," Mr. Tepper says.
