Eastman Kodak Co.'s net income dropped 33% in the fourth quarter, but operating profit rose because of cost-cutting and strength in its health and information-systems segments.
The photography and health concern reported net income of $201 million, or 61 cents a share, compared with $299 million, or 92 cents a share, a year earlier.
The prior period's results include gains of 23 cents a share on investment sales and 15 cents a share in income from discontinued operations of its chemical division.
Sales from continuing operations in the latest quarter were flat at $4.48 billion.
The results exceeded analysts' consensus estimate of 56 cents a share.
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Kodak rose 12.5 cents to close at $44.25.
But some analysts remained cautious.
"The key issue is that cost savings were achieved in 1993," says Jack Kelly, an analyst with Goldman, Sachs & Co.
"The real question is why aren't more of those cost savings flowing to the bottom line?"
He pointed out, for example, that overall costs of goods sold increased 6%.
Kodak, based in Rochester, N.Y., said operating profit from its imaging, information and health segments rose 20% in the fourth quarter.
The boost came primarily from a 57% earnings increase in Kodak's health division, driven by "volume increases and cost control," said Wilbur J. Prezzano, health-group president.
Despite posting its lowest quarterly earnings of the year, Kodak's beleaguered information-systems unit still earned $22 million in the fourth quarter against a loss of $12 million the year before.
The unit benefited from "substantial earnings gain" in copy products, which chief executive officer George Fisher said was "not for sale" earlier this month, ending more than a year of speculation.
Some costs were also lower, Mr. Fisher said, with research and development expenses dropping 13% in the quarter and sales, administrative and other related expenses down 10%.
Michael Ellmann, an analyst with Wertheim Schroder & Co., said that Kodak has made some significant progress in cost reduction, but that it "had to surrender some of the benefits to the marketplace."
For example, Mr. Ellmann said that Kodak's revenue from 35mm color negative film sales in the U.S. slipped between 2% and 4%, despite an increase of 2% to 3% in the volume of film sold.
He placed some blame for the revenue drop on the company's fourth-quarter seasonal packaging promotions of its Gold film.
The holiday-discount package was supposed to be a trial for Kodak's new economy Funtime film announced last week.
"It's hard to feel any more comfortable with Funtime after reviewing results of this quarter," Mr. Ellmann says.
For the year, Kodak reported a loss of $1.52 billion, or $4.62 a share, including a charge of $2.17 billion, or $6.60 a share, from accounting changes taken primarily in the first quarter, and a $387 million, or $1.18 a share, third-quarter restructuring charge relating to Kodak's previously announced 10,000 layoffs.
Sales for the year fell slightly to about $16.36 billion from $16.55 billion.
Last year, Kodak posted net income of $1.15 billion, or $3.53 a share, including a $141 million, or 43 cent charge, and a $152 million, or 47 cents a share, boost from accounting changes.
