It's everybody's second question.
When any two quake-shaken souls encounter each other in the aftermath of Monday's earthquake here, once the preliminaries are over -- how are you, your family, your house -- the next topic is: How are you going to get to work?
Travel disruptions in a region whose culture has been defined by the automobile will not only drastically change people's daily lives, but will have lingering economic consequences as well.
The freeway system has six major breaks in it, most severely affecting two major California lifelines: the Santa Monica Freeway, the major east-west artery in Los Angeles, and the Golden State Freeway, the state's major north-south route.
The Santa Monica is one of this city's busiest commuter feeders, linking Los Angeles's affluent west side to its downtown.
The Golden State is a crucial truck-filled link to the fruit and vegetable growers of the San Joaquin Valley and the high-technology and other manufacturers of Northern California.
The Golden State is busier still when thousands of commuters who live in the Santa Clarita and Antelope Valleys head south toward Los Angeles.
Even before the quake, the connecting Antelope Valley Freeway, which carves through steep mountains, often would be bumper-to-bumper before daybreak.
Yesterday, large construction equipment began the task of tearing down the area's fractured roadways.
Authorities said they hoped to put the construction process on the fast track so that repairs would be completed by the end of the year, at a cost of about $100 million, according to preliminary estimates.
The major Santa Monica Freeway collapse will clog already-busy commercial streets nearby.
There's only one real alternate road for the Golden State, and it was jammed yesterday, even when most people stayed home from work.
The only other driving possibilities are hair-raising one-hour drives thousands of feet up into the San Gabriel Mountains, often on icy roads, or wide diversions to the east.
Or taking public transportation.
Nick Walsh, an official with the Federal Highway Administration, says the toppled sections of highway will have a "significant impact" on the economics of trucking in Southern California.
He says the closure of the Golden State will add about three hours to the typical 10-hour truckers' run from San Jose to Anaheim, making it illegal for a single driver to make the trip without a break.
"That'll be reflected in prices to consumers," he adds.
In the earthquake's wake, there has been much talk about increased use of the city's public transportation system, such as it is.
Officials hope employers will stagger working hours to lessen the rush-hour crush.
Increased ride-sharing is expected.
But in a city where nightmarish traffic already is a municipal obsession as well as a piece of cultural identity, the prospect of a crippled freeway system seems impossible to contemplate.
Some will have to seek radical answers.
"There is really no solution," says one commuter, Brad Marks.
"A lot of people are going to have to find work in the other direction, or just plain move."
Mary Ann Mandy is thinking about renting an apartment closer to work.
She commutes with 13 others in a van for her employer, a health-maintenance company, and the commute currently takes one-and-a-half hours.
She figures that it will now take four.
That's each way.
"I have no idea what I'm going to do," she says.
The true test may not come until next week.
Yesterday, with businesses and schools heeding a mayoral call to remain closed, many freeways were eerily empty.
It was reminiscent of the 1984 Olympics here, when prognostications of nightmarish traffic kept people off the roads.
"The rest of this week is going to play like a holiday week," says Chris Sieroty, a producer for Metro Traffic Control, which provides traffic reports to 45 local radio stations.
Even so, there were long delays yesterday at several spots where freeway traffic was diverted -- sometimes by National Guard troops -- onto surface streets.
Angelenos already go to great lengths to make their commutes work.
Mr. Marks, head of an executive search firm, lives on a ranch in an area of Santa Clarita known as Canyon Country -- on the other side of a crumbled freeway intersection.
For Mr. Marks's one-hour commute into Century City every day, he already makes adjustments to save time, such as breakfast meetings in the San Fernando Valley on his way in, so he can go "over the hill" into West Los Angeles at 9:30 when the traffic is letting up.
He has dinner meetings at night to miss rush-hour traffic going home.
"Now," he says, "I don't know how I'm going to get to work.
It's no way to run a business."
Old habits will die hard for Southern California drivers.
Although the lingering recession here has reduced traffic jams a bit in the past few years, commuters still average more than 30 minutes each way.
The percentage of those driving solo remains steady at about 80%.
Only 5% rideshare; 3% take public transportation.
"If there's anything good to come out of all this," says Steve Saville, a spokesman for Caltrans, the state transportation agency, "it's that people here will learn that there's another way to get around other than using their cars or being a single person in a car."
An official of the San Francisco Bay Area's rapid transit system says that following the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake, ridership increased to an average of 335,000 a day from 219,000.
After downed bridges were fixed, ridership stabilized at about 250,000.
"The earthquake had more impact on ridership than any event in the last 20 years," adds Michael Burnick, vice chairman of the BART regional transit board.
Clearly, commuters will have to adapt.
Melissa Harnett, who lives in Agua Dulce and works more than 40 miles away downtown as a litigation attorney, is adjusting her own life.
"I've got a court appearance later this week at 8:30 in the morning, and it looks like I'd have to leave at 4 a.m.," she says.
Instead, she thinks that the night before, she'll just stay in town with her father.
