Walt Disney Co. reported record profit and revenue for the fiscal first quarter, ended Dec. 31, buoyed by record-breaking home-video sales and insulated from Euro Disney losses that already had been written off.
Net income climbed 34% to $368.6 million, or 68 cents a share, from $275.1 million, or 50 cents a share, a year earlier, excluding the cumulative effect of accounting changes registered last year.
After the accounting changes, Disney reported a restated net loss in the year-ago quarter of $96.4 million, or 18 cents a share.
In the first quarter of fiscal 1993, before the accounting changes, Disney recorded a $43 million loss in connection with its 49% investment in Euro Disney S.C.A.
Last November, Disney took a $350 million, or 40 cent-a-share charge, changing its accounting and fully reserving its receivables in the troubled theme park outside Paris.
Disney wrote down its investment in the park to zero.
If Disney winds up investing more in Euro Disney as part of renegotiations over the refinancing of the resort, the accounting again will change.
Disney said its latest first-quarter figures don't reflect any results related to its Euro Disney investment.
The results exceeded analysts' expectations.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Disney shares closed at $47, off 12.5 cents, on volume of 1.8 million shares.
Fiscal first-quarter revenue rose 14% to $2.73 billion from $2.39 billion.
Disney's gains were spearheaded by its filmed-entertainment unit, which reported a 45% gain in operating profit to $340.2 million from $235.4 million, even though it lacked a blockbuster in U.S. theaters during the quarter.
Revenue increased to $1.43 billion from $1.21 billion.
Much of this was generated by home-video sales of "Aladdin," which has sold more than 20 million units in the U.S. to make it the largest-selling videocassette release.
Its performance was even more impressive given that it must be compared to that of last year's video release of "Beauty and the Beast," the previous recordholder.
But perhaps the biggest impact came from the overseas home-video release of "The Jungle Book," which sold nearly 15 million units.
Analyst Richard Simon of Goldman, Sachs and Co., said he believes those sales added $60 million to $65 million to operating profit, compared with last year's international release of "Cinderella," which sold much less.
Ticket sales for "Aladdin" overseas also improved results.
Disney's theme-park results were more or less flat.
Walt Disney World in Florida had a decline in attendance, which the company attributed to a slowdown in visitors from recession-plagued Europe.
The company didn't mention the lingering effects of publicity about violence against tourists in Florida, or the strengthened dollar, but said higher per-capita spending and hotel attendance partly offset these factors.
Disneyland in California continued to benefit from its new "Toon Town" attraction.
Theme-park revenue increased 3% to $768.9 million from $745 million, while operating profit grew 1% to $138.1 million from $136.7 million.
Sales of character merchandise and growth in Disney's retail stores helped consumer-products revenue to grow 22% to $532 million from $437.1 million.
Operating profit increased 17% to $146.1 million from $124.6 million.
