Moody's Investors Service Inc. put this insurance holding company's debt ratings on review for a possible downgrade.
Moody's is also reviewing the financial-strength ratings of Cigna's property and casualty unit.
Moody's now rates Cigna's senior notes single-A-2.
About $1.4 billion in debt is affected.
Moody's said it will focus its review on the "strategic outlook for and risk profile of Cigna's domestic property and casualty operations, as well as the segment's capital needs."
The rating agency will also look into how much more money the Philadelphia-based company might lose on asbestos and environmental claims.
DEL WEBB Corp. (Phoenix) -- Standard & Poor's Corp. lowered its ratings on $191 million of debt of this builder of master-planned retirement housing communities.
Lowered were the ratings on $95 million of 10 7/8% senior notes due 2000 to single-B-plus from double-B-minus, and on $96 million of 9 3/4 % senior subordinated debentures due 2003 to single-B-minus from single-B.
S&P also assigned a single-B-minus rating to the company's recently completed offering of $100 million of 9% senior subordinated debentures due 2006.
S&P said the downgrade reflects the company's plans to expand its operations, which will make it more highly leveraged.
FIGGIE INTERNATIONAL Inc. (Willoughby, Ohio) -- Moody's Investors Service Inc. downgraded Figgie's long-term debt ratings and placed them under review for a possible further downgrade, citing continued financial difficulties at the company.
About $195 million in debt was affected.
Moody's downgraded senior debt to Ba-3 from Ba-1 and subordinated debt to B-2 from Ba-3.
The ratings agency said the action reflects the company's projected losses and deteriorating operational results over the past several years.
The company announced last week that it would suspend its dividend and seek new long-term financing.
Figgie has interests in fire-protection products, machinery and allied products, and other areas.
The company couldn't be reached for comment.
RITE AID Corp. (Harrisburg, Pa.) -- Moody's Investors Service Inc. downgraded the debt ratings of Rite Aid because of "the increased credit risk stemming from the company's equivocal investment strategy to meet the challenges of the changing health-care services environment."
Among the ratings downgraded were senior unsecured debentures and industrial revenue bonds to A-3 from A-2.
About $1.2 billion of debt is affected.
Moody's said Rite Aid, a drugstore operator, needs to "accelerate investment in its core drug retail business or related health-care services to maintain a long-term competitive position."
WELBILT Corp. (New Hyde Park, N.Y.) -- Standard & Poor's Corp. said it raised its senior debt rating on this maker of food-service equipment to double-B-minus from single-B and removed the company from CreditWatch.
About $100 million of debt is affected.
S&P said the upgrade reflects "improvement in the company's capital structure and enhanced financial flexibility" following its initial public offering of 4.8 million shares.
Proceeds of about $62 million were used primarily to redeem high-coupon subordinated debt.
