A SLEEPER in Clinton's health plan may be a nightmare for some firms.
A little-noted provision would create a big tax increase for many businesses organized as sub-chapter S corporations.
In a sub-chapter S corporation, earnings are taxed as part of individual shareholders' personal income.
Such small and midsize businesses already face higher tax rates as a result of the 1993 budget law.
S corporation owners now have a top tax rate of 39.6%, compared with the 35% rate paid by larger corporations.
Under President Clinton's health-care reform bill, S corporations in service industries would also pay the 2.9% employment tax for Medicare on all of their reported earnings.
Currently, these firms must pay the tax only on revenue paid as salaries.
The administration is targeting service-oriented businesses, from consulting companies to theater troupes, because their earnings result mainly from human labor rather than a mix of labor and equipment.
"S corporations are being penalized," contends Robert Blair, chairman of the S Corporation Reform Project, a Washington, D.C., group that wants Congress to simplify tax rules affecting S corporations.
"It's even more damaging than the 1993 tax bill," he adds.
An additional tax would represent a marked change for many small businesses, says Sam Starr, who heads the S Corporation Taxation Committee for the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.
"It gets down to the most basic question you ask about a tax: `Do I have the wherewithal to pay?'"
Business owners will answer no if they reinvest earnings in their S corporations, he continues.
A so-called anti-abuse provision of the Clinton health-care plan probably would be enforced vigorously, tax experts say.
The provision aims to prevent S corporation owners from avoiding employment taxes by paying themselves artificially low salaries.
RESTAURATEURS SERVE UP a lobbying blitz on health-care reform.
Last month, the National Restaurant Association began seminars around the country to tell restaurant owners why they should oppose President Clinton's health-care plan.
The trade group dislikes the Clinton proposal requiring all employers to help pay for employees' health insurance.
At the seminars, restaurant owners complete work sheets to compute how the Clinton plan would affect their bottom lines.
Owners are then urged to cite the data in their calls and letters to members of Congress.
The association wants owners to support a bill, sponsored by Democratic Rep. James Cooper of Tennessee, that would simply require employers to offer workers health insurance.
Herman Cain, president and chief executive officer of Godfather's Pizza Inc. in Omaha, Neb., is the lead speaker at the seminars, which will be held through next month.
"What prompted me to get emotional about this is when I did the calculation for my own company," says Mr. Cain, also a vice president of the association.
"It showed a 250% increase in my health-insurance costs.
That would get anyone's attention."
Mr. Cain says most of the increase would occur because the Clinton plan extends coverage to part-time workers that he doesn't now cover.
The chain, which employs about 4,000 people, owns 142 restaurants and franchises many others.
Despite heavy lobbying by the restaurant association and other small-business advocates, however, numerous owners now back the Clinton plan, which would subsidize health-insurance costs for the smallest, lowest-wage employers.
Richard Gross, president of Gross Electric Inc., a Toledo, Ohio, wholesale supply business, estimates that the president's plan would save his small company $131,000 annually in health-insurance costs.
The company currently spends about $268,000 a year on health insurance for its 64 employees.
Big lobbying groups try to "put all small businesses in the same pot," Mr. Gross complains.
SMALL-BUSINESS INCENTIVES in the 1993 budget act are attracting little interest, despite high hopes initially.
A provision increasing the value of equipment that can be written off in the first year to $17,500 from $10,000 isn't enough to cause most companies to change their purchasing plans, says John Evans, deputy director of Arthur Andersen Enterprise Group, a Chicago unit of Arthur Andersen & Co.
And the capital-gains tax cut for assets held for five years may not survive future changes in the tax law, venture capitalists say.
"From a sophisticated investors' point of view, these might be things that push a deal forward, but they don't generate activity on their own," Mr. Evans concludes.
INVESTMENT BOOST: Small Business Administration chief Erskine Bowles plans to revamp the Small Business Investment Company program by licensing as many as 200 new investment companies, with private capital ranging from $10 million to $15 million apiece.
The 280 current SBICs have an average of $11.5 million in capital.
An SBIC is a government-licensed company that invests a mix of its funds and Uncle Sam's money in high-risk, firms with high-growth potential.
SBA officials believe bigger and better-capitalized SBICs would better survive economic swings.
Under the reform plan, the government would hold preferred stock in SBICs rather than lend them money.
ENVIRONMENTAL OMBUDSMEN: Small-business groups push to expand the Environmental Protection Agency's new ombudsmen program.
The EPA is placing ombudsmen in every state capital to help small companies comply with the Clean Air Act.
The National Federation of Independent Business and the Printing Industries of America want Congress to broaden the ombudsmen's role so they cover all federal environmental legislation.
Democratic Reps. Blanche Lambert of Arkansas and Ron Wyden of Oregon consider sponsoring the measure.
SMALL TALK: The SBA drops its much ballyhooed plans for a toll-free number enabling business owners to call and calculate the effect of the Clinton health-care plan on their companies.
Officials decided the phone line would cost too much. . . .
So far, five bills have been introduced in Congress to restore the tax deduction for business meals and entertainment to 80%; it was reduced to 50% in last year's budget act.
