Cynics argue that the interstate banking bills now wending their way through Congress are trivial because they only belatedly recognize reality.
After all, Bank of America, NationsBank, Banc One, Citicorp, Chemical, First Interstate and many other bank holding companies already have major subsidiaries in multiple states.
Many of these institutions are on the verge of becoming truly national organizations without any legislative help.
Indeed, banks have already seen some of the economic efficiencies of nationwide banking, despite the lack of regulatory reform.
Employment by U.S. depository institutions over the past 10 years has declined 25%, to about 1.4 million from 1.8 million.
As a result, bank productivity as measured by assets per employee has nearly doubled to $2.6 million per employee from $1.4 million per employee.
Much of these gains have resulted from consolidating banks, savings and loans and savings banks through interstate acquisitions that are currently allowed.
So why bother legislating what is already common practice?
Because what we've seen so far is just the start of the savings that will come from real reform.
A recent McKinsey & Co. study for four well-managed regional banks found that the annual costs of interstate banking under today's cumbersome regulatory structure can range from 0.5% to almost 1% of a company's noninterest expenses.
Eliminating these costs under a nationwide banking scheme could save multistate banks anywhere from $2 billion to $4 billion over five years.
And these savings, in turn, are dwarfed by those that will come from the nationwide consolidation of operations.
Customer service could also improve dramatically if both houses of Congress follow the lead of their Banking Committees and pass the interstate banking legislation.
Sen. Christopher Dodd (D., Conn.) has noted that 60 million Americans live in metropolitan areas that cross state lines.
Another four million commute each day across state lines.
They and countless Americans who travel daily are deprived of service by truly national banks because of restrictive laws with no counterpart in the rest of the industrialized world.
Enacting the interstate banking bill will not only make basic financial services more convenient and more price competitive, but will also make a broader array of services -- from new annuities and mutual funds to an expanded loan menu -- available to customers.
More broadly, nationwide banking is good for the U.S. economy.
It will facilitate the free flow of capital to the highest value return -- the most efficient use of resources -- and encourage the creation of strong, financially stable financial service providers across regions.
Any final law also must provide for full national treatment for foreign banks that serve U.S. customers.
Consumers and businesses in Texas and New England can tell you what local economic downturns mean for the conduct of their financial affairs.
Geographically constrained banks can fail and basic financial services can become disrupted, with negative consequences for the real economy.
These conditions are only exacerbated by the Great Depression-era restrictions on interstate banking, which prevent strong, diversified banks from lending their capital strength across regions in times of financial need.
A recent study by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston shows the unfortunate results of not having had full interstate banking in New England.
According to Boston Fed President Dick Syron, the economic shock to New England in recent years would have been less severe if regional banks had been better diversified across state lines.
Moreover, all of the top federal banking regulators have testified repeatedly that nationwide banking reform would help to diversify institutions geographically and consequently help to lower their individual risk profiles.
Former Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.
Chairman Bill Seidman views nationwide branching and banking reform as a good way to reduce the risk of potential loss to the FDIC and American taxpayers.
The benefits will be especially great for business.
Occidental Petroleum Co., a Fortune 100 corporation, has testified before Congress that it expects to save 3% to 4% on its total banking costs because of nationwide branching benefits.
The treasuries of all U.S. companies will benefit from a reduction in fees that will come from rebidding business based on a nationwide or expanded regional basis and reducing the number of banking relationships.
Will nationwide banking pull deposits out of small rural communities with a giant sucking sound?
Absolutely not, if current trends are any indication.
The 182 multistate bank holding companies (which employ more than 900,000 people) make 70% of all loans today.
These companies have a higher loan-to-deposit ratio than their noninterstate brethren: Interstate banks lend 84 cents for every dollar on deposit, while noninterstate banks lend only 67 cents on the dollar.
The experience of states like California and New York that already allow interstate banking confirms that larger financial institutions do not neglect small communities or drive local banks out of business.
Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan has summed up the benefits of interstate banking: "Authorization of interstate banking is, in effect, a more efficient use of capital and a capital-building step by reducing banks costs. . . .
What interstate promises is wider consumer choices at better prices and, for our banking system, increased competition and efficiency, the elimination of unnecessary costs associated with the delivery of financial services and risk reduction through diversification."
What is needed now is leadership from President Clinton, Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell and House Speaker Tom Foley to ensure a "fast track" for the banking bills and passage by Memorial Day.
The congressional leadership should also encourage members to withhold all extraneous amendments in an effort to ensure passage of this pro-consumer legislation.
Such amendments were shot down in the House and Senate Banking committees, but various special interests are likely to try again when the bills come to the floor.
It would be a supreme irony if extraneous provisions caused the defeat of a truly market-driven, consumer-convenience bill.
But there are some useful amendments that should be added.
As currently drawn, both bills delay their full benefits through some cumbersome provisions.
One section, for example, allows states to opt out of interstate banking after two to three years.
Another forces an 18-month wait for banks to consolidate branch networks.
These measures make no economic sense.
They ought to be deleted -- today.
A recent study by McKinsey's Global Institute has shown that U.S. banks are now the most productive in the world.
Using the U.S. as a benchmark, U.K. banks are only 64% as productive and German banks are only 68% as productive in the delivery of payment, deposit and credit services.
With the advent of true nationwide banking, the U.S. could leap even further ahead.
Mr. Wilson is a consultant in the Washington, D.C., office of McKinsey & Co.
