The little ads fill the back pages of National Review and the American Spectator.
There are bumper stickers that say, "Honk!
If You Hate Clinton" or "My Choice, Abort Clinton" or "Never, Ever, Ever EVER Trust a Draft Dodger" ($3 each, two for $5).
T-shirts are popular too.
One of them shows the presidential seal and the words, "Smoke Dope, Dodge Draft, Cheat Wife, Become President.
The New American Way!" ($16.95, plus postage and handling).
Something curious is going on out there.
While Bill Clinton celebrates an economic recovery, glories in 60% job-approval ratings in the polls and gloats in his State of the Union address over the end of legislative gridlock, an angry, sullen minority continues to view him with extreme distaste.
"You get so much deep hatred out there," says Brian Lamb, chief executive officer and moderator for C-SPAN, cable television's public-affairs network.
"It comes through in their angry voices {when they speak out on C-SPAN's daily viewer call-in shows}.
Nothing is going to change these people."
Every president in the country's history has managed to make some voters angry, but widespread hatred is fairly unusual.
Jimmy Carter never stirred very much hatred, partly because he was seen as ineffective.
Lyndon Johnson didn't inspire venomous hatred until the last months he was in office, and that was caused by his prosecution of an unpopular war in Vietnam; those chants of "Hey, hey, LBJ, how many kids did you kill today?" came mostly from the mouths of the children of registered Democrats.
People disagreed with both Ronald Reagan and George Bush, but not very many people really hated either one of them.
But Bill Clinton and his activist wife Hillary Rodham Clinton have aroused something deeper.
You can hear it on talk shows and conversations with friends; you can see it in letters from newspaper readers.
Why do so many people so intensely dislike the Clintons?
White House communications director Mark Gearan says some people loathe him for the same reason that others love him: "He has come to Washington with an agenda of change and in doing so has taken on some entrenched interests."
But the explanation is probably a little more complicated than that.
Some of it is surely cultural.
As the presidency's first baby boomer -- with all that connotes, from Vietnam protests to marijuana -- Mr. Clinton is carrying the baggage of an entire generation, one that many nonboomers view with a jaundiced eye.
Then there is Mrs. Clinton.
She stokes the fires, especially among older voters accustomed to traditional family values.
People who are angry about the president usually are just as angry about the first lady.
"It's this whole feminist thing," says Georgetown University political scientist James Reichley.
"They're just not comfortable with this leadership role she has taken at the White House."
But there's more to it than that.
Like his predecessors Franklin Delano Roosevelt and Richard Nixon, Bill Clinton arouses something in many voters that makes strong dislike turn to passionate hatred.
In Mr. Roosevelt's case, many Americans worried about their pocketbooks and their future; in Mr. Nixon's case, they worried about whether they could trust their president.
Mr. Clinton, in a way, draws on both traditions.
FDR did arouse real hatred.
A classic 1936 New Yorker cartoon by Peter Arno summed it up.
It shows two well-dressed couples strolling down the street on the way to the news-reel theater.
One of these toffs calls out to friends, "Come along, we're going to the Trans-Lux to hiss Roosevelt."
Mr. Roosevelt angered well-to-do Republicans by calling them "economic royalists" representing the "forces of selfishness."
"I welcome their hatred," FDR gloated, as he played his own game of class warfare.
Much of the hatred stemmed from fear -- fear that FDR was a political mastermind, and that he really was intent on making sweeping changes in the way the country was structured.
There's a little of that in the thinking of people who condemn Mr. Clinton, too.
"People worried Roosevelt might pull it off," says Richard Viguerie, the conservative direct-mail specialist.
"We see this guy as a serious player, too, and we worry he might succeed in his core belief -- expanding the role of the federal government."
GOP pollster Tony Fabrizio warns that Mr. Clinton is in "a perfect position to co-opt traditional Republican issues," especially crime and welfare reform.
He urges his party to wake up to the Clinton peril before it's too late.
But the hatred of Mr. Clinton is equally reminiscent of the way many Americans felt about Richard Nixon.
From the very beginning, a significant number of Americans despised him.
It had little to do with his policies; he was, after all, something of a political pragmatist, and not many people believed he wanted to restructure American society.
They just disliked him personally, and they never did trust him.
The feeling was summed up in the question, "Would you buy a used car from this man?"
People -- mostly Democrats -- called Mr. Nixon "tricky."
People -- most of them Republicans -- call Mr. Clinton "slick."
If Mr. Clinton isn't quite the Democratic Richard Nixon, there is some common ground here, some people say.
It's a question of trust and credibility, and it lies out there waiting for him, should the time ever come when voters begin to reject his reform agenda.
"I think there's a sense among a lot of people that he's illegitimate," says Vin Weber, a former GOP congressman and now a leader of a conservative advocacy group.
"These people think the character issue should have disqualified him in the first place, during the 1992 election."
Right now, Mr. Clinton is riding fairly high in the public-opinion polls, despite the controversy surrounding his investments in the Whitewater Development Co. in Arkansas that has now led to the appointment of a special counsel.
But no matter how high his approval rating climbs, the doubts about him persist.
In the latest Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll, only 35% of Americans are very confident that Mr. Clinton has "the right set of personal characteristics" to be president, down from 50% a year earlier.
And only 33%, down from 50%, give him high marks for his "ethical and moral values."
"It's always been a problem for Clinton," says Paul Greenberg, editor of the editorial page of the Arkansas Democrat-Gazette in Little Rock and a long-time critic of the president.
"Here, unlike Nixon, you have this great salesman, wonderful in these one-on-one television appearances.
But the guy has no traction.
He's apt to change his mind, about almost anything, the next day.
He's just so casual about his personal and political obligations."
Some analysts believe this seething anger will boil over at the polling booths in the off-year elections in November.
"People who are mad turn out to vote," says Mr. Weber.
"And a lot of people are really mad.
Some of the comments I hear are just amazing.
It's not going to go away."
Whether it does or not, there is one group that must be thanking its lucky stars for Mr. Clinton: those who make an industry out of bashing him.
The American Spectator reports its circulation has climbed to 251,000 from 35,000 in early 1992; National Review reports a surge from 157,000 to 240,000.
Meanwhile, the Republican National Committee says that in 1993 it raised $30 million in individual contributions of $100 or less, 78% of all the money it collected; small contributions were up sharply from 1992, a presidential-election year.
At the American Conservative Union, where membership has soared from 30,000 on the eve of Mr. Clinton's inauguration to 450,000 now, President David Keene says simply: "He has been a godsend."
