The director Roger Donaldson explains the "distinct advantage" to re-making a film.
"You have a rough blueprint to work from.
And what is great is that you can rely upon the strongest elements of the original and improve upon the weaker ones."
I wonder which elements of the 1972 film, "The Getaway," he felt he was merely relying on, and which he felt were being improved, as he made "The Getaway" again.
He has certainly relied on the mean and violent spirit of the original.
The "improvements" are more difficult to find.
Mr. Donaldson, a talented director, has made a film that manages to be even more mean and more violent than the original, yet more wishy-washy, too.
Both movies are about a criminal named Doc McCoy who gets sprung from jail after his wife Carol sleeps with a powerful man to arrange her husband's release.
The husband's subsequent jealousy leads to the violent death of the powerful man and to many other killings.
The husband and wife get away, with their lives and with the money they've stolen in a major heist.
Both films contain a subplot about a sadistic killer who kidnaps a married couple and humiliates the man by having gleeful sexplay with his wife in front of him.
Both movies have stars who were or would become married to one another in real life -- Steve McQueen and Ali MacGraw then; Alec Baldwin and Kim Basinger now.
Both movies are also based on a novel by Jim Thompson, the writer who specialized in hard, cynical crime stories.
That cynicism of despair was changed in both movies to the cynicism of Hollywood, which dictates that even the most vicious criminals must be likable if they are the stars of a movie.
However, the new version carries this pseudo-principle to a ridiculous extreme.
Doc no longer smacks Carol around.
They are now "sensitive" people who want to go straight, just as soon as they get across the Mexican border with the vast sums of money they've stolen.
In fact, we are meant to believe they are actually good.
After all, the only people they kill -- and they kill many -- are scumbuckets.
(We are supposed to believe this even after Doc brutally beats up a small-time thief because, while he is at work burgling train station lockers, he stumbles onto Doc and Carol's bag of loot.)
So the updated Doc and Carol are, in the eyes of the filmmakers, even nicer than their forerunners.
This moral upgrade is undoubtedly one of the improvements Mr. Donaldson referred to.
What were the other refinements added to make this picture "acceptable" today?
In 1972 it was acceptable for Ali MacGraw to be a bimbo and for Steve McQueen to whack her in the face when she said stupid things.
In 1994 this is not acceptable.
Carol has been given a much bigger role.
She is now assigned to the crucial tasks of driving cars and killing.
In 1972, back when movie distributors wanted PG ratings, it was unacceptable for movie stars to have sex onscreen.
Now, thanks to the new improved "Getaway," we don't have to imagine what Mr. Baldwin and Ms. Basinger do with one another when their workday is done.
It is a busy marriage.
"The Scent of Green Papaya" is worlds apart from "The Getaway" in almost every way except one: like Roger Donaldson, the director Tran Anh Hung has a big cinematic gift, but he has used it to seduce, not to bludgeon.
The 32-year-old Mr. Tran, who moved to France from Vietnam when he was a boy, wanted to make a film about his birthplace that wasn't about the Vietnam War.
His exquisite movie about a lost Vietnam seems especially valuable now, as Coke and Pepsi battle Minh City and Saigon.
"The Scent of Green Papaya" is about a bourgeois household in the Saigon of 1951, as seen through the eyes of a young girl named Mui who comes to work there when she is 10.
At first she thinks it may be paradise, as she marvels at the papaya tree out her window or the struggle of an ant to move a crumb from here to there.
There are many other natural and man-made wonders in this beautiful place: a many-tiered house, small courtyards, lush tropical plants.
It seems peaceful, too.
Only the sounds of birds, of crickets, and the stringed instrument the man of the house is constantly playing disturb the quiet.
But it soon becomes apparent that there are inner disturbances.
Upstairs the grandmother constantly prays for her dead husband and dead grandchild, a little girl who would be Mui's age had she lived.
The man of the house never leaves because of the evil he's done and the evil he thinks he's done.
The lady of the house suffers, but is unfailingly kind to Mui.
Her younger sons react to the unspoken tension with small cruelties toward insects and servants.
With sensuous grace, "The Scent of Green Papaya" captures this hothouse life, both the beauty and the rot within.
VIDEO TIP: Alec Baldwin is not an improvement over Steve McQueen.
You can verify this by watching the original of "The Getaway," if you must.
But you can do much better, starting with the ultimate cool McQueen in "The Cincinnati Kid."
He could be glamorous, too ("The Thomas Crown Affair"); he could be tough ("Bullitt"), and he was a very good cowboy ("The Magnificent Seven").
