The Federal Aviation Administration said it will propose holding commuter airlines to the same pilot-training standards as large airlines.
The announcement came during a House hearing that was prompted by two recent fatal crashes of turboprop planes.
The FAA has been criticized for applying less-stringent standards for commuter airlines' equipment and pilots; administrator David Hinson told lawmakers yesterday the agency is working to narrow the gap.
The new pilot-training rules are still being drafted, and probably won't take effect for at least 18 months.
They would require pilots of all airplanes with 10 or more seats to be trained the same way, according to Anthony Broderick, the FAA's associate administrator for regulation and certification.
Currently, all airline pilots have to pass the same certification tests, but those flying airplanes with 30 seats or less have less-detailed training guidelines, the FAA said.
New guidelines probably will force regional airlines to train their pilots in flight simulators that can duplicate difficult conditions such as icy wings and lost engines, said Randolph Babbitt, president of the Air Line Pilots Association.
Now, he said, "You could hand a pilot the books, and say, `Come back in a week and let's see what you learned from books.'"
But Walter Coleman, president of the Regional Airline Association, said the commuter airlines his group represents already have narrowed their training gap with large airlines.
In fact, he said, some commuter airlines already have gained permission from the FAA to follow large-plane training rules for their pilots.
The FAA also said it is pursuing rules that will require large and small airlines to include training programs that teach crew members to work better as teams.
According to a preliminary National Transportation Safety Board report, the pilot of an Express II Airlines turboprop flight that crashed last Dec. 1 had failed four proficiency tests in five years, was known for intimidating co-pilots, and was angry with his company the day of the crash.
The safety board is still investigating the accident, which killed 18 people, including the pilot.
It hasn't found any mechanical explanations.
Express II operates as Northwest Airlink.
