Despite worries about political violence, Mexico's Banco Nacional de Comercio Exterior, or Bancomext, managed to find buyers for $1 billion of global notes.
The issue, only the second global note offering from a Latin American issuer, was launched yesterday and is slated to be finalized this morning.
But due to worries about political violence in Mexico, demand for the Mexican bank didn't seem to be nearly as strong as for the first global note offering from a Latin American issuer, Argentina's $1 billion sale in early December.
Global bonds are usually issued simultaneously in all the world's major markets and are often sold in amounts of $1 billion or more.
The advantage to the issuer is the ability to garner lower interest rates because it is easier for more investors to buy them.
The advantage to investors is that a global bond is supposed to be more liquid, or easily traded, than a bond designed to trade in just one market.
The combination of greater liquidity and a relatively attractive yield make for an appealing buy for American investors looking for higher yields.
Bancomext is expected to sell the 10-year notes at a yield of 1.60 to 1.65 percentage points above the U.S. Treasury's 10-year note, which yielded 5.66% late yesterday, compared with 5.71% on Wednesday.
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond dropped to 6.26% from 6.29% on Wednesday.
Its price, which moves in the opposite direction of the yield, rose more than 3/8 point, or more than $3.75 for a bond with $1,000 face value.
Just how far Mexico has come in the eyes of American investors can be measured by the narrowing yield spreads of Mexican issues over comparable U.S. Treasury issues.
Just a couple of years ago, it was not unusual to see Mexican notes and bonds coming at spreads of four to five percentage points.
The spread on yesterday's offering by Bancomext was originally expected to be something between 1.50 and 1.55 percentage points.
Just six months ago, Bancomext sold securities in the U.S. which yielded 2.15 percentage points more than comparable U.S. Treasurys.
Bancomext is Mexico's state-owned trade bank.
But syndicate officials cited recent turmoil in the southern Mexican state of Chiapas and rumors that a large position in Mexican bonds was being unwound by a Japanese institution as factors which helped weaken demand for the offering and force the yield spread to widen.
Even at the current spread, however, the offering is one of the most tightly priced to come from a Latin American borrower to date.
It is rated Ba2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and double-B-plus by Standard & Poor's Corp.
The notes were sold through joint lead underwriters Goldman, Sachs & Co. and Merrill Lynch & Co.
"Countries get hot and countries get a little cool," said Gerard Finneran, a portfolio manager at Trust Company of the West, a big investor in Mexico.
"At least for a few weeks there, people were concerned about Mexico and the problems they were perceived to be having," he said.
"But in terms of credits, Mexico with the North American Free Trade Agreement clearly is the best credit in Latin America," he added.
One syndicate member said about a third of the notes had been sold in Europe and the Far East with the rest going to U.S. investors.
Corporate issuers sold nearly $2 billion of new notes and bonds yesterday, including a $100 million offering from Mitchell Energy & Development Corp., a $300 million deal from Gulf Canada Resources Ltd. and a $100 million debt offering from Whitman Corp.
Investors continue to clamor for corporate bonds, syndicate officials said.
"Anything that comes to market with a reasonable price is going to be a foodfight," said one syndicate official.
He said investors are not receiving even close to the amount of bonds they are requesting in new issues.
Strong investor demand for corporate bonds is also apparent in the investmentgrade secondary market, where trading during the session was light and prices followed Treasurys higher.
Investors piled cash into short-term and intermediate-term Treasury securities, betting that the unseasonably cold weather across much of the U.S. could put a chill on economic activity.
Most Treasury securities posted price gains with the benchmark 30-year bond rising more than 3/8 point to 99 23/32, the 10-year note rising 3/8 point to 100 18/32 and the seven-year note rising nearly 3/8 point to 101 20/32.
Traders said that investors, flush with cash, took comfort in the argument that the cold snap, along with the earthquake in Southern California, could restrain economic activity after its heated fourth-quarter performance.
If economic growth does slow from what analysts say might have been a 5% rate of growth at the end of 1993, the Federal Reserve will not have to raise short-term interest rates, investors reasoned.
"People have decided that the upcoming economic reports will reflect some softness because of the cold weather and that creates the perception that the Fed might hesitate a bit more before pulling the trigger," said Anthony Karydakis, senior financial economist at First Chicago Capital Markets.
Analysts agreed that when the economic figures for January are released next month, they will likely be on the soft side.
"There is not very much economic activity occurring east of the Mississippi or in Los Angeles," said Alan Levenson, money market economist at UBS Securities Inc.
With sentiment leaning toward bullish for the time being, investors opted to ignore news of a stronger housing sector and instead chose to focus on figures with hints of softness.
When the Commerce Department reported yesterday morning that housing starts rose a greater-than-forecast 6.2% there was only a brief sell-off.
In the end, the market paid more attention to an unexpected rise in initial unemployment claims of 23,000 to a level of 380,000 for the week ended Jan. 15.
"The reports yesterday morning were conflicting," said Mr. Karydakis of First Chicago.
"The market was confused for a while, but as the day wore on, people decided to throw their lot behind the rise in claims and ignore the rise in housing starts."
The bond market also chose to see the brighter side of the January Philadelphia Federal Reserve Business Outlook Survey, as the Fed bank's index came in at 34.2, down from 42.9 in December.
Analysts noted that despite the decline, the index still reflected solid growth in manufacturing for the Philadelphia area.
Late yesterday, the two-year note to be auctioned next Tuesday was yielding 4.08% in when-issued trading while the five-year note to be auctioned next Wednesday was yielding 5.03%.
Municipal issues followed the Treasury market, dipping in early trading and strengthening as the day progressed.
Dealings were highlighted by the competitive sale of Illinois's $249.6 million refunding general obligation bonds.
A Merrill Lynch & Co. group won the bonds with a bid setting the true interest cost at 4.59%.
Yields for reoffered bonds range from 3.80% in 1998 to 4.95% in 2008.
The issue was rated double-A by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and double-A-minus by Standard & Poor's Corp.
The New York State Medical Care Facilities Finance Agency's 5.50% of 2024 bonds were 1/4 point stronger at 99 1/4 to yield 5.52%.
Prices were unchanged to as much as 1/2 higher in late dealings.
There was solid demand for the more than $1 billion of bonds sold yesterday and Wednesday, and muni specialists say the market is faring well given this month's unexpectedly heavy issuance.
Prices of mortgage securities rose although trading slowed, with the heaviest activity in the low-coupon sector.
Low-coupon issues often benefit on news that homeowner refinancing activity is climbing.
The Mortgage Bankers Association reported late Wednesday that its refinancing index climbed to 873.2 in the week ended Jan. 14 from a revised 738.1 in the previous week.
Among 6 1/2% securities for February delivery, Government National Mortgage Association was up 10/32 at 100 1/32.
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Golds and Federal National Mortgage Association were both up 8/32 at 100 5/32 and 100, respectively.
Among the current-coupon (those priced below par) 6% issues, prices were up 9/32 to 10/32.
Paul Hannon in London contributed to this article.
