J.P. Morgan & Co. and two other banks are organizing a $1.1 billion syndicated loan to Petroleos Mexicanos, marking the first big infusion of bank credit to Mexico in years.
Petroleos Mexicanos, or Pemex, Mexico's state-owned oil giant, could have easily lined up the money in the international bond markets.
But the new lending facility is a deliberate move by the Mexican government to bring back foreign bank credit, which has been almost nonexistent since the debt crisis here 12 years ago.
Mexico has been a near pariah in the international bank loan market since 1982, when it defaulted on some $80 billion in foreign loans, about $50 billion of which represented direct credits from foreign banks.
"This is a landmark; Mexico is reentering the syndicated-loan market," said Eduardo Cepeda, managing director at J.P. Morgan's Mexico City office.
"We can't be telling our investors that Mexico is a great story and not be putting our own money into it."
The banks apparently have confidence in the continuity of Mexico's economic reforms, no matter who wins the August presidential elections, at a time when many investors don't.
Mexican stock prices, for example, have fallen more than 15% from their all-time highs hit in early February, and the peso has weakened against the dollar.
But while the loan does represent a return of bank lending to Mexico, the banks' approach is cautious.
Rather than a straight, unsecured loan, the program remains linked to trade and sales of oil.
Essentially, the banks are underwriting Pemex's dealings in the international oil markets by pledging to pay if Pemex does not.
By the time the deal closes, several banks from around the world are expected to take a chunk of the risk, the first time in more than a decade that a banking syndicate has loaned to Mexico in this size.
Coming in an election year, any large loan to a government-owned organization is bound to draw scrutiny.
That's apt to be particularly true this year, given the country's highly charged political climate following the Chiapas uprising in January.
Still, given Pemex's central role in the Mexican economy, the loan is likely to be viewed positively, as helpful to the country as a whole rather than any particular political faction.
Three banks will lead three different sections of the loan.
J.P. Morgan will underwrite a $500 million, two-year loan to back up a new U.S. banker's acceptance program.
Bankers' acceptances are short-term, unsecured obligations whereby a company pledges to repay debt using the proceeds it receives.
BankAmerica Corp.'s Bank of America unit will underwrite a $300 million standby letter of credit to shore up Pemex's U.S. commercial-paper program.
Industrial Bank of Japan Ltd. will underwrite a $300 million banker's acceptance program for Pemex in Japan, according to J.P. Morgan.
All three banks are expected to sell off pieces of their loans; J.P. Morgan plans to keep about $75 million of its loan.
Pemex had the largest trade-finance program in the world in the early 1980s, but credits were cut down sharply after the oil company nearly slipped into default.
The Mexican government was siphoning so much cash out of Pemex in 1982 that the company began to borrow more money for oil shipments than it was actually shipping or even expected to produce in a given year.
The U.S. Federal Reserve intervened, ruling in favor of the practice but only to save the banks and Pemex the pain of technical default, according to some financial historians.
Since that time, international banks have largely retreated, pledging very few new credits to Mexico.
A 1989 restructuring program known as the Brady Plan helped restore Mexico's credibility in the international bond markets.
Since then, Mexican corporations, such as Cementos Mexicanos, have been able to launch $1 billion bond issues.
The trouble is that Mexico isn't rated investment-grade by either of the two main U.S. credit-rating agencies.
Consequently, Mexican bonds are largely held by investment funds with special risk characteristics or by speculators.
These investors are all too ready to sell when yields rise on better-grade investments, as recent weeks have shown.
Pemex is expected to require more borrowings and financing in the months to come.
George Baker, an energy analyst with an Oakland, Calif., firm that bears his name, says Pemex needs more refining capacity at a cost of $2 billion.
Pemex officials were unavailable for comment.
Separately, Pemex also launched a $400 million three-year floating-rate program in the international markets yesterday.
