Stock prices in Tokyo eased Wednesday on profit-taking following their recent surge.
But London's rally resumed and stocks finished at record highs, driven partly by expectations for lower European interest rates, which also propelled the Paris exchange to a new high.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 119.02, up 0.01, reflecting higher American and European markets and lower Asia/Pacific markets.
Plantations stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 227.71, up 9.49, or 4.4%, with Kumpulan Guthrie of Malaysia posting a 8.9% gain in its local currency.
Consumer electronics stocks trailed at 134.44, down 3.09, or 2.25%, with Sony of Japan sliding 3.6% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which rose 187.34 points Tuesday, fell 166.31 to 20250.03.
In trading Thursday, the Nikkei index eased 60.01 points to close the morning session at 20190.02.
Wednesday's first-section volume was estimated at 670 million shares, still brisk though down from 950.8 million shares a day earlier.
Losers outnumbered gainers, 664-391.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which added 13.88 points Tuesday, dropped 15.44 to 1627.66.
The Tokyo correction had been expected following the huge gains earlier this week.
After a strong opening, the Nikkei plunged more than 200 points on arbitrage-related selling.
A wave of buying in afternoon dealings reined in the declines.
Yet stocks' generally limited drops signaled that investors were comfortable with the current price range.
Foreigners provided much of the buying support, as they have for the past month.
Japanese dealers and institutional investors were among those taking profits, though some dealers resumed buying later in the session.
Still, some investors were worried that the Japanese yen's recent gains in currency markets threatened to cut into earnings of Japanese exporters; the yen's strength also makes yen-denominated assets more expensive for overseas investors.
A push higher by the yen could cool overseas investors' ardor for Japanese assets.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index jumped 38.8 points, or 1.1%, to 3520.3, an all-time high that topped the 3500 level for the first time.
The FT 30-stock index rocketed up 36.7 points, or 1.4%, to 2713.6.
And the FT 250 index surged 45.5 points, or 1.1%, to 4150.9.
Volume was unchanged at 1.08 billion shares.
The across-the-board gains, with foreign and U.S. investors figuring heavily as buyers, came despite a lack of fresh corporate news, an easing in bond prices and lower interest-rate futures.
The stock market's rise was linked to the futures pit, which was driven by speculation that Germany's central bank might cut interest rates today.
And some London stock market participants were convinced Britain would follow suit with a lending-rate cut.
That speculation sent stock-index futures rallying early, catching investors and dealers in the stock market by surprise and forcing the covering of some underweighted positions.
Bulls also were heartened by a statement by Britain's treasury that the retail-sales trend remains "strongly upward" and that the latest economic data suggest "further recovery."
In Frankfurt, prices closed mixed to slightly higher in a directionless session, as investors were divided on whether German rates would be reduced.
The DAX 30-stock index rose 4.34 points to 2184.01, for the fifth gain in a row and a 2.4% gain this week.
In Paris, stocks advanced 1.1% to a record, the second this week, amid snow-balling expectations for lower interest rates.
Opinion was divided about prospects for Germany, the rate-setting leader, to make a reduction, but Paris investors didn't let any uncertainty damp their optimism.
A German rate cut could clear the way for France's central bank to act likewise.
In Milan, reversing early declines from profit-taking, shares ended sharply higher, buoyed by a public offering in the financial sector that was popular among foreign investors, and by potential turnarounds for some financially ailing companies.
In Madrid, equities rebounded, driven up by Spanish mutual funds that have been having huge growth and by declining bond yields, providing seemingly endless liquidity for buying stocks; sentiment also was helped by speculation about rate cuts in Europe.
In Stockholm, prices loped up in record turnover, led by the auto and household-appliance sectors, partly on favorable earnings.
In Zurich, shares rose, paced by robust buying in the banking sector.
In Brussels, profit-taking knocked prices down following big gains.
In Hong Kong, after seesaw trading in heavy turnover, prices slipped into negative territory late in the session and ended at their lows.
Stocks traded unsteadily but with gains in a wide band most of the day, with little corporate news to influence a trend.
Participants were disappointed by China's cool reaction to the British colonial government's latest funding proposals for a new airport.
In Singapore, shares fell because of late profit-taking, while foreign investors only nibbled selectively and retail investors also were quiet.
But in Kuala Lumpur, stocks surged 3.7% in moderate trading, lifted by broad support for blue chips and some fresh speculative plays.
In Taipei, stocks climbed 1.3% on healthy volume following Tuesday's 1% gain, bringing the main index's advance to 7.3% for the past six trading days.
The seasonal bull run ahead of the holiday next Thursday for the lunar new year was reinforced by the Taiwan central bank's recent easing of its tight money policy.
In Manila, shares rallied 2.5% in light volume in a technical rebound after falling since the Philippine government last Friday announced price increases on petroleum products, electricity rates and transportation fares.
And in Seoul, prices advanced 1.5% in robust activity, as big, high-priced blue-chip issues continued their bull run, defying repeated threats of South Korean government intervention to narrow gaps with low-priced stocks.
Among corporate developments, in Paris, Elf Aquitaine jumped 6.7 French francs, or 1.6%, to 430.7 francs ($73.21).
The offering of 89 million shares in the privatization of the French state-controlled oil company, to run today through next Thursday, was priced at 385 francs a share, which could raise a total of at least 34 billion francs ($5.78 billion).
In Amsterdam, Fokker slid 1.90 guilders, or 8.3%, to 21 guilders ($10.81) amid news reports that the aircraft company faces huge losses this year and that a boardroom battle may claim additional victims; the chairman this week departed following an apparent dispute about restructuring.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
