Minnesota Mining is cleaning up in the 80-year-old soap pad business by applying space-age technology to the vexing problem of removing burnt macaroni and cheese.
By tapping into its expertise in abrasives, Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co.'s new Never Rust wool pads grabbed a sizable chunk of the $120 million business last year, largely at the expense of its two main competitors, Miles Inc.'s S.O.S. pads, and Dial Corp.'s Brillo pads, according to Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.
For the 52 weeks ended Dec. 5, sales of 3M's Scotch-Brite Never Rust soap pads in supermarkets increased 91.8% to $18.5 million, or 15.4% of the category, according to InfoScan.
S.O.S. sales dropped 1.4% to $43.5 million, or 36.2% of the market, while Brillo sales fell 6.8% to $18.3 million, or 15.2% market share.
Minnesota Mining's consumer research had shown that rusty soap pads were a major source of angst among homemakers, sparking the creation of Never Rust pads.
Now 3M scientists are getting ready to market a steel wool-type pad that doesn't scratch nonstick cookware, which account for nearly three-quarters of all pots and pans sold.
Minnesota Mining expects the new product to increase the lackluster category's sales by 15% a year.
"There had been no innovation in the category," since Brillo introduced soap-impregnated pads in 1917, says Moe Nozari, vice president of 3M's consumer markets division.
Minnesota Mining plans to keep the pressure on, with Mr. Nozari promising major product introductions in each of the next three years.
Minnesota Mining also greatly outspent its rivals in advertising last year; Mr. Nozari estimates that 3M's $30 million ad budget for soap pads was four times that of its two largest rivals combined.
The market leaders have been "asleep at the switch," says Jack Trout, president of Trout & Ries, a Greenwich, Conn., marketing consulting company.
"You've got a bunch of guys sitting on their hands unwilling to attack themselves with a new idea.
This scratch-proof pad is a classic next-generation product."
Not surprisingly, rivals aren't effusive about 3M's patent-pending no-scratch technology.
"I don't think it's the greatest thing since sliced bread," grumps Andrew Reichlin, marketing manager for cleaning products at Dial, the maker of Brillo.
But Dial has already dropped the price and increased the size of a similar product, and it may be gearing up to match 3M's technology head on.
"We have aggressive plans" is all Mr. Reichlin will say.
Minnesota Mining's other main rival, Miles, the maker of market leader S.O.S., has taken a different tack altogether: cheating, then bailing out of the business entirely.
Last October, Miles agreed to pay a $4.5 million fine and pleaded guilty to attempting to establish a price-fixing scheme with Dial.
Dial informed the Justice Department of the scheme and cooperated with the investigation.
Earlier this month, Miles agreed to sell S.O.S. to Clorox Co. for an amount that wasn't disclosed.
The deal is expected to close next month.
Miles won't discuss the price-fixing case, but people close to 3M say that Miles attempted the scheme out of concern over 3M's stepped up presence.
Unemployment in Britain fell to a seasonally adjusted 9.8% of the work force in December from 10% in November, according to provisional estimates released by the U.K. Department of Employment.
The number of seasonally adjusted jobless was estimated to have fallen 46,800 during December after dropping a revised 39,000 in November.
