John Maynard Keynes has been dead for almost half a century, but the markets are still worried about him.
That at least was the impression this week, when Wednesday's bond market plummeted following reports of January data showing strong personal spending and wage and salary gains.
The market later turned around.
But its flip-flop shows it is still spooked by the theories of Keynes, and by the Phillips Curve.
In 1936, Keynes argued that new government spending was needed to restore employment and end the Great Depression.
After the war, self-styled Keynesians held that more spending would stimulate employment and output, albeit at the cost of some inflation.
Such thinking seemed to be borne out in the Phillips Curve, a famous plot showing a trade-off between inflation and unemployment.
Policy makers in the 1960s thought the curve meant that increased government spending might increase employment but also bring higher prices (which were bad, but worth it).
But by the 1970s' end, stagflation (inflation with unemployment) and succeeding events made it clear that the Phillips Curve had vanished.
Still more recently, though, policy makers have embraced another post-Keynesian idea: Instead of believing that higher inflation means higher output, they are now convinced that higher output means higher inflation!
Whereas before people thought that every uptick of the consumer price index heralded an improvement in gross national product or gross domestic product, now everyone seems to think that every uptick of GDP is proof that the economy is "overheated."
Hence bonds' early movement Wednesday.
Of course, the truth is that an increase in GDP may involve an increase in prices with no change in real output, or an increase in output with no change in prices, or some combination of price and output increases.
If GDP increases while consumer and producer prices appear more-or-less stable, as has been the case lately, the presumption ought to be that GDP growth is real growth, and not merely imminent inflation.
History offers abundant examples of real economic growth unaccompanied by inflation.
Indeed, some of the highest real growth rates ever recorded were experienced during the late 19th century -- an era of persistent deflation.
Market participants are of course right to be frightened by any prospect of 1970s-style inflation.
It is time, though, to stop paying penance for Keynesian sins of the past and allow ourselves to relish a little real growth now and then.
Mr. Selgin teaches economics at the University of Georgia's business school.
