Consumer confidence in the economy surged in March to the highest level in nearly four years, and consumers indicated they feel even more optimistic about the months to come.
Separately, the Commerce Department reported that new-home sales rose 1.9% in February.
The Conference Board said its closely watched index of consumer confidence rose to 86.7 in March, up nearly seven points from a revised 79.9 in February, and the highest reading since July 1990.
A survey of 5,000 households, conducted for the economic research organization by National Family Opinion, showed that consumer expectations for the next six months rose as well, to 93.0 points from 84.4 in February.
"This is a nice, sturdy increase," said Fabian Linden, executive director of the Conference Board's Consumer Research Center in New York.
"Consumers are feeling reasonably secure and prosperous," he said, and in the mood to make purchases they may have put off in the past.
Consumer spending represents about two-thirds of economic activity.
The positive sentiment is important, particularly during a period when interest rates have crept up and the bond markets have shown signs of worry about inflation.
Indeed, news of the consumer confidence report caused bond prices to tumble yesterday, which in turn pulled stock prices sharply lower.
Yields on the 30-year Treasury bond rose to 7.06%, the highest levels in more than a year.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged 63.33 points, or 1.68%, to 3699.02.
The report also indicates Americans continue to worry about job prospects, the weakest leg of the current recovery.
In the March survey, 33% of respondents reported that jobs are "hard to get," compared with 13.2% who responded that jobs are "plentiful."
The March survey also showed that respondents were more worried about jobs than they were in the February survey.
Meanwhile, sales of new homes rose last month to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 649,000 from the revised annual rate of 637,000 in January, the Commerce Department said.
The figures are subject to large revisions.
The 1.9% rebound followed a January decline of 22.5%, which was attributed to bad weather and unsustainably high December sales.
The January report, revised from an original 20.1% decline, was the steepest plunge since the government began tracking new-home sales in 1963.
Economists fretted that while temperatures have increased, allowing builders to resume construction, interest rates have climbed, too.
Rising interest rates could eventually cause home sales to slow.
"Rates are well above what we had been expecting," said David Seiders, chief economist for the National Association of Home Builders.
Last year, low interest rates and weak home prices combined to spur longtime renters into the housing market.
If rates continue their climb, Mr. Seiders said he may shave 50,000 off his forecast for 700,000 new single-family home sales this year.
The West, which has seen a deep real-estate slump, reported a 28% increase in new-home sales, the best regional showing.
Sales of single-family homes fell elsewhere, by 10.6% in the Northeast, by 10.2% in the Midwest and by 5.8% in the South.
Actual sales of new single-family homes for the first two months of 1994 totaled 100,000, up 6.4% from 94,000 a year earlier.
A bright spot for home sales, Mr. Seiders pointed out, is a tax change announced by the Internal Revenue Service this week.
Buyers of homes may now deduct from their income taxes the mortgage fees, or "points," paid on their behalfs by sellers.
The seller may also continue to deduct the points, as under previous rules.
"This is a goodie," said Mr. Seiders.
"Buyers can deduct the whole works."
The rule change is retroactive to home sales after Dec. 31, 1990.
The hitch?
When a home is resold, the buyer's investment in the property is reduced by the amount of the points deduction, increasing the capital-gains tax on the sale.
