AN INDEPENDENT COUNSEL SAID he would question the Clintons under oath.
Robert Fiske Jr., appointed to investigate the president's investment in Whitewater Development, promised a "complete, thorough and impartial" probe of the affair.
Fiske, a former U.S. attorney in New York, was named by Attorney General Reno, who called him an "excellent prosecutor" who is "ruggedly independent."
Fiske personally wrote the charter that outlines his duties and authorizes him to investigate "whether any individuals or entities have committed a violation of any federal criminal law" relating to the Whitewater case.
Fiske said he will investigate the suicide of former White House Deputy Counsel Foster to the extent it involves Whitewater-related events.
California residents face the likelihood of higher taxes to cover some of the repairs from Monday's quake, which caused damage of up to $30 billion.
Clinton released an additional $100 million for road repairs and authorized the U.S. government to continue paying 100% of certain shelter and food costs.
Russia's finance minister quit Yeltsin's cabinet, charging that "attempts are being made to stop the course of reform and even to move backward."
But Prime Minister Chernomyrdin, in announcing his new cabinet ministers, tried to reassure the world that the government will stick to its market reforms.
Federal government offices are due to reopen in Washington this morning after a one-day holiday at the request of local utilities, which feared a massive power failure because of a cold wave.
A weeklong cold spell, affecting the Midwest, Northeast and parts of the South, has been blamed for at least 113 deaths.
Christopher plans to underscore U.S. support for implementing a pact on Palestinian self-rule when he meets with PLO chief Arafat and Israel's foreign minister in Oslo tomorrow.
The secretary of state will attend the funeral of Norwegian Foreign Minister Holst, who played a key role in talks that led to the PLO-Israeli accord.
Israel's Rabin denied he ever pledged to retain the Golan Heights, and he said that a decision on exchanging the strategic plateau for peace with Syria would have to be made this year.
The prime minister's statements appeared to be part of a campaign to gradually accustom Israelis to the prospect of losing the territory.
Japan's Parliament was poised to vote today on Prime Minister Hosokawa's package of political reform bills, which would alter the rules that have governed Japanese politics since World War II.
The vote is expected to be close, with likely defections threatening the government's thin parliamentary majority.
Clinton's fiscal 1995 budget will propose shifting HUD resources toward caring for the homeless and away from public-housing programs.
Although details haven't been disclosed, public-housing advocates already are protesting the expected cuts in their programs.
The European Parliament called for the dismissal of Lord Owen, the European Union's mediator to the Yugoslav peace process, saying that he has been ineffective.
The parliament, whose opinion isn't binding on the EU, also urged the use of military intervention to protect Bosnian civilians.
Owen said he had no intention of quitting.
China has agreed to enforce compliance with international copyright laws in order to curtail the production of counterfeit compact disks, Treasury Secretary Bentsen said after meetings in Beijing.
Also, China and the U.S. reached a verbal accord aimed at preventing the export of goods made with prison labor, he said.
Hong Kong's governor accused China of being irrational in talks on the British colony's future and indicated Britain wouldn't make any more concessions.
Patten also told a parliamentary panel in London that Britain would publish its version of why talks with China had broken down if the Chinese don't resume negotiations.
Vietnam and the U.S. agreed to hold talks aimed at settling $250 million in U.S. claims stemming from the 1975 Communist victory.
Separately, the Clinton administration is expected to release soon a U.S. intelligence analysis that could lead to the lifting of an embargo against Hanoi.
