Publishers of small newspapers, burglar-alarm companies, on-line computer services and telephone equipment makers expressed concerns about legislation to let the Bell telephone companies enter new business lines.
Although the groups generally support the bills, which House leaders have put on a fast track, each is seeking changes that would help its business.
One bill, a compromise worked out by Commerce Committee Chairman John Dingell (D., Mich.) and Judiciary Committee Chairman Jack Brooks (D., Texas), would eventually let the regional telephone companies provide long-distance service and make phone equipment.
A companion measure would open the local phone business to competition and let phone companies into cable television.
In testimony yesterday before the House telecommunications subcommittee, R. Jack Fishman, president of Lakeway Publishers Inc., which puts out the Citizen-Tribune, a 21,000-circulation daily in Morristown, Tenn., warned that left to their own devices, the Bell companies could stifle rural competitors.
Mr. Fishman told lawmakers that state regulators approved the use of a three-digit number -- 511 -- to offer sophisticated information services at a modest fee.
Lakeway figured that it would draw about 3,000 calls a month.
But South Central Bell, a unit of Atlanta-based BellSouth Corp., proposed charging an initial $22,000, plus at least $10,000 a month.
Callers, Mr. Fishman complained, would get socked for more than $3 a call, well above prices charged for a similar service in suburban Atlanta.
Mr. Fishman wants Congress to block any pricing disparity between rural and urban areas.
A South Central Bell spokeswoman said the proposed tariff is substantially lower than Mr. Fishman cited, and callers "might place 10 or more calls a month, with a charge of only 30 cents a call."
Bigger information-services companies also expressed worries that the legislation's definition of electronic publishing is too narrow and that future two-way services might escape regulation.
James Cullen, Bell Atlantic Corp.'s president, countered that the Brooks-Dingell definition strikes the right balance and that services such as electronic games and other interactive entertainment shouldn't be included.
Meanwhile, Stan Martin, executive director of a burglar alarm trade association, told lawmakers that the Brooks-Dingell bill's six-year ban on the Bells entering the alarm business "is critical."
The alarm companies also want the bill to require the Bells to stop offering any alarm service.
Telecommunications equipment makers also want changes.
John Major, chairman of the Telecommunications Industry Association and a Motorola Inc. senior vice president, told panel members that the Bells should be allowed into the manufacturing arena more slowly than the bill envisions.
Unless the Bells face competition in the market for local telephone service, he warned, they "retain both the ability and the incentive" to compete unfairly.
