CLINTON KNEW in advance that the RTC sought a criminal probe of Madison.
Raising new questions about whether the White House may have meddled in an investigation of Madison Guaranty, the president said he was told about a criminal referral in the case before the action was made public.
His disclosure provides the first evidence that he and his staff were warned of the RTC's decision to request a criminal inquiry into whether funds from Madison may have been improperly diverted into his gubernatorial campaigns or into Whitewater.
The special counsel investigating Whitewater yesterday expressed a "strong concern" about any congressional hearings into the Whitewater affair, saying such an inquiry would "pose a severe risk" to his probe.
The Postal Service board voted to propose a 10.3% rate boost for almost all classes of mail.
The price of mailing a first-class letter would rise to 32 cents.
The proposal now goes to the Postal Rate Commission, which has 10 months to decide whether to approve the rates.
The Supreme Court gave greater legal protection to parodies, marking a defeat for copyright owners.
The unanimous ruling in a case involving the rap group 2 Live Crew was the court's first clear statement that musical, written or visual parodies may be permissible.
Medical research should focus more on the way diseases affect women and minorities, according to guidelines that the National Institutes of Health plans to publish this week.
Black women are rising more rapidly than black men in corporate America, according to an analysis of EEOC data.
Black female professionals number almost 200,000 in the 38,000 companies that report to the commission.
Israeli soldiers shot dead two Palestinians in the West Bank and guerrillas killed nine people in Israeli-held south Lebanon, officials said.
Meanwhile, Muslim extremists warned they will initiate suicide attacks on Jewish settlements in the occupied territories, saying Israelis will "cry in blood" for the Feb. 25 mosque massacre in Hebron.
PLO leader Arafat met with an Israeli envoy in Cairo to discuss terms for resuming talks on limited Palestinian self-rule.
It was the first such face-to-face meeting since the slayings in Hebron.
President Clinton said the U.S. is inclined to support a U.N. peacekeeping force in the ex-Soviet republic of Georgia if warring parties can make progress on peace talks.
Clinton, who met with Georgia's Shevardnadze, said no Americans would be included in any peacekeeping force.
The U.S. is reconsidering sanctions it imposed last year that prevent China from launching a U.S.-made satellite, Secretary of State Christopher said.
The move may send a mixed signal to Beijing, where Christopher is due to begin talks Friday in an attempt to get China to improve its human-rights record.
China denied that it had engaged in sweeping detentions of dissidents over the past week, and it labeled the reports "rumor."
However, the U.S. State Department said three dissidents had been arrested and may be charged with crimes, a fourth man was taken into custody, and 10 others were picked up and released.
The U.N. deployed peacekeeping troops around Serb-besieged Tuzla airport in preparation for an airlift into the northern Bosnian town.
But Serb forces shelled the nearby town of Maglaj and blocked aid shipments.
Meanwhile, Croat and Muslim troops withdrew more weapons from the front lines in central Bosnia.
A black homeland confirmed that it would boycott South Africa's elections in April, prompting an African National Congress official to accuse Bophuthatswana of hindering democracy efforts.
California's Gov. Wilson signed a "three strikes, you're out" anticrime bill.
The law requires a life prison term with no chance of parole for 25 years for any third-time felons previously convicted of two violent crimes.
A five-man interim coalition took power in Liberia, composed of leaders of rival factions that have fought for four years.
Peacekeeping troops from nine African countries began disarming guerrillas.
