"Don't worry.
It's just a normal, healthy correction."
Veteran investors have heard that phrase hundreds of times from brokers and market commentators.
And they are hearing it now.
What are the odds it's true?
Three out of four.
About 74% of all dips in the market -- defined as a 5% drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average -- never develop into anything serious, according to a study conducted at The Wall Street Journal's request by Ned Davis Research in Nokomis, Fla.
The current decline began five weeks ago, spurred by a Federal-Reserve-inspired uptick in interest rates.
So far, stocks have fallen only mildly, despite a few headlines to the contrary.
The industrial average reached a record 3978.36 on Jan. 31, then fell 4% through March 1.
In the past few days it has bounced back feebly to 3853.41, about 3% below its high.
Is this decline destined to stay an innocent little thing, or will it grow into a big, punishing bruiser?
There's no sure way to tell, but here's what the market pros watch.
"A 7.2% decline is the area" to keep an eye on, says Ned Davis, president of the research firm bearing his name.
Once stocks slide a bit more than 7%, he says, there's an even chance the downturn will worsen into a full-fledged bear market.
One common definition of a bear market is any stock-market decline of 20% or more.
On that basis, there have been nine bear markets in the past 50 years.
Mr. Davis also counts as a bear market any downturn of 13% or worse that lasts six months or more.
Under his definition, bear markets have happened about once every three years.
Mr. Davis expects to see, at the least, "a big correction."
President Clinton is "under siege with this Whitewater problem."
People are turning against his health-care plan.
The economy is in danger of "overheating."
This could force the Fed to raise interest rates further.
Stocks are at high valuations and have been for two years.
New mutual-fund investors have little experience with market declines.
They might panic.
All in all, Mr. Davis says, it's "a perfect background for a bear market."
Philip H. Smith, an analyst at Birinyi Associates in Greenwich, Conn., is much more optimistic.
Serious declines, he says, have always been preceded by "excesses of positive sentiment" about stocks.
When the market started to slip in the summer of 1987, he says, the prevailing attitude was, "Well, big deal, there's no problem."
By contrast, he says, investors today lack that overconfident swagger.
In fact, gloom-and-doom sentiment abounds.
The current decline, Mr. Smith says, is specifically tied to interest-rate boosts.
"The concerns are well defined. . . .
It's the devil you know."
The time to worry, he suggests, is "when the market drops and you don't have a reason."
One more comforting factor, in Mr. Smith's view, is Birinyi Associates' studies of trading-volume trends.
The firm views it as healthy if volume is high when stocks are rising and low when they're falling.
So far, he says, that's been the case.
Other market professionals say they aren't sure if the current mild drop will grow into something more ominous.
But they are paying close heed to their favorite warning signals.
Richard McCabe, chief market analyst at Merrill Lynch, says there are five warning signs "that a particular decline is not just a nice, placid, 5% drop."
Four of those five are evident to some degree right now, he says.
-- TECHNICAL FACTORS: Deterioration is an ominous sign.
For example, Mr. McCabe says, money managers' cash levels are low.
Speculation is rife in small stocks.
And companies are rushing to pump out new issues of stock.
-- SELLING INTENSITY: On Feb. 4, the day the Fed raised short-term interest rates, the Dow Jones industrials fell 96 points.
Since then, there have been several days in which the number of losing stocks substantially exceeded the number of gainers.
But Mr. McCabe says this indicator isn't looking too bad yet, because the major averages are still above their trend lines.
-- FEEBLE RALLIES: After declines, buyers normally rush in to scoop up bargains, and the market should stage comeback rallies.
"When that doesn't happen, it's a bad sign," Mr. McCabe says.
He isn't sure yet about how to classify the current situation, but says, "I'm a little concerned."
-- FALTERING FINANCIALS: Weakness in financial stocks and other interest-sensitive stocks such as utilities often suggests that a decline isn't going to be mild, Mr. McCabe says.
Weakness in these stock groups often foretells an advance in interest rates.
Lately, the stocks have been weak.
-- EXCESSIVE BULLISHNESS: On the other hand, Mr. McCabe says his fifth warning sign -- excessive investor bullishness -- seems absent.
Here, his line of reasoning parallels Mr. Smith's.
For example, Mr. McCabe says, sales of "put options" (a bet that stock prices will decline) recently exceeded the sales of "call options" (a bet that stock prices will rise).
"The put/call ratio is the highest ever now," he says, certainly a sign that investors aren't complacent.
Overall, Mr. McCabe says he thinks most stocks made their highs last year.
He envisions 1994 as "a corrective year," especially since stocks have fallen badly in seven of the past eight years in which a U.S. president was serving the second year of his term.
Jim Melcher, president of Balestra Capital in New York, says the key point to watch is the flow of individual investors' money into mutual funds.
"It isn't over yet," he says, but the flow has slowed because of "rate angst."
Portfolio managers are fretting about the market, Mr. Melcher says, but they have no choice but to invest the river of cash inflows.
"You've got a whole bunch of money managers out there who have been forced into stocks that they don't want to be in," he says.
"Do that to rats in a laboratory and they go insane."
Mr. Melcher has raised a little cash in his portfolios, but says he would "get fully invested on a serious correction, 10% or more."
He says the U.S. has "the strongest economy in the world," inflation is dormant, and labor is "quiescent, even cooperative."
So there's "no reason for a bear market," he says.
What about the time-honored advice that investors should buy on dips?
Scott Lummer of Ibbotson Associates in Chicago studied what happens in the month following any calendar month in which Standard & Poor's 500 Stock Index fell 5% or more.
He found no consistent pattern in the aftermath.
There have been 82 such dips since 1926.
Mr. Lummer found the market rose 44 times in the following month and declined 38 times -- a perfectly normal ratio.
In eight cases, the market roared back 10% or more within a month, but in six cases it fell a further 10% or more.
So, at least judging by Mr. Lummer's one-month yardstick, a strategy of "buying the dip" is neither particularly shrewd nor particularly dumb.
The market behaves after a 5% decline pretty much the way it behaves the rest of the time -- unpredictably.
Market history suggests that most dips (declines of 5%) in the Dow Jones Industrial Average don't turn into anything serious.
But once the Dow industrials are down 10%, there's an almost even chance the total damage will be 15% or more.
