The get-acquainted session between President Kim Young Sam and Sir Leon Brittan late last year was going smoothly when Mr. Kim dropped something of a bombshell.
"I believe in economic reform and opening up Korea's markets to foreign products, because it's good for Korea," President Kim told the European Union's trade envoy.
Then, gesturing to the cabinet members at his side, he continued: "The problem is that they don't believe that."
The remark was meant more to shame Mr. Kim's ministers, who aren't used to public reprimands, than to assuage Sir Leon.
But the message was clear: Korea's bureaucrats are quietly subverting many of the changes the president and others consider vital if the country is to avoid becoming the first of the Asian tigers to lose its teeth.
And it is up to the ministers, most of whom are committed reformers but untested in bureaucratic turf battles, to keep their troops in line.
Unless Korea revives its competitiveness by deregulating business, liberalizing its financial markets and reversing a steep decline in foreign investment, some government economists and private analysts say, it will be overtaken by newly emerging economic powers in Asia and Latin America.
This concern weighs as heavily on Mr. Kim's mind as the crisis over North Korea's nuclear program, which has pushed South Korea into geopolitical prominence just as it is fading from the world stage as an emerging industrial power.
Less than a decade ago, South Korea had the world's fastest growing economy" -- the next Japan," people often said -- thanks to a smooth, paternal relationship between government and business.
Now, that axis is crumbling, with business fighting to break free of red tape and bureaucrats struggling to retain control.
Rising wages coupled with chronically high interest rates, a result of the government's tight rein on liquidity, have priced Korean goods out of the world's most lucrative export markets.
Regulations that hamper the raising of capital have hobbled local industry.
Barriers to foreign investment, legacies of Korea's past autocratic regimes, have chased away the kind of high-tech joint ventures the country needs to preserve its competitive edge.
"Korea's No. 1 problem is the bureaucracy," says Robert Broadfoot, managing director of Political & Economic Risk Consultancy Ltd., a Hong Kong research firm.
"If you talk to some Korean businessmen, it's like they have a bowling ball strapped to their legs."
The challenge is similar to that confronting Japan, where business is also hindered by regulation.
But the stakes are higher for Korean companies, which can't yet compete effectively in sophisticated markets and are being undercut in low-wage industries by cheaper goods from evolving nations.
Mr. Kim, a former dissident and South Korea's first civilian president in 30 years, has pledged to reshape its tightly corseted economy into one ruled by free markets.
"We must waste no time in reforming and energizing the bureaucracy," he said in a February speech marking his first year in office.
"Unnecessary regulations must be resolutely abolished."
The president gets high marks from liberal-minded policy makers and foreign investors for making deregulation his top priority.
Under his administration, communication between the economics ministries and foreign business has vastly improved.
Interest rates, which a few years ago peaked at around 18%, have been deregulated and are beginning to ease; the bureaucracy has been ordered to streamline, and a watchdog body has been created to ensure that change is implemented at ground level.
But progress is slow.
After a generation of central planning, even cabinet members favoring market reform are intimidated by the prospect.
Credit is still tightly controlled, and interest rates -- around 11% for the South Korean equivalent of the prime rate -- are above the regional average.
Ministers who implement aggressive changes are often outmaneuvered by career civil servants who like things the way they are.
Shrinking the country's huge ministries will take years, given employment laws that bar Western-style layoffs.
Even reform-minded bureaucrats defend a slow pace for change.
Says a former deputy director at the finance ministry, "We simply don't have the expertise in the banking industry to deregulate any faster."
Historical factors have endowed Korea's civil servants with considerable power.
After the Korean War, a series of autocrats charged the bureaucracy with charting the country's stunning industrialization.
It decided which companies would develop which industries, with funding controlled by the central bank.
In a nation suspicious of foreigners, the bureaucracy also has been entrusted with the job of tightly regulating alien influences, including imports and investment.
For President Kim, an outsider with a narrow power base, such interests are too potent to challenge head-on.
His successful raid last August on Korea's vast underground economy, for example, was waged with guerrilla tactics.
Soon after his election, he decided to prohibit the use of false names in banking transactions.
For more than a generation, the practice bankrolled South Korea's once-rampant corruption -- allowing, for example, large political contributions to remain untraceable -- while stunting the financial system.
Access to official capital markets was so poor that most small businesses were forced to use underground sources for funding.
Mr. Kim had to move furtively, lest the beneficiaries of the false-names system foil his plans.
He selected a task force of about 14 people to hammer out a strategy, and swore them to silence.
Each night for two months, the team crunched numbers in a sparely lit rented office.
To avoid suspicion, some sent their families on trips abroad.
A few worked full time, telling their staffs they were in Hawaii attending a conference.
The ruse worked.
At an evening press conference in August, Mr. Kim unveiled a plan to phase out false-name banking transactions, leaving his rivals flatfooted.
If the reform was a victory for Mr. Kim, it also revealed his limitations.
The administration set aside a $1.2 billion emergency fund to help small business survive the transition.
Only a fraction of the money was distributed, however, because bankers refused to lend to companies without adequate collateral.
Two months after the announcement, the number of bankruptcies among small and midsized businesses had tripled from the like period in 1992.
"The commercial banks used to do whatever the government told them," an aide to Mr. Kim says.
"But not under this administration."
Priorities clash even within the bureaucracies themselves.
Consider the case of Lim Chang Yuel.
The career civil servant has spearheaded a five-year plan for economic change that was roundly praised by negotiators at the Uruguay Round trade talks in Geneva last year.
"Korea showed itself to be one of the countries most committed to reform," he says.
"We were the only ones who had something on the table when we arrived."
Mr. Lim has cultivated a healthy dialogue with international businessmen.
At a meeting early this year with the American Chamber of Commerce's foreign bankers group, he sought to allay concerns that a somewhat vague provision in Korea's banking-reform law was intended to discriminate against foreign banks.
At the same time, unknown to Mr. Lim, a junior ministry official was saying just the opposite in a telephone conversation to an assistant to Paul Muther, vice president and general manager of the First National Bank of Chicago and chairman of the foreign bankers' group.
"He told us the provision did indeed discriminate against foreign banks, and if we didn't like it, we could move our headquarters to Korea and become a local bank," recalls Mr. Muther, adding he will take the issue directly to Mr. Lim.
(Mr. Lim says he was unaware of his subordinate's action.)
If Korea's regulatory environment is confusing for foreigners, it is just as bad for local industry.
Despite its rhetoric, the government hasn't completely broken its habit of intervening in Korea's financial markets.
In February, the finance ministry clipped a bull run on the stock market, in part by ordering financial institutions to dump their shareholdings.
More recently, it decided to retain its authority to limit equity-related instruments issued overseas.
This year, that limit has been set at about $2.5 billion.
Among the 30 or so companies in need of capital are Hyundai Motor Co. and Kia Motors Co., which hope to issue global depository receipts worth $60 million and $150 million, respectively, to help finance their push into the U.S. market.
Others want to raise funds to localize production abroad to escape high interest rates and labor costs at home.
Only a few are expected to get the nod.
Ministry officials, including Mr. Lim, say the size of overseas issues must be restricted to control inflation.
But businesspeople cite the limit as another factor in Korea's decaying competitiveness.
"We have a liquidity problem in this country, but it's not because there's a shortage of cash in the system," says Milton Kim, managing director of Ssangyong Investment & Securities Co.
"It's because the ministry of finance doesn't want to lose control."
Even in sectors earmarked for liberalization, the fruits of reform could take years to ripen.
Take foreign-exchange dealing.
Korean companies are discouraged from hedging their currency exposure by a thicket of regulations designed to curb speculation.
Partly as a result, nonfinancial companies regularly chalk up huge foreign-exchange losses.
The finance ministry has pledged to establish a reformed currency market as part of its five-year plan.
But it will be years before local financiers develop the expertise and computer systems needed to adequately cover foreign-exchange risk, having traditionally relied on the government for direction.
"If the ministry were to take the wraps off tomorrow, there'd be chaos and the forces opposed to change would have a field day," says a senior official at Citibank N.A.'s Seoul branch.
Whereas many Korean companies still suckle on government-rationed capital, others are force-fed technology.
In 1992, eager to leapfrog the Japanese in a fast-growing industry, the ministry of communications announced that digital systems would replace analog technology as the national standard for new telecommunications projects.
Local manufacturers like Daewoo Telecom Ltd. and Samsung Electronics Co. had little say in the matter.
Although impressive in theory, digital technology is untested.
"It's one of the more difficult technologies of the 20th century," says David Hytha, director for business development for McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. in Tokyo.
"Korea is trying to lose a few pounds by starting out with a triathlon."
Industry giants like American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and Motorola Inc. are expected to have marketable digital systems within a year.
If so, local industrialists say, the ministry's decision could leave Korean firms stranded, because few are ready to compete with established telecommunications manufacturers in the West in the digital market.
Communications ministry officials would not comment.
At the same time, industrialists say, red tape has impeded the transfer of basic technologies local industries want.
Take aerospace.
Although the government has targeted aircraft manufacturing as a strategic industry, it has done little to discourage the flock of aerospace-related joint ventures here from migrating to better business climes.
McDonnell Douglas Corp.'s local subsidiary, which had a licensing agreement with Korea Air Lines to build aircraft parts, left the country last year.
Litton Korea Ltd., the 100%-owned local arm of Litton Industries Inc., of Beverly Hills, Calif., closed its doors after failing to find a local buyer.
Litton Korea, which helped supply avionics and guidance systems for local defense projects, had been barred from competing in the country's fertile commercial-aviation market.
A year ago, it began looking for a local partner with which it could gain market access in return for management expertise, systems software and computer technology.
No deal was forged, because no company was willing to merge with a partner shackled by the kind of restrictions that bound Litton.
Park Un Suh, an enthusiastic reformer and assistant minister for trade and industry at the time, tried to have the regulations lifted, but to no avail.
"We need more dramatic liberalization," says Mr. Park, now at the Industrial Advancement Administration, which helps small business.
"But we first have to change a philosophy that has lasted here for 30 years."
