International Business Machines Corp. has decided to forgo the right to manufacture Intel Corp.'s latest-generation chip, the Pentium, freeing IBM to put more resources behind its rival entry in an emerging chip war, the PowerPC.
IBM and Intel announced a new pact yesterday that amounts to the boldest, and perhaps riskiest, move IBM has yet made to push the PowerPC chip into the market.
It clearly pits IBM against Intel as a competitor by having IBM back away from the Pentium, the most powerful and latest entry in the Intel chip family that has long powered most personal computers.
If IBM succeeds, it could significantly damage Intel's position as the leading chip supplier to the PC industry.
But by forgoing production rights for Pentium, IBM also is running the risk that the PC market could heartily embrace the Intel chip.
That would leave IBM without the cost advantages of making the Pentium and force it to buy at a higher cost directly from Intel.
"We've made a commitment to PowerPC," James Cannavino, IBM's top strategist, said in an interview.
"We just didn't think it was productive for us to make Pentiums."
Curt Rohrman, an analyst for CS First Boston Inc., said after IBM's announcement, "There will be a chip war in 1994.
There's no doubt about it.
All the troops are lining up."
In a mutually beneficial relationship up until now, IBM, under license with Intel, has manufactured its own Intel chips.
It is less expensive than buying the devices from Intel, and it ensures an adequate supply for IBM.
For Intel, however, the arrangement also ensured that the world's largest PC maker would be committed to using an Intel-designed architecture.
Andy Grove, Intel's president and chief executive, said he doesn't see the new agreement changing the nature of past agreements.
"IBM is our largest customer.
It was before and remains so now," Mr. Grove said.
IBM, Armonk, N.Y., and Intel, Santa Clara, Calif., plan to continue that relationship.
But the agreement leaves out the Pentium and allows IBM to increase its own production of Pentium's predecessor, the Intel 486 chip, which is the most popular chip in computers today.
IBM now plans to make the 486 chip for 50% of its PC line, compared with 20% under the old agreement.
Last year, IBM shipped 4.3 million PCs with Intel chips and expected to increase production by one million units this year.
Mr. Grove says Intel will be able to make the transition to Pentium chip production more quickly now that IBM has agreed to make more 486 chips, thus decreasing the production demand on Intel.
Mr. Cannavino of IBM said the company's IBM Personal Computer Co. unit isn't abandoning its commitment to Intel and will buy Pentium chips as demand for higher-power computers based on that line emerges.
He said IBM's relationship with Intel is "friendly, so far.
But we're tough competitors."
But the new pact clearly signals that IBM may be betting against the Pentium line.
Mr. Cannavino said it would have cost IBM several hundred million dollars to build plants from scratch to make the latest Intel chip.
The Pentium requires two types of microprocessor technology, unlike anything else IBM makes, Mr. Cannavino said.
Analysts also said the price war is already bringing down Pentium chip prices, which may have played into IBM's thinking.
Chip prices could drop sharply as various competitors take on the Intel lineage, including Silicon Graphics Inc.'s MIPS Technology unit and Digital Equipment Corp.'s Alpha chip effort, as well as the PowerPC effort mounted by IBM with partners Motorola Inc. and Apple Computer Inc.
"Intel is going to be in the driver's seat and will lower the price of Pentium, lowering return on investment for any Pentium clone," observed Richard Zwetchkenbaum, an analyst at International Data Corp., Boston.
In other words, Mr. Zwetchkenbaum said, IBM may have decided it wasn't worth the investment to make Pentium chips because Intel will be leading the way in slashing prices.
In the short-term, Pentium chips are still a small part of the market: Only 1% of all PCs shipped world-wide last year had Pentium microprocessors, compared with 58% running on the 486 chip, Mr. Zwetchkenbaum estimates.
Intel has said it expects 15% of all PCs shipped this year to contain the Pentium.
But in the long run, IBM faces a significant challenge.
There is no guarantee that the world is going to want its PowerPC chip.
Only one product, the RS6000 workstation, has been announced with the PowerPC chip.
IBM doesn't yet have a desktop operating system, the internal software that acts as a computer's traffic cop, for the PowerPC that will enable it to run the host of software programs that now run on the Intel chips.
Moreover, Intel, as the leading chip supplier in the world, controls most of the market.
Out of a total of 36.1 million PCs shipped last year, 84% had Intel architecture.
Billions of dollars worth of software has been purchased by computer customers based on the Intel design.
The PowerPC chip, unlike the Intel chips, uses reduced instruction -- set computing, or RISC, design.
IBM says it will be swifter and less expensive to manufacture than the Pentium, and will compete most directly with Intel's next generation of Pentium chips.
IBM has promised a PC running on the new chip by the middle of this year.
It is also planning a host of consumer products that will run on a family of PowerPC chips.
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, IBM shares closed at $56.50, down $1.25.
On the Nasdaq Stock Market, Intel shares closed at $65.25, up 12.5 cents.
