W.R. Grace & Co.'s National Medical Care Inc. unit, under sharp prodding from the Food and Drug Administration, agreed to correct manufacturing problems at its five U.S. production facilities.
National Medical, the nation's biggest provider of dialysis services and products, presented the consent decree as the culmination of "six months of cooperative effort," during which it demonstrated to the FDA that it has enhanced quality control at its plants.
But the agency gave a harsh assessment of what one official characterized as the company's record of "chronic" problems with quality control, which prompted the examination.
National Medical's manufacturing deficiencies have caused "numerous problems that have affected the safety and quality of its products," the FDA said, adding that the shortcomings have generated 18 medical-device recalls since 1987, nine of them in the past year alone.
In the consent decree, National Medical pledged to bring the facilities into compliance with so-called Good Manufacturing Practice requirements.
The pact leaves the company's domestic production intact, and appears to pave the way for National Medical to resume importing products soon from two overseas plants whose output the FDA earlier banned.
While National Medical neither admitted nor denied any wrongdoing, the decree settled a lawsuit that the U.S. simultaneously filed against National Medical and three top officers in federal court in Newark, N.J.
Under the decree, National Medical's facilities can continue to operate and will be examined on a preset schedule already under way.
If the plants don't pass muster, the consent decree says, they could be ordered closed.
The FDA noted that it has been negotiating with the company for several months, and that many of the manufacturing shortcomings have been cleared up.
"While National Medical recognized the need to improve its manufacturing practices," Grace said, "at no time did their manufacturing practices endanger the lives of its patients and at no time was National Medical charged by FDA or other parties with doing so."
But in an interview Ronald Johnson, director of compliance for the FDA's Center for Medical Devices, presented a darker picture.
National Medical has had a "real problem for the past four to five years," he said.
"It wasn't just one facility with a problem.
It was multiple facilities in this country and outside, and we believe that was reflective of a corporate-wide attitude toward compliance."
After letters to individual facilities failed to yield satisfactory corrective action, he said, "we felt we had to be more aggressive to get the company's attention."
The FDA official noted that no patient deaths could be directly attributed to the problems.
He stressed that dialysis patients are very ill, and that many of them "die, or suffer illness in the normal course of events."
But he added that "we believe that problems of this type have contributed to the mortality" level among dialysis patients in general.
"These are the kinds of thing that we need to correct if we're going to reduce" the morbidity rate among such kidney patients.
The problems that concerned the FDA included plastic-blood tubes contaminated with a chemical agent used to sterilize them during production; the FDA official said the agency also found excessive endotoxins -- potential fever agents -- in some of the tubes, which are known as bloodlines.
One recall involved bloodlines contaminated with pesticide.
In some cases, Mr. Johnson said, bloodlines were found to be prone to leaking at connections, a situation that he says presented a potential health risk not only to the patients but also to health-care workers.
Containers for some products used in a certain kind of internal dialysis had minute holes, presenting an opportunity for microbial contamination, he said.
And in 1992, he recalled, a dialyzer cartridge made at the unit's Dublin, Ireland, facility was discovered to be contaminated with ether, a residue of the cleaning process, "and we had some reactions and injuries as a result of that."
Last spring, the FDA banned importation of dialysis products made at National Medical sites in Dublin and Reynoso, Mexico.
That ban is still largely in place, although the Mexico plant is being allowed to ship some of the bloodlines because National Medical's rivals haven't been able to turn out an adequate supply.
The consent decree includes those plants in the inspection schedule, and imports will be allowed to resume after FDA certification.
In a statement issued by its Boca Raton, Fla.-based parent, National Medical said it "remains committed, as it has through its 26-year life, to the highest quality of patient care."
National Medical added that the mortality rate at it "is better than any other provider of dialysis services in the U.S."
National Medical operates about 450 dialysis sites nationwide, and overall revenue for 1993 is expected to be about $1.5 billion.
In an interview, a National Medical official said the company thinks that "the seriousness of our effort and the success of our effort to date in rectifying the quality-control issues" of concern to the FDA are "testified to by the nature of the agreement we signed."
In comparison with terms of other consent decrees in the medical-device field in recent years, he said, the agreement with the Grace unit, which includes no fines or penalties, is "extraordinarily mild," he added, "and would appear to give very clear evidence that the FDA feels the job of bringing things up to standard is very nearly complete."
