The Rev. Jesse Jackson, the often fiery Rainbow Coalition president, was subdued, reflective, nearly rhymeless.
At a recent hearing of the Congressional Black Caucus brain trust on crime, he spoke solemnly, his voice breaking, of how some young black men feel "more secure in jails than on our streets."
With tears in his eyes, he spoke of death in his own neighborhood here and the precarious position of black youth.
"Nearly half of all murder victims are black," he said.
"More blacks kill each other each year than were killed in the entire history of lynching."
Yet, the Rev. Jackson assailed one of the prime legislative vehicles for dealing with that explosion of violence -- the Senate-passed crime legislation that President Clinton backed in his State of the Union address.
The measure, he declared, is an "ill-conceived bill" and a "Draconian . . . expensive non-remedy."
The bill has widespread bipartisan support in the Senate.
Lawmakers contend it represents the toughest and most comprehensive government attack yet on violent crime, an issue at the top of the public's list of concerns in opinion polls.
But at a time when African-Americans increasingly are speaking out against black criminals and the "gangsta rap" that seems to glorify violence, the Black Caucus and others say the Senate bill is too concerned with punishment, and not enough concerned with the alleviation of the conditions that cause crime.
The strong opposition to the measure presents a problem for President Clinton, whose support for the legislation places him at odds with a core group of Democrats who elected him.
Citing Mr. Clinton's embrace of one provision of the Senate bill -- mandatory life sentences for criminals convicted of three violent felonies -- the dean of the Black Caucus, Democratic Rep. John Conyers of Michigan, decries the "lock-'em up and throw away the key" approach that "only fools the public into believing that we're doing something about crime."
The White House will try to assuage at least some opponents' concerns as Congress undertakes to reconcile the Senate bill with a much different House measure.
Justice Department officials, who were criticized for not visibly exerting influence over the Senate bill last year, will play a more overt role in removing or modifying the more extreme provisions this year.
Deputy Attorney General Philip Heymann plans to testify at House crime legislation hearings, and Mr. Clinton himself held out the carrot of help to endangered youth in his speech to Congress.
"We have got to stop pointing our fingers at these kids who have no future," he said, "and reach our hands out to them."
The question, though, is whether enough changes can be made to the bill to soften opposition to it.
In addition to the Black Caucus, a range of others -- including the American Bar Association, the American Civil Liberties Union, the National Conference of State Legislators and many federal judges and prosecutors -- oppose stringent sentencing provisions in the bill.
Other less controversial provisions in the $22.3 billion legislation include authorization for 100,000 additional police officers, drug treatment and other crime-prevention programs.
Some black leaders, such as the leadership of the Nation of Islam, have long spoken out against crime and for the kind of values that make it unacceptable.
But the mainstream civil-rights leadership generally avoided the rhetoric of "law and order," regarding it as a code for keeping blacks back.
Law and order didn't mean justice, Mr. Jackson used to say, but "just us."
In the past, many were hesitant to speak about crime in public because "the larger community would talk about 'lock them up and throw the key away' and hide behind black leaders in doing it," explains Rep. Craig Washington, the Houston Democrat who led the caucus hearing.
Now there is escalating discourse within the black community about what it can and must do to stop crime.
Just after the new year, Mr. Jackson held the first of several conferences focusing on just that.
"The premier civil-rights issue of this day is youth violence in general and black-on-black violence in particular," he has said.
His conference also noted the structural conditions that encourage crime -- the sorry state of the black economy, high unemployment, poor education and a legacy of racism.
"The black leaders recognize that if they don't step out front and engage in the discussion, that basically our young people are turning themselves into slaves," says Rep. Washington.
Within the black community, there is "more public concern and debate about the appropriate level of response to increasing crime and violence."
Many of the black leaders involved in the growing debate retain strong objections to the Senate bill, with its large number of mandatory minimum sentences, death penalties and federalization of local crimes.
One of the Senate measures strongly opposed by most members of the Black Caucus has as its author one of its own, Illinois Democratic Sen. Carol Moseley-Braun.
Her amendment would restrict prosecutorial discretion -- a point opposed by Attorney General Janet Reno -- by directing U.S. attorneys to prosecute as adults 13-year-olds charged with committing violent crimes with firearms.
The provision would federalize many crimes currently prosecuted by the states.
Yet, notes federal Judge Maryanne Trump Barry of Newark, N.J., who is chairwoman of the criminal law committee of the Judicial Conference of the U.S., there is no federal juvenile justice system to handle such cases -- no federal juvenile prisons, for instance, and no federal youth probation officers.
The National Conference of State Legislatures is so opposed to the federalization of state crimes -- another provision in the bill, pushed by GOP Sen. Alfonse D'Amato of New York, would federalize all violent handgun crimes -- that it recently wrote President Clinton to say "the Senate bill is inimical to principles of federalism, and we must oppose it."
And a measure that would require states to adopt certain federal sentencing guidelines, such as mandatory minimum sentences, to get federal prison building funds is "coercive policy," complains Jon Felde, NCSL's general counsel.
There are numerous mandatory minimum provisions in the legislation that Mr. Washington fears could be used in an unfair fashion against blacks who may be charged more harshly than whites for similar acts.
And federal judges have "consistently, vehemently, and virtually unanimously opposed" mandatory minimum sentences, Judge Barry wrote to Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Joseph Biden, Democrat of Delaware, in November.
Other measures that caucus members say could be used in a discriminatory way are those that would make it a federal crime to conspire to participate in a criminal street gang and that provides the death penalty for drug kingpins even if no death can be shown to have resulted directly from their illegal activity.
The Justice Department has warned Congress that it thinks the drugkingpin provision is unconstitutional; the anti-gang measure will also be hit on constitutional grounds in the House.
But Sen. Biden insists that the final legislation will include enough significant prevention and punishment provisions that liberals and conservatives alike will be able to endorse it.
After all, he says, "everybody is kind of singing from the same hymnal on the broad strokes."
