FRANCHISEES' NEGLIGENCE can cost franchisers plenty.
Franchisers have long argued that franchisees are independent businesses, with legal responsibility for their missteps.
But increasingly, courts are holding that the control franchisers exercise over their chains makes them liable too, specialists say.
The less leeway given to franchisees, the greater the risk to franchisers, they add.
In recent years, "there has been an explosion of cases holding franchisers vicariously liable for the acts and omissions of franchisees," says David J. Kaufmann, a New York franchising lawyer.
Consider franchiser Domino's Pizza Inc., the target of lawsuits over its former practice of promising pizza delivery within 30 minutes -- a practice alleged to cause its drivers to rush.
The Ann Arbor, Mich., franchiser abandoned that policy in December, after a Missouri jury awarded $78 million in mostly punitive damages to a St. Louis woman who had been injured by a driver for a Domino's franchise.
The plaintiff contended that the franchiser's delivery policy was negligent and made it liable for her injury.
When it comes to legal precedent, though, Domino's -- and other franchisers -- may have more to worry about in a Florida case that more explicitly addresses the issue of so-called vicarious liability for franchisees' errors.
An appeals court in West Palm Beach rejected the notion that -- as a matter of law -- Domino's can't be sued over an auto accident allegedly triggered by a truck driver for a Domino's franchise.
In a suit in Okeechobee County court, brothers Ralph and Ricky Parker say they were attempting to aid victims of a two-vehicle mishap in that county in 1986 when a third vehicle struck them.
They sued both Domino's and its franchisee, J&B Enterprises Inc., Okeechobee.
In a summary judgment in 1992, however, the trial court said Domino's wasn't liable as the franchisee is an independent contractor.
The Parkers appealed that ruling -- and won a decision that the franchiser possibly can be held liable, depending on how much control it exercised over the franchisee.
The case was remanded to the trial court.
Domino's is asking the appeals court to reconsider the ruling.
"Franchising is based on the premise that the franchisee is an independent business owner," says Joel F. Graziani, an Ann Arbor attorney for the franchiser.
But Philip M. Burlington, a West Palm Beach attorney for the Parkers, says the level of control by Domino's over its franchisee is so great that the franchiser shares responsibility for any injuries that the franchisee causes.
"The legal principles that govern the appeals decision aren't new and are very well established," he says.
ADM. INMAN'S `Zoe Baird' problem aids maid-service franchisers.
Such franchisers see a silver lining in the clouds around Bobby Ray Inman, the latest public figure to be embarrassed by reports of immigration or tax problems with household help.
David G. McKinnon, president of Molly Maid Inc., Ann Arbor, says a dozen potential franchisees have mentioned Adm. Inman's tardy payment of taxes for a worker as one reason that they see a maid-service franchise as attractive.
When consumers use maids from a franchise, the franchisee takes care of the taxes and other paperwork.
Molly Maid says it sold 33 U.S. franchises last year, up from 17 the year before, in part because buyers expect growing numbers of customers.
Others also say the field is booming -- but mostly for demographic reasons.
"The Nannygate stuff is small potatoes," says Don M. Hay, president of Maid Brigade Inc., Atlanta.
That franchiser says system-wide revenue surged 15% last year to $15 million, mostly because growing numbers of women work outside the home.
A NEGATIVE ARTICLE on Decorating Den creates an uproar.
With James S. Bugg Sr. expected to take over Feb. 13 as chairman of the International Franchise Association, a McCall's magazine report on Decorating Den Systems Inc. is Topic A in current industry talk.
Mr. Bugg is president of the franchiser.
Copies of the article, faxed by gossips, are reaching franchising people who don't normally read the women's magazine.
"It is certainly an explosive article," says one East Coast public-relations specialist.
The piece, "Shattered Dreams: Women Who Lost Almost Everything," focuses on disgruntled home-decorating franchisees of Decorating Den.
Citing company figures, it says Decorating Den has an unusually high termination rate for franchises -- and also has many franchisees who fail to make money.
Decorating Den confirms that 577 franchises shut down in the three years ended Dec. 31, 1992.
On that date, 1,138 franchises were in operation.
The Bethesda, Md., franchiser contends that the termination rate is acceptable for an inexpensive, home-based franchise -- in part because some people abandon such ventures after trying them out for a while.
And it says McCall's mostly ignored happy franchisees.
Decorating Den says company officials and their allies have fired off dozens of indignant letters, not only to McCall's but also to the individual directors of the magazine's owner, New York Times Co.
"A tabloid hatchet job," wrote Steven C. Bursten, founder of Decorating Den.
And the 10-year-old daughter of one happy franchisee complained that McCall's is "verry pregados" -- that is, very prejudiced -- against the franchiser.
Mr. Bugg maintains: "If we were even half as bad as this article purports us to be, the market forces that operate in our economy would have ended our company years ago."
Kate White, editor in chief of McCall's, says she stands by the article as "very fair and balanced."
The magazine says it has also received letters from people applauding the article.
Mr. Bugg's aggressive defense has done nothing to silence his critics, or the IFA's.
The franchiser group has been trying to polish the industry's image.
But is Jim Bugg's the best face to put forward?
"Obviously not," says Susan P. Kezios, a franchisee advocate in Chicago.
Mr. Bugg says he intends to serve as IFA chairman if members ratify his selection.
BRIEFS: The IFA predicts record attendance, topping 1,000, for its annual convention to be held in Las Vegas Feb. 13-16. . . .
At the convention, the workshop on public relations will be moderated by Patti Coons, senior vice president -- of Decorating Den.
