Tom Hayden, the longtime liberal activist and now a gray-haired state senator, has found a new vehicle for protest: an electric car.
His cause is cleaner air.
Under the creaky hood of his dingy white Ford Escort station wagon are nothing but batteries -- 18 of them, weighing several hundred pounds.
The converted vehicle is quiet, smog-free, and "perfectly adequate for tooling around the city," says Mr. Hayden.
So auto companies ought to gear up to build electric cars for everybody, he says.
But nearly a continent -- and cultural light-years -- away, Detroit has a one-word answer: nonsense.
Sure, the auto companies could make electric cars, concedes Sam Leonard, director of auto-emission control at General Motors Corp.
But, he maintains, nobody would want to buy them.
He could lead a chorus of that refrain from one end of the auto industry to the other.
And therein lie the elements for what may turn into one of the nastiest cultural clashes of the 1990s -- between the motor heads of Detroit and the electric-car crowd in California.
For what is nonsense in the Motor City looks like the future to an unlikely coalition forming on the West Coast.
It consists of environmentalists, venture capitalists, electrochemists, mechanical engineers, the electric-utility industry and politicians desperate for a new jobs-generating industry.
They all believe the future should start now.
"It's going to be a big battle," says Dianne Wittenberg, manager of electric transportation at Southern California Edison Co. in Rosemead, which has an obvious interest in selling the power that would recharge electric cars.
Emboldening the auto industry's critics is a belief by many that Detroit has blown its credibility concerning its responses to demands for change.
Critics recall how auto makers used to claim that consumers would never pay for catalytic converters, or air bags, or wrinkle-proof bumpers.
"Fortunately, there are enough people who are old enough to know the auto industry's history of deceit," Mr. Hayden says.
So it is that California's requirement that car makers sell a certain percentage of zero-emission vehicles -- most likely electrics -- by 1998 is threatening to spread.
Clean-air regulators in a dozen states from Maine to Virginia -- plus Washington, D.C. -- are to begin deciding next month whether to impose California-style rules.
If all do, then half the U.S. car market would be covered by a mandate effectively requiring that one in every 10 new cars sold after the year 2002 be electric.
Understandably, this has gotten Detroit's attention.
The Big Three have billions invested in internal-combustion engines.
They are spending billions more to make conventional cars comply with the tougher emissions standards of the 1990 amendments to the Clean Air Act and with similar rules set by California.
For instance, California also wants conventional cars to carry computerized devices that tell drivers when their vehicles are spewing out too much noxious stuff.
"We're going to go to market with a system that's going to light up the dashboard like a Christmas tree," cracks John F. Smith Jr., GM's president and chief executive officer.
"It's going to make a lot of people mad."
To try to prevent the electric-car movement from establishing itself in the Northeast, the Big Three have been promoting their own clean-air plan, one they maintain would be more palatable to consumers and easier for the car companies to meet.
And in California, a bill has been introduced that attacks the state's zero-emission mandate.
"We're not ready," declares Ford Motor Co.
Chairman Alex Trotman.
"We are simply unable to provide a vehicle that provides the range that is acceptable to customers out in California or anywhere else in the United States at a price that is affordable."
Mr. Hayden's converted Escort, industry experts say, would sell for at least $30,000 and would be lucky to go 100 miles between eight-hour charges.
But to electric-car proponents in California, Detroit's marketing concerns aren't the issue.
Rather, it is whether electric cars are technologically feasible.
The California Air Resources Board will hold a public review of auto technology later this year to help determine that.
Back in the 1970s, when CARB found in favor of exhaust-scrubbing catalytic converters for cars -- despite industry protests -- the technology in fact followed.
So, like conspiracy theorists reviewing grainy old newsreels, some electric-car advocates detect a Detroit plot to kill a promising new technology.
Take the U.S. Advanced Battery Consortium, a Big Three-led, $260 million group formed three years ago to search for the Missing Link -- a compact, lightweight, long-lasting, quick-charging battery that is capable of making electric cars match gasoline-powered autos.
As commercial-development manager for the Electric Power Research Institute, Jack Guy is also hunting for that elusive battery.
His coalition of utilities has put more than $25 million into battery research, including contributions to the battery consortium.
But Mr. Guy wonders whether the consortium might have deliberately set itself an impossible goal -- a breakthrough battery -- in hopes of sabotaging California's electric-vehicle mandate.
"If you don't want electric cars to happen quickly," says Mr. Guy, "you don't come up with a battery."
Just maybe, he argues, a breakthrough battery isn't necessary right now.
Maybe an improvement in the lead-acid batteries in Mr. Hayden's Escort would be good enough.
Mr. Guy's group is investing $6.6 million in an Austin, Texas, company that is to start manufacturing such batteries for cars this year.
The company, Electrosource Inc., maintains its battery pack will sell for less than $10,000.
That is much less than the $45,000 that Ford says is the cost of the sodium-sulfur battery pack used in its prototype electric cars.
The people behind the battery consortium say they know the limitations of lead-acid batteries, and therefore are concentrating on finding better types.
This sort of stance by the auto industry is what irritates utility-industry executives, battery developers and Wall Street investors.
Many West Coast political and business leaders ask why the Big Three can't see the immediate potential to create a Silicon Valley for the American electric-car industry (preferably not too far from the real Silicon Valley).
Aren't they worried about losing another lucrative market to the Japanese or the Europeans (though they haven't leapt into the technology in a big way, either)?
Electric-car believers see a niche market of environmentally friendly folks who want a second or third car to drive for commutes of 40 miles or less.
Take actor Leslie Nielsen, star of "Airplane" and "The Naked Gun."
When he isn't driving one of his three gas-guzzling Bentleys, he is usually tooling around the hills of West Hollywood in an electric-powered Toyota Paseo.
"It's just a lovely little black bug that zips around the traffic," says Mr. Nielsen, who modeled for an electric-car ad in the Neiman Marcus Christmas catalog.
"It's a great second car."
Or maybe even a first car, according to Southern California Edison.
In a survey the utility commissioned last year of 1,000 Californians -- 70% of whom were aware of electric cars' limited range -- more than 60% expressed an interest in buying an electric car if it were as affordable as regular cars.
That suggests it wouldn't be hard to find enough buyers to meet the state requirement that 2% of the cars a company sells in California be zero-emission by 1998.
Two percent of California's two million-vehicle-a-year market is 40,000.
To put that into perspective, some European auto makers struggle to sell 20,000 cars a year in the whole U.S. market.
(There are about 3,000 electric cars on the road currently.)
Clearly, the leaders of this movement fervently believe in the electric dream.
At an electric-vehicle conference last fall in Phoenix, Bill Stephenson, an executive for Arizona Public Service Co., led an emotional defense of the cause.
"So call us unreasonable," Mr. Stephenson said in challenging the Big Three's criticism of California's zero-emission mandate.
"But what we believe are unreasonable and unacceptable are delay tactics."
Regardless of whether the California mandate sticks and spreads, a few who are at the forefront of electric-vehicle development aim to plow ahead.
U.S. Electricar, a small company located in the lush valleys of quaint Sebastopol, Calif., converts Geo Prizms and Chevy S-10 pickup trucks to electric power to sell to federal researchers, electric utilities and the few individual buyers like Mr. Nielsen.
Though Electricar has sold just 200 vehicles since 1983, it expects to sell 1,150 this year.
If it does, it will have done so with indirect help from GM.
When GM spiked plans to build the electric Impact for next year, fleet managers found themselves in a jam to meet federal requirements to begin adding alternative-fuel vehicles -- creating an opportunity for Electricar.
Moreover, the Power Control Systems division of GM's Hughes Aircraft Corp. unit in Torrance, Calif., makes the drive system for Electricar's vehicles.
Electricar converts vehicles by removing their internal-combustion engines and replacing them with shiny, briefcase-sized boxes from Hughes.
Crammed with electronics, these boxes become the engines that drive Electricar's $40,000 vehicles, with the batteries placed under the car.
If the vehicles were mass-produced Detroit-style, their cost could be cut in half, Electricar says.
That, electric-car advocates argue, is the flaw in the industry's argument that electric cars wouldn't be affordable.
Cruder conversions already sell for much less than $40,000.
And as for whether people will like driving them, well, just take a ride with Daniel D. Rivers, the manager of Hughes's electric-vehicle program.
With a head-snapping screech out of his parking lot, Dr. Rivers punches the pedal on an Electricar Geo Prizm.
Laughing as he barrels around a corner, he brags about the drive system's torque curve, claiming the car can zoom to 90 miles an hour in first gear.
"We're trying to see who can get the first legitimate traffic ticket in one," says Dr. Rivers.
"I think the consumer will like it."
