Poor Betsey Wright indeed.
All she's done since she came to town last March is make a splash lobbying for everything from the North American Free Trade Agreement to American Airlines to health care.
And when she wasn't doing that, she was flying down to Little Rock on her own time to work some dextrous damage control over allegations by Arkansas state troopers that they had seen Mr. Clinton in some pretty compromising situations.
"I'm having the time of my life," she says in an interview in her comfortable office on the sixth floor of Washington's first steel-beamed office tower.
"This is wonderful."
"She's a great strategist and she's doing wonderful things for us," says her boss, Anne Wexler, a prominent Democrat and chairman of Wexler Group, a government relations and public affairs consulting unit of Hill & Knowlton Inc., itself a unit of WPP Group PLC.
Its client list runs from American Airlines to General Motors Corp. to J.P. Morgan & Co.
Ms. Wright won't even discuss who her clients are, let alone how much she is paid as one of Wexler Group's seven executive vice presidents.
But it's a fair bet that it is a lot more than she made in her years as one of Mr. Clinton's top aides and political operatives in Little Rock.
"For the first time in my life, I can say it's no one else's business," she says.
What makes the 49-year-old Ms. Wright so special is her relationship to Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
She's so close to the first couple that she can afford to turn down an invitation to drop by the White House for an informal dinner and a movie, an opportunity most lobbyists and wheeler-dealers here would die for.
"I didn't want to see the movie," she says.
So close, too, that Ms. Wright expects to be subpoeaned by a federal grand jury in Little Rock looking into Mr. and Mrs. Clinton's role in the controversy surrounding their Whitewater Development Co. real-estate investment.
Ms. Wright says the Federal Bureau of Investigation told her to expect such a subpoena, but she says she has now been told to disregard that warning.
In any event, she says, she expects to be subpoenaed eventually because she knows so much about Mr. Clinton's Arkansas campaign records.
She says she will co-operate with investigators.
Ms. Wright comes from rural Texas -- she was reared in little Alpine, just down the road from Marathon, in the southwestern "Big Bend" corner of the state -- and honed her political skills at the University of Texas.
She met Bill Clinton in 1972, when they both worked in Texas in George McGovern's forlorn presidential campaign.
She came to Little Rock in 1980, after Mr. Clinton had been defeated for re-election as governor, and then served as his chief of staff after he was returned to office in 1982.
She ran his successful re-election campaigns in 1982, 1984 and 1986.
"There is no person in the entire universe who is more loyal to Bill and Hillary Clinton than Betsey," says Ms. Wexler.
Ms. Wright is almost as protective of the state of Arkansas.
She loves the place.
When Mr. Clinton decided to run for president, Ms. Wright saw that each of the hard-edged handlers he hired was given a copy of Diane Blair's book about Arkansas government and the state's rich, and sometimes gamey, political history.
She wanted them to read the book and learn to appreciate Arkansas's rural charms.
The fact that none of Mr. Clinton's hired guns -- she calls them the "white boys" -- read the book, or tried to give Arkansas a fair shake, still riles her.
"They showed so much disdain towards the state.
I felt it was very offensive," she says.
At a campaign-managers' seminar at Harvard University's Institute of Politics after the election, she unloaded on the attitudes of a number of Mr. Clinton's handlers, fingering pollster Stanley Greenberg as being particularly nasty about Arkansas and what Mr. Clinton had done for the state during the 12 years he was its governor.
"I don't know why I singled him {Mr. Greenberg} out," she says.
"He wasn't any worse than the rest of them."
She is intense about her Clinton-Arkansas connection, and it was this intensity that often led the campaign handlers to work around her during the campaign, in which she was officially listed as deputy chairman.
The handlers won't soon forget the time she set out to rebut charges that Mr. Clinton had raised taxes and fees in Arkansas something like 128 times.
Not so, she told reporters, it was only about 110 times -- an admission that left senior strategist James Carville speechless.
She continues to view the "white boys" left over from the campaign and still working for Mr. Clinton with deep suspicion.
She lays the White House's problems in dealing with the Whitewater controversy to the fact that "none of them knew anything about the issue.
There was no continuity.
They couldn't connect the dots."
Left unsaid was the thought that she did know something about Whitewater and could have done a better job connecting the dots.
And so, when it comes to lobbying the White House, not everyone working there is her friend.
She prefers to deal with old friends and colleagues from Arkansas whose connections to the Clintons go back beyond the campaign.
Fortunately, Washington swarms with them.
"It's nice," she says, "I can't walk much more than a block or so without bumping into someone from Arkansas."
She was first used at Wexler Group to lobby for Nafta, working mostly to drum up support from governors and mayors.
"I must say, I was impressed," says Craig Fuller, a former high-ranking aide to George Bush, and now senior vice president of Philip Morris Cos., who worked with Ms. Wright on the Nafta campaign.
"We were at the White House almost every day, and she won the respect of a lot of people."
She has also used her connections to set up White House meetings for representatives of the paper industry in their efforts to water down federal provisions on how much recycled waste should be contained in paper bought by the federal government.
The Wexler firm's client is the American Forest and Paper Association.
Ms. Wright also has put in a lot of time with an obscure, congressionally sponsored agency called the College Construction Loan Insurance Association, better known to its friends as Connie Lee.
Congress set up Connie Lee in 1987 to guarantee low-rated bonds for building programs at colleges and universities.
The congressional thinking was that the private market would cover the insurance for the higher-rated bonds.
But with such restrictions in its operating charter, profit-seeking Connie Lee hasn't had much of a chance to spread its wings.
And so it has turned to Ms. Wright and Wexler Group to lobby the White House and Congress for permission to expand its insurance business to bond issues for secondary and elementary schools and possibly to bond issues for infrastructure work -- everything from bridges to sewers.
Ms. Wright says she knows a lot about this line of business from her days in Little Rock.
"People keep saying if you come from local government you don't know anything about Washington.
That's a crock.
We've been the ones dealing for years with all these programs dumped on us by the federal government."
"Betsey Wright has been very effective," says Oliver Sockwell, Connie Lee's ambitious president.
"She has an almost unique skill to translate highly complex issues into words that everyone can understand."
Ms. Wright has now reached the point where she gets credit for pulling off lobbying coups in situations where she has barely been involved.
It was rumored, for example, that she was a pivotal factor in getting President Clinton to intervene in the American Airlines strike just before Thanksgiving, and that a grateful airline had paid out $1 million to the Wexler firm in acknowledgement.
"Ridiculous," says Ms. Wexler.
Ms. Wright was barely involved with the strike, according to several people familiar with the situation.
Ms. Wright see nothing wrong in blending personal rescue missions for the president with her lobbying efforts inside the administration.
"I'm very careful not to abuse the relationship," she says.
"When I call people I always mention the subject I want to talk about and I always identify my client."
But it does help, she concedes, that she knows so much about the president and how he thinks.
"Every now and again, some staffer tells me, 'The president believes this or the president believes that.'
`Boy,' I sometimes can say, `you better check back with him on that.
It's not what he told me.'
