Your Jan. 18 lead editorial "Fountain of Trust?" states that Worthen is controlled by the Stephens family.
This statement is false.
Several Stephens family members and trusts, if aggregated, currently own approximately 26% of the outstanding shares.
However, they do not control the management policies, lending or operations of Worthen.
No Stephens family members or nominees sit on Worthen's board of directors or hold any officer position with Worthen.
All directors of Worthen are elected by the stockholders at large and represent all stockholders.
Fourteen of Worthen's 15 directors are outside, independent directors; only one Worthen director also serves as an officer of Worthen.
This group of distinguished and accomplished individuals repudiates the suggestion that any attempt has been made by any Stephens family member to inappropriately influence the activities of Worthen.
In the same sentence in which your editorial inaccurately attributes control of Worthen to the Stephens family, you also state that Worthen made loans to President Clinton's campaign committee and held a lien on James McDougal's Madison Guaranty stock, in a thinly veiled attempt to imply that the two loan transactions were related to each other.
In fact, these loan transactions are not related to each other and are separated in time by a period of 10 years.
Furthermore, the loan to Mr. McDougal and the attendant taking of the lien was initiated in 1982, prior to the time that any Stephens family member owned any shares in Worthen.
Additionally, no current member of Worthen's executive management team was in executive management of Worthen when that loan was approved or made.
For the sake of perspective, the outstanding balance of Mr. McDougal's loan never exceeded $250,000.
The value of Worthen's lien on the Madison Guaranty stock was irretrievably destroyed in 1987 when Madison Guaranty was taken over by the regulators.
The loan extended to President Clinton's campaign committee was originated long after Madison Guaranty had ceased to exist.
The campaign loan was approved and made by current management on a sound banking basis, secured by campaign matching funds payable by the U.S. Treasury and was paid in full as agreed, in July of 1992.
The interest rate charged to the campaign committee was the maximum rate allowed by Arkansas law.
Ten years elapsed between the making of these two loans.
Contrary to the intended implications of your editorial, absolutely no relationship exists between the loan to President Clinton's campaign committee and the loan to Mr. McDougal -- or for that matter, between either of those loans and the Stephens family's ownership interest in Worthen.
We disagree with the thought that such inaccuracies, innuendoes and phantom linkages can continue to be made without consequence.
Future publications that assert or imply the existence between Worthen and Stephens family members of relationships that do not in fact exist or that suggest a linkage between the 1992 loan to the Clinton campaign committee and a 1982 loan to Mr. McDougal will be viewed as attempts to intentionally mislead the public and damage the reputation of Worthen.
William B. Keisler
Worthen Banking Corp.
Little Rock, Ark.
