In a surprise move, a federal bankruptcy judge named Cyrus R. Vance, the former secretary of state, to act as a mediator to speed the creation of a bankruptcy-reorganization plan for retailer R.H. Macy & Co.
The move may derail discussions about a reorganization plan that already were under way between Macy; General Electric Capital, a unit of General Electric Co.; and mutual fund giant Fidelity Investments.
The unusual move by Judge Burton Lifland of the federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan was widely viewed with dismay by creditors' attorneys, who fear the appointment will slow Macy's current reorganization efforts.
The appointment is considered a highly unorthodox move at a time when Macy itself appeared to be making progress with its senior creditors.
Harvey Miller, Macy's bankruptcy attorney with the law firm Weil, Gotshal & Manges, said of Mr. Vance: "I hope he does better here than he did in Bosnia," a reference to Mr. Vance's recent diplomatic efforts to bring peace to the Balkans.
Judge Lifland said Mr. Vance was being named in an effort to move Macy's bankruptcy proceedings "out of the court's clutches by end of the year."
Macy filed for federal bankruptcy-law protection from creditors in January 1992, and the big retailer was in court yesterday asking for an extension of its exclusive right to file a reorganization plan.
Judge Lifland granted Macy's request, which was supported by most of its creditors, to extend for about four months, to Aug. 1.
However, the appearance of Mr. Vance is likely to open up the negotiations to other creditor proposals.
The judge's order requires Macy to file with Mr. Vance by March 8 a term sheet "specifying the principal terms and conditions" of a reorganization plan.
But the judge's order also specifies that any interested parties that wish "to submit a proposed plan of reorganization," as well as creditors including Federated Department Stores Inc., General Electric Capital, and Fidelity Investment, may likewise, based on a request by the mediator, submit a similar term sheet at that time.
The order said interested parties could join together in submitting a term sheet, a relatively brief document the court hopes will be no longer than ten pages.
Myron E. Ullman III, Macy's chairman and chief executive officer who has been fighting to keep the retailer independent, appeared buoyed by the judge's surprise appointment.
"It's a bit unusual, but we support anything that brings this to a successful conclusion," he said.
Mr. Ullman in recent months has been fending off Cincinnati-based Federated, its rival and most senior creditor.
Federated paid $109.3 million to buy control of half of a $1 billion senior claim from Prudential Insurance Co. of America in order to gain a seat with creditors at the Macy reorganization negotiations.
Mr. Ullman wouldn't comment on a report in yesterday's Wall Street Journal that General Electric and Fidelity are discussing a possible investment in a reorganized Macy.
Fidelity owns $490 million of senior bank debt.
Judge Lifland will hold a hearing on March 3 about Mr. Vance's appointment.
Some creditors may object because Mr. Vance's law firm, Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, named as the mediator's counsel, also represents Chemical Bank, a Macy creditor and agent bank of the retailer's working-capital facility.
The subject of a mediator hadn't previously arisen in the hearings, and the appointment is thought to be the first time a mediator has been appointed in a bankruptcy proceeding in the Southern district of New York.
Mediators occasionally have been used in other jurisdictions where bankruptcy proceedings have been bogged down.
Already some lawyers have sought to unseat Mr. Vance.
As soon as Judge Lifland made his announcement, Mr. Miller and Joel Zweibel, an attorney for a group of banks, were called into the judge's chambers, where it's believed they tried to dissuade him from making the appointment.
"No luck," Mr. Zweibel said when the attorneys reemerged several minutes later.
Mr. Vance's appointment ends June 22, subject to extension by the court.
Asked whether the appointment was of concern to Federated, which itself has talked to creditors about forming its own competing reorganization plan, David Heiman, a Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue bankruptcy attorney for Federated, said: "I'm not concerned about it.
Maybe it can help."
"This will slow the process down," said one senior creditor, echoing sentiments expressed by bankruptcy attorneys present in court.
Creditors expect that it will take Mr. Vance some time to get up to speed on the complexities of Macy's bankruptcy proceeding, before negotiations can begin in earnest.
But Robert Miller, an attorney with Berlack, Israels & Liberman, viewed the appointment "optimistically."
Indeed, the development reassured Macy's bondholders.
Macy bonds due in 1998, which had dropped on the news of talks between Macy, General Electric, and Fidelity, rallied to close at 40.5 cents on the dollar, or $405 for each $1,000 bond.
Subordinated bonds due in 2001 closed at 15, down substantially from Friday's close of 20, but above the day's low of 13; the zero-coupon bonds due the same year closed at 4, down from 7 1/2.
