MCI Communications Corp. is sitting pretty with a boatload of cash and a bold, $20 billion network-expansion plan.
But the company's future could turn ugly in a showdown with the Baby Bells.
MCI Chairman Bert C. Roberts Jr. vows to use an enlarged MCI network to "wage war" on the regional Bell companies' local phone monopolies and slash the access fees they charge for completing long-distance MCI calls.
MCI says these fees siphon as much as 45 cents of every revenue dollar MCI takes in.
MCI plans to build fiber-optic systems initially in 20 U.S. cities for $2 billion, so corporate customers can hook directly to its network, bypassing the regional Bell companies.
Eventually MCI, which lately has been flush with huge gains in the consumer and toll-free 800 market, will extend the local networks to more than 200 U.S. metropolitan areas, as part of a $20 billion global project it calls "networkMCI."
But the Baby Bells' hold on local telephone service is formidable, and they have ambitious plans of their own for gaining new entry into MCI's long-distance turf.
In addition, MCI must wage its most aggressive new strategy in years without having yet lined up full financial backing; potential partners among big cable companies are allying left and right with the Baby Bells.
And even as MCI turns its sights on local service, it faces tougher competition in long-distance from American Telephone & Telegraph, which shows signs of a rebound.
Still, Washington-based MCI, whose initials stood for "Money Comin' In," in the view of its late founder, William McGowan, has significant strengths.
Its long-distance business is currently growing at more than twice the industry rate, thanks to huge gains from the Friends & Family consumer service and new corporate business in the toll-free 800 and data-transmission markets.
That point was underscored yesterday by MCI's fourth-quarter earnings report, whose strength was disguised by a charge.
Yesterday, MCI said net income fell by 33% to $107 million, or 18 cents a share, from $160 million, or 30 cents a share, a year earlier.
On Dec. 15, MCI announced it would take a charge of $150 million after restructuring the company, consolidating facilities and streamlining its work force.
Minus that charge, net would have grown to $199 million, an increase of more than 24%, MCI said.
Revenue grew more than 13% to $3.13 billion from $2.76 billion a year earlier.
For the year, MCI's net income fell 4.4% to $582 million, or $1.04 a share, from $609 million, or $1.11 a share, a year earlier, because of the quarterly charge plus early debt retirement and federal tax-law changes.
Minus these items, 1993 net would have totaled $731 million, a 20% increase.
Revenue grew almost 13% to $11.92 billion from $10.56 billion.
In Nasdaq Stock Market trading, MCI shares fell 25 cents, or 0.9%, to close at $28 yesterday.
MCI also has the lowest cost structure of any carrier.
That advantage would be enhanced if MCI delivers on its plans to build the new local networks, says Jack B. Grubman of PaineWebber Inc.
He estimates that the $2 billion MCI plans to spend over the next four years will increase its depreciation costs by about 10% a year.
But MCI would have to reduce the access fees it pays to the Baby Bells by only 2% to offset that increase, he estimates.
A mere 5% reduction in the more than $5 billion a year that MCI spends on access fees, moreover, would let the new MCI local networks pay for themselves in only a few years, "even if other carriers don't sign up to use them," Mr. Grubman says.
Although it was announced only recently, MCI's plot to take on the Baby Bells came together in late August.
MCI's Mr. Roberts was ready to chart a new course.
He was the key strategist in the 1970s who devised the idea for the "switched" communications service that eventually shattered the monopoly of AT&T.
In the mid-1980s, he pushed MCI to buy old Western Union Corp. telegraph conduits, giving it crucial rights-of-way it would later need to run fiber in hundreds of U.S. cities and towns served by local phone companies.
One day in late August, Mr. Roberts phoned his top marketing executive, Gerry Taylor, the key force behind MCI's Friends & Family campaign, and summoned him to the Roberts house in Annapolis, Md., on Chesapeake Bay.
On the way, Mr. Taylor's new Porsche collided with a lumber truck.
He had the truck driver push the totaled car to the side of the road, and a backup car from MCI took him the rest of the way.
Over the course of the day, the two hammered out a collision course of their own.
They code-named the new plan "Project Destiny."
It included a major overhaul in MCI management, which left Mr. Taylor in daily control of 90% of MCI's businesses, and the blueprint for MCI's $20 billion plan to expand its network.
(They'll get help from the $4.3 billion that British Telecommunications PLC plans to invest in the company for a 20% stake.)
The six-year "networkMCI" project essentially doubles MCI's capital-spending program and calls for the installation of high-speed switching and fiber-optic transmission systems.
It also will have MCI seek wireless-services partners and build local phone networks.
But one key partner MCI had hoped for, cable-television companies, soon lined up with Baby Bells.
MCI executives say they were negotiating to set up a joint venture with cable giant Tele-Communications Inc., only to have TCI turn around and announce a deal with Bell Atlantic Corp.
The giant Bell Atlantic-TCI combination will give the two companies access to 25 million homes, about 10 million more homes than MCI's customer base.
Bell Atlantic and TCI could very well link their own facilities in a national long-distance network.
U S West Inc. and Southwestern Bell Corp. also are teaming with cable companies whose networks could be an important part of new long-distance networks to rival MCI.
The Baby Bells have been barred from the lucrative market in the decade since they were formed in the breakup of the old AT&T.
Many industry experts expect the barriers to fall within a few years.
When they do, "life will be very tough for MCI," predicts Jeffrey Miller, a partner specializing in telecommunications at Andersen Consulting.
"MCI doesn't own the local phone customers the way the local phone companies do."
The Bells are trimming their flabby operations and taking multibillion-dollar charges to impose massive work-force cuts and shut unneeded facilities.
They may use the extra profits and leaner operations from these cutbacks to disarm the nimble MCI and other rivals.
The regional Bell companies would enjoy numerous advantages as long-distance players, not the least of which are the phone lines that umbilically tie each local "Ma Bell" to callers.
Experts such as Mr. Miller envision Bell companies such as Ameritech Corp. or Bell Atlantic hawking their long-distance service in notices conveniently inserted in each monthly phone bill.
The Bells could also offer "least-cost routing" services to customers, using the phone company's big computers to find the cheapest long-distance route; that could further divert some traffic away from MCI's network.
