Continental Airlines told employees it plans to shift nearly 1,400 workers and dozens of jets from its Denver hub later this year, signaling that it might reduce service there far more than next week's 23% cutback or close the hub entirely.
The Houston-based carrier has been realigning its routes, beefing up its CALite short-haul service in the Southeast and cutting unprofitable operations elsewhere, in an attempt to regain profitability.
Next week, it is scheduled to cut the number of daily flights out of Denver, its third-largest hub, to 108 from 139.
A Continental spokesman wouldn't comment.
In a tape-recorded message to employees late yesterday, Chief Executive Robert R. Ferguson III said even more changes lie ahead, and "it's possible that at the end of the process we will be closing the Denver crew base entirely."
Closing a crew base nearly always goes hand-in-hand with shutting a hub.
Losing Continental's hub would be a blow to the new Denver International Airport, which was built on the assumption that Continental and UAL Corp.'s United Air Lines would operate hubs there.
After the airport's opening, which this week was delayed until May, the facility's annual cost will be $410 million just to cover bond payments and operations.
Separately, Standard & Poor's Corp. placed the bonds of the new airport on CreditWatch with negative implications because of the opening delay.
The postponement, the third for the $3.2 billion airport, was the result of glitches with the computerized baggage system and other technical problems.
In a statement, S&P said the delay "raises the question of how well the city can deliver on this project."
The new airport's bonds currently are rated by S&P at triple-B, one of the lowest airport ratings the rating company maintains.
Denver negotiated an unusual arrangement with the airport's airline tenants in which they will contribute $100 million toward the cost of the delay.
Of that, $30 million will cover debt service and the airport's maintenance and operations before it opens.
Of the remaining $70 million, UAL will advance the airport $45 million, $25 million in unused bond money and the rest as an advance against UAL's rent.
Both sums will be repaid with interest.
Continental will contribute $25 million, if it can successfully sell bonds.
In his message to Continental employees, Mr. Ferguson said that between May and July, 529 pilots and 863 flight attendants will be transferred from Denver to other bases, primarily Newark, N.J., Greensboro, N.C., and Houston.
Some pilots will be moved to Honolulu and Los Angeles.
Denver International Airport officials had no comment on the S&P action.
