Dun & Bradstreet Corp. said John C. Holt resigned as an executive vice president and chairman of its A.C. Nielsen market research unit.
Mr. Holt, 53 years old, took a post as president and chief executive of Analytic Sciences Corp., a major unit of Primark Corp., which provides information services.
Mr. Holt has been a director of Primark, based in McLean, Va., since 1985.
Mr. Holt lost his operational duties last July in a shake-up of D&B's key marketing information businesses, although he remained Nielsen chairman.
At that time, he was named executive vice president, global resources, a staff position involved in human resources issues and in charge of company communications.
A D&B spokesman said the company had no immediate plans to name a successor to Mr. Holt as Nielsen chairman.
Mr. Holt had been an executive vice president of D&B since 1982 and a corporate director since 1985, a position he also resigned.
He had been Nielsen chairman since 1987.
D&B's Nielsen and IMS International marketing-data services have faced intense competition in recent years, particularly from Information Resources Inc., Chicago.
The two companies collect sales data around the clock from supermarkets, drugstores and mass merchandisers, using checkout scanner information, and sell it to the wide variety of packaged-goods manufacturers and other companies eager to know as soon as possible what customers are buying.
The two companies' battle intensified last year when George R. Garrick, a top IRI executive, was lured away to Nielsen.
He stayed four months, only to rejoin IRI.
Mr. Holt "failed to turn around the Nielsen situation," where IRI is gaining market share, "and decided his opportunities were elsewhere," suggested one person familiar with D&B.
Last July, Serge Okun, 47, a senior vice president at D&B and president of its IMS International pharmaceutical research unit, was named an executive vice president and assumed a new position as Nielsen president and chief executive.
He has had operating responsibility for Nielsen since then.
D&B, a leading marketer of business information, software and services, had revenue in 1992 of $4.8 billion.
In September 1992, Primark purchased Datastream International Ltd., a unit of D&B, for $191 million in cash and notes.
Datastream International, a financial-information provider, had 1991 revenue of $94.6 million and "excellent margins," according to Primark at the time.
Primark had $309.7 million in revenue in 1992.
Mr. Holt also was elected an executive vice president of Primark and will continue to serve on that company's board.
Joseph E. Kasputys, Primark chairman and chief executive, said Mr. Holt is an experienced information-industry executive who will help Analytic Sciences grow.
