Less than a month from now, KeyCorp and Society Corp. shareholders will cast votes on the proposed merger of the two banking companies.
If all goes as planned, they will create Key Bancshares, the 10th largest banking chain in the nation.
Usually, such a vote would result in the routine endorsement of the proposal.
But this case has attracted Wall Street's attention because KeyCorp must clear some hurdles that threaten to trip up the transaction.
And it has industry executives interested because the outcome could help shape the course of bank mergers and acquisitions to come.
"The Key vote is the key vote," said Thomas McCandless, an analyst at PaineWebber Inc.
That's because the merger needs the approval of holders of two-thirds of KeyCorp's stock at a special meeting Feb. 16, instead of the simple majority typically required.
KeyCorp, with headquarters in Albany, N.Y., and $33 billion in assets, is chartered as a corporation in the state and is required under state law to garner the higher level of votes.
Society, a $26 billion-asset bank holding company based in Cleveland, is holding a special shareholders meeting on the same day in which it is required to win only a majority of votes.
Since individuals are a large percentage of KeyCorp's stockholder base -- about 48% -- and because uncast ballots will be considered "no" votes, KeyCorp is seen as having to pull out all the stops to convince both institutional and individual shareholders that the merger should be sanctioned.
For the past two weeks, Keycorp and Society executives have been on the road and on the telephone peddling the merits of the merger to institutional holders, a sign, some say, of nervousness that the vote could go against them.
Adding to the concern is speculation that some institutional holders have either held on to the shares since the proposal was put forth Oct. 4 or taken positions before the record date of Dec. 28 to send it down -- and the stock up.
If the merger plan is defeated, the company would be seen as a takeover target and the stock put in play, securities analysts said.
Indeed, long before the merger was proposed, many investors were lured to KeyCorp on the bet that Chairman and Chief Executive Victor J. Riley would cash out and put the company up for sale as he drew closer to retirement age without having picked a successor.
When Mr. Riley opted to hitch up with Society in a merger-of-equals transaction instead, many holders were disappointed that they wouldn't receive an immediate premium for their shares but would have to wait for any added value to materialize.
Mergers-of-equals transactions tend to be viewed skeptically because often the integration of the companies gets bogged down, throwing cost-reduction and earnings-growth targets off track.
Donald Kauth, a spokesman for KeyCorp, said the company is "confident" it will win the support of shareholders, big and small.
"We think we're going to get it," he said.
"We haven't heard that holders will vote against it."
But sounding a note of caution, Mr. Kauth added, "You find out how they're going to vote when they actually vote."
Mr. Kauth, however, thinks that holders who disapprove of the merger have probably already left the stock.
Even the presence of hedge-fund manager Michael Steinhardt, who bought 1.1 million shares in the third quarter, doesn't ruffle KeyCorp, Mr. Kauth said, "As far as we can tell they're in this because of the fundamentals."
Mr. Steinhardt couldn't be reached for comment.
The company's largest institutional shareholder, Delaware Management Co., has already voted for the merger, said Robert Arnold, a bank analyst at the Philadelphia-based money management firm.
Delaware was persuaded to vote in favor of the merger only after KeyCorp and Society executives came calling Jan. 10, Mr. Arnold said.
"They really did a good job of explaining why the merger made strategic sense," he said.
"That was a pivotal meeting for us.
We were on the border and we turned very favorable after that."
Mr. Arnold noted that the two banks have distinct strengths, KeyCorp in consumer banking and Society in trust services, that can play to each other's customer bases and lead perhaps to meaningful revenue growth.
"I think this is a huge advantage in this merger," he said.
Even more impressive, Mr. Arnold said, is the compatibility of the two companies' back-office technology: The overlap largely removes an expense typically associated with such mergers and speeds along the integration.
"I have a feeling if this merger succeeds, it's going to change the course of the bank M&A game forever," Mr. Arnold said, based on conversations with industry executives.
"If it succeeds, we're going to see a lot of mergers of equals."
Mr. Arnold also confirmed that Delaware added to its KeyCorp position in the fourth quarter on his recommendation.
The shares had become "extremely undervalued" based on projected earnings and price-to-book value, he said.
