The U.S. Justice Department is probing possible price fixing and market allocation by cement producers.
Several major cement makers said they have recently received civil investigative demands -- a list of questions about customers and pricing -- from the Atlanta office of the Justice Department's Antitrust Division.
Bruce McIntosh, spokesman for the Portland Cement Association -- a trade group representing 42 U.S. cement makers, or 83% of U.S. capacity -- said he assumes all its members received similar questionnaires.
He also said the association itself received such a letter.
"We're going to cooperate with it fully," said Mr. McIntosh.
"We're confident PCA hasn't violated any antitrust laws."
He added that his organization has no idea what prompted the investigation.
A Justice Department spokeswoman said the Antitrust Division "is looking at pricing practices in the cement industry nationwide."
She refused to elaborate.
The U.S. cement industry, which produces 85 million tons a year, is in an upswing after several recession-battered years, aided by reviving building activity in many parts of the country.
A series of natural disasters -- including the Mississippi floods and the Los Angeles earthquake -- are contributing to the upswing.
David Lee Smith, an analyst at SouthCoast Capital Corp. in Austin, Texas, said he believes it would be "extremely difficult" for cement producers to fix prices.
"It appears to me to be a very competitive industry," he said.
Mr. Smith said U.S. cement prices are averaging roughly $55 to $60 a ton, compared with less than $50 a ton during the recent recession.
Still, he noted, that is well below the prices paid elsewhere, which range from about $85 a ton in Mexico to more than $100 a ton in Japan.
"If U.S. cement producers have been fixing prices, they're not very good at it," he said.
Medusa Corp., a Cleveland-based cement maker, said it had received an inquiry, and that it intends to cooperate fully with the investigation.
It emphasized that it has not violated any part of the U.S. antitrust laws.
Lafarge Corp., the U.S.'s second-largest cement producer and majority owned by France's LaFarge Coppee SA, also received an inquiry.
Ted Pile, a company spokesman, said that Lafarge has an internal policy forbidding employees from participating in any form of price fixing or "allocation of territories or customers."
Southdown Inc., the nation's third-largest cement producer, said it intends to fully cooperate with the inquiry and said it hasn't violated any federal antitrust laws.
