The economics and politics of President Clinton's new budget have been much analyzed.
But the budget is more than a program; it is also a book, a work of literature.
It deserves to be appraised as such for its style and effectiveness in fulfilling the authors' objectives and meeting the readers' expectations.
That is what I propose to do here.
Nobody not being unusually morbid expects to get much pleasure out of reading the budget.
What the reader can expect is to obtain useful information with as little intellectual, emotional and physical strain as possible.
On the side of physical strain, Budget Director Leon Panetta and his deputy, Alice Rivlin, deserve a big round of applause for unbundling Darman's Disaster.
As budget director for President Bush, Richard Darman had the conceit of packaging all parts of the budget into one enormous volume weighing six pounds and two ounces, which was much too much for the average reader to handle.
(Most people who read budgets are not big in the bench-pressing department.)
The new team has returned to the previous practice of publishing the budget in four separate volumes.
One, with all the details, is still pretty heavy, but it is of interest only to lobbyists and congressional staffers.
The other three are all of manageable size.
One of the three, containing the historical tables, is invaluable to all students of the budget.
A second volume, called "Analytical Perspectives," is now more important than ever, because it contains some of the information that, properly in my opinion, used to be included in the main volume.
It also includes some innovative ways of looking at the budget, and although I cannot follow or swallow all of them I believe they should be encouraged.
I concentrate here, however, on the volume called "The Budget."
One can see, as one would expect from the staff of the Office of Management and Budget, that a great deal of honest, intelligent work has been done for this volume.
But the net result is distressing -- blatantly political and confusing.
All presidents are politicians, and they are all more or less campaigning all the time.
But there are different degrees and forms suitable for different occasions.
A president does not behave the same way at the funeral of a foreign head of state as he does at a party fund-raiser.
In making his budget report the president is telling us what he did with the last trillion-and-a-half of our dollars and what he proposes to do with the next trillion-and-a-half.
His appropriate posture should be sobriety, factuality and humility.
He should seek to merit trust.
The new budget is not like that.
The "Budget Message of the President" -- the part he signs himself -- is his 1992 stump speech, consisting of extravagant description of the failures of his two predecessors and extravagant promises of what he will do for us, padded out with extravagant claims for his achievements in the first year of office.
A decent respect for the intelligence of his readers would have required him to refer to the fact that he inherited a country free from the Cold War, with subdued inflation, the accumulated liabilities of the savings-and-loan crisis paid off, and recovery under way from a mild recession.
Recognizing this would not have diminished the reader's appreciation of the big responsibilities facing Mr. Clinton.
But it would have done much to enhance the credibility of what he has to tell us.
The following chapters, "Where We Started" and "What We Have Accomplished" -- "We" meaning "Friends of Bill," not "We, the People" -- are more of the same.
Here the argument is made more dramatic by charts with bases and time periods well chosen to the authors' purpose.
(The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers is much more objective in displaying the same information.)
Throughout the text there are scattered, at the heads of chapters and sections, little epigraphs printed in italics within boxes.
These are apparently intended to inspire the reader with some respect for what is to follow.
And what are the sources of these nuggets of wisdom?
Adam Smith?
Thomas Jefferson?
No surprise, the author of 23 of the 27 epigraphs is none other than President Clinton himself.
You would think he is Chairman Mao.
One of the Clinton epigraphs is this:
"The best way to serve distressed communities in urban and rural America is through a comprehensive, coordinated and integrated approach that combines bottom-up initiatives and private sector innovation with responsive Federal-State support."
(A little long for a fortune cookie.)
Of the four gems that are not by the president, two are by Vice President Gore, one is from the National Performance Review and one, which happens to be the pithiest, is by the commissioner of the SSA, which I suppose means the Social Security Administration.
The text is filled with a kind of jargon that I cannot place exactly, but that sounds to me like junior honor-student, managerial technocratese.
It delights in words like "reinventing," "coordination," "integration," "flexibility," "user-friendly," "strategic" and "vision."
What this seems to mean is that this team is going to do things better than its predecessors did.
But every new team thought that.
And when I look at this team, I wonder who is going to achieve these marvels of management.
At one point, speaking of Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities (their capital letters), the budget says, "The competitive application process will encourage creative planning by requiring each applicant to develop and submit a strategic vision for change."
And the vision this conjures up for me is of five pols at the back of some saloon dreaming up a strategic vision for change so they can get a grant from the Feds.
This may seem an oddly heated reaction to what is traditionally a dull government report.
But the excess of propaganda, of jargon, and of cult of personality provokes this reaction and, more important, diverts the reader from what should be the substance of the message.
In the "olden," pre-Darman, days the discussion of budget expenditures was organized into 20 major functions, with their subfunctions.
These categories were mutually exclusive and exhaustive.
That is, every expenditure belonged in only one function or subfunction, and when all the functions were added up their sum equaled total expenditures.
These assignments of expenditures to functional categories were to some degree arbitrary, but they were an accommodation to the limitations of the human mind, which cannot think of everything at once.
Today the discussion of expenditures is grouped into four major themes, with subthemes.
Nowhere in the budget, as far as I can see, is there a table of total expenditures divided into these four categories.
The same programs crop up in various parts of the discussion.
Head Start, being a particular favorite, is particularly ubiquitous.
Some of the tables do not seem to add up at all.
One has its total in the middle, followed by odds-and-ends that are presumably parts of the items above but not an exhaustive list of the items above.
Some have mysterious headings, like "Public/Private Cash and Non-Cash Value of CRADA Investments."
Some of the tables are labeled "highlights" of something or other, meaning that they are some unknown part of a total.
I suppose I am betraying a book-keeper's mentality, lacking strategic vision.
But some bookkeeping doesn't seem out of place in a budget.
And I am becoming allergic to "vision" for America.
It sounds to me like the vision of a department store Santa Claus, promising the kiddies toys that he will not pay for.
The federal budget is inescapably very complicated.
One has the feeling that the authors of the budget have decided to abandon the old simplifications but have not yet synthesized their story into a new, intelligible simplification.
But meanwhile the whole thing is a frustration for the reader, at least for one who likes to see things add up.
As another great budgeter, Ronald Reagan, used to say, there must be a pony in there someplace, but the heavy political spin put on the presentation discourages at least this reader from trying to find it.
A former chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, Mr. Stein is an American Enterprise Institute fellow and the author of the updated edition of "Presidential Economics" (AEI).
