Aluminum Co. of America said it is slashing 100,000 metric tons of annual production, or about 8% of domestic capacity, suggesting that an accord to cut global oversupply may succeed.
Alcoa, the world's biggest aluminum producer, said the reductions will begin immediately at its operations in Rockdale, Texas, and Wenatchee, Washington.
The move will cause an undetermined number of work force reductions at the two plants, which employ 2,200.
In Brussels late last month, major aluminum-producing nations reached an accord to cut global production by up to two million metric tons a year, or roughly 10% of the world's capacity.
The accord was spurred by soaring stockpiles, largely a result of Russian aluminum's flooding the market after the downfall of the Soviet Union, whose military was a big consumer of aluminum.
The supply spike sent prices plunging to historic lows on an inflation-adjusted basis in the fall, though prices have recovered somewhat since then.
The accord calls for Russian smelters to cut a total of 500,000 tons of annual production, with Western producers slashing another one million to 1.5 million tons.
Some observers have expressed skepticism over the accord since producers must make the cuts voluntarily.
Analysts said Alcoa's announcement, which came after the stock market's close, showed that the pact is working.
"It's clear that producers are acting in the spirit of the Brussels agreement," said Thomas M. Van Leeuwen, an analyst with CS First Boston.
"I would hope that we would see other producers follow through, especially in Europe."
"The sooner producers recognize what the problem is, the sooner they'll stop feeling the pain," added Stewart Spector, an analyst who writes the Spector Report.
So far, world producers have announced production cuts of about one million tons, analysts said.
Combined with domestic cuts made last year, Alcoa has idled 410,000 metric tons of annual capacity, or 32%.
But under the accord, the company receives credit for only the most recent reduction.
