The European economy is in the doldrums, but it doesn't look so bad from here.
Nearly three years after completing the acquisition of the European appliance business of Philips Electronics NV, Whirlpool Corp. is posting higher profits and bigger market share in Europe, even as the overall industry experiences a recession-induced slump.
There are signs that the worst is over, but a recovery is expected to be slow.
Executives at the company's world headquarters here say their European appliance business will contribute to record corporate operating earnings, before special one-time charges, when 1993 results are released early next month.
In 1992, Whirlpool posted record profit of $205 million, or $2.90 a share, on revenue of $7.3 billion.
While some companies, such as U.S. rival Maytag Corp., struggle with global strategies, Whirlpool wins raves from analysts for making its aggressive expansion work.
By moving into Europe and into developing nations, Whirlpool aims to tap growth areas to complement its mature, slow-growth business in North America.
It's also plotting a move into Asia, where it now has market share of only 1%.
But the company aims to have five manufacturing facilities in Asia in the next few years.
With the No. 1 market position in North America, No. 3 position in Europe and a leading presence in South America, Whirlpool already is "the best positioned appliance company for the 1990s," asserts analyst Jerry Herman of Kemper Securities Inc. in Chicago.
Wall Street seems to agree.
The company's shares were up 87.5 cents to $65.75 in late New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, not far from the 52-week high of $68.
That's twice their level of mid-1991, when Whirlpool completed its two-step acquisition of the Philips business for a about $1 billion.
Whirlpool acquired its initial 53% stake in January 1989.
As the third-largest among some 100 appliance makers vying for business in Europe, Whirlpool faces stiff competition.
And despite improvement, Whirlpool's operating margin of about 5.6% in Europe is far from its goal of 10%.
Moreover, with the stronger role of unions and political resistance to layoffs and plant closings, it takes longer to trim costs in Europe than in the U.S.
Still, Whirlpool has already simplified its organization as Europe moves toward a single market.
Separate sales organizations in 17 countries have been replaced by four regional sales offices.
The company cut inventories and whittled the number of warehouses from 30 to 16.
The goal is to reduce that to five or six, says Hank Bowman, president of Whirlpool Europe BV.
At the same time, global buying of parts decreases costs and contributes to a 40% reduction in the number of suppliers to European operations.
Technology is also shared across borders.
"There's a dramatic opportunity for product improvement," says Mr. Bowman in a telephone interview from Whirlpool's European headquarters in Comerio, Italy.
Whirlpool's new European dryer has 22% fewer parts, yet Whirlpool says it's more efficient and of higher quality than its previous offering.
On the outside, it looks European.
But "tear that baby apart, and it's designed like our U.S. dryer, which we believe is the low-cost product in the U.S.," says William Marohn, Whirlpool's president and chief operating officer, who preceded Mr. Bowman as head of European operations.
Whirlpool plans to spend hundreds of millions of dollars over the next few years to remake its European appliances, even as it continues to pare costs.
The idea is to exploit what the company calls a "value gap" between U.S. and European markets: Measured by number of hours worked, European consumers pay up to twice as much for major appliances as their U.S. counterparts.
With product redesign and cost-cutting, Whirlpool figures it can give European customers higher quality and keep more profits for itself.
"A piece we'll share with our customers and a piece we'll share with our shareholders," says Mr. Marohn.
In 1993, Whirlpool's European shipments rose about 5%, even as the overall European appliance business was flat or down.
That marked the fifth consecutive annual increase in market share, leading to its current estimated share of 10% to 15% of the market.
Big players such as Whirlpool have a chance to add market share over the next few years.
The European appliance business is expected to consolidate, much as the U.S. appliance industry did in the 1970s and 1980s.
Europe has a collection of 200 brand names, many of them popular in just one country.
The biggest player, Sweden's AB Electrolux, is about to get bigger, with the planned acquisition of the appliance unit of Germany's AEG AG.
The No. 2 company, Bosch-Siemens Hausgerate GmbH, has a marketing and technical agreement with Maytag.
While Maytag has high hopes for that agreement, it has stumbled badly with its Hoover appliance operations, located mainly in Great Britain.
Whirlpool's strategy is to stand out with strong pan-European brands.
"Research tells us that the trends, preferences and biases of consumers, country to country, are reducing as opposed to increasing," says Mr. Bowman.
Although regional preferences will remain, Whirlpool sees a chance to take advantage of the move toward a less fractured Europe.
In the U.S., Whirlpool has become the most successful at building a ladder of brands, with KitchenAid on the top rung, Whirlpool and Sears Kenmore labels in the broad middle, and Roper and Estate in the lower, or "value," ends.
It hopes to do the same in Europe, with its Bauknecht brand at the high end, Whirlpool in the middle, and Ignis with lower-priced appliances.
When Whirlpool first entered Europe, it used a dual Philips/Whirlpool brand to introduce consumers to its flagship Whirlpool brand.
But it's starting to go it alone now, silencing skeptics who thought Europeans wouldn't buy the new American name.
Andrew Haskins, an electronics analyst at London's James Capel & Co., says Whirlpool connotes quality to consumers.
"Philips had a strong brand name, and Whirlpool has been able to build on that quite considerably," Mr. Haskins says.
