EARTHQUAKE VICTIMS don't have to wait until next year to deduct losses.
Because President Clinton has signed a federal declaration of disaster for Southern California, victims have an unusual choice.
Usually, casualty losses may be deducted only in the year they occur.
But once the president declares a disaster area, victims may deduct their losses in the year the disaster hit or in the preceding year.
Thus, quake victims may deduct casualty losses for the 1993 tax year, says Sidney Kess, a New York lawyer and accountant.
But some victims might be better off waiting until next year anyway, he says.
The answer hinges on how much income they expect in 1994, how much they earned in 1993, and their tax bracket for both years, he says.
Personal casualty losses are deductible, after subtracting insurance proceeds and a $100 threshold for each casualty, only to the extent that they exceed 10% of adjusted gross income.
The IRS is expected to waive penalties on victims who are late with any federal tax filings.
TWO WORDS lead to a courtroom battle between a tax protester and the IRS.
Do you have a right to protest when filing your federal-tax return?
That was the question in a recent case pitting Lawrence P. McCormick of Brooklyn, N.Y., against the IRS.
Mr. McCormick filed his 1991 return on April 15, 1992.
Beneath his signature, he wrote "under protest."
The IRS refused to accept the return and charged him penalties for a frivolous filing and a late return.
But U.S. District Court Judge Jack B. Weinstein sided with Mr. McCormick.
"A taxpayer need not suffer in silent acquiescence to a perceived injustice," the judge wrote.
Mr. McCormick didn't change the meaning of anything on the return by adding those two words of protest.
Instead, Mr. McCormick "properly exercised his first amendment right to protest" while still complying with his obligation to file a timely tax return, the judge said.
A protest is "an expression of grievance, seeking redress that the Internal Revenue Service may not throttle or mute by threats of penalties."
DECLARATION of dependents: The value of personal exemptions has shrunk.
Taxpayers with children and other dependents do not get nearly as big a tax break as they did several decades ago, says Eugene Steuerle, senior fellow at the Urban Institute in Washington.
"The increase in tax on households with dependents represents by far one of the most fundamental tax changes of the postwar era," he writes in Tax Notes, a weekly publication.
If the exemption had been adjusted for both inflation and real growth in income since 1948, it would have risen to $8,652 in 1993, Mr. Steuerle says.
The actual amount for 1993 was $2,350.
He notes that the amount of the exemption has been tied to the cost of living for only about a decade and was increased in the 1986 law.
He favors increasing child allowances or credits to make up for this past decline and to replace certain welfare payments.
Because of inflation, the exemption will rise $100 in 1994 to $2,450.
THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT you may contribute to your tax-deferred 401 (k) retirement plan this year rises to $9,240 from $8,994 last year, IRS officials say.
The higher 1994 level reflects annual cost-of-living adjustments required by law.
HIGH-INCOME TAXPAYERS, take note: IRS Form 8841 now is available.
It shows how to take advantage of a provision in the 1993 tax law allowing those hit by the two new higher income-tax rates of 36% and 39.6% to spread out payment of their higher taxes over three years.
WE SHOULD ALL BE SO LUCKY: The American Society for Payroll Management complains to the IRS that one box on 1993's W-2 form doesn't leave room to type in income of $1 million or more.
The society warns members to use typewriters that type 12 characters per inch on the form.
"This could affect a lot of people on Wall Street," a spokesman explained.
The IRS is looking into it.
DEFERRED-PAY PLANS may be more attractive because of a recent decision.
Albertson's Inc., a large food and drugstore chain based in Boise, Idaho, recently won part of a U.S. appeals-court case that "could change the way most employers handle their deferred-compensation plans for tax purposes," says Laurie Keenan, a tax lawyer at Ivins, Phillips & Barker in Washington.
Albertson's agreed to defer certain payments to several of its top executives and an outside director.
The company also promised to pay interest on those deferred payments, and it deducted the interest each year.
The IRS challenged the deductions and won in Tax Court.
But now an appeals court has ruled the company may deduct the interest currently, even though it won't pay it for years to come.
This is a "groundbreaking decision," says Edward J. Abahoonie of Coopers & Lybrand.
Jerrold S. Gattegno of Deloitte & Touche says the ruling that a company can get an interest deduction before the individual receives the income "is pretty monumental."
The IRS hasn't said yet if it will appeal or challenge it in other areas.
BRIEFS: A new tax guide for journalists by CCH Inc. of Riverwoods, Ill., includes details on strike benefits, parking tickets, bribes and kickbacks. . . .
A natural villain: A professional wrestler who totes a briefcase calls himself "IRS."
