Kenneth Fay Neal had done his homework.
The 43-year-old drifter had studied Mobile Telecommunications Technologies Corp.'s financial filings.
He knew that Jai Bhagat was the telecommunication company's executive vice president and a director.
He knew roughly what Mr. Bhagat was paid and how much he was worth.
And he knew, apparently, that Mr. Bhagat was in California on business and wouldn't return to his home in Jackson, Miss., until late in the evening last Wednesday.
Thus, that night, at about 7:30 p.m., Mr. Neal, wearing a ski mask and brandishing a pistol, broke into Mr. Bhagat's house, bound and gagged the executive's wife and 17-year-old daughter, and waited.
The next 24 hours, according to law-enforcement officials, would see the kidnapping of Mr. Bhagat himself, the unfolding of an elaborate scheme by Mr. Neal to make off with $750,000, and the fatal wounding of the kidnapper in a gunfight with police in a grocery-store parking lot.
Mr. Bhagat, his wife and daughter all survived unharmed.
Only on Friday did Jackson, where Mtel is based and a patrician town of the deep South, learn of the family's abduction.
Over the weekend, police continued to piece together a portrait of Mr. Neal, as well as answers to how and why he chose Mr. Bhagat as a target.
"It doesn't appear that Mr. Neal had any connection to Mtel," said M.C. Overton, a special agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Rather, Mr. Neal "had knowledge of Mr. Bhagat's position at the company and his status in the community.
It was strictly monetary."
Indeed, in an interview Friday, Mr. Bhagat, 47, described the events of the previous day, noting that his abductor was amazingly frank, at times, in explaining how he had come to be standing in the Bhagats' house with a gun pointed toward their heads.
When Mr. Bhagat opened the door to his home at about 10:40 p.m. on Wednesday, he found his wife, Jackie, with her hands tied and her mouth taped shut.
His daughter, Melanie, similarly gagged, was bound to a chair and blindfolded.
Standing off to their side was a man with a mask.
"He told me, `Mister, I have a gun -- if you cooperate, you won't get hurt,'" Mr. Bhagat recalled.
"I thought it was a joke."
The abductor -- whom law-enforcement officials identified Friday as Kenneth Neal, a drifter with ties to Jackson -- remained awake through Wednesday night, holding the family hostage.
"He obviously had done some research," Mr. Bhagat said Friday.
"He seemed to know a lot about Mtel.
He knew what my salary was.
He said he had read Mtel's reports."
Apparently, Mr. Neal had also considered a second Mtel executive as a possible quarry.
"But he said I was an easier target," Mr. Bhagat recalled.
"He said the other fellow had more security at his home."
On Thursday, Mr. Neal ordered Mrs. Bhagat and her daughter to drive to their local bank and withdraw $750,000.
Mr. Neal, meanwhile, drove away with Mr. Bhagat, who was blindfolded, in a second family vehicle.
The two groups stayed in contact by means of cellular phones.
Bank officials, questioning the large amount of money that Mrs. Bhagat asked to withdraw, contacted the FBI.
Mrs. Bhagat then revealed the situation to law-enforcement officials, who began monitoring her movements.
After leaving the bank, Mrs. Bhagat was ordered, by phone, to meet Mr. Neal at a parking lot on the north side of the city.
There, she handed the money to Mr. Neal, who drove off with Mr. Bhagat -- followed at a distance by police.
Finally, at about 9 p.m., Mr. Neal parked at a grocery store, got out of the car with the ransom in his hands and headed toward a second parked car.
At that point, police ordered Mr. Neal to halt.
Instead, he opened fire.
"My first instinct was that he had shot at me, but missed," said Mr. Bhagat, who was still sitting in the car, blindfolded, when the gunfire erupted.
Mr. Neal was hit several times and taken to a local hospital, where he died from his wounds.
No one else was injured.
Over the weekend, residents of Jackson recalled a similar incident in 1988, when the wife of one of the state's most prominent businessmen, Robert Hearin, was kidnapped.
In a case that drew nationwide attention, Mr. Hearin paid an estimated $1 million in ransom, but his wife was never found.
Friday, executives at Mtel said they were stunned by the incident.
But the company declined to discuss what protective measures, if any, were provided for executives or what measures might be added in the future.
For his part, Mr. Bhagat said Friday that he was "just glad my family and I are alive."
But he professed to be mystified by the stranger in his home.
"He was actually very nice, very respectful," Mr. Bhagat said.
"He seemed to admire what I did."
