RUSSIA'S YELTSIN VEERED away from his free-market reforms.
The Russian president, in a state-of-thenation address to parliament, made a clear turn away from economic reform, declaring that a strong state apparatus is the only means to end the country's economic and social crises.
While pledging allegiance to the reforms begun in 1992, Yeltsin said it is essential to close a widening gap between rich and poor.
His vision of a strong government contradicts the attempts by reformers to diminish the state structure.
The speech was helpful in defusing tensions between Yeltsin and parliament's lower house, which is dominated by Communists and nationalists.
Bosnian peace talks will shift to Washington from Geneva this weekend with the aim of creating a two-republic country-one Serb and the other a Croat-Muslim mixture, the State Department said.
Bosnia's Prime Minister Silajdzic welcomed the expanded U.S. role in seeking a peace settlement.
Croat-Muslim fighting raged in parts of central Bosnia but both sides said they would honor a truce that is scheduled to begin today.
Separately, the U.N. said at least eight suspected Serb weapons sites near Sarajevo still haven't been inspected.
A CIA team returned from Moscow "empty handed" after seeking Russia's cooperation in an unfolding spy scandal, a top U.S. official said.
President Clinton is to meet today with lawmakers to quell their calls for a suspension of aid to Russia.
Clinton traveled to Connecticut to stress the benefits of his health proposals for the elderly.
He shrugged off mounting congressional criticism of two major aspects of his plan: regional alliances to buy insurance, and a requirement for employers to pay up to 80% of their workers' premiums.
The Rose Law Firm may have acted improperly in not disclosing its dealings with a failed Arkansas thrift, the government's savings-and-loan cleanup agency suggested.
The U.S. was accused of deliberately contaminating hundreds of people with radiation in 1954 by exploding a hydrogen bomb near the Marshall Islands in the Pacific.
Papers presented at a congressional hearing showed the government knew 12 hours in advance of shifting winds that put islanders at risk, but proceeded with the blast.
Surgeon General Elders labeled smoking an adolescent addiction and accused the tobacco industry of trying to persuade teenagers that cigarettes will make them sophisticated and successful.
Her report on smoking concluded that if teens can remain nonsmokers until high school graduation, "most will stay that way forever."
Black U.S. soldiers have been targeted by a hate campaign at their base in Germany, the Army said.
The soldiers, stationed near Frankfurt, have received phone threats and have reported slashed tires and racist graffiti for 18 months, according to U.S. officials.
The harassment is believed to be the work of unidentified Americans.
The National Rifle Association said it is mounting court challenges to the Brady law, hoping to block enforcement of its five-day waiting period for handgun purchases.
The law is to take effect Monday.
Nicaragua's government reached a peace agreement with the last of the country's Contra rebels.
The accord, which ends decades of guerrilla warfare in Nicaragua, calls for the rebels to be incorporated into the police force in exchange for disarming over the next 45 days, officials said.
The Justice Department is considering a temporary waiver of a rule barring people with the AIDS virus from entering the U.S., officials and gay-rights activists said.
The waiver would allow HIV-infected foreigners to participate in the Gay Games in New York in June.
Ethnic minority rebels signed a ceasefire agreement with Burma's government, formally ending 32 years of fighting.
The pact signed by the Kachin rebels marked a breakthrough for junta, which also has reached accords with some other groups.
Died: Dinah Shore, 76, entertainer known for her TV variety show in the 1950s, in Beverly Hills, Calif., of cancer.
