Legislation written by Rep. Jim Cooper (D., Tenn.) gained new attention this week when the Business Roundtable supported it as a "starting point" for congressional deliberations on health care.
To many people, the Cooper bill has become the leading alternative to President Clinton's health plan, the rallying symbol for those who consider the White House proposal to be too rich, too regulatory and too bureaucratic.
But to others, including the administration, the Cooper plan is too timid and too vague.
The Clinton bill would guarantee health coverage for all Americans.
The Cooper bill wouldn't, although its authors argue it would remove so many obstacles that nearly everyone could obtain health insurance.
Under the White House plan, all employers would be required to pay, on behalf of each full-time worker, at least 80% of the cost of the average price of a federally defined health-benefits package.
Lesser contributions would be required for part-time workers.
Poor and unemployed people would get government subsidies to help pay for coverage.
The Cooper bill would require all employers to offer their employees a health plan, but it wouldn't require them to pay for it.
It would provide subsidies to help low-income people buy health insurance.
Both the Clinton and Cooper proposals would outlaw a number of insurance practices that make it difficult for people to obtain coverage.
They would forbid insurance firms from denying coverage to people with so-called "pre-existing" medical conditions, from raising premiums on the sick and from dropping high-risk people from health policies.
The Clinton bill would establish a national benefits package for every American -- including coverage for hospitalization, physician visits, prescription drugs and a range of preventive services like childhood immunizations.
The Cooper bill also provides for a standard benefits package, but the details would be determined later by a federal commission, and would be subject to congressional approval.
Guidelines in the Cooper legislation say the package would have to cover preventive care, prescription drugs and medically appropriate services and procedures.
Mr. Cooper said this week he is willing to specify an interim benefits package in the bill.
Purchasing Pools.
Both plans would unite businesses and consumers in insurance-buying pools.
The pools would collect premiums from individuals and businesses to pay for various plans providing the standard benefits package.
Individuals then would select from among the plans.
The idea behind the pools is to spread insurance risk and increase the negotiating power of consumers in the health-care market.
But there are big differences between the Clinton and the Cooper plans.
The Clinton bill would require all employers with fewer than 5,000 workers to join the "health alliances" in their regions.
The alliances would be set up and supervised by the states.
They would monitor the quality of health plans, and would impose ceilings on health-insurance premiums.
The Cooper bill would set up regional, nonprofit, state-chartered "health-plan purchasing cooperatives."
Only businesses with fewer than 100 employees would be required to join the cooperatives, which wouldn't have as many powers as the Clinton health alliances.
Cost Containment.
Both bills seek to stimulate competition in the health industry in order to hold down prices.
But the Clinton plan also would place legal ceilings on premiums for the standard benefits package.
Both would offer incentives to encourage enrollment in health-maintenance organizations and other prepaid networks of doctors and hospitals.
Taxation of Health Benefits.
Ten years after enactment of the Clinton bill, employees would have to pay taxes on any health benefits they receive that aren't in the standard benefits package -- unless they were receiving these extra benefits as of Jan. 1, 1993.
Employers could continue to deduct all their health-benefits costs.
The Cooper bill would limit employer deductions to the cost of the lowest-price "accountable health plan" in each region.
For workers, health benefits would continue to be tax free.
The Cooper plan also would allow individuals to deduct any portion of their health benefits that they pay themselves.
Both plans would allow self-employed people to deduct 100% of the cost of their health coverage.
The Clinton plan would raise taxes on cigarettes and other tobacco products.
It would cap spending on Medicare and Medicaid, the two big government health programs, and use the savings to help finance universal coverage.
It also would assess a 1% payroll charge on large corporations that opt not to join the regional alliances.
The Cooper plan would use revenues raised from limiting employer deductions for health benefits to finance subsidies for low-income people.
The Clinton plan would subsidize health premiums for people whose income is less than 150% of the poverty level, and for businesses with fewer than 75 workers and wages that average under $24,000.
It also would have the federal government absorb 80% of the health-insurance costs of people who retire before age 65.
The Cooper plan would subsidize health premiums for people who earn less than 200% of the poverty level.
Both plans would leave it virtually alone.
The Clinton plan is sponsored almost entirely by Democrats, with the exception of Sen. James Jeffords (R., Vt.).
The Cooper plan has bipartisan sponsorship, consisting mostly of conservative Democrats and moderate Republicans.
While Mr. Cooper has gotten most of the publicity, the legislation's other chief sponsor in the house is Rep. Fred Grandy (R., Iowa).
A companion bill in the Senate is sponsored by John Breaux (D., La.) and David Durenberger (R., Minn.).
