Piemonte Foods Inc. is betting that supermarket delicatessens can become a major factor in the pizza business if they offer a high-quality product.
Piemonte, until recently a small baker of pizza crusts, expects to expand rapidly by providing top-quality crusts, sauces and toppings to supermarket delicatessens, said Virgil L. Clark, vice chairman and chief executive officer.
Supermarket personnel can quickly assemble those ingredients into "taste-competitive" pizzas and compete head-on with leading pizzeria restaurant chains for carryout orders, Mr. Clark told Dow Jones.
Early indications are that the approach is working for Piemonte.
Sales for the fiscal year ending May 28 will rise more than 15% to $31 million, Mr. Clark said, from a restated $26.8 million in 1993.
Mr. Clark said he's shooting for $40 million of sales in fiscal 1995, "but a lot of things will have to happen for us to make that figure."
Earnings gains will come more slowly, he said, because of the cost of introducing new products.
He expects fiscal 1994 earnings to rise modestly to 60 cents a share or slightly higher, from a restated $806,102, or 56 cents a share, in 1993.
If the company reaches its $40 million sales target for 1995, net income is likely to climb "to the high 60 cents to low 70 cents-a-share range," he said.
Piemonte's results for fiscal 1994 were restated for the acquisition last fall of Origena Inc., a suburban Chicago pizzacrust baker.
Share earnings were adjusted for a 5% stock dividend paid last August.
One of Piemonte's most important new products is Focaccia Italian flat bread, which can be served as purchased or used as a crust for do-it-yourself pizzas, Mr. Clark said.
The company supplies pizza sauces and toppings for sale from the same rack on which the bread is displayed.
The product, which was introduced last October, is offered in 1,000 supermarkets, he said, and probably will be in 2,000 stores by May 31.
Pizza is a $20 billion to $25 billion a year industry, Mr. Clark said.
"The three largest pizza restaurant chains account for $10 billion of that," he said, while supermarkets garner less than 10% of pizza sales.
"The quality of supermarket pizza has been sacrificed for price," Mr. Clark said.
"Housewives buy supermaket pizza for the kids and the baby sitter."
But that's starting to change, the executive said.
About 70% of pizzas are eaten at home, and consumers are willing to buy a carryout pizza from a supermarket deli instead of a pizzeria if the taste is comparable.
"We see an opportunity to assist the supermarket in offering a taste-competitive pizza at $7 to $8 that typically costs $10 at a pizzeria," he said.
Last fall's acquisition of Origena in exchange for 100,000 shares of Piemonte common stock provided the company with its second bakery, "essentially doubling our capacity," Mr. Clark said.
"We're in an acquisition mode," he said, and are looking for other pizza-related companies.
Mr. Clark said he doesn't see a need for additional financing.
The company is expensing the cost of new product development and introduction, he said.
Because of the plans for rapid expansion, Piemonte plans to continue to pay stock dividends rather than cash, he said.
