Even before Los Angeles was jolted by another aftershock yesterday, insurance experts were raising their loss estimates from the January earthquake to about $4 billion.
The aftershock shook the area for about 30 seconds in the early afternoon.
Police and fire officials said there were no reports of fatalities or major structural damage to buildings, although preliminary reports indicated that the area's already-damaged highway network experienced some additional damage.
The magnitude of the aftershock was put at about 5.3 on the Richter scale, compared with 6.7 for the Jan. 17 quake.
The $4 billion loss estimates, which are at least $1.5 billion higher than the most recent estimates, are based on late Thursday's surprise announcement by Twentieth Century Industries, a Woodland Hills, Calif., insurer, that its volume of claims on the California quake would more than double, to $325 million.
Trading in the company's stock was halted before the announcement.
When it resumed trading on Friday, it ended the day down $3.625, or 14%, at $21.50, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Twentieth Century said damage from the quake was "more severe and widespread" than originally estimated, resulting in a higher number of claims.
The damage includes such things as cracks in building foundations that weren't immediately apparent but that can result in extensive repairs and even a building's demolition.
There was no immediate indication whether yesterday's aftershock would boost that total even higher.
Still, analysts said Twentieth Century's announcement made it likely that other insurers would boost their loss estimates.
"It's going to be in the neighborhood of $4 billion," said John Snyder, senior vice president for A.M. Best Co., an insurance-rating agency.
"It's just like in Hurricane Andrew, where the numbers kept getting higher."
Sean Mooney, economist for the trade group Insurance Information Institute, agreed that the number will climb.
"Everything we've heard from companies is that the number will go higher," he said.
A $4 billion loss would approach the $4.2 billion of claims paid for Hurricane Hugo in 1989, the second-largest disaster in U.S. history.
But it still would be far below the $16.5 billion from 1992's Hurricane Andrew.
Even a $4 billion loss would be relatively small for an industry with more than $163 billion in capital, although it would further depress the first-quarter results of many property and casualty insurers.
The American Insurance Services Group, a trade organization and the official scorekeeper for insurance claims in disasters, last estimated the total for the quake losses at $2.5 billion.
The biggest total reported by a single company so far is the $600 million announced by State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co.
On Friday, a State Farm spokesman said the company remains "comfortable" with that estimate, but he didn't rule out the possibility of an increase.
As a result of the higher-than-expected claims, Twentieth Century expects to take a first-quarter charge of $161.7 million, or $3.15 a share.
In the year-earlier period, the company reported profit of $23.9 million, or 47 cents a share.
A company spokesman said Thursday that the company remains financially strong despite the charge, which will wipe out 26% of its net worth.
At year end, the company had capital and surplus of $655.2 million.
The loss is the largest related to a single disaster in the company's 36-year history.
Rhonda Rundle contributed to this report.
