Secrecy and deception gave the former Soviet Union an undoubted edge during its protracted struggle with the rest of the world.
Nobody is yet sure how deeply the various spy rings penetrated, nor the extent to which each country's Communist Party was an instrument of sabotage and treason.
In "Double Lives" (Free Press, 419 pages, $24.95), Stephen Koch treats the particular career of Willi Munzenberg as a general illumination of Soviet deception.
Rising from a humble German background, Munzenberg became the foremost operator of the Comintern, Stalin's agency for subversion abroad.
Munzenberg has been written up several times, but Mr. Koch was able to check these accounts and much accompanying rumor with Munzenberg's widow, Babette Deutsch, a formidable witness of the times (who has since died).
The result is a lively, readable book.
Once Hitler took power, Munzenberg moved to Paris, where he gathered round him what Mr. Koch calls "MunzenbergMen."
His principal lieutenant was Czechborn Otto Katz, half playboy and half monster, and well-cast for the role.
Between them, Munzenberg and Katz managed to cross the paths of an immense range of the celebrities, rogues and willing dupes who made up public opinion.
They were the recruiting officers of the army of fellow travelers who turned the Soviet Union into the most fashionable of causes between the wars.
Munzenberg shrewdly perceived that if the Soviet Union was to be widely admired, the terror of its system had to be made invisible.
The best means for achieving this lay in concentrating on the mistakes and failings of communism's enemies, in the first instance Nazism and then capitalism, or America.
Where Hitler was concerned, it was easy for Munzenberg or anyone else to claim the high moral ground.
The trial of Comintern leader Dimitrov on the phony charge of setting fire to the German Reichstag, the whole course of the Spanish Civil War, the Popular Front, the persecution of Jews -- these were for Munzenberg opportunities to contrive Communist virtue out of Nazi vice.
Mr. Koch describes how the likes of Malraux, Hemingway, Sinclair Lewis and Picasso so badly wanted to believe this simple scheme that Munzenberg hardly had to do more than telephone them.
It is Mr. Koch's contention that Munzenberg's tentacles spread through Bloomsbury and into Philby's Cambridge, corrupting intellectuals everywhere, reaching into the Washington of Noel Field and Alger Hiss, even catching hold of Hollywood.
Certainly Munzenberg proved an impresario of genius.
Out of his imagination poured the setups and procedures now taken for granted in manipulating opinion: front organizations, cultural congresses, publications sponsored to spread slanted news, peace rallies, organized letters in the press by prestigious artists and writers.
Nobody knew better how to arouse indignation, and nobody knew better how to conceal the ends to which that indignation was to be put.
The essential trick was never to define the point at which indignation had slipped into fellow traveling.
Once people were persuaded that fellow traveling was morally justified, then they had already become the human material out of which downright traitors and spies could be shaped.
If Mr. Koch is right, what looked like separate rings of agents in the democracies were really under central control.
In Orwellian fashion, Big Brother Stalin was dictating policy and manipulation alike.
Once Stalin had absolute control at home, Hitler was the only man in the world who could still threaten him.
Behind the Dimitrov trial, Mr. Koch argues, can be detected the early elements of the collaboration with Hitler in which Stalin thought his safety lay.
Likewise, Stalin took an interest in Spain only to acquire something he could trade off with Hitler.
The Popular Front and the Munzenberg-Men were useful covers for the purges and Great Terror of 1937.
But policies so deceptive and terroristic were bound to render expendable those who carried them out.
When Munzenberg was found mysteriously dead in 1940 -- apparently as he tried to escape across France from the invading Germans -- some thought the Soviets had liquidated him.
For Hitler's sake, Stalin may have decided to betray his own great engine of treason.
Mr. Koch's detailed account of Munzenberg's last days makes the assumption of Soviet murder a virtual certainty.
As for Otto Katz, he was deported from the U.S. in 1940.
Once the Communists staged their coup in Czechoslovakia in 1948, he returned home and came into his own.
But another change of Stalin's line brought show trials.
Arrested, Katz "confessed" that all along he had been a Western agent, and he was hanged.
The Soviet world is no more, but it is still a challenge to comprehend the twists and turns of its defilements, including lives like these.
Mr. Pryce-Jones is author of "The Closed Circle: An Interpretation of the Arabs."
