I found your Feb. 16 Capital Journal article "Jay Rockefeller Burns With Rage Over Health Care" particularly revealing about the senator's unwavering support for the Clinton health plan.
First, let me express my sincere condolences to Sen. Rockefeller over the painful and unfortunate death of his mother from Alzheimer's disease, as explained in the article.
I lost my own mother to cancer in 1991.
The experience teaches that medical science can only do so much.
Enacting the Clinton health care plan will not change that reality, for either rich or poor.
The fact that people suffer and die tragically every day does not mean that we have a health care crisis capable of being solved by another huge government entitlement program.
Compassion is a wonderful and necessary trait for lawmakers.
It is, however, rarely a sound basis for making legislative or policy decisions which actually work.
When it comes to governing, we need laws based on logic, reason and common sense.
We also need representatives who understand the limits of what government can do.
Our statute books are littered with well-intentioned government programs of compassionate liberal legislators.
Many of these programs, although providing full employment for social service workers, have failed to actually make life materially better for the people they were designed to help.
In some cases, they make things materially worse.
One thing is clear from your article: Anyone who "burns with rage" over an issue and declares that there is "a special place in hell" for a responsible business leader who dares to publicly prefer a less expansive program is neither exercising unclouded judgment nor engaging in rational debate.
I hope cooler heads prevail.
Health care reform is a complex issue on which reasonable minds may easily differ.
It is also an area in which huge new government bureaucracies are likely to cause more problems than they solve.
The Clinton plan, for instance, while providing universal coverage, may also have the unintended side effect of stifling the research necessary to eventually equip doctors with the new knowledge and tools to be able to really help patients like Sen. Rockefeller's (or my) mother.
If that occurred, it would be a real tragedy.
Those in Washington debating this issue will do well to adopt the medical oath as a rule of good government: "First, do no harm."
Nothing will be lost by attempting to reform such a critically important and complicated system as health care in small, well-reasoned and manageable steps.
I was touched by Jay Rockefeller's experience and his mother's death from Alzheimer's disease.
As a longtime volunteer in our local hospital emergency room, I can attest to the desperation of that heart-rending "Help me!
Help me!" that caused Sen. Rockefeller to take his mother out of the hospital and back home where she "died two weeks later in relative comfort."
But I also know that the "help me, help me" is usually caused by a lack of understanding of what is going on rather than by the actual treatment.
When a tiny child comes into an emergency room needing stitches in his scalp (a fairly common occurrence), there is no way to make him understand what needs to be done to help him.
He is instead strapped to a board with velcro fasteners to render him immobile so that the surgeon can give him Novocain or whatever and then stitch him up as quickly as possible.
And the whole time he is screaming, not about the stitching, which he cannot feel, but about being strapped down and treated in a manner he perceives as unacceptable.
And of course, everyone is touched by the poor little guy's plight, but that's just the way it is, and the problem is that he was not able to understand.
I submit that an elderly woman with Alzheimer's would be equally unable to understand what was being done to her and why, and would with some justification feel as though she were being tortured.
Another patient with all his sensibilities might not care for the tubes or the mask, but would understand that he was already getting help, and that those tubes and the oxygen were the very things that were helping him, however less-than-ideal the situation.
And an older child with a scalp wound is able to hold very still and does not need to be strapped down.
Perhaps the real cause for Mr. Rockefeller's "fire" is the fact that he came face to face with a terribly painful situation that no amount of money, his or mine, could really improve.
The problem is clearly not a hospital's aggressive treatment of pneumonia, but Alzheimer's itself and its tragic effect.
We pray that in the very near future a cure is found for this grotesque disabler.
In the meantime we must do everything possible to encourage research into this and many other at-present-incurable diseases, the most hopeful of which efforts are being carried out by our drug companies.
Any legislation we enact to try to curb drug companies' "excess profits" will of necessity have a direct effect on the research they are able to plan and execute.
Can anyone possibly believe that politicians could make better decisions than scientists about where to spend research money?
Norma B. Stockton
Manahawkin, N.J.
