WMX Technologies Inc. stunned investors with its second straight quarter of lower-than-anticipated profit, and indicated more trouble lies ahead, sending the waste concern's shares plunging 11.5% on volume of nearly 15 million shares.
In written announcements and in a lengthy conference call with analysts and investors, WMX acknowledged in far stronger language than it previously had that its problems go beyond the recent recession.
It also acknowledged that its credibility with Wall Street has been damaged and said it hopes to put an end to negative earnings surprises.
Shares in WMX, based in Oak Brook, Ill., and formerly known as Waste Management Inc., fell $3.25 to $25 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading, clipping $1.57 billion from the company's stock-market value.
The company announced Tuesday night that fourth-quarter profit skidded 11% to $162.9 million, or 34 cents a share, from $182.8 million, or 37 cents a share, a year earlier.
Yesterday's trading was like a replay of what happened Oct. 20, when WMX shares plunged 17% to $24 after the company posted lower-than-expected third-quarter results.
Since then, support for the widely owned stock has slowly been rebuilt, and in recent weeks several analysts have enthusiastically recommended WMX shares, only to be embarrassed by yesterday's bad news.
The fundamental problem in the trash business remains a glut of disposal capacity in many markets, leading to cutthroat pricing.
As much as analysts have hoped that economic recovery would improve the industry's outlook by increasing waste volumes, so much excess dump and incinerator capacity exists in some areas that prices could fall further rather than rebound.
Dean L. Buntrock, chairman and chief executive officer of WMX, said the ravages of recession had "masked, to a certain extent, some important structural changes" also hurting the company's business.
Previously, Mr. Buntrock had told investors that mostly what the company needed was an economic recovery.
Analysts had expected fourth-quarter earnings to rise.
Alex. Brown & Sons' Hugh F. Holman, who upgraded the stock to a "strong buy" on Jan. 21, had projected 38 cents a share.
Vishnu Swarup of Prudential Securities, last month calling the purchase of WMX "our single best idea," also thought 38 cents.
Hoping to avoid future disappointments, WMX said its "target" for 1994 is now per-share profit growth of 5% to 10%.
James Koenig, WMX's chief financial officer, said of the analysts' overly optimistic projections: "Part of our problem is our internal expectations have been aggressive."
By announcing a 1994 target range, "We are trying to get everyone on the same page.
This is the best information we have."
As one of the great growth stocks of the 1970s and 1980s, WMX isn't accustomed to discouraging enthusiasm, but that's now one of Mr. Koenig's jobs.
Thus, despite hopeful signs on pricing mentioned by Mr. Swarup, Mr. Koenig said prices overall fell 1% in the fourth quarter.
And, while Mr. Holman was speculating that the Los Angeles earthquake might rival last year's lucrative cleanup work from Hurricane Andrew, Mr. Koenig said he sees no gain from the quake.
WMX also said first-quarter per-share profit would fall to 34 cents from 41 cents a year ago, when net income was $199.3 million.
The declines in the fourth and first quarters partly stem from a reorganization effort in the North American trash collection and disposal business, the company said.
Analysts said the company's announced target seems to indicate that Wall Street profit projections for some of WMX's majority-owned units -- Chemical Waste Management Inc., Wheelabrator Technologies Inc., Waste Management International PLC and Rust International Inc. -- may be too high.
Mr. Koenig wouldn't comment on that.
But sharply reduced capital spending, including for acquisitions, to a planned $1.55 billion this year from about $2.5 billion in 1993 will make growth harder to come by in those businesses, as well as the trash operation.
