"August and Everything After" (DCG Records) by Counting Crows is a glorious recording of lean, insightful songs in the tradition of Bob Dylan, Van Morrison and their successors.
The disk's 11 tracks are alive with vivid and occasionally startling images by Adam Duritz, who doubles as the quintet's lead vocalist.
Amid a mood that's foreboding but never glum, Duritz, a keen observer, reports on modern love via tales of one man's alienation, heartache and dreams.
"Raining in Baltimore," "Ghost Train" and "Perfect Blue Building" are compact, impressionistic, chilling: novellas with a chorus.
In "Time and Time Again," which is reminiscent of the Stones' "Wild Horses" for its sound and sense of yearning, Duritz cries: "I wanted to see you walking away from me/Without the sensation of you leaving me alone."
In "Mr. Jones," one of the few uptempo numbers on the disk, Duritz wonders if the adulation stardom brings might cure his loneliness.
When Mr. Jones -- Duritz's alter ego? -- admits that all he wants is to be "a little more funky," Duritz replies: "When everybody loves you, son, that's about as funky as you can be."
And the sentiment that runs through each song is found in "Omaha": "It's the heart that matters more."
If Duritz's lyrics are as interesting to listen to as they are to read -- and they are -- it's because of his sensitive and passionate singing and the band's moody, cunning support, captured by T-Bone Burnett's delicate production.
Charlie Gillingham drops in appropriate fills on piano, organ and accordion, and drummer Steve Bowman knows when to ease off and let tension build in the void.
When the band kicks in hard on the closing number, "Murder of One" -- "Are you happy when you're sleeping?/
Does he keep you safe and warm?"
Duritz asks -- it plays with an exuberance that says it knows it has just topped off a masterpiece.
"Mirror Blue" (Capitol) by Richard Thompson extends the singer-songwriter's string of excellent recordings.
As on 1991's "Rumor and Sigh," and all the way back to his Fairport Convention days, Thompson melds rock, folk and Gaelic influences to underscore ominous stories that fall somewhere between slice-of-life and a Nicholas Ray film.
His protagonists are always out of step, their women either angelic or a disappointment, and everyone is moments away from becoming victimized by precisely what they are trying hardest to avoid.
"I Can't Wake Up to Save My Life" begins with, "In my nightmare everything's wrong/I'm waiting for love but you come along."
The pulsing "Easy There, Steady Now" presents a revenge-minded man lost in gnawing thought: "She didn't have the decency to sweep away what's left of me."
Given the surrounding darkness, Thompson's love songs are especially poignant.
In "King of Bohemia," he writes: "And there is no rest for the ones God blessed/And he blessed you best of all."
An extraordinary guitarist, Thompson surrounds himself with comparable sidemen on "Mirror Blue," including Pete Thomas on drums and percussion and Jerry Scheff on bass.
A wide range of Celtic instruments enrich several tracks, and Tom McConville contributes a touching performance on fiddle on the lovely "Beeswing."
It's always a pleasure to hear the extraordinary voice of Alison Krauss, the young country and bluegrass legend, and on her latest project she joins the Cox Family, five vocalists who are up to her high standards.
The resulting recording, "I Know Who Holds Tomorrow" (Rounder), is an earnest and engaging collection of 12 traditional and contemporary gospel tunes.
Krauss and sisters Evelyn, Lynn and Suzanne Cox take turns on lead vocal on songs such as Loretta Lynn's "Everybody Wants to Go to Heaven" and David Marshall's "Never Will Give Up."
Brother Sidney Cox handles lead vocal on Paul Simon's "Loves Me Like a Rock," while patriarch Willard takes over on "Far Side of Jordan."
Pianist Gary Smith and guitarist Ron Block, a member of Krauss's group, Union Station, contribute to the ringing backing tracks; and Krauss and Andrea Zonn offer teardrop fiddle lines on "Remind Me, Dear Lord" and "Will There Be Any Stars?"
For its disk "Hand on the Torch" (Blue Note), US 3 delved into the rich jazz archives of Blue Note Records, pulled out some of the catchiest, most accessible tracks, and added contemporary rhythms, rap and instrumentation.
The result is the best extended marriage of jazz and rap to date.
Drawing from the likes of Herbie Hancock, Donald Byrd, Grant Green, Lou Donaldson and Horace Silver, US 3 has chosen material that lends itself to augmentation, and the members of the group's horn section -- Ed Jones, Gerard Presencer, Dennis Rollins and Steve Williamson -- take turns adding a choice solo here and there to help unite the old and new.
US 3 includes three rappers, and while Kobie Powell is less than ordinary (he does, however, succeed in rhyming "ammo" and "abdomen"), Rahsaan and Tukka Yoot each have a lilting style that at times seems to float along with the rhythm.
Noted guitarist Tony Remy is featured on "Go to Work," while pianist Matthew Cooper executes the disk's best new solo on "Make Tracks."
