Something unusual is popping up in this long-depressed industrial city lately.
The Kvaerner Govan Ltd. shipyard, on the verge of closing a few years ago, has added 300 employees.
Claremont Garments Ltd. has hired 100 new workers and may take on 200 more.
TSB Homeloans has added 100.
There is work to be found at a new hospital, the Sainsbury supermarkets and the foreign-owned electronics plants in nearby "Silicon Glen."
Isn't this Europe, the land of nearly 20 million unemployed and few new jobs?
Yes, but Britain has gone its own way.
While the Continent has largely resisted change, 15 years of Conservative Party rule have helped make Britain's once-rigid work force more flexible.
Unions and workers' rights have been weakened, minimum wages struck down, jobless benefits cut and some wages squeezed.
Productivity has risen an average of 4.5% annually since 1979 -- the fastest rate of any major industrialized nation.
This, the government and its laissez-faire supporters believe, has led to increased investment, new business and, finally, more jobs.
But the strategy has come at a high cost: It has left Britain with a low-paid, low-skill work force.
"In days gone by, they never would have got away with this," laments David Cousins, a home-loan officer working on a three-month tryout for #4.50 ($6.74) an hour.
The pay is "a nightmare," adds the bearded 44-year-old, who earned $22.46 an hour before being laid off a couple of years ago by another bank.
Yet workers see no alternative.
"Sometimes I thought, `Why am I doing this?'" says Alan Josey, who got a job that pays $181.20 a week plus tips as a waiter, after five months on the dole and six months as an unpaid trainee.
"The state things are now, I'm just glad to have a job."
Whether Britain can -- or should -- be a model for the rest of Europe stirs intense debate.
Many in the European Union, intent on creating high-skill, high-wage jobs, want no part of Britain's strategy.
The Trade Union Advisory Committee to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development argues that the "solution does not lie in forcing the unemployed to become the `working poor' through a negative interpretation of labor-market `flexibility.'"
It says such a strategy "will entail a downward spiral of competition based on low quality standards, continued stagnation of markets, growing inequality and increased social conflict, which will also undermine economic growth."
Instead, many EU people talk about creating 15 million new jobs by the year 2000 by training workers and spending vast sums on public-works projects.
Of course, Europe has been trying that strategy for a decade, to little avail.
As a result, many experts predict that eventually the Continent will come to terms -- as the U.S. did and Britain is doing -- with the notions that the world has changed and that it must change to compete on the world's terms.
"They don't have any option, really," says Patrick Minford, an economist at Liverpool University.
Even Germany, long Europe's powerhouse, is looking to the onetime sick man of Europe.
Gunter Rexrodt, the German economics minister, told his parliament earlier this year that Britain had "achieved exceptional results" with deregulation, "breaking down bureaucratic obstacles to starting new businesses and managing existing companies."
This is not to say that Britain is an economic miracle.
Over the past decade, restructuring has wiped out hundreds of thousands of jobs in its coal, steel, auto and banking industries.
And the work force is undertrained compared with that of some European countries, according to a survey by the National Institute of Social and Economic Research in London.
As in America, large companies in Britain are still cutting costs by laying off workers, and the U.K. unemployment rate remains uncomfortably high at 9.8% (9.3% in Scotland).
But the rate is declining and is well below Germany's 11.5%, France's 12%, Italy's 10.4% and Spain's more than 20%.
Economists say Britain is adding an average of about 100,000 jobs every three months, compared with quarterly losses of about 50,000 jobs at this stage in previous recoveries.
Within several years, Prof. Minford predicts, British unemployment could fall to a 3% or 4% rate while the Continent remains stuck at about 10%.
Encouraging signs are cropping up all over Britain.
In Wales, a Sony color-TV plant that pays its mostly female work force $5.99 an hour added 600 jobs last year and plans hundreds more; its sister plants on the Continent aren't doing that.
In Nottinghamshire, a coal mine is reopening with 200 workers after they agreed to more job flexibility.
Black & Decker Corp., citing "significant" cost savings, will move some operations from Germany to Spennymoore.
Maytag Corp.'s Hoover unit has closed its operations in Dijon, France, in favor of Cambuslang, Scotland.
The new flexibility in labor is clearly helping Kvaerner Govan, a Norwegian-owned shipyard on the River Clyde -- an area once known as the Red Clyde because of the union power.
When Kvaerner Govan took over in 1988, the 1,200 workers were used to long tea breaks, frequent absenteeism, rigid work rules and working only 28 of the 37 hours for which they were paid.
The company demanded that they work a full 35-hour week, cut the number of shop stewards and phased out extra days off and work rules.
When the union struck in 1991, the company fired all the workers.
The union surrendered.
And Kvaerner Govan gave about half of its highly paid support staff of 566 a tough choice: a lower-paying production job or no job at all.
"The people at Govan recognized their only chance of surviving was if we made it competitive enough to secure orders," says Bobby Gordon, the personnel director.
Now, Kvaerner Govan can move production workers freely from department to department.
It also can use contract labor to avoid having idle staff on the payroll.
The shipyard has doubled productivity, building two ships a year instead of one.
It now has the lowest labor cost -- $354.91 a week per worker -- of any Kvaerner yard, even one in the former East Germany.
It has landed orders from Norway and Saudi Arabia that not long ago it wouldn't have obtained.
The gains in productivity and orders enabled the shipyard to expand its staff to about 1,500 from 1,200, plus up to 500 more workers on a contract basis.
With fewer people in high-paying jobs, its real labor costs haven't risen, Mr. Gordon says.
The shipyard earned money last year after decades of losses.
And the workers have lost their militancy.
"It's impossible to maintain the wages we once enjoyed," says David Cooper, a pipe fitter and shop steward.
He agrees it is "difficult to support a family" on his wages -- his wife earns more as a civil servant -- but he hopes for better times.
"We're somewhat disadvantaged at the moment, but we don't see it being that way forever.
Britain was a prosperous country, and it will prosper again."
The Conservative government gave workers little choice but to change their tune.
It made it easier to hire and fire.
It diluted union power by banning secondary strikes and closed shops; the 187 strikes last year were the fewest since the tally began in 1891.
It delayed workers' eligibility for employment rights-protection against unfair dismissal and payments to people laid off -- until they had been on the job for two years.
It abolished "wage councils," which had set minimum wages.
And it cut unemployment and related benefits to make the dole less attractive while increasing job-hunt requirements for the unemployed.
As a result, British wages have risen more slowly since 1980 than the EU and OECD averages.
Hourly compensation costs for U.K. production workers, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics' latest figures, average $14.69, compared with $25.94 for Germany, $19.41 for Italy, $16.88 for France and $16.17 for the U.S.
And that stirs controversy.
Virtually all the net new jobs have been part-time; most of them go to women and pay less than full-time jobs.
In Scotland, average pay is $444.76 a week, with nonmanual female workers under age 18 earning only $148.70.
The Low Pay Unit, a London-based nonprofit group, says the number of full-time British employees with weekly pay below the Council of Europe's "decency threshold" (currently defined as $8.61 an hour) is up to 37% from 28.3% in 1979.
"There are huge divisions between high and low pay, and that's getting worse," says Morag Gillespie, director of the Scottish Low Pay Unit.
Despite slow growth in average wages, she says, "in the longer term we will see people suffering real cuts."
Lesley Edgerton already has.
She had made $11.98 an hour as a secretary but now is working in a temporary job for $7.49, with no benefits.
"They're taking advantage and not paying like before," she says.
But the government's policies have won over many companies here.
In downtown Glasgow, TSB Homeloans has added 340 "full-time equivalents" since the division of TSB Group PLC opened three years ago.
Many of those replaced jobs in smaller offices that were closed, but the company has added 100 new jobs in the past year.
TSB uses the new labor flexibility to the fullest; that is crucial in a business in which wages constitute 70% of costs.
Some 10% to 15% of its workers are on three-month tryouts; it then hires the temporaries it likes.
The division has five different business areas for processing mortgages, and each morning it assigns workers to a function depending on the day's mail.
It has no union, no job "demarcations" and almost no overtime.
Despite adding employees, the company hasn't increased its overall labor costs.
It has eliminated some managers in favor of lower-wage clerical workers.
"If I've got a manager earning 30,000 $44,925 a year, that's equivalent to four or five clerical people," says Alan Power, general manager.
"If I shed five managers, I'm into 25 more people."
Mr. Power terms the low pay a necessary, and temporary, strategy.
"If we're cheaper and more efficient, we get more business and deliver more jobs," he says, noting that the division managed a 25% increase in assets last year.
He figures that British companies can build a highwage economy after they gain a greater share of world markets.
Until then, he says, "we've got to sacrifice, accepting that it's a very difficult marketplace we're in -- marketplace Earth."
Workers find that argument difficult to counter.
At TSB, Mr. Cousins says he must supplement his income with parttime work as a nightclub security guard.
But if he were the boss at TSB, he adds, he would run it the same way.
"It's irresistible logic," he says.
"In this market, high wages can't work."
Claremont Garments, on the south side of Glasgow, says more-flexible labor has allowed it to resume expanding after years of retrenchment.
The plant employed 1,600 before cutting back to 730 in the 1980s, but the threat of further job losses led to huge productivity gains.
"When workers see jobs disappearing, it has a salutary effect on people's attitudes," says Michael Weir, the manufacturing director.
Claremont took a six-week strike a couple of years ago and forced workers to accept a 20% cut in guaranteed pay -- but offered them a chance at more incentive pay.
It also won the power to move workers freely from task to task and has cut highly paid office jobs in favor of more production people.
Soon, the workers are to complete their 38 1/2-hour week in four days, leaving the fifth for maintenance.
With higher productivity, the payroll has grown to 820 from 730 and may climb to 1,000.
Mr. Weir says higher productivity and flat pay rates have cut his labor cost to two-thirds the U.S. level and half that of Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium.
Row on row of workers -- mostly young women -- fill the six-acre plant.
Earning incentive pay for each piece sewn, they work frantically, rarely talking or looking up.
One, Amanda Campbell, a 20-year-old single mother, earns only $134.78 a week but hopes to double that through hard work.
The pay isn't high, but neither are Ms. Campbell's expectations.
"It's a job," she says, "and I hope to keep it."
