Like a beleaguered general, Edward "Ted" Rogers spreads out a map of Ontario and describes the battle lines.
Rogers Communications Inc. serves cable customers in the red areas, Maclean Hunter Ltd. in the blue zones.
But the telephone company is everywhere.
"You just have to know military history to know what will happen," Mr. Rogers says.
"We'll be encircled, and we'll be wiped out."
It is to consolidate the blue and red forces, Mr. Rogers says, that he plans a takeover offer for Maclean Hunter by Rogers Communications, of which he is president, chief executive officer and controlling shareholder.
Terms of Rogers' offer for 83% of Maclean Hunter's stock won't be decided until a Rogers board meeting today, but the current value of those shares is three billion Canadian dollars (US$2.26 billion).
Canada hasn't yet had the flurry of cross-media acquisitions that is sweeping the U.S.
But regulations preventing telephone companies from buying major cable operators are under review, and Mr. Rogers wants to be ready just in case.
He also wants to expand the subscriber base for multimedia offerings he is developing.
Canadian regulators will take a close look at any linkup between Rogers Communications, the nation's leading cable-TV operator, and Maclean Hunter, which ranks fourth, because together they account for 35% of the Canadian cable business.
But Mr. Rogers says regulators should allow cable companies to consolidate on a regional basis, "or you break up the telephone companies and let them have all different colors on their maps, too."
Mr. Rogers, who is sometimes called the Ted Turner of Canada, is a telecommunications pioneer in a family that has a tradition of pioneering.
His father invented the first home radio to run on house current instead of batteries.
And the younger Mr. Rogers started Canada's first commercial FM station while he was still in law school.
In the 1960s Mr. Rogers became an early cable-television operator, and he went into the fledgling cellular telephone business in 1983.
He now controls Canada's largest cellular telephone company and biggest cable operator, and he is a minority partner in Unitel Communications Inc., the country's biggest long-distance competitor to traditional telephone companies.
Mr. Rogers' friends, such as Douglas Bassett, a Toronto broadcasting executive, say he's generous, down to earth and responsive to customers.
During the Gulf War, a cable subscriber with family in Israel was upset when Mr. Rogers' company stopped transmitting Cable News Network on a free trial basis.
A sales representative told the subscriber that it would take a week to add CNN to his regular service, so the subscriber looked up Mr. Rogers' number in the phone book and called him at home.
The next morning, a Sunday, on Mr. Rogers' orders, technicians arrived at the subscriber's house to hook him up to the news channel.
Mr. Bassett says Mr. Rogers never slows down, even on holidays at his cottage on the Muskoka lakes north of Toronto.
Tall and slim, and sporting a tan from his frequent getaways to the Bahamas, the 60-year-old Mr. Rogers says his arm is getting a little too creaky for tennis but he swims a lot to stay fit.
Public shareholders in Mr. Rogers' companies have little voting power and rarely see a profit.
He controls the businesses through special voting shares.
New projects and expansion take precedence over net income.
The flagship, Rogers Communications, reported losses of C$123.7 million in the nine months ended Sept. 30 and C$180.3 million for all of 1992.
But shareholders are happy to be aboard because sharp growth has meant hefty capital gains.
A dollar invested in Rogers Communications' shares in 1979 would have a value of more than C$25 today.
His expansion efforts have forced Mr. Rogers to pioneer in the art of raising money as well.
Just last month Rogers Communications issued the country's first Canadian-dollar denominated junk bonds.
In 1991 it was the first Canadian company to issue liquid yield obligation notes, or LYONS, which are hybrid securities that are part stock and part bond.
Despite the big money involved in the Maclean Hunter bid, Mr. Rogers plays down the deal as "merely a continuation" of Rogers' growth.
He's sketchy on his plans if the acquisition succeeds, but he has big plans for new multimedia services.
He met with Microsoft Corp.
Chairman Bill Gates last month and hopes to test some Microsoft software in Canada within six months.
Unlike some of his earlier forays into new technology, Mr. Rogers says, the Maclean Hunter bid poses "no risk here at all.
In fact," he adds, "there's a risk in not doing it for the industry and for us."
