The virus that brings on sneezes, aches and coughs is about to do a lot of good.
In a warren of laboratories tucked away in a New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center building overlooking the East River, a small crew of scientists is brewing up hundreds of millions of copies of a virus that can cause the common cold.
But unlike the "wild" viruses that cause headaches, fever, stomach ills and the rest, these laboratory virues have been tamed, their cold-causing stingers snipped out.
These crippled viruses are about to be enlisted in humankind's war against brain cancer, inherited diseases, heart attacks and a host of other life-threatening and vexing ailments.
The researchers have left intact the virus's ability to deftly wriggle into certain human cells.
It is this cell-infecting characteristic that scientists here and in a handful of other research labs are trying to exploit.
They hope to use the virus to ferry disease-fighting genes into regions of the human body generally inaccessible to modern medicines.
The common-cold virus "may turn out to be one of the most effective new ways of delivering medicine there is," says Ronald Crystal, who directs New York Hospital's virus-tinkering program.
"The medicine in this case is produced by genes."
Genes represent the molecular blueprint used by cells to produce proteins such as enzymes and hormones that carry out the second-by-second chemical functions of life.
By transplanting specific genes directly into clusters of human cells, scientists hope to induce the cells to produce new therapeutic proteins that are either safer and more effective than medicines produced in drug factories or capable of doing a job that cannot be done by any man-made medicines.
This new virus-aided technique is behind the sudden explosion of gene-therapy experiments.
At the moment there are 68 government-sanctioned human experiments involving gene therapy planned or under way, up from 26 last year.
A principal reason for this is a flurry of new findings made by Dr. Crystal and others about the common-cold virus, known formally as the adenovirus.
Dr. Crystal, who spent 20 years at the National Institutes of Health cooking up new therapies against poorly treated respiratory illnesses before he moved to New York last year, appreciates the irony of harnessing one of his longtime archenemies.
"It's not surprising that I was attracted to the adenovirus," says Dr. Crystal.
"Like everyone researching pulmonary disease, I've studied it extensively.
Much was known about the virus and how it gets inside cells.
What's been a true surprise is what an extraordinarily versatile therapeutic agent it's turning out to be."
The deactivated virus also may be safer to use in transplanting genes than another virus scientists have used in early experiments.
Unlike the other virus, the adenovirus doesn't thrust its genes into the cell's own sensitive DNA, or genetic material.
Instead, the virus deposits the gene alongside the DNA, where it churns out its designated proteins without changing the cell's own genetics.
Scientists working with the cold bug also like it because infected cells generally spit out the virus within weeks, meaning the virus and its transplanted gene have only a temporary effect.
Last year, Dr. Crystal helped make scientific history when his NIH lab used the adenovirus for the first human gene therapy for cystic fibrosis.
Cystic fibrosis is an inherited disease involving a defective gene in cells that line the lung's tiny air passages.
Because of the genetic defect, the lungs are unable to make a protein that keeps the airways clear of mucus.
As a result, the lungs of cystic-fibrosis patients become clogged with a thick mucus-like substance that renders the patients highly susceptible to dangerous bacterial infections.
Back in 1989, about the time scientists discovered the cystic-fibrosis gene, Dr. Crystal got the idea of using the common-cold virus to repair the lung cells' genetic flaw.
"I was jogging one day and it hit me," says Dr. Crystal.
"The adenovirus targets the very same cells as are damaged in cystic fibrosis.
It seemed like a natural way to deliver the missing gene."
In a series of test-tube and animal experiments over the next few years, Dr. Crystal and his colleagues found they could successfully hitch a variety of human genes to the adenovirus.
In animal tests, altered virus injected into the lungs via a long catheter homed in on the airway cells and triggered the cells to manufacture the missing airway-clearing protein.
In the human tests conducted in recent months, the researchers found evidence that the virus inserted the gene in about 5% of targeted lung cells.
Only one of the four treated patients developed a disturbing flulike illness, but Dr. Crystal believes that was caused by using higher doses of the virus than was necessary.
New tests planned on about a dozen more patients will determine if the implanted gene produces enough protein to keep the lungs clear.
Of equal importance, Dr. Crystal says, researchers were surprised to find in their experiments that the adenovirus was able to target cells that line numerous other organs, such as the brain, the liver and the heart.
"Suddenly, we realized we had this phenomenal delivery tool," says Dr. Crystal.
To generate the funds needed to exploit the virus, Dr. Crystal helped form a new closely held company, called GenVec Inc., which is based in Bethesda, Md., near the NIH and is partly owned by Genentech Inc. of South San Francisco, Calif.
In one set of animal experiments conducted at the NIH and New York labs, Dr. Crystal's team found the virus can infect cells that line coronary arteries.
The scientists hope this discovery will lead to a way to counter a problem that often develops after a procedure called angioplasty, in which doctors inflate a tiny balloon at the tip of a catheter to pry open coronary arteries that have been blocked by the fatty deposits of heart disease.
The problem is that angioplasty can wound the artery's smooth inner lining, triggering the rapid growth of scar tissue that, in turn, can reclog the artery.
Dr. Crystal's lab is now testing several genes that might be inserted into the inner wall of an artery, where they will temporarily produce proteins to prevent or slow the scarring.
In another test, the scientists believe they can improve the benefits of heart-bypass surgery by injecting genes that promote the rapid growth of new blood vessels around damaged arteries.
These new vessels would carry oxygen-nourishing blood to parts of the heart muscle that are beyond the help of bypass surgery.
And in still another set of experiments, scientists have found that the adenovirus can carry cancer-fighting proteins to the site of a tumor.
In exploiting basic research by scientists at Harvard School of Medicine and the University of Chicago, GenVec is developing an adenovirus carrying a gene that will "turn on" when hit by a tiny burst of radition.
The turned-on gene produces a protein that kills cancer cells.
Such a trick could limit effects caused by the protein and also reduce the amount of radiation used to destroy a tumor, and thereby limit damage to healthy tissue.
"The best site for this treatment is brain cancer," for which current treatments are limited, Dr. Crystal says.
"If it works, we hope to target other cancers, too."
