With "On Death and Dying" 25 years ago, Elisabeth Kubler-Ross may have written the first bestseller about death.
But she certainly didn't write the last.
Books about death have become one of the fastest-growing categories in publishing.
Leading the pack is "Embraced by the Light," Betty J. Eadie's account of a near-death experience in which she says she was escorted to heaven and talked to Jesus.
The book has sold more than a million copies in hardcover and is now the No. 1 book on every major nonfiction bestseller list in the country, including The Wall Street Journal's list, which begins with this issue (see related article: "Marketing & Media: Journal Commences Its Own Weekly Tally Of Bestselling Books" -- WSJ Feb. 23, 1994)
Sherwin B. Nuland, author of "How We Die," which was published this month, has several theories about why the topic has become so popular.
"I think we're exploring the last great unknown," he says.
"Starting in the '60s, we explored our sexuality in great depth, and death, like sex, is something we've secretly wanted to know a lot about."
He finds the most receptive readers of his book to be baby boomers.
"They are seeing their parents die," Dr. Nuland says, "and they want a book like this to help them deal properly with that."
Maureen Golden, Barnes & Noble's vice president of merchandising, thinks baby boomers are concerned with their own deaths as well, and are looking for comfort and understanding.
"As people now middle-aged get closer to that reality themselves . . .
I expect this category to get even stronger," she says.
There are scores more death-related books coming, and some new releases are already enjoying startling success.
"How We Die," Dr. Nuland's description of death from common causes, is appearing on regional bestseller lists despite graphic writing that one reviewer called "eloquent" but "almost sadistic in its candor."
The fastest-growing segment of the death market, booksellers say, is "New Age" titles like "Embraced by the Light," which are not scientific but spiritual in their focus.
Sarah Hunt, a buyer for Barnes & Noble's superstores, says, "We probably carry about the same number of death titles in the psychology section as we did five years ago, but we have six times as many in the New Age department."
Among the recent favorites: "The Tibetan Book of Living and Dying," a 1992 book about an ancient Buddhist philosophy of death.
Bertelsmann AG's Doubleday has just published "A Necessary End," a book in which author Nick Taylor recounts the end of his parents' lives; the book is illustrated with woodcuts by Mr. Taylor's father.
And Random House's Villard is about to publish "Saved by the Light," written by a man who claims to have had not one but two near-death experiences.
The field has gotten so large that there's even room for sleeper hits like "Final Gifts," in which two hospice nurses recount what people say and do just before they die.
Denver's Tattered Cover bookstore sells 20 copies of "Final Gifts" monthly.
"Embraced by the Light" defies virtually every precept of modern publishing: Ms. Eadie had never written a book before, and Gold Leaf Press had never published one.
And, while publishers say a book has little chance of becoming a bestseller if it doesn't become popular quickly, this book came out in 1992.
Last summer, the Bantam Books division of Bertelsmann AG paid $1.5 million for the paperback rights in a heated auction.
The paperback is due out next fall.
Booksellers say they've never seen anything quite like the current boom -- and they expect it to continue.
"I think Betty Eadie's success has put the topic on the front burner more than ever before," says Joel Fotinas, buyer of religion and philosophy books for Denver's Tattered Cover bookstore.
Such groups as the Hemlock Society and Choice in Dying have also brought death into the public eye with tomes about taking control of death through things like living wills and even suicide.
Indeed, one reason for the latest flood of death books is the amazing success in 1991 of "Final Exit," Derek Humphry's precise prescription for "self-deliverance" by prescription drugs.
The book has sold more than 450,000 copies.
Also continuing to proliferate are books about near-death experiences, a topic that first became popular with the 1975 publication of "Life After Life" by Raymond Moody.
Based on about 100 individual accounts of people resuscitated from neardeath states, the book has sold millions of copies and spawned dozens of imitations.
Predicting what will sell in the death genre isn't always easy.
Booksellers say Ms. Eadie's "Embraced" finally roared up bestseller lists last fall after the author appeared on Oprah Winfrey's talk show, the book world's most coveted showcase.
And yet an appearance on Oprah by Dr. Moody didn't do much for his most recent title, "Reunions: Visionary Encounters With Departed Loved Ones."
"Oprah usually creates an incredible pop in sales," says Ms. Golden of Barnes & Noble.
"But I think in this case, the audience just didn't believe what he was saying about contacting dead people."
(The publisher of "Reunions," Villard, said it isn't disappointed in the book.
While fewer than 100,000 copies are in print, a spokesman said, "We expect it to sell for years.")
Ms. Eadie, booksellers say, came across as sincere and down-to-earth in her many television appearances.
Also, her description of death as spiritual and joyful reinforces many people's fantasies.
And publishers inspired by the success of "Embraced" are hoping talk shows will make bestsellers of their new titles.
Villard, for one, is sure it has a winner in "Saved by the Light," due out next month, by Dannion Brinkley, the man who claims to have died twice.
"The first time, he was struck by lightning and returned from death incredibly psychic," says his enthusiastic publisher, Diane Reverand.
"This guy is so psychic he can call me up and read the correspondence on my desk.
He's going to be incredible on TV."
