USAir Group, hurt by the steep fare cuts it launched last month, predicted its first-quarter loss would widen sharply and urged its unions to make new wage concessions.
The struggling carrier also disclosed that its big shareholder British Airways won't invest an additional $450 million until the labor talks are completed.
USAir predicted a first-quarter loss of about $200 million before taxes -- more than triple the year-earlier $61 million loss -- and said the pretax deficit for the year will be wider than last year's $350 million loss.
The deep first-quarter loss reflects steep fare cuts that USAir launched last month as a move to protect its core market in the eastern U.S. against low-cost rivals as well as harsh weather, which cut flights by 8% in January and February.
The sharp fare cuts stunned the airline industry and accelerated a crumbling of the high-fare structure along the Eastern Seaboard.
The crush of negative news yesterday drove USAir's stock down 12%, or $1.25, to $9 in composite New York Stock Exchange trading, setting a new yearlong low.
USAir, based in Arlington, Va., said it has opened discussions with leaders from its four unions on ways to pare expenses, including wage cuts and productivity improvements.
The outcome of the discussions could reverberate far beyond USAir, however.
British Air's suspension of investment in the carrier could further strain yearlong negotiations over a U.S.-United Kingdom aviation treaty.
As a 24.6%-shareholder of USAir and one of the world's most profitable airlines, British Air has been viewed by USAir investors as something of a security blanket, even as USAir racked up operating losses of about $1.5 billion since 1989.
It was widely expected after last month's fare discounts of as much as 70% that USAir would be forced to turn to labor to gain wage or work-rule concessions, perhaps in exchange for an equity stake.
Trans World Airlines and Northwest Airlines underwent similar restructurings, and UAL Corp.'s United Airlines has one in the works.
Saddled with one of the highest cost structures in the industry, USAir did persuade its unions to accept wage and work-rule concessions in 1992.
But the wage portion, which saved USAir about $170 million, was a one-year-only deal, and wages have since snapped back.
Meanwhile, the labor groups won multiyear no-furlough guarantees that will make it harder for the company to use any anxiety about job security to its advantage.
Some USAir managers have become concerned that the unions also have been reluctant to pitch in again because of USAir's partnership with British Air, which involves joint marketing and frequent-flyer programs.
"The unions feel they have a sugar daddy in London, and they don't need to do anything," a former USAir executive said.
In the past, union leaders have acknowledged privately that they expected British Air to provide a cash cushion.
Moreover, they have contended that USAir management didn't use the savings from the earlier concessions wisely.
Union leaders couldn't be reached for comment yesterday.
Although British Air is financially strong, USAir's financial performance has the U.K. airline's managers feeling cautious about spending more money.
So far, British Airways has invested $400 million in USAir, and the original agreement between the two airlines calls for the U.K. airline to spend another $450 million.
In explaining its decision, British Airways said in a statement that "it would not be in its shareholders' interest to commit to investing the additional $450 million . . . until the outcome of the restructuring is known."
But British Airways said it remains firmly committed to its partnership with USAir and plans to continue looking for ways to cut costs and share routes with its U.S. ally.
British Airways shares slipped 1%, or 4.5 pence a share, to 430 pence a share on London's stock exchange Monday.
The U.K. airline noted in its statement that the decision to postpone future investments in USAir "may affect the dynamics of the U.S.-U.K. aviation negotiations" under way.
In those talks, the U.S. government has said it would approve British Airways' future investments in USAir and extend their code-sharing arrangement only if U.S. carriers are given greater access to London's Heathrow airport.
In Washington, the Transportation Department didn't have any comment on British Air's move, or its implications for the bilateral aviation agreement.
The U.K. airline urged the two governments to consider the many benefits of the partnership.
"One of the principal reasons that the bilateral negotiations have not so far succeeded has been the barrage of misinformation by certain U.S. carriers who have no interest in the success of the talks," British Airways said, alluding in particular to American Airlines Chairman Robert Crandall.
On a tour of Europe recently, Mr. Crandall was highly and publicly critical of the British Airways-USAir code-sharing deal.
Brian Coleman in Brussels contributed to this story.
