United Nations Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali increased the pressure for Western military action in Bosnia following the weekend shelling of a Sarajevo market that killed 68 people and wounded more than 200.
Mr. Boutros-Ghali asked the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to give him the power to order NATO air strikes on artillery or mortar positions around Sarajevo, which is under siege by Bosnian Serbs.
Whether the alliance will launch the long-threatened air strikes, or simply indulge in more hand-wringing and recriminations, isn't known.
Mr. Boutros-Ghali is apparently more interested in using the new authority to deter further Serb attacks against civilians, than in launching an immediate retaliation for Saturday's slaughter.
Speaking after a meeting with his top foreign policy advisers, President Clinton ruled out any immediate military action, telling reporters that the U.S. first had to consult with "reluctant" allies and "give the United Nations a chance to confirm responsibility" for the attack.
"That's not to say there won't be retaliation, because we certainly discussed it in considerable length today," Mr. Clinton said.
But he emphasized that the U.S. didn't have the authority to act on its own, and he noted that those countries with peacekeepers on the ground were far more reluctant to launch air strikes.
Mr. Boutros-Ghali's move did signal a more assertive attitude on the part of France, which has the largest contingent of peacekeepers on the ground.
"He's responding to his principal troop contributor," said a U.S. official.
In the past Mr. Boutro-Ghali has been seen as an obstacle to military action.
The U.N. leader has refused to use similar authority to that he is currently seeking to order air strikes to protect U.N. troops on the ground.
But with France's change of heart, Mr. Boutros-Ghali may take a different approach.
However, other allies remain reluctant.
The key decisions rest with the North Atlantic Council, NATO's political arm, which will meet this week.
Britain and Canada -- two other key troop contributors -- continue to oppose the idea arguing that air strikes would increase the risk to their peacekeepers and derail relief deliveries and political negotiations to end the conflict.
British Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd warned yesterday that a retaliatory air strike may yield "simply one day of satisfaction . . . . followed not by the lifting of the siege but by its intensification."
A senior U.S. official said yesterday that the administration may now be willing to become more involved in negotiations to bring an end to the brutal Balkan conflict.
One idea, the official said, would be to send a special envoy to Sarajevo to help the Muslim-led government craft a new peace-settlement map.
Until now the U.S. has refused European calls to join in the negotiating process, saying it wouldn't press the Bosnian Muslims to go along with particular proposals.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher spent much of Sunday discussing Bosnia with NATO allies.
A senior official described Mr. Christopher's approach as somewhere between pressing for air strikes and soliciting opinions.
A top European official, meanwhile, said that the Clinton administration's credibility on Bosnia is "extremely low these days," especially after it refused European requests that it get more deeply involved in peace negotiations.
Senate Republican Leader Bob Dole of Kansas, speaking on NBC television, said that President Clinton would "have strong bipartisan support in the Congress," if he decided to launch air strikes.
When told of congressional calls for air strikes, Mr. Clinton responded: "It's very well for these members of Congress to say that they don't have constituents on the ground."
American C-130 transport planes ferried medicine and supplies into Sarajevo yesterday and flew out dozens of the wounded for medical treatment at a U.S. military hospital in Germany.
In all, 200 people were wounded in Saturday's attack, the second in two days.
On Friday, a Serb-launched mortar barrage killed 10 people lined up for food in Sarajevo.
