Denny's restaurant chain -- saddled with old, drab outlets, financial losses and allegations of bias against black customers -- is overhauling its image, its stores and its attitude.
All 1,515 restaurants will be remodeled over the next three years at a cost of at least $190 million.
Yellow-and-brown interiors and green polyester uniforms, long favored by Denny's management, are out; reds and blues and button-down shirts with brightly colored ties are in.
Menus are being revamped.
New cooking equipment is being installed to help speed up service.
Television ads, emphasizing the chain's breakfast offerings and a new focus on value, will run in more markets and for longer periods of time.
But while the company has clearly moved forward on some fronts, it has barely left the starting gate on others.
Denny's, by most accounts, has begun the slow process of addressing the charges of racism that have bedeviled the company for the past year.
While many of the promises the chain made last summer to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People have yet to be kept-minority businesses are still receiving only a sliver of Denny's purchasing, marketing and advertising dollarschange is evident.
The percentage of black managers, for instance, rose to 6.7% from 4.4% in the past six months.
"This is a company that started out trying to deal with their problem in a superficial way," says Guy T. Saperstein, an Oakland, Calif., lawyer who last year brought a class-action lawsuit against Denny's.
But "now, they're dealing with it in a substantive, remedial way.
It's good for everybody."
Just 12 months ago, little looked good for Denny's, part of Flagstar Cos. in Spartanburg, S.C.
The Justice Department had substantiated allegations of bias against black customers of the chain.
A group of 32 black customers sued the company in federal court in San Jose, Calif., alleging that blacks in California Denny's restaurants were required to prepay for meals and pay cover charges, while whites were not.
Four additional discrimination suits -- including one by a group of Secret Service agents, who said they were denied service in a Denny's -- soon followed.
Last July, the company agreed with the NAACP to invest $1 billion over seven years to double the number of Denny's franchises owned by minorities, add hundreds of African-American managers and sharply increase purchasing from minority enterprises.
In addition to the increased percentage of minority managers, one African-American woman, Dr. Vera King Farris, president of Richard Stockton College in New Jersey, has been added to the Flagstar board.
Charitable contributions to minority groups are more than double the annual $100,000 that was promised.
But the number of black-owned franchises stands today where it stood last year: at one.
And of the $96 million that Flagstar planned to provide for minority suppliers in the first year of the agreement, only $10 million in contracts have been signed so far.
The company acknowledges both the progress and the lack of it.
C. Ronald Petty, Denny's chief operating officer, says that by the end of 1993, the company received 600 inquiries from minorities regarding franchise ownership and, as a result, sent out more than 100 applications.
Today, he says, 55 black applicants are in the final stages of review.
Denny's says awarding contracts to minority businesses has proved more difficult than it first thought.
"We were getting a lot of inquiries from African-Americans who were in one stage or another of developing their own business but weren't equipped to do business with corporate America," says Thomas A. Lounds Jr., a Flagstar executive.
To ease that problem, Flagstar has provided initial funding for a Fair Share Resource Center in New York City, which will open in April and will provide guidance to minority entrepreneurs.
Overall, maintains Mr. Lounds, the pact with the NAACP is proceeding apace.
Getting the company's marketing strategy on track requires, first and foremost, a facelift.
Mr. Petty, the chief operating officer, characterizes today's Denny's as a "40-year-old concept with no fundamental changes in 20 years."
Accordingly, as much as $250,000 will be poured into each restaurant, making dining areas more inviting both inside and out, Mr. Petty says.
Much of what Denny's envisions is newly on display in and around Houston.
There, 21 outlets have been refurbished with one of three new interior designs: a Southwestern motif; a traditional, woodpaneled look; and a contemporary theme, with red and blue accents.
Outside, a thin ribbon of green neon wraps around the roof of the renovated restaurants, making them more noticeable at night.
New menus highlight "Fit Fare," or low-calorie items.
"Senior Selections" are printed in larger type that's easier to read.
Regional preferences will be catered to: Fried okra already appears on Southeastern tables.
To complement the 27 million pies Denny's sells each year, the company has teamed up with Baskin-Robbins to test the sale of ice cream.
New Denny's merchandise stresses that the restaurants are open 24 hours: T-shirts, sweatshirts and mugs with the words: "Denny's Til Dawn."
With breakfast accounting for 40% of all sales, Denny's plans to focus heavily on that meal in its advertising and promotions.
Moreover, 70% of the chain's business comes from repeat customers; of those, almost half are over age 50.
(Indeed, Denny's calculates that its older clients walk through the front door two to five times each week.)
Nicholas A. Castaldo, vice president-marketing, says the company needs to attract new customers without alienating the old.
One way to do that, he says, is to make Denny's the "value leader" within its segment of the restaurant industry.
Will Denny's succeed?
Ron Paul, president of Technomic Inc., a food-service consulting firm in Chicago, says the company is in a difficult category within the restaurant business.
So-called midpriced family-dining outlets -- like Denny's, Shoney's, Cracker Barrel and others -- all have to grapple both with cheaper fast-food rivals and with pricier "casual" restaurants, which typically provide more attractive and livelier settings.
Adds Richard K. Herzer, chairman, chief executive and president of IHOP Corp., the restaurant chain based in Glendale, Calif.: "I think Denny's concentration on rehabilitation of the restaurants is exactly the way they should go.
The better all of us are, the better the segment will be regarded."
