As the debate swirls around the Fed's tightening, Chairman Alan Greenspan is bracing himself for his appearances this week before the House and Senate banking committees.
Why, Chairmen Donald Riegle and Henry Gonzalez no doubt will ask, did he tighten, against their wishes, with no signs of inflation on the horizon?
And how does he explain the fact that the financial markets greeted the move with clear contempt?
What's Mr. Greenspan going to say?
The most prominent arguments on either side of the debate offer him little assistance.
But it is important that they be understood and that Mr. Greenspan be prepared to handle them.
From the Keynesians, we got the New York Times essay of James K. Galbraith, Feb. 8, "The Fed Goes for Overkill."
From the monetarists, we got the Feb. 9 article by Allan Meltzer on this page, "Still Too Easy."
From the technicians, we got Randall W. Forsyth's Feb. 14 report in Barron's, "Tightening's Impact: What History Teaches."
My position was represented in Robert Novak's Feb. 10 column in the New York Post, "Fed's Miscue," which centers on the arguments of Wayne Angell, whose eight years as Fed governor ended the previous day.
The only other really important piece that has appeared in public print was the letter in the Feb. 16 New York Times by Geoffrey Moore of Columbia University, "Forecast Warns of Inflation Clouds," which challenges the Galbraith arguments of Feb. 8.
The Galbraith argument makes the Keynesian case, popular with Sen. Riegle and Sen. Paul Sarbanes: What is the justification for the quarter-point rise in the fed funds rate?
"There is none.
{Mr. Greenspan} warned for months about the threat of rising inflation, yet each monthly price index report undercut his predictions.
So now we have a pre-emptive strike" that isn't needed.
Mr. Galbraith chastises President Clinton for going along with it.
"Confronted with this brazen act by the Fed, President Clinton wounds himself by seeming to welcome it."
The Meltzer piece, appearing the following day, contradicts the Galbraith assertion that "all agree" there is no inflationary threat.
On the surface, it seems like a defense of Mr. Greenspan.
But Prof. Meltzer builds his analysis on the rapid growth of the monetary base, and the Fed governors have spent the past three years trying to drive a stake through the heart of these monetary aggregate rules -- which were at the heart of the great inflation of the past 20 years and destroyed both the Nixon and Carter presidencies.
Randy Forsyth of Barron's takes us through the history of the past several Fed tightenings going back to 1958, in support of his thesis that they are always bad for bonds.
Insofar as Mr. Greenspan seems to have the green light from the White House to tighten by as much as 75 more basis points during the course of the year, this would seem to be very bad news for bonds.
The Forsyth argument, though, lacks internal logic, as it suggests the bond market would respond positively to a perpetual easing of monetary policy by the Fed.
Somewhere along the line bonds have to respond negatively to ease and positively to tightening, or the nation's creditors have to be a bunch of simpletons, happy as clams holding depreciating assets.
In an ideal monetary world, assuming the nation's creditors are, in aggregate, as sharp as tacks, a Fed tightening would always be followed in the first instance by a rise in bond prices.
And, if the Fed believed incipient deflation was the problem, a Fed ease would be followed in the first instance with a rise in bond prices.
For most of the history of the Federal Reserve, going back to 1913, this was indeed the case; but the easings and tightenings were so microscopic, it would take Barron's a few years of digging into the records to find them.
This is because they were automatically adjusting to liquidity preferences on a daily basis to keep gold at $20.67 an ounce until 1934, and at $35 an ounce into the late 1960s, when the Fed began caving in to political pressures to devalue the currency, to inflate.
In each instance, the indexes of statistical inflation were preceded by a rise in the gold price or a gold outflow to Europe.
This thinking was behind the Novak column: "Angell . . . did not participate in the Feb. 4 decision.
He wanted rates increased twice as much and much earlier.
His reason: the rising price of gold, signaling inflation ahead."
That is, if Mr. Greenspan had followed the advice of Mr. Angell last year before gold advanced by 10% above the $350 level, it would have taken only one small tightening to rein it in.
Now, he believes, if the Fed were to tighten just once, confounding the Forsyth analysis, it should have been a 50 basis point move, accompanied by an explanation from Mr. Greenspan that his concern is gold's inflationary signal.
That's pretty much my view, but that's history.
What now?
Which brings us to the letter from Prof. Moore, who cites a basket of signals that have emerged since Jan. 1 indicating inflation on the horizon -- led by commodity price inflation, but also including a rising percentage of purchasing managers reporting higher prices, managers reporting slower deliveries, a rising percentage of businessmen expecting higher sale prices in the last quarter, the ratio of employment to population heading up and likewise with import prices.
"There are early warning signs of a cyclical upswing in inflation," he says.
There is more Phillips Curve thinking in this argument than I like.
"Inflation is not caused by too many people working," as Margaret Bush Wilson of the NAACP put it a dozen years ago.
Just as Mr. Greenspan cannot lean on Mr. Meltzer's fallacious argument for support, he has to find a way to play down Mr. Moore's cyclical arguments, which may be correct in a narrow sense but only get the bondholders mixed up.
Mr. Greenspan tried in his Joint Economic Committee testimony of Jan. 31 to explain that he would not tighten to slow economic growth, only to anticipate inflation.
That's not how the tightening was reported four days later.
This week, he either has to develop his arguments further or be coaxed into that process by the committee members.
The nation's creditors cannot afford to reward him with a bond market rally unless he gets it right.
Mr. Wanniski is president of Polyconomics Inc., a Morristown, N.J., consulting group.
