In a marketing move designed to broaden its record distribution, Time Warner Inc.'s Warner Music Enterprises is launching two magazines that enable subscribers to order records directly by mail or a toll-free telephone number.
In September, the company plans to launch a rock-and-roll magazine, Huh, featuring interviews and reviews of more than 100 albums and music videos each issue.
Readers will then be able to order those products directly through the magazine.
Another planned monthly, New Country Magazine, will be sent to subscribers accompanied by a compact disk or cassette; the magazine will also feature more than 100 reviews of current country music that can be ordered direct.
Jazz and children's music magazines may follow.
The publishing projects from Warner Music Enterprises, a unit of record company Warner Music Group, are an effort to boost sales of new music outside traditional record stores and record clubs.
Virtually all of the major record labels -- including Time Warner -- are exploring music home shopping channels as well.
Huh will make its debut in September and will be produced by Los Angeles-based Raygun Publishing Inc.
Although sister company Time Inc.
Magazines won't be involved in the editorial production, Warner Music will use Time's subscription fulfillment center in Florida and draw on mailing lists of such Time publications as Entertainment Weekly.
Chris Linen, president of Warner Music Enterprises, said that Huh will be sent free to current subscribers of Rock Monthly Video, a year-old venture that each month produces a videocassette featuring 10 new music video clips.
The videocassettes are available in five genres, including pop, heavy metal, alternative rock, rap and country.
Subscribers can then buy any album highlighted on the videocassette via an 800 number or through the mail.
Although the sale of music videos is relatively new, the category has shown surprising strength.
According to the Recording Industry Association of America, a Washington trade group, music videos generated $213.3 million in 1993, a gain of 35.5% from a year earlier.
Unit sales jumped 44.7% to 11 million.
Mr. Linen said that Huh reviewers will be allowed "to pan" albums if they don't like them, and that Warner Music Group won't have any involvement in deciding which albums are reviewed.
Readers who order the albums pay list price plus shipping and handling.
All six major record companies are supplying product.
As an extra inducement, readers of Huh who go to a music store and buy an album or video shown that month in a Rock Video Monthly videocassette will receive discount coupons worth as much as $20 after sending in proof of purchase.
The coupons will be redeemable against later purchases from Huh.
"Most direct mail people say to buy only from them," said Raju Puthukarai, executive vice president at Warner Music Enterprises.
"Instead, we're encouraging people to go to the music stores because we want to be part of building and developing new acts."
