Japan's financial walls are crumbling, with banks and brokerages charging into each other's business.
Regulators hope that the phenomenon, which puts Japan ahead of the U.S. in the trend toward "universal banking," will mean a stronger financial system, including a vibrant corporate bond market.
But Japan's financial sins of the past, including shady securities transactions, and the pressure on loan-starved banks to capture market share, raise some doubts.
On Friday, Kankaku Securities Co. announced it was taking an emergency 70 billion-yen ($666 million) subordinated loan from Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd.
DKB, the world's largest bank, is expected to gain added influence over Kankaku, in which it already holds a 4.9% stake, which will be useful when DKB opens its own securities subsidiary later this year.
But $666 million may not buy DKB all that much.
Kankaku projected pretax losses of $733 million for the year ending March 31, largely from questionable bond-trading practices stretching back to 1990.
Kankaku also has one of the highest break-even points of any comparable securities firm.
"To the extent that DKB is in the securities business faster, it's good, but this is not a clear-cut positive," said Betsy Daniels, financial analyst at Morgan Stanley Japan Inc.
"Short-term, DKB suffers from injecting funds into Kankaku," said Nozomu Kunishige, financial analyst at Kleinwort Benson International Inc.
"But in the long term," he added, "it's good for them to have an affiliated broker."
That's because DKB's own securities operation, which is expected to begin in November, will be allowed to underwrite corporate bonds, but won't be allowed to manage retail distribution.
Equity underwriting is entirely off limits for the bank's securities arm, for now.
"We would like to cooperate" with DKB's securities company, said Yoichiro Kato, Kankaku's president, who announced Kankaku's losses.
In a prepared statement, DKB President Tadashi Okuda noted that both Kankaku, a mid-sized securities company with 4,400 employees, and the Ministry of Finance had asked DKB to step in.
"We expect Kankaku to promote rationalization and streamlining of its business" in the future, the statement said.
DKB is one of Japan's 10 major "city," or commercial banks, all of which are expected to line up securities affiliates this year.
Two other Japanese banks specializing in long-term corporate lending, LongTerm Credit Bank of Japan Ltd. and Industrial Bank of Japan Ltd., opened such affiliates last year.
IBJ Securities Co., famous for hiring some of the savviest bankers in Tokyo, has been an early leader in the securities field.
The company is managing a $190 million Japanese domestic bond issue for Nissan Motor Co., and IBJ president Yo Kurosawa sees more such issues in the near future.
"The global trend is toward the bond business," Mr. Kurosawa said.
Moving into securities "is the most exciting trend in Japanese banking."
Japan has a long way to go before it has a world-scale bond market; most of Japan's 2,500 publicly listed companies have been discouraged from issuing domestic corporate bonds because of rules dictating high bank fees as a prerequisite to issuance.
But with Japanese banks hurting from a loss of clients to the offshore capital markets, the terms are likely to ease, particularly when banks become bond underwriters.
Indeed, the fear is that newly minted universal bankers will press for market share, and everyone will lose money.
Taro Yamada, deputy president of Yamaichi Securities Co., already worries about what a big influx of new brokerages means for his bottom line.
"Our old territory is being invaded," he said.
"The bidding for bonds is going to get tougher, and the banks are on better terms than the securities companies with Japanese regulators."
But Mr. Yamada is enthusiastic about Yamaichi's recent move into fund-management and foreign exchange businesses, once the province of Japan's low-profitability trust banks.
"This is very important for us," he said.
"We're looking forward to the opportunities."
"The question is, what will a free-for-all do to the banks' balance sheet?"
Ms. Daniels said.
"They say they'll be profitable only in five years . . . this will drain capital from higher-returning businesses."
Some of the retail brokerage firms with close ties to the banks also worry that a push for underwriting market share will mean unsalable bonds.
"If the competition for clients becomes too keen, they might underwrite paper under conditions that are unacceptable to buyers," said Shozo Yorita, president of Daito Securities Co., a retail brokerage with ties to Fuji Bank Ltd.
