Dan Quayle just can't seem to get away from potatoes.
The former vice president, who once inadvertently encouraged a youngster to misspell the word "potato," will appear in a television commercial for a new potato chip from PepsiCo Inc.'s Frito-Lay division.
Mr. Quayle makes a cameo appearance in the spot, which will be shown only once, during the Super Bowl this Sunday.
It isn't Mr. Quayle's first appearance in advertising, but it is perhaps the first of his choice.
While he was a heartbeat away from the presidency, Mr. Quayle was included in a spate of advertising, much of it subjecting him to ridicule over the potato misspelling incident.
For example, a shoe manufacturer placed print ads featuring Mr. Quayle wearing a goofy expression.
The headline: "Don't forget to vot."
Mr. Quayle was contacted by Frito-Lay's ad agency, Omnicom Group's BBDO.
There was no hesitation, says Max W. Hittle Jr., an attorney with Krieg Devault Alexander & Capehart, an Indianapolis law firm where Mr. Quayle's wife Marilyn is a partner.
Mr. Quayle himself is embarking on a 33-city tour to promote a new nonfiction book.
"He wanted to do the commercial for fun," says Mr. Hittle.
"It is a fun way to present himself to the public."
Does this harm his chances in the event he wants to be taken seriously for a run for the presidency in 1996?
Mr. Quayle couldn't be reached for comment, but Mr. Hittle says, "This commercial isn't to be taken as a political statement.
It won't hurt at all."
Mr. Quayle may be the first former vice president to appear in ads hawking a product.
Of course, other politicians have been featured in commercials, and former candidates for vice president have made commercials.
William E. Miller, who ran with Barry Goldwater in 1964, made a spot for American Express cards, and Geraldine Ferraro, who was the running mate of Walter Mondale in 1984, appeared in a Diet Pepsi commercial.
Mr. Quayle, who is donating his undisclosed earnings from the spot to charity, is used "for the shock value of the unexpected," says Alan Pottasch, a senior vice president at Pepsi-Cola International, who worked on the commercial for Wavy Lay's potato chips.
The commercial also features child star Elijah Wood, who is seated in one of the worst seats in the Georgia Dome in Atlanta, the site of the Super Bowl.
Munching on Wavy Lay's, he proposes a bet to a gentleman seated in front of him.
If the man can't eat just one Wavy Lay's, he must trade seats with the youth.
As Elijah keeps winning bets, he keeps improving his seat position.
Finally, he gets to Mr. Quayle, who is seated in the first row on the 50-yard line.
As fast as you can say, "family values," Mr. Quayle loses the wager.
According to a PepsiCo. official, one scenario had Elijah work Mr. Quayle's flub of "potato" into the script.
But "no one had the nerve to ask Mr. Quayle if he would go along with it, so we dropped it," says the official, who didn't want to be identified.
Some marketing experts are unimpressed with Mr. Quayle's foray from Pennsylvania Avenue to Madison Avenue.
"Both Mr. Quayle and Frito-Lay have reached new lows," says Steven E. Permut, president of Marketing Sciences Inc., a marketing and consulting firm in Guilford, Conn.
"Showing him is not the way to encourage a consumer to buy the product.
Should I buy this potato chip simply because Dan Quayle can't eat just one?
All this will do is provide grist for the Jay Leno and David Letterman joke machines."
