A saga of management instability continued at Harvard Business Review as Ruth R. McMullin stepped down as president and chief executive officer of Harvard Business School Publishing, the review's holding company.
People familiar with the situation confirmed that Ms. McMullin had frequent disagreements with subordinates and superiors about the direction of the review and the publishing company, which also markets popular business-school case studies and videos.
Ms. McMullin couldn't be reached for comment, and a spokeswoman for the review declined to comment on the reasons behind her resignation.
The Business Review, often quoted as an authority on how companies should be managed, has had little executive stability of its own over the past two years.
Its circulation is dropping, and to outsiders at least, top managers serving in positions with similar responsibility and authority make it difficult to discern who calls the editorial shots.
Ms. McMullin, paid about $400,000 annually, was named to her post when Harvard Business School Publishing incorporated as a nonprofit entity in January 1993 in an attempt to gain more revenues from the output of professors at Harvard Business School and contributors to the magazine.
According to an internal memo to the staff, she will be succeeded by Linda S. Doyle, currently associate dean for administration at the business school.
The memo, from William A. Sahlman, chairman of the holding company, said Ms. McMullin had "contributed significantly" to the start-up company, but gave no reason for her departure.
One insider, however, said that Mr. Sahlman had "philosophical differences" with Ms. McMullin, and that she also had disagreements with top magazine staff.
The executive editor of the magazine, Joel Kurtzman, got his post in January 1993 in a move that displaced editor T. George Harris, who was brought in to quell staff strife over the tough management style of former editor Rosabeth Moss Kanter a few months earlier.
But Mr. Kurtzman hasn't yet been given the title of editor, and earlier this month the magazine's editor-at-large, Nan Stone, was given the additional title of editorial director, seemingly giving her the responsibility for the day-to-day editorial operations that had been Mr. Kurtzman's.
Additionally, Anne Laura Friedman, the woman listed on the current masthead of the Review as managing editor, the title just below Mr. Kurtzman's, has quit the magazine to join a small start-up company involved in new media technologies.
Mr. Kurtzman, a former New York Times editor, has been trying to make the Review brighter, sharper and more accessible, yet he is said to have run into continued friction with faculty members, who see the magazine as an outlet for their writing.
The magazine has added summaries of its articles, and more-colorful graphics.
