Florida's insurance department accused 87 sales agents for Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. of fraudulent sales practices.
The administrative complaint represents one of the most sweeping actions ever against a group of insurance agents.
It also comes just days after Met Life settled similar accusations brought by about 40 states.
The New York-based insurance company agreed to pay a $20 million fine and to refund as much as $76 million to 60,000 customers around the U.S. who were allegedly defrauded.
That settlement didn't include Met sales agents.
As a result, other states may follow Florida and file complaints against Met agents in their states.
Texas is already planning such a move.
The Florida complaint accuses Daniel "Rick" Urso, who ran Met's Tampa office and was once the company's most successful agent, as well as others, with misleading customers into buying life insurance by calling it a retirement account.
The complaint could result in agents being fined and losing their license to sell insurance.
"Deceptive sales practices are wrong, these agents should have known it, and they have to face the consequenses of their acts," said Florida Insurance Commissioner Tom Gallagher.
An attorney representing Mr. Urso blamed Met Life.
"The agents were doing what they were trained to do," said Morris Weinberg.
"Mr. Urso is a scapegoat.
He was trained to do this.
None of this was invented in Tampa."
He said he will fight the charges.
Met Life fired Mr. Urso, as well as many of his superiors, in December.
"The Urso way of doing business is not the Met Life way of doing business," said Met spokesman Charles Sahner.
"He bears responsibility for the activities of his office and those who work for him."
Of the agents charged in the complaint, 47 worked in Mr. Urso's office, which was the biggest producing office at Met.
The operation ran a national sales campaign targeted at registered nurses.
The other 40 worked in offices elsewhere in the state.
Most of the agents still work for Met.
"We will defend those agents who made innocent mistakes," Mr. Sahner said.
The charges represent an escalation in the effort by Mr. Gallagher to root out deceptive sales practices in the life-insurance industry.
They are also a part of a wider effort by increasingly aggressive state insurance regulators across the country to crack down on insurance fraud.
One reason for their heightened concern is the fear that Congress might try to replace the current system of state insurance regulation with federal oversight.
Florida officials say they will pursue the 87 individuals on a case-by-case basis.
Agents are subject to a $2,500 fine for each violation.
The insurance department can take administration actions against agents without going to court.
So far, about 30 states, representing the majority of policyholders allegedly defrauded by Met, have signed on to the multistate agreement with Met.
Noteworthy among the holdouts is Texas, which wants to study the agreement to determine whether it is in the best interests of policyholders in its state.
Like Florida, Texas said it plans to bring charges against agents involved in deceptive practices.
"We are compiling evidence against the agents now," said insurance department spokesman Lee Jones.
New York, Met's home state, has no plans to file charges against agents, a spokesman said.
