The dollar tumbled to new lows for this year against the yen on fresh concerns over the future direction of U.S. interest rates and over stalled trade negotiations with Japan.
The dollar fell heavily against most other major currencies, but recovered some lost ground on promising new U.S. economic data and a spate of short-covering and bargain-hunting.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7320 marks, down from 1.7345 marks late Monday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 107.70 yen, down from 108.70 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.5010, down from $1.5060.
About midday Wednesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 108.20 yen and at 1.7336 marks.
The surprise resignation of David Mullins, vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, yesterday roused speculation that U.S. interest rates, long thought to be headed for higher ground, will stay flat.
The departure of Mullins, considered an anti-inflation hawk, opens the way for President Clinton to appoint an inflation dove as his successor.
The move also countered somewhat warnings on Monday by Alan Greenspan, the Fed's chairman, that short-term U.S. rates will move higher eventually in order to prevent any return of inflation.
Mr. Mullins, who will resign Feb. 14, said he won't attend the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee tomorrow and Friday.
Traders said that may diminish the likelihood of a panel vote in favor of higher rates at this week's meeting.
In addition, Mr. Mullins' leave-taking coincides with the departure Feb. 10 of Federal Reserve Governor Wayne Angell, a far more resolute anti-inflation hawk.
"You have two people that historically have been inflation fighters leaving at the same time," said Alan Leslie, chief economist for Discount Corp. of New York.
"They were both appointed by more conservative administrations, and expectations are that Clinton will appoint more growth-oriented people as opposed to anti-inflation people -- which means lower interest rates and a lower dollar," he said.
The Mullins announcement brought the dollar to its intraday low of 107.55 yen, the lowest level since Dec. 8.
Traders also said the slide was pushed along by concerns that U.S. trade representative Mickey Kantor's trip to Japan to further trade negotiations will be too little, too late.
"The dollar-yen is reacting to Mickey Kantor," said Carl Forcheski, a trader at Chemical Bank.
"There are worries that nothing will come of his visit."
Indeed, Japan is under the gun to produce a viable trade agreement prior to Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's meeting with Mr. Clinton Feb. 11, and traders fear that lack of an agreement will prompt more U.S. pressure for a strong yen.
Meanwhile, the dollar made a partial recovery from its fall against the mark on a combination of short-covering and promising U.S. economic data.
The National Association of Purchasing Management's January report showed its overall index of business activity rose to 57.7% from 57.1% in December.
Economists had predicted a decline to 56%.
