COMPETITION HEATS UP in the fast-growing tax-software business.
Meca Software and ChipSoft still dominate the market but face aggressive marketing from several rivals, including Computer Associates and Parsons Technology.
Growing competition is good news for shoppers; prices have fallen slightly from a year ago.
And industrywide revenue in the U.S. and Canada for the first 11 months of 1993 surged about 28% from 1992, says the Software Publishers Association.
With more low-cost personal computers being sold, "it's clear more people this year are going to do their taxes using tax software than last year," says Ken Wasch, the association's executive director.
Daniel Schley, president of Meca, a unit of H&R Block Inc. and publisher of Andrew Tobias's TaxCut, predicts "this will be a tremendous year" for tax-software sales.
Enthusiasts say software saves time and aggravation.
But some buyers complain software can be tricky to use and often is of little use in gray areas or complex questions.
SHOULD CONGRESS grant amnesty to nanny-tax offenders for their past sins?
This thorny question troubles lawmakers as they struggle to rewrite the heavily criticized and widely ignored law requiring household employers to pay Social Security taxes on housekeepers and other employees.
Now, anyone paying over $50 a quarter must pay Social Security taxes and file a form quarterly.
Experts predict Congress will raise the threshold to $1,000 a year or higher and require filing only once a year.
The question of granting partial or complete amnesty for past omissions is "highly complex," says Clint Stretch of Deloitte & Touche.
Advocates say wiping the slate clean would encourage more people to start filing.
But others insist amnesty would be unfair to honest taxpayers who complied for years and to workers who would lose benefits.
The House passed a bill last year lifting the annual threshold to $1,800 and making it retroactive, adjusted for inflation.
FILING BY PHONE: The IRS expands its program to six more states.
A file-by-telephone system tested in Ohio for the past two years is now also available in Florida, Indiana, Kentucky, Michigan, South Carolina and West Virginia.
The IRS expects to receive over 550,000 returns by phone this year, up from 149,000 last year.
But this "TeleFile" program is available only to single taxpayers who would otherwise use Form 1040EZ -- which means taxable income under $50,000 and no dependents.
Also, filers must not have any name or address changes to their tax-package label.
Filers dial a toll-free number and enter tax data with a touch-tone phone.
The call takes about five to seven minutes.
While the caller is on the line, the IRS calculates adjusted gross income, the tax, and any refund or tax due.
Most callers then mail a signed Form 1040-TEL with W-2 forms attached.
In southern Ohio, though, the IRS is testing completely paperless filing, with a "voice signature" attesting to the return's correctness.
Thus, the only thing taxpayers there may need to mail is a payment check.
The typical user last year was 25 years old and had income of $10,000.
WE LOVE COMPLEXITY: As taxpayers struggle with the new tax law, investors buy shares of H&R Block, the big tax-return preparer.
Block's stock now stands at $45.125, up nearly 20% from last October.
GOV. MERRILL of New Hampshire receives the top rating in a report card issued by the Cato Institute, a Washington think tank, on governors' tax and spending policies.
At the bottom, according to Stephen Moore and Dean Stansel of the free-market group, is Gov. Weicker of Connecticut.
TAX DROPOUTS: The IRS received 114,925,000 individual tax returns during 1993, down from 115,774,000 in 1992.
That was well below the 117 million returns officials once projected for 1993.
ELECTRONIC FILING: The IRS expects more than 14 million returns to be filed electronically this year.
Taxpayers in 23 states now can file both state and federal returns electronically to the IRS, which then relays the state agency the data it needs.
HELPING YOUR SON become a golf pro may be admirable, but is it deductible?
Saul H. Nova, an executive in the garment business, agreed to sponsor his son Jeff, who had won some amateur events, on the pro golf tour.
They made it official with a "Professional Golfer/Sponsor Agreement" in December 1987.
But competition proved tough; over several years, Jeff spent about $60,000 and won only $155.
The father finally ended the sponsorship because of the cost.
The IRS disallowed the deductions, saying he didn't have a profit motive.
Tax Court Special Trial Judge Peterson sided with the IRS.
The judge said Mr. Nova didn't prove that he had analyzed the pact as a profit-seeking venture.
Instead, the judge ruled, the father did it "to give his son the opportunity to make a career change and become a professional golfer."
The father's support "was no different than that of any parent who decides to financially help a child with educational expenses or with expenses for other career-seeking endeavors," the judge said.
The father plans to appeal, says his lawyer, Joseph Thibodeau.
BRIEFS: The IRS seeks a fiscal 1995 budget of $7.61 billion, up 3.5% from the prior year's authorized amount. . . .
Freebie: New IRS Publication 950 offers a primer on federal estate and gift taxes.
Call 800-8293676 for a copy.
