As one vital ratification vote nears in the proposed labor-led buyout of United Airlines, efforts of the pilot union's leadership to sell the deal to members are running into some unexpected, grass-roots resistance.
Leaders of the pilots' and the machinists' unions negotiated the $5 billion buyout agreement late last year with UAL Corp., the carrier's parent company.
In exchange for an initial stake of 53% of UAL, the two unions and thousands of non-contract workers offered more than $4.5 billion in wage and work-rule concessions and an additional package of cash, preferred stock and notes.
But as pilot union officials fanned out across the country this week to explain the proposal to United's 8,000 pilots, several pilots raised serious concerns about the proposed transaction in letters that are being widely circulated.
The airline's pilots stand to gain the largest proportion of employee-owned stock -- 46.2% -- but also face the largest pay cut as a group, 15.7%.
"It hasn't been smooth sailing in pilot-land" this week, said one union adviser.
One letter from a leading official of the pilots' union gave the first indication that ratification might not be a shoo-in.
Written by Dave Landry, the chairman of United's pilots' local in Los Angeles, the letter assailed several parts of the agreement and noted that ratification is "by no means assured."
Meanwhile, the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, which will put a vote to its members late this month, seems more solidly in favor of the proposed deal.
For one thing, roughly one-fifth of the machinists' membership -- 5,000 employees -- who work for a flight kitchen division that is being sold -- are likely to vote for the buyout.
They stand to receive severance packages if the transaction is completed.
Also, the leaders of the machinists union last week voted to strongly recommend that members approve the deal.
Members of the Air Line Pilots Association don't actually get to ratify the agreement.
Rather, it is the union's national leaders, called the master executive council, who will vote on the deal late this month.
However, one purpose of this week's roadshows is to sound out the wishes of United's pilots.
The council then is supposed to vote accordingly.
The lack of direct voting, standard ALPA procedure, has begun to rankle some United pilots.
Before negotiating the UAL buyout, the master executive council "never quizzed the rank-and-file about our feelings," said one United pilot in Seattle.
"The buyout isn't very popular, and we'd like to be able to vote individually."
It's hard to say just how widespread is the opposition among the pilots.
Union officials who have attended meetings in several cities this week say they have seen pockets of resistance, but believe most pilots generally are supportive.
"There are a lot of mixed feelings among pilots," conceded a pilots' union spokesman.
"Some are happy with the deal, some aren't."
Mr. Landry, the union leader in Los Angeles, wouldn't be interviewed.
But his letter criticized the proposed buyout for failing to provide so-called wage snapbacks.
At the end of the almost six-year period covered in the agreement, pilots would have to return to the negotiating table to bargain for a pay raise of more than 15.7% just to return to today's rates, his letter said.
Last year, United's pilots earned an average salary of $114,000, according to the company.
He also wrote that because the agreement allows retiring employees to sell their stock to the public, the total employees' share of stock would be diluted over time.
"In other words," the letter said, "the ESOP self-destructs."
In addition to approvals from the pilots and machinists unions, the UAL buyout requires shareholder consent.
A definitive agreement is set to be completed by March 15, and proxy materials will be mailed soon after.
Meanwhile, the Association of Flight Attendants, the other big union at United, said it recently received a proposal from UAL suggesting how the group could join the employee buyout.
The flight attendants, whose participation isn't necessary for the current transaction to close, have been reviewing the proposal in meetings this week.
Last summer, the flight attendants left the union group trying to acquire majority control of UAL in a dispute over the airline's decision to open a cabin-attendant base overseas.
