And so it comes down to the Main Event.
Nancy vs. Oksana Baiul and Surya Bonaly in the long program, for all the marbles.
Tonight at 7 at the Olympic Amphitheater here and 1 p.m.
New York time, or whenever CBS decides to air it (stay tuned!).
Be there or be square.
Wait a minute, you might be saying.
This was supposed to be Nancy vs. Tonya, womano a womano.
What happened to Tonya?
Tonya didn't skate very well Wednesday night in the short-show prelim, worth a third of the final score, that the figure-skating people choose to call the "technical program."
She stumbled coming out of the first part of her opening combination jump, took an extra step before the second part and, generally, performed as if she hadn't done enough stretching exercises beforehand.
She wound up in 10th place, well behind the above-mentioned top three, and unless something unthinkable happens to seven of the skaters above her (well, not unthinkable anymore), she will be returning to Portland unmedaled and facing graver questions than those surrounding her triple Lutz.
The cognoscenti -- meaning anyone who took the trouble to check recent results in the sport -- pretty much expected that outcome.
Nancy was a bronze medalist at the two-years-ago Olympics, the Ukrainian Baiul is the reigning world's champion and the Frenchwoman Bonaly was her runner-up.
You need credentials to get most places around these Olympic precincts, but especially into the upper reaches of the figure-skating standings.
Events aplenty remain to be run as the Lillehammer Games head into their homestretch, and all will appeal mightily to some.
Finns, Swedes, Canadians and Russians have hockey teams to root for.
Italians will get another chance to see their man, Alberto Tomba, try to outslalom the world.
Bjorn Dahlie and Vegard Ulvang, the skiing Norsemen, go in the 50-kilometer cross-country finale Sunday that their cross-country-mad countrymen have been awaiting eagerly.
But for us Americans, women's figure skating plays the main room in the Winter Olympics.
That phenomenon predates Nancy-Tonya, and it's interesting to speculate about the cause.
Potential medals surely are one; aside from short-track speed skating, the figs figure to present our last good chance for one of those, as it has in other years.
Maybe, too, the activity's charming imprecision is an antidote to two weeks of events measured to the millisecond, or ones requiring slicker hardware than you can get at Sharper Image.
Mostly, though, it's a good show, so good it's easy to forget that, really, that's all it is.
Where else in sports can you find comely competitors dressed like Robin Hood (Katarina Witt), a swan (Ms. Baiul), a French maid (Nancy), a German peasant girl (Tanja Szewczenko) and Miss Kitty from the Longbranch Saloon (Tonya), the way you did Wednesday?
If they were men, and weighed 150 pounds more, they'd be professional wrestlers.
And then there are the judges, here to decide, along with the rest of us, whether they prefer slim or chunky, blondes or brunettes, powerful or smooth.
Their job is easy if one top skater "hits" her program and all of the others falter, but that condition rarely obtains, so matters of taste intrude.
"It used to really get me when a kid of mine got robbed {by the judges}, but, eventually, I told myself this is the kind of sport it is, and I'd have to get used to it or quit," Kathy Casey, the veteran coach of the U.S. men's champion Scott Davis and others was saying before the Games began.
She went on: "The rules say somebody has to win so the judges must choose, and it can be tough.
I judged a men's professional meet once, and that was enough for me.
One fellow did a clown routine and another skated to `Ave Maria.'
It was comparing apples to oranges.
But in the long run, I think, the biases even out and the right skater wins.
I mean about 85% of the time."
The range of choice in the women's field was especially wide this time because of the presence of Ms. Witt, the Olympic champ of 1984 and '88.
She turned pro by definition of the International Skating Union after that, but, along with men's side ex-Olympic or world champs Brian Boitano, Kurt Browning and Viktor Petrenko, took advantage of a rule change to return.
None of those three men medaled, and, like them, Ms. Witt learned Wednesday that it's more difficult to please Olympic judges than an ice show audience in Omaha.
To these eyes, and to those of most of the 6,000 nonjudge spectators, her short-program routine looked perfectly fine, but all it got her was sixth place.
The Games seem to be telling the pros that, while their names look good on the marquee, they should look to their paychecks for gold.
That leaves us with the top trio and, maybe, fourth-placer Lu Chen of China for the top spot, and that might involve some choices.
Nancy, Ms. Chen and the waiflike, teenaged Ms. Baiul fall into the lyrical category that the judges traditionally favor.
Ms. Bonaly, born in Reunion Island, is the sport's premier leaper, one who is capable of doing tricks the sport's overseers don't permit.
Nancy won the technical competition because she hit her program while the others failed, however slightly.
A repeat of that would complete her transformation from victim to victor.
Weirdly, Ms. Baiul suffered a leg injury during practice, when she and Ms. Szewczenko collided.
Ms. Baiul received three stitches but is expected to skate tonight.
The consensus among the knowledgeable here, though, is this: If Ms. Baiul and Ms. Kerrigan skate equally well, Ms. Baiul will win because she's the better actress.
For Ms. Bonaly to win, those two would have to mess up while she completes all seven or eight of her triple jumps.
Assuming, of course, she comes down.
