White House notoriety Patsy Thomasson actually showed up to testify to Congress Tuesday, and proved herself charming.
She did little to still concerns about the administration's security procedures, however, and on the matter of her nocturnal visit to Vincent Foster's office in the wake of his death she pleaded the Fiske.
Ms. Thomasson "would like nothing better," she said, than to tell the subcommittee "what I did that night in that office."
But due to Special Counsel Robert Fiske's probe into Mr. Foster's death, she couldn't possibly comment on that.
Ms. Thomasson, in case you've spent the last month as an orbiting astronaut, is the FOB from Arkansas who was once the top aide of FOB bond dealer and drug convict Dan Lasater, and who has risen in life to be director of the Office of Administration at the White House, where she oversees personnel, computers and some security operations.
These responsibilities seem to weigh heavily in this administration.
The White House Counsel's office is responsible for security passes, the immediate responsibility of Associate Counsel William Kennedy III, the former Rose Law Firm partner now tottering on the brink of resignation (maybe by tonight's 7:30 press conference?) over a nanny-tax issue.
Last night, the White House said Mr. Kennedy would no longer handle passes.
The security situation is so dire that Congressmen Dan Glickman and Larry Combest, Chairman and ranking minority member of the House Intelligence Committee, have written the Director of Central Intelligence (see text below) more or less suggesting that he cut the White House off from classified information. (see accompanying illustration -- WSJ March 24, 1994)
More specifically, they asked CIA Director James Woolsey what steps he had taken to ensure that White House staffers without clearances hadn't had access to classified material.
The two Members said they were troubled, and that "The urgency of this matter has been highlighted by the arrest of Aldrich Ames," (for astronauts, the recently apprehended KGB mole in the CIA).
When Ms. Thomasson responded to similar concerns expressed this week by House subcommittee chair Steny Hoyer, a Maryland Democrat, she was hardly reassuring.
"We don't think we have any Aldrich Ameses at the White House," Ms. Thomasson responded.
"But we certainly could."
Ms. Thomasson admits that she lacked a permanent White House pass or security clearance until earlier this month; despite that, she has had 24-hour access to the West Wing.
At one point in her testimony, she also said she had "no need" to have the combinations to any safes in the White House; they are in the possession of Charles Easley, a security officer who works for her.
She also revealed that while Mr. Kennedy was handling clearances for White House passes, his own background check was finished in March 1993, but he didn't receive his own permanent pass until December.
GOP Rep. Frank Wolf, who first agitated these issues on the House subcommittee that oversees the White House budget, told us that White House Chief of Staff McLarty's background check was completed on January 22, 1993 -- two days after the inauguration.
He didn't get his permanent pass until just this past March 5, the day Mr. Fiske's first subpoenas arrived at the White House.
House Members wanted to know what was going on.
Ms. Thomasson, however, persisted in telling Rep. Wolf on Tuesday not to worry.
She said there was no reason for concern that senior White House aides lacked permanent passes because they nonetheless had gotten "requisite security" approval.
She holds that Mr. McLarty's case was "fully adjudicated," which apparently means the background check was complete and accepted by Mr. Kennedy, who just hadn't gotten around to forwarding the Chief of Staff's papers to the Secret Service.
This is "malarkey," says Phil Larsen, who was administrative officer in Jimmy Carter's White House and ran personnel management under President Bush.
The Secret Service must clear a final financial check, and is part of an adjudication.
"None of this makes any sense," he told us; it would be "astonishing" if security clearances were issued before passes were.
"The two always -- and should -- go together."
After sleeping overnight on Patsy's testimony, Rep. Wolf and Rep. Bill Clinger, ranking Republican on the Government Operations Committee, called for a GAO investigation of the White House pass problem.
At 8:15 p.m. last night, AP reported Press Secretary Dee Dee Myers had suddenly issued a "fact sheet" indicating that more than 100 White House staffers lack security clearances and one-third of the 1,044 employees don't have permanent passes.
