The best opportunity for the Clinton administration to punish Libyan terrorism is being missed.
Libyan ruler Moammar Gadhafi continues to defy the international community by refusing to cough up two operatives who have been indicted for their role in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am 103.
That terrorist act killed 270 people, including 189 Americans.
But despite President Clinton's tough campaign talk about bringing the fugitives to justice, the best the U.S. and its allies have been able to accomplish are United Nations sanctions that miss the main target -- Libya's oil revenues.
Now would be the ideal time to cut Libya's oil lifeline.
The world is awash in oil.
Henry Schuler, an oil-industry expert and critic of Col. Gadhafi, notes that current North Sea production of highgrade "light, sweet" oil, similar to that which the Europeans buy from Libya, is at record levels.
Indeed, the increase in North Sea production alone this year is expected to equal Libya's total production of 1.4 million barrels a day, Mr. Schuler says.
U.S. will appears to be lacking, though.
Despite the favorable world oil supply, the administration continues to accept its allies' assertions that they depend heavily on Libyan oil, and therefore can't go along with American requests for a U.N.-imposed oil embargo.
In the next few years, it will only become more difficult to persuade the Europeans to cut their business ties with Libya and punish Col. Gadhafi.
The French oil company Total SA reached an agreement in 1993 to conduct a feasibility study on developing Libya's Mabruk oil field, and could soon begin investing as much as $1 billion in the project.
An Italian oil company is discussing major development of natural-gas deposits in Libya.
And Col. Gadhafi has plans to expand Libya's ownership of refineries in Europe.
President Clinton suggested a way to spur the Europeans toward action.
On Dec. 21, he joined family members of victims of Pan Am 103 at a ceremony in Arlington National Cemetery to dedicate a memorial to those killed.
Mr. Clinton told the family members that the 1988 attack on Pan Am 103 was "an attack on America," an assertion that neither President Reagan nor President Bush ever made.
Such an attack would seem to demand a response similar to Mr. Clinton's decision to unleash a raid on Iraq in retaliation for Saddam Hussein's alleged attempt to assassinate former President Bush in Kuwait.
Mr. Schuler and other critics suggest that it is time to deal with the Libya issue outside of the U.N., where it bogs down in debate.
They advocate telling the European allies that the U.S. will act militarily unless the Europeans join an international oil embargo.
Instead, the administration has sent Libya and other would-be terrorist states a bad signal by proposing to fold the State Department's counterterrorist operation into a larger bureaucratic unit that would also handle such other matters as narcotics and international crime.
Since 1986, the head of counterterrorism has held the rank of ambassador and reported directly to the secretary of state.
The administration's idea, which Congress is expected to alter, "would downgrade the counterterrorism job, and amalgamate it with two other issues, which means it won't get as much attention," says Paul Bremer, who held the counterterrorism post from 1986 to 1989.
In the absence of more decisive Western action, Col. Gadhafi shows signs of reverting to his old ways.
In December, a leading Libyan dissident and U.S. resident, Mansour el Kikhia, was kidnapped from a hotel room in Cairo.
Some U.S. national security officials worry that his disappearance could signal a return of Col. Gadhafi's 1970s campaign to wipe out opponents.
Still, the U.S. continues to shy away from aggressive action.
Following the ceremony in Arlington, Susan and Daniel Cohen, whose daughter, Theodora, was killed on Pan Am 103, wrote a scathing letter to the White House.
They said: "After five years, we will have a tombstone for the kids, a place to come and cry every year.
Is that the best the most powerful nation on Earth can do?"
