For Paul McCartney, being one of the most famous rock musicians in the world means not putting your name on your newest album.
Mr. McCartney, the 51-year-old former Beatle, has just released "Strawberries Oceans Ships Forest" on Capitol Records.
But his name doesn't appear on the liner notes -- or anywhere else for that matter.
Although the album's nine tracks are attributed to a mysterious performer called "The Fireman," the rhythmic blend of industrial music, tribal drums and strange moanings was recorded by Mr. McCartney and British producer Youth, otherwise known as Martin Glover.
It is practically impossible to recognize Mr. McCartney's distinctive voice on any of the cuts.
That may be the point.
Although Mr. McCartney has released more than 20 albums since his glory days as a Beatle, his last two works -- "Paul Is Live" and "Off the Ground" -- both produced disappointing sales results in this country.
Some in the record industry wonder whether Mr. McCartney's low-key approach will be any more successful.
"He's trying to avoid preconceived notions, but I don't think this is going to work," says Lou Simon, a senior director of artists and repertoire at RCA Records.
"You have to remember that Paul McCartney is now about the same age as Perry Como when the Beatles came to the United States in 1964."
While other performers go out of their way to get noticed -- rhythm-and-blues trio Tony Toni Tone have just finished making a new music video for Mercury Records in the nude -- Mr. McCartney's new album will receive no planned promotional support.
James Bowman, manager of the Coconuts Music & Movies store in New York's Greenwich Village, says Capitol Records shipped the album without any mention of the former Beatle.
Martin Scott, marketing manager of MPL Communications Ltd., Mr. McCartney's London-based management and publishing company, says the performer won't be giving any interviews on the subject.
Mr. McCartney has two reasons for concealing his identity.
"Paul is known for a particular kind of music, and he didn't want his fans to buy this album and then be disappointed because it wasn't what they expected," says Mr. Scott.
"Also, he wanted people to listen before they knew who it was."
