If the U.S. were to adopt a Canadian-style national medical plan, health-care spending in America would:
A) Increase by $21.2 billion.
B) Decrease by up to $241 billion.
C) Increase by $38 billion.
The answer: all of the above -- or none of the above, depending on whose data you believe.
Each estimate is based on a sophisticated economic model that its sponsors swear by (Lewin-VHI, a consulting firm, produced answer A; the Economic and Social Research Institute, a nonprofit research group, answer B; and the Congressional Budget Office answer C).
Each is designed to guide America's lawmakers in the health-care debate.
And each underscores a simple truth: In the complex effort to calculate healthcare costs, economic modeling and forecasting are very uncertain sciences.
Don't necessarily believe what you read.
"The numbers out of these models are better than you could get by back-of-the-envelope calculations," says Constance Citro, a researcher at the National Academy of Sciences who has studied health-care models.
"But there needs to be more recognition that there is uncertainty."
Actually, uncertainty abounds.
It takes a mountain of computer coding and often millions of pieces of data to create an operating model -- a computer program that attempts to sum up mathematically the effects of potential policy changes.
Even the most sophisticated of these models is usually far from objective.
In the end, a welter of subjective judgments and guesses gets funneled into the models, and that's where the trouble begins.
"It's a weak point," says Donald Yett, a professor at the University of Southern California who helped develop one health-care cost model.
"We end up having to make rather crude forecasts."
Some questions: How many people will stick with their own doctors or opt instead to join health-maintenance organizations?
How efficiently -- and thus inexpensively -- will these HMOs be run?
Once people who have never had coverage before are insured, how much health care will they use?
No one knows for sure.
Different assumptions about these and myriad other factors can result in answers that diverge by billions -- if not trillions -- of dollars.
So it is that the government, perplexed, has been examining the examiners.
One study by Congress's Office of Technology Assessment, which looked at the differing analyses of the Canadian-style health plan, is titled "An Inconsistent Picture."
Another, a paper prepared by Ms. Citro and Eric Manushek of University of Rochester, asks: "Why Are the Numbers So Different?"
One reason the numbers are different is that, again, the assumptions are, too.
In their analysis of the Canadian-style health plan, both Lewin-VHI, a unit of managed-care concern Value Health Inc., and the Economic and Social Research Institute calculated the administrative costs the U.S. would save if it adopted Canada's program.
But the institute added a further -- and quite significant-assumption: that the U.S. would drive down its overall health-care spending to Canada's level (as a percentage of gross domestic product), which would be about a 30% drop.
While the institute acknowledges that isn't realistic -- "We did it to see what were the potential savings if we had a system that costs us as little as the Canadians did," says the institute's president, Jack Meyer -- the result of that assumption is the huge difference in the two estimates.
The same problem crops up in competing models of the Clinton health plan.
Take, for example, that question about whether HMOs would or wouldn't be less costly than traditional fee-for-service plans.
Lewin-VHI assumed no.
The Clinton administration assumed yes.
And what about the cost of insuring the previously uninsured?
Again, a wide difference of opinion between Lewin-VHI and the administration, with the Clinton forecasters coming in on the low side.
"We just disagreed," says Kenneth E. Thorpe, deputy assistant secretary for health policy, who coordinated the White House's model.
Based on its assumptions, the administration figured that over five years its plan would cut about $58 billion from America's budget deficit, more than double the $25 billion figure Lewin estimated.
Even within the White House, though, there isn't always unanimity.
When two different health-care modeling groups in the administration found big differences in their cost forecasts, fingers wagged.
Some observers felt that "one organization was producing numbers more politically correct than another," says Dean Farley, a senior research manager at the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research.
In fact, he says, when the two groups compared notes, they found that what they disagreed on wasn't the future but the present.
The two had very different estimates of what is being spent to care for uninsured people today.
Outdated research also causes problems.
Some of the most extensive research comparing HMOs with fee-for-service plans was done by Rand Corp. in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
Even today, many modelers base some of their assumptions on Rand's results.
But times have changed, and so have conditions in the health-care marketplace.
Back when Rand did its study, for example, it was examining an early form of HMO that had doctors practicing together as a group.
Today, however, linked networks of individual doctors are the more prevalent HMO.
That difference may affect costs.
"It's risky to assume that the past is prologue to the future," says Mr. Meyer at the Economic and Social Research Institute.
What's more, the sheer volume of data and the complexity of calculations involved often result in flaws creeping into big models.
"We have errors in the original data sets, forecasting errors, judgments that have to be made about important parameters, estimates that economists pull out of their heads," says Jack Rodgers, director of health-policy analysis at Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm.
"What comes out the other end?
The answer is truly that it's very complicated and no one knows the answer."
So, the forecasts and modeling data flooding the health-care debate may help lawmakers vaguely sketch out the horizon, but little more.
In the end, the chief thing the models confirm is something legislators already knew: "The difficulties we have in estimating are a metaphor for the difficulties of doing these reforms in the first place," says John Sheils, vice president of Lewin-VHI.
"This is a massive restructuring, and we don't know how it's going to come out."
