Tokyo equities ended mixed Tuesday, influenced by stock-index futures, with the market focused on foreign-exchange developments.
London prices fell but finished above intraday lows, after muscle on Wall Street provided late support.
Sydney stocks rebounded 1.1% on bargain hunting following the previous day's slump.
Hong Kong shares rallied 2.1% but the gains didn't recover the losses of the day before.
Singapore equities also climbed 2.1%, as retail investors propelled a late surge ahead of government budget proposals.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.57, up 0.74, reflecting higher Asia/Pacific and American markets and lower European markets.
Plantations stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 234.06, up 10.25, or 4.6%, with Dunlop of Malaysia posting a 9.8% gain in its local currency.
Advanced technology/medical devices stocks trailed at 68.32, down 2.42, or 3.4%, with Stryker of the U.S. sliding 3.8% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which advanced 434.34 points Monday, dropped 51.31 to 19342.63, near the session low.
In trading Wednesday, the Nikkei rose 35.81 points to close the morning session at 19378.44.
Tuesday's first-section volume was estimated at 310 million shares, up from 234.4 million shares a day earlier.
Gainers outnumbered decliners, 614-388.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which rose 12.85 points Monday, edged up 2.21 to 1572.17.
Stocks rallied in morning dealings following the U.S. dollar's strength the previous day against the Japanese yen in currency dealings, but the U.S. currency fell back in the afternoon session, and stocks followed it lower.
Shares were led by index futures, as first strength and then weakness in futures contracts prompted arbitragers to buy and then sell in the stock market.
Though the yen's continued retreat cheered investors, the market remained nervous about the threat that the currency market poses to Japan's economic recovery.
Overseas investors bought more actively than they had in recent days, as some of the pressure from the yen's surge had lifted; a high yen makes yen-denominated assets, including Japanese equities, more expensive for holders of other currencies.
But public pension funds, which were rumored to have bought Monday, were quiet Tuesday.
Investors also were awaiting Japan's offer to the U.S. this week to try to head off escalation of trade disputes between the two countries.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index fell 16.6 points to 3333.7, after bouncing up from the session low of 3320.3.
The FT 30-stock index declined 9.3 points to 2576.5.
Volume was 625.2 million shares, compared with 506.3 million shares a day earlier.
After opening slightly higher, the benchmark index quickly slipped into negative territory, where it remained most of the day, pressured by the March stock-index futures contract's discount to the market.
Investors were disappointed by statements by six independent economic advisers to Britain's treasury, who were bearish about further interest-rate reductions, overshadowing encouraging British economic growth data for the fourth quarter.
And the market was nervous ahead of an appearance in the U.S. Congress by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, but had little reaction to his remarks, which were similar to the views of the British advisers.
But as both positions didn't present any surprises, stocks rebounded a bit.
In Frankfurt, share prices slipped in extremely low volume.
The DAX 30-stock index fell 11.91 points to 2107.62, deepening this week's loss to 44.35 points.
Of the DAX issues, 23 retreated and seven advanced.
Though some investors remained on the sidelines ahead of Mr. Greenspan's testimony in the U.S., the German market's slackness also was attributed to testing the wind for stocks' direction.
In Paris, prices firmed following two losing sessions, easily brushing aside profit-taking with boosts from strong French trade and household consumption data.
In Amsterdam, despite a stronger dollar and bond prices, stocks fell, hurt by disappointing corporate earnings.
In Milan, equities ended lower as Italian political preoccupations began to intrude, with elections scheduled for late next month.
In Stockholm, prices declined broadly, as enthusiasm was damped partly by a trend toward higher bond yields.
In Brussels, prices continued to slide in thin trading, on fears about long-term interest rates.
In Mexico City, equities fell for the ninth time in 10 sessions.
The IPC index slumped 1.8% as profit-taking continued with the return of U.S. investors following a holiday Monday, when the Mexican market sank on a report of disappointing economic growth last year.
The market has lost 8.5% in the past two weeks.
In Sydney, stocks bounced back strongly, led by a 2.3% jump for the banking sector, while gold shares weakened in line with the metal's price; Monday's sell-off was considered an overreaction to fears of higher interest rates in the U.S.
In Hong Kong, the rebound came in an afternoon rally, though turnover remained sluggish partly because of resistance by insitutional investors, who stayed on the sidelines, poised to sell; all sectors rose, paced by a 3.4% jump for property issues.
In Singapore, shares racked up solid gains in late dealings, mainly on buying of blue chips, property stocks and smaller Malaysian equities, ahead of Singapore's budget proposals Wednesday.
Property stocks were hot, on a bet that the budget will seek a cut to 14% from 16% in the property tax rate.
Activity was dominated by retail investors, and buying expanded gradually as resolution of a state election race became clearer, and on positive corporate earnings.
In Kuala Lumpur, the market jumped 1.6%, driven by heavy trading in small and speculative stocks, but blue chips remained weak, as foreign investors either stayed away or liquidated positions, partly because of the weak Malaysian currency.
In Taipei, prices fell broadly in lackluster trading, continuing a stubborn correction, despite the posting of impressive corporate profits; sentiment was damped by the Taiwan central bank's announcement Monday that it wouldn't ease restrictions on foreign investment.
Among corporate developments, in Amsterdam, Unilever slumped 6.30 guilders, or 2.8%, to 221.50 guilders ($115.29).
The Anglo-Dutch consumer products company's 1993 profit fell 9.8% to a lower-than-expected 3.61 billion guilders ($1.88 billion) from a year earlier, hurt by a surge in one-time charges to 1.37 billion guilders from 233 million guilders.
Excluding special items, net income rose 2.9% to 4.27 billion guilders.
Unilever raised the annual dividend 1.7% to 5.88 guilders a share, citing confidence in the underlying strength of its business.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
