Tokyo shares dropped 1.3% Monday, as Japanese corporations and financial institutions unloaded positions to take profits after the market's recent run-up.
London prices gained, led by smaller issues as investors focused on the economic recovery under way in Britain.
Sydney stocks jumped to a six-year high, while many Asian bourses were hit by profit-taking.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 113.03, down 0.21, reflecting lower Asia/Pacific and American markets and higher European markets.
Precious metals stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 162.97, up 3.11, or 1.95%, with Gold Mines of Kalgoorlie of Australia posting a 12% gain in its local currency.
Plantations stocks trailed at 227.25, down 21.68, or 8.71%, with Highlands & Lowlands of Malaysia sliding 12% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which jumped 396.44 points Friday, retreated 248.33 to 18725.37.
In trading Tuesday, the Nikkei rose 37.41 points to close the morning session at 18762.78.
Monday's first-section volume was estimated at a thin 280 million shares, compared with 468.7 million shares in the previous session.
Losers overwhelmed gainers, 701-333.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which climbed 22.15 points Friday, fell 9.71 to 1515.91.
Coming after two weeks of nearly uninterrupted gains, Tokyo's decline was viewed as a relatively positive correction.
Overseas investors again were net buyers, though their purchasing slowed from last week, when they were the driving force behind the market's 800-point rally.
After a sharp arbitrage-related plunge at Monday's opening, shares steadied, with a brief burst of afternoon buying pushing them higher before domestic sales knocked them back at the close.
But participants said sentiment remained positive about prospects for swift parliamentary passage of Japanese political-reform legislation, a precursor to measures to breathe life into the staggering economy.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index rose 7.2 points to 3407.8, though this was down from a 20.5-point intraday gain.
The FT 30-stock index rose 3.4 points to 2615.5l.
Volume was 808.3 million shares, compared with 1.02 billion shares in the previous session.
The trading trend was led by the futures market, where a late retreat pushed FT-100 prices down, and attention shifted to FT-SE 250 stocks, which have smaller capitalizations than the 100 big issues.
The 250-share index clocked a 33.1-point rise to 3948.8, its second consecutive record high.
The top stocks are already highly valued and investors again moved to the small-cap issues, which were hit hardest by recession and are believed to be positioned to benefit the most from economic recovery.
For the small stocks, low interest rates have slashed borrowing costs, allowing them to expand to meet growing demand and to post solid earnings.
Indeed, the British government yesterday reported that inflation remained subdued while growth continued.
In Frankfurt, prices fell.
The DAX 30-stock index declined 4.44 points to 2137.38, as blue chips were still ailing from disappointing corporate news last week.
Bucking the trend, Metallgesellschaft soared 27 marks, or 13%, to 241 marks ($137.76), after the metal and engineering company was rescued from a bankruptcy filing when major creditor banks over the weekend agreed to a package of 3.4 billion marks ($1.94 billion) in equity and credit.
In Paris, after chalking up moderate early gains, equities shed 1.2%, dragged lower by heavy selling in index futures.
Sales from computer-guided programs kicked in late in the session and heavy selling on the futures side pushed blue chips sharply lower; traders said a U.S. investment bank was a major seller in index futures.
In Amsterdam, prices rose, though with a weak Wall Street opening, some globally traded Dutch multinationals couldn't hold their early gains and finished with declines; in general, though, the market was underpinned by the London bourse's rise, the steady dollar, and news Sunday that the Dutch government planned to use a tax-revenue windfall to reduce personal income-tax rates this year.
In Milan, shares climbed 1.9% following weekend decisions to disband Italy's Parliament and hold elections March 27, helping to clear the slate in the country's scandal-tainted political arena.
The move allowed the bourse to turn to the economy, which is expected to manage a slow recovery this year as interest rates ease.
In Stockholm, the market surged broadly to a record for the second session in a row in extremely heavy trading.
The climb was paced by forestry issues, which are to raise prices on several products this spring, and blue-chip industrials, which gained from rosy profit forecasts.
In Zurich, prices firmed solidly, led by cyclical, banking and some chemical issues.
Still, the finish was off the day's highs, after Frankfurt's weak showing prompted scattered profit-taking on the Swiss bourse, and the insurance sector was hurt in the final hour on news of an earthquake in Los Angeles.
In Sydney, share prices surged 1.4% to their highest levels since the global stock market crash in October 1987, supported by a rise in the price of gold and buying by offshore investors.
In Hong Kong, shares ended with mild gains in a themeless session marked by choppy dealings after spectacular drops last week ending in a big gain Friday.
In Singapore, prices recovered from the day's lows but still finished with a 1.1% loss in moderately thin dealings; selling was reinforced by limited buying, as brokerage houses continued to put a cap on trades, and many institutional investors stayed sidelined because of market volatility.
In Kuala Lumpur, stocks slumped 2.6% in brisk dealings, as edgy investors, in a bid to reduce their exposure, took profits after Friday's soaring rebound.
In Taipei, stocks slipped in active turnover, as investors raked in profits following the 5.6% surge in the previous session.
In Manila, equities also eased on profittaking.
In Seoul, shares fell after swinging wildly in reaction to corporate news.
In Bangkok, stocks sank 2.8% in moderately active trading, after rebounding Friday; participants were nervous after stock indexes in the region fell earlier in the day.
Among other corporate developments, in Paris, Eurotunnel lost 2.9 French francs, or 5.4%, to 50.7 francs ($8.54), after Trans-Manche Link, the Franco-British consortium of contractors for the tunnel under the English Channel, reopened the unresolved question of who will absorb billions of francs in cost overruns on the project.
Agreement must be reached in five months before an arbitration panel takes over.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
