Prudential Securities Inc. seems to be running into legal spats at every turn these days.
An investor sued a Prudential Securities stockbroker starring in the firm's new "straight talk" television advertising campaign, alleging fraud in his limited-partnership account.
The investor, Maximos Mardelli -- an 81-year-old Roman Catholic priest -- said the broker improperly forced him to accept a small settlement involving a $200,000 portfolio of Prudential real-estate partnerships, rather than advising him of other legal options.
The suit, filed in a Los Angeles federal court, is ticklish for the brokerage arm of Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
Prudential launched the ad campaign with much fanfare earlier this month in a bid to polish its tarnished image.
The ads feature Prudential brokers leveling with their clients above the message: "Prudential Securities today.
It starts with straight talk."
Prudential, the nation's fourth-largest brokerage firm, has set up a $330 million reparations fund as part of an October settlement with federal and state regulators.
Prudential has been accused of misleading investors on the risks and returns of $8.15 billion of partnerships in the 1980s.
The broker, Jeffery D. Daggett, couldn't be reached for comment.
But Prudential said the 40-year-old Mr. Daggett has had a "spotless" compliance history since joining Prudential in 1986.
Indeed, a check of the broker's compliance record with regulators shows no disciplinary cases.
Prudential said Msgr.
Mardelli didn't complain to the firm in the more than six years he had an account there, nor did he ever complain about the real-estate partnership settlement.
In a statement, Prudential said: "In our experience, it's most irregular for a client or his legal representative to commence a proceeding against a broker without first making a complaint to the firm."
Joseph Lovretovich, a Woodland Hills, Calif., lawyer representing Msgr.
Mardelli, said the complaint was in the works for "awhile" before recently seeing the Prudential commercials featuring Mr. Daggett.
"Pru isn't involved in straight talk," asserted Mr. Lovretovich.
"They should stop trying to use the legal system to minimize their exposure."
Prudential, for its part, says Mr. Lovretovich has filed more than 15 similar cases on behalf of Prudential investors, alleging that they were told they had no option but to settle real-estate partnership cases.
When Mr. Daggett inherited Msgr.
Mardelli's account, its value was about $300,000, Prudential said.
Despite losses in the monsignor's $100,000 investment in VMS Realty Partners real-estate partnerships, his brokerage account was still about $300,000 when he transferred from Prudential, the firm said.
Mardelli took part in the VMS class-action settlement in 1991, in which investors received just pennies on the dollar.
Mardelli, who couldn't be reached for comment, switched his Prudential account from Prudential to Charles Schwab Corp. in 1992.
