The Bank of England, apparently seeking to bolster business confidence, cut its base lending rate by one-fourth point to 5.25% amid predictions that another small cut may follow.
The central bank said better-than-expected inflation projections led to the cut.
Speaking at a conference in Paris, British Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke indicated that a further cut of one-fourth point may follow, asserting that the government is "set on a course of restrained inflation."
The move seemed timed to gain political mileage for the ruling Conservative Party, which is raising taxes and wants to ensure that the U.K.'s recovery continues.
However, a one-fourth point rate cut will provide little benefit for consumers, economists said.
It may even depress savings, if deposits are earning less interest.
"It's difficult to see what inspired this cut," said Peter Warburton, chief economist at Robert Fleming Securities.
However, the reduction should make it easier for companies to raise capital, Mr. Warburton added, and provides businesses a psychological boost.
Still, London stocks reacted little, if at all, to the rate cut.
The bank's decision also sent a signal to international investors that the U.K.'s rates aren't going to follow those in the U.S., where the Federal Reserve Bank increased the federal-funds rate by one-fourth point to 3.25% last week, roiling world markets.
The last British cut was in November, when the base rate was lowered to 5.5% from 6%.
Despite Mr. Clarke's optimism, economists take a dimmer view of the recovery's strength.
Certain indicators, including monetary growth, signal that the recovery is slowing, and that inflation is as likely to rise as to decline in coming months, according to Chris Dillow, an economist at Nomura Research Institute here.
Mr. Dillow said he believes the tax increases planned for April will hurt the recovery.
The government insists they won't, asserting incomes will rise as the economy strengthens.
Britain's overall inflation rate in December was 1.9%, with an underlying rate of 2.7% after taking out the effect of lower mortgage-interest payments.
At a news conference, Bank of England officials projected inflation would stabilize at 2% to 3% after the first half of this year excluding mortgage-interest payments and the impact of higher indirect taxes.
Economists see a much gloomier inflation picture.
Mr. Dillow says underlying inflation, excluding mortgage payments, could grow to about 4.5% by year's end.
Mr. Warburton sees inflation hovering around 3.25% by year's end, and expects general economic growth of only 1.8%, compared with the government's projection of 2.5%.
"One could argue that this rate cut should have been deeper and come much sooner," Mr. Warburton said.
