FIVE YEARS AGO, when Ron Brown became the first black to head the Democratic Party, he got a prescient piece of advice from Roger Wilkins, a prominent black academic.
"You are perfectly positioned to do something Democrats need to do," Mr. Wilkins advised.
"Steal the crime issue back from the Republicans."
Today, that is essentially what is happening.
As crime escalates in importance, polls say the public now thinks Democrats are as capable of fighting it as are Republicans.
Coming 25 years after Richard Nixon perfected the art of running for sheriff and president simultaneously, this represents a noteworthy change.
How did it happen?
At least in part, precisely because of hardening attitudes in the black community about crime and punishment.
This new attitude has pushed Democrats as a whole toward a tougher line, and has made it politically correct for President Clinton to talk about harsher penalties without being accused of simply suggesting ways to throw more blacks in jail.
Black congressional leaders actually have been lagging behind this changing attitude within their own constituency.
But as anticrime legislation is crafted in the House of Representatives beginning this week, the trick for Democrats is to take this new attitude into account without overreacting to it.
For a look just below the surface also shows that it's easy to misinterpret the change.
There's no doubt that blacks attach enormous importance to fighting crime.
Consider one finding in a poll taken a week ago by The Wall Street Journal and NBC News, in which Americans were asked to pick which of a series of issues they thought needed the greatest attention from the federal government.
Among blacks, 41% cited combating street crime and violence, double the percentage that cited any other issue.
By contrast, 30% of whites cited combating street crime.
AN EARLIER JOURNAL/NBC poll found few big distinctions along racial lines over some of today's trendy get-tough tactics for fighting crime.
A majority of whites and nonwhites alike favored putting 100,000 more police officers on the streets.
Some 65% of whites said they favored making more crimes punishable by death, while 59% of nonwhites agreed.
By virtually identical shares, a majority of whites and nonwhites alike favored lowering to 14 the age at which juveniles can be tried as adults when accused of serious crime.
And blacks were far more enthusiastic about raising fees for gun dealers and taxes for ammunition.
"I think it is correct that the black community has toughened its stance on crime," says Albert Wynn, a thoughtful, 42-year-old black freshman congressman from Maryland.
Rep. Wynn traces the change to the end of a period of "denial" in the black community, when "people . . . wouldn't even discuss the problem of black-on-black crime."
For their part, aides to President Clinton say they picked up on the change while conducting polls and focus groups with voters during the presidential campaign, particularly in some striking talks with blacks in South Carolina.
The Clinton camp's conclusion: As long as black voters feel assured that a politician starts out with solid convictions on basic civil-rights protections, they will accept a tougher line on crime.
THE CONGRESSIONAL Black Caucus, which has resisted significant parts of a crime bill the Senate passed last year, has started catching up to this new attitude.
But while taking advantage of that change, the Clinton administration faces the parallel task of reining in other Democrats who will be tempted to race ahead with some overly simplistic notions about what African-Americans really want.
There is ample evidence that blacks are fully comfortable with tougher punishments for today's generation of criminals only when they are accompanied with some meaningful social programs designed to save the next generation of potential criminals.
At the same time its attitudes are hardening, Rep. Wynn warns, "the black community is concerned that not enough resources are being invested in disadvantaged communities: urban academies, boot camps, things like this."
Nor are blacks much taken by some of the more simplistic crime-fighting proposals.
Recent Journal/NBC polls, for instance, suggest blacks are cynical about the usefulness of simply building more prisons.
And blacks, says Rep. Wynn, see a lot of "foolishness" in some of the sweeping three-strikes-and-you're-out proposals to put repeat offenders away for life.
President Clinton seems to sense the need for a balancing act.
He's wisely trying to limit the scope of the three-strikes provision that Congress ultimately passes, and talks about prevention as well as punishment.
Black attitudes can help forge a new Democratic identity in crime fighting -- but only if the party's approach is as sophisticated as are black attitudes themselves.
