As a fresh college graduate, Jiang Xinhao was elated when China's State Commission for Restructuring Economy hired him to study the development of special economic zones.
"It was one of the hottest jobs around for young people," he says.
That was in 1986, in the early days of China's experiment with free-market economics.
Today, the 28-year-old, armed with a portable phone and a pager, darts around Beijing as a manager for Heng Tong Co., a thriving property and transport company.
He earns about 2,000 yuan ($230) a month, compared with about 300 yuan at his old job.
"Researching reforms is out; `xia hai' is in," Mr. Jiang says.
Xia hai, which means to jump into the sea, is slang for leaving government to enter the business world.
Lots of government employees, most of them semiskilled workers and specialized technicians, have taken the leap since the early 1980s.
But more recently, some of China's best and brightest bureaucrats have joined the rush to the private sector.
Better pay is one reason.
But many people are leaving their government jobs because they find private business more challenging and more interesting.
In addition, Beijing's 1989 crackdown on pro-democracy activists put a damper on many government researchers and policy makers who backed the movement, prompting them to pursue reform from the outside.
In one way, the exodus is good, helping Beijing reduce its bloated bureaucracy.
Last year, Beijing ordered that all government departments cut staff by one-fourth, covering about two million jobs.
But the brain drain comes at a time when China needs expertise to help guide it through some of the more challenging phases of reform, such as overhauling ailing state enterprises and reforming the tax system while keeping inflation, currently in double digits, from worsening.
"The government's quality and efficiency are going down," says Yang Yang, executive vice president of China International Intellectech Co., a job-placement firm partly backed by a government agency.
"The government should be slim, but it should also have muscle.
Now some substantial departments don't have substance."
The State Council's Development Research Center, for example, has lost about two-thirds of 16 researchers in its market and price department over the past two years.
Ma Jiantang, who heads the department, says that while the office used to be overstaffed, "I wish some of them would have stayed.
The problem is economic research organizations these days have neither power nor money."
Tian Yuan is one researcher that the center would have liked to keep.
A year ago, Mr. Tian left his job to become chairman of China International Futures Co.
The thoughtful, soft-spoken analyst-turned-businessman says he made the switch because he felt he could accomplish more in the private sector.
"My personality is such that when I have an idea, I just do it," he says.
"To set up a futures market in China requires a lot of explaining to the government, and in the time that it takes, I could've gone ahead and done it all."
The 39-year-old Mr. Tian worked around the clock, napping occasionally on his office floor, as he built up the company's business of trading gold, commodity, financial and other futures on Chinese and foreign exchanges.
In the year since he took over, his staff has grown to 1,000 from five, and assets have doubled to 100 million yuan.
Mr. Tian now earns more and rides in a chauffered Audi.
But he says idealism underpins his drive in his current job just as it did in government, where he conducted pioneering experiments with mergers and futures markets in the mid-1980s.
"I still want to help my country, but my way of doing it is different," he says.
"Before, I developed policy.
Now, I can help develop an industry."
He says he has turned down several offers to return to government work.
The belief among people such as Mr. Tian that they can help China more by working in the private sector has been stoked by the government's attitude toward them.
As a department head at the research institute of the State Commission for Restructuring Economy, Zhang Shaojie participated in some of the front-line reform debates of the 1980s.
But following the 1989 crackdown and a bout of economic overheating, reform efforts came to a virtual halt.
So in 1991, he and some friends set up Heng Tong, the Beijing property and transport concern where Mr. Jiang works, with Mr. Zhang as chairman.
"I took eight researchers with me to Heng Tong," says the 41-year-old Mr. Zhang.
(Mr. Jiang joined later.)
In some ways, he says, he has been able to accomplish more for reform with Heng Tong than he did in government.
For example, when former colleages at the restructuring commission wanted to experiment with so-called legal-body shares, which are traded only among enterprises, he volunteered Heng Tong to issue shares after other companies refused.
In addition, "We can ask local governments for such-and-such a condition if we bring in investments, and that's like a kind of reform," he says.
Not all bureaucrats who go into business enjoy the competition and risk that come with it.
Zheng Hongqing, chairman of Wuhua Co., says that while he wouldn't consider returning to his high-level position at the restructuring commission for now, running his property-investment concern hasn't been easy.
In late 1992, Mr. Zheng took up an offer to run the company from one of the government departments that financed it.
At the time, the property market was peaking.
Shortly afterward, prices started to fall, and badly needed loans were cut off as Beijing implemented an austerity program in June.
As a result, the company hasn't been able to sell or develop its holdings in Beijing, and "if you can't sell, you lose money," says Mr. Zheng.
"The differences between theory and actually doing something are really big," he sighs.
