GAY PARTNERS' BENEFITS gain favor, but the pace of change is slow.
Law firms, consultants and manufacturers are asking more often about insuring employees' same-sex mates, mostly in the Northeast and West, says Andrew Sherman of Segal Co. in Boston.
Home Box Office Inc. in New York, which began offering "spousal equivalents" coverage in July, says covering gay partners costs 83% what heterosexual spouses cost, because of no pregnancy costs.
International Data Group in Boston has 25 people in its nonmarried partner plan; about a fifth are homosexual couples.
Still, change isn't quick.
Francis Moynihan of the New England Employee Benefits Council says the coverage isn't drawing more interest than many other potential new benefits, such as on-site day care.
Despite talks with its gay and lesbian caucus, Xerox Corp., of Stamford, Conn., decides against coverage because of cost.
As with many other areas of benefits, companies wait to see how Clinton's health-care overhaul turns out before making any major changes.
SEX DISCRIMINATION?
It happens only to others, many women say.
Women contend that sex bias is prevalent in the workplace, but rarely believe it happens to them, say psychologists Diana Cordova of University of Michigan and Faye Crosby and Karen Jaskar of Smith College.
This "not me" attitude is part of what the researchers call "the denial of personal disadvantage," an outlook shared by black activists, gay men and others.
Ms. Crosby led studies of men and women of comparable age, education, training and job level.
Although women earn less than male counterparts and believe that discrimination is a social problem, only 8% of the women feel shortchanged.
FIRMS TRY TO AID workers in natural disasters, but rarely have formal plans.
A string of disasters, capped by last week's California earthquake, has companies thinking about helping employees.
In Des Moines, Iowa, Meredith Corp. is setting up a "phone tree" system to keep workers informed in disasters.
The publisher closed its headquarters for 2 1/2 weeks during last summer's floods.
Ryder System creates a disaster-relief fund for workers, with employee donations matched by the company.
Enron, which recently had dozens of windows in its Houston office tower broken by a tornado, lets workers stay home for natural disasters based on "personal needs."
Dayton Hudson also uses an as-needed leave standard, and provides workers with grants and low-interest loans.
In Houston, city employees donate food, clothes and money; Texas law bans paid time off for disasters because it is considered a gift of taxpayer money.
HOT TIMES FOR TEMPS: While the industry represents only about 1.4% of gross domestic product, it generated 15% of new U.S. jobs for the 12 months ended November, the Bureau of Labor Statistics says.
The average part-timer is working about 22 hours a week.
More than six million part-time workers want more hours, says BLS economist Tom Nardone.
FORGET JOBS, jobs, jobs.
It is meetings, meetings, meetings for this administration.
The Labor Department schedules a parley Feb. 2 to showcase what works in job training for unemployed workers.
Then, ministers from the Group of Seven industrial nations will huddle March 14 to start their long-rumored jobs summit.
Both meetings will be held in or around Washington.
ON THE ROAD?
Try job hunting.
Career Express, a combination book store, personnel agency and consulting office, opens in the Hyatt Regency Chicago Hotel.
The store, claiming to be the only retail center in the U.S. to specialize in career and job-related resources, carries 3,500 books and offers career-advice and resume-writing services.
THE ADMINISTRATION VOWS tougher work-site monitoring, but skeptics abound.
Labor Secretary Reich says his agency will "target the worst actors," to aid such "vulnerable populations" as children, the elderly and low-wage workers.
For women and minorities, it will shift focus to "systemic discrimination" from individual cases, solicitor Tom Williamson says, though he notes those cases will be tougher to bring.
In all workplaces, he says, the agency will try a more strategic approach, rather than one that is complaint-driven.
Such talk may be just smoke, particularly given budget constraints, labor lawyers say.
"The rhetoric is for much tougher enforcement," says George Salem, a former Labor Department solicitor.
"But I haven't noticed a discernible difference in the cases they've brought."
Union safety officials say OSHA has been drifting, but they hope safety chief Joseph Dear will bring new toughness.
OSHA is expected to issue new rules requiring firms to keep better records.
"That's the real name of the game where enforcement is going," says labor lawyer Scott Railton.
"Employers will keep records that rat on them."
THE CHECKOFF: Chief of Self-Police, Mixed Metaphor Division: At a briefing on workplace enforcement, Secretary Reich says, "We have to carry a stick and make sure there are no bad apples."
He quickly adds, "Wait, let me start again." . . .
Looking for work?
"Vibrant" cities for hiring include Las Vegas, Phoenix, Chicago, Salt Lake City, Minneapolis and Denver, Dunhill Personnel Systems says. . . .
The Office of Personnel Management proposes a two-year limit on temporary workers in short-term federal jobs, half the current maximum.
