When computer systems malfunction, the results can be nightmarish: car accidents, medical misdiagnoses, botched accounting and inventory lists.
For lawyers, this means big new opportunities for highstakes litigation.
"There's actually more opportunity for technology to malfunction now than there was 10 or 15 years ago," says Clyde "Buzz" H. Wilson, Jr., a computer-litigation specialist in Sarasota, Fla., who conducts seminars for lawyers on how to present computer-performance cases to juries.
As technology becomes more pervasive and complex, he says, it is more likely to fail.
The consequence: an emerging legal niche for clients seeking damages due to malfunctioning computer systems.
"In the 21st century, computer performance is going to play a role in most litigation," predicts Bruce Bierhans, a Boston plaintiffs' lawyer who is head of a computer-vendor liability group at the Association of Trial Lawyers of America.
He points to an auto-accident suit he investigated last week involving a woman who injured her neck when her car skidded into a telephone pole.
She blames faulty brakes.
To prove the allegation, Mr. Bierhans will look not only at the brake cylinders and linings but also at the vehicle's computer-assisted antilock system.
"What I'm trying to do is begin to educate more tort lawyers . . . in linking computer performance to traditional tort cases," he says.
The new litigation is driving software vendors to be more cautious in what they promise in their contracts and buyers to be more realistic in what they expect.
So far, the biggest lawsuits link companies' lost profits to allegedly faulty software.
In a trial that has been going on since last September in New Jersey Superior Court in Jersey City, Kane Carpet Co., formerly the fourthlargest carpet distributor in the nation, is claiming that a $308,000 computer system it bought in 1988 for inventory control went haywire, plunged the company into chaos and drove it out of business in 17 months.
"It was like taking a perfectly healthy human being and putting in a defective part," says Kane's attorney, Marc S. Friedman of the Roseland, N.J., firm of Friedman & Siegelbaum.
Lost assets and "consequential damages," including the diminished value of the company and money now owed to creditors, exceed $37 million, he contends.
The defendant in the case, a now-defunct division of McDonnell Douglas Corp., maintains that Kane was already on a slippery financial slope when it bought the software, and that the software didn't cause the collapse.
In such cases, part of the problem between software vendors and users is one of dependency; users find themselves at the vendors' mercy.
"A computer company can take over a business because it's the only entity that knows what's going on," says Hank Barrie, a San Francisco computer-performance litigator at the firm of Cooley, Godward, Castro, Huddleson & Tatum.
Lawyers for software manufacturers counter that many buyers have unrealistic expectations, communicate their needs poorly or change their minds about what they want their computers to do.
In Tallahassee, Fla., EDS Corp., a unit of General Motors Corp., is suing the state Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services for withholding a $46 million payment for the design and installation of the nation's largest social services computer.
In a countersuit alleging breach of contract, the state agency contends that the computer ended up costing more than twice the original estimate and that the system still isn't powerful enough to handle the state's needs.
At the core of the problem was a 1988 state projection of how many Florida residents would require state aid by the time the computer was on line five years later.
It turned out to be wildly short of the mark, leading to errors in payment and delays that resulted in $17.5 million in federal penalties levied on the state.
EDS says it delivered what it promised and blames the state.
"It just shows that when you've got a complicated system you've got to have workable needs to adapt to changing assumptions," says EDS attorney John Radey of the Tallahassee firm of Aurell Radey Hinkle Thomas & Beranek.
Dennis Dean, assistant attorney general, counters that in its rush to win the lucrative state job, EDS promised more than it could deliver.
"Computer companies can't say no," says Mr. Dean.
"You go to them and they say, `Sure we can do that,' and sometimes they have problems in coming through."
Disputes as complex as this underscore the importance of drafting contracts that clearly spell out what is being provided, the cost and what limits on legal remedies and damages apply.
So vendors, computer law experts say, increasingly insist on contract clauses and warranty disclaimers that bar damages for anything beyond the out-of-pocket cost of purchasing the system.
These clauses seek to preclude damages for economic losses that the buyer may sustain because a computer system doesn't meet its needs.
"Most vendors' position is fairly simple," says Larry H. Reese III, a Boston computer-performance attorney and associate editor of the Computer Liability Report.
`If you don't buy in to the disclaimers, we don't sell.'"
Last June, a New York appeals court threw out a $5.4 million damage award to Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. because of a clause in its contract with a vendor in Roseland, N.J., Noble Lowndes International Inc.
The contracted software program was never completed, allegedly costing Metropolitan $5.4 million in expenses and savings that it anticipated had the claims-processing software performed as promised.
The appeals court ruled that under its contract, Metropolitan was only entitled to what it had actually paid the vendor: $204,000.
That ruling and others like it are forcing plaintiffs' lawyers to try circumventing contract provisions in lawsuits over computer performance by alleging fraud or misrepresentation.
"It's fair to say that in most computer companies, there are strong incentives on the part of some sales people to oversell the system," says Mr. Reese.
That is what is being alleged in Kane Carpet's lawsuit.
According to the suit, the vendor assured Kane that its software was custom-tailored to the floor-covering distribution industry.
When the system switched on in March 1989, the company claims, chaos ensued.
"We were telling customers we couldn't fill their orders when we had the stock and that we could fill their orders when we didn't have the stock," says former administrative systems manager Jim Slattery.
In a business where prompt and reliable delivery to retailers is crucial, it didn't take long for Kane's customers to find other distributors.
"There was no way to recover," says Mr. Slattery.
"We had destroyed our credibility with the bulk of our customers."
Vanna White won a jury verdict of $403,000 against Samsung Electronics Co. and its advertising agency in a case that expands celebrities' protection from unauthorized uses of their likenesses.
The federal court jury in Los Angeles said the South Korean company and the advertising agency Deutsch/Dworin Inc. violated Ms. White's "right of publicity" with an advertisement depicting a letter-turning robot in a Vanna-like wig and gown.
Ms. White, who is a star of the television show "Wheel of Fortune," didn't give permission for the ad, which bore the caption, "Longest Running Game Show, 2012 A.D." and which was intended to suggest the long life of Samsung products.
Ms. White won compensatory damages of $205,000 from Samsung and $198,000 from Deutsch/Dworin, New York.
The companies declined to comment on the jury's findings.
Deutsch/Dworin said it probably won't appeal.
In a notable decision in the case last year, the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals expanded on earlier rulings that stopped advertisers from using celebrity faces and names without permission.
The court said celebrities also have the right to control likenesses of themselves such as the letter-turning robot.
Philip M. Cowan, head of the New York state bar section on entertainment law, said advertisers have since become more cautious about appropriating celebrity images.
A federal judge in Houston overturned two new Texas laws that were designed to keep lawyers and doctors from rushing to solicit business from accident victims.
One of the measures would bar lawyers, health professionals and private investigators from writing to accident victims to solicit their business within 30 days of the accident.
The provision also would bar written solicitations of criminal defendants within 30 days of their arrest.
The second measure would keep lawyers and health professionals from obtaining access to an accident report within 180 days of an accident.
But insurance agents and news reporters would have immediate access.
The laws were challenged by lawyers, chiropractors and organizations that research public records for a fee.
U.S. District Judge David Hittner, who in August temporarily enjoined enforcement of the measures, this week ruled that they violated the First Amendment's protection of commercial speech.
A spokeswoman for the Texas attorney general's office said she expected the state to appeal the ruling.
(Mary Moore et al. vs. Dan Morales et al., U.S. District Court, Houston, Civ.
Junda Woo and Arthur Buckler contributed to this article.
