Mr. Stempel, ousted as chairman of the world's largest auto maker in a November 1992 boardroom coup, said he's in the "preliminary" stages of forming a very small company that will build and sell electric cars.
It's a business Mr. Stempel's successors at GM have backed away from in their drive to boost GM's profits.
Indeed, shortly after Mr. Stempel's forced resignation, GM shelved plans for one of his favorite projects, the high-volume manufacture of an electric-powered two-seater called the Impact.
Even though most Big Three executives question whether it's possible to make money selling electric vehicles, Mr. Stempel said the electric car is inevitable next step in the evolution of the U.S. automobile.
"To work with today's cars you have to have a computer in your other hand," Mr. Stempel said.
"It's only a logical extension to go a step further and do it all electronically."
Mr. Stempel, confirming a story in yesterday's edition of the trade journal Automotive News, said he first plans to focus on mass-production of a battery that will work for his car venture.
To that end, he aims to help Energy Conversion Devices Inc., a Troy, Mich., company he joined earlier this month as a board member.
Energy Conversion is struggling to mass-produce a nickel metal hydride battery, which shows promise for improving on the range of 80 miles or so that current lead-acid batteries deliver on most electric cars.
That will be no easy task.
The ECD battery's materials are expensive.
That puts it at a cost disadvantage against lead-acid batteries, currently the most popular energy source for most electric cars.
Mr. Stempel says if the ECD battery is successful, he then may begin assembling capital to form his own electric-car assembly venture.
To date, he said, he hasn't incorporated or enlisted venture capital partners for a car-making operation.
Eventually, Mr. Stempel says, he could wind up supplying his cars to other auto makers, including GM.
All major auto makers face a mandate from California to make electric vehicles account for 2% of their total sales in the state by 1998.
Mr. Stempel said he doesn't agree with California's mandate, but added that his ambition is to create a car that people would buy, with or without a government decree.
GM's Impact, he said, could have been such a car.
"Frankly," he said, "we had a car that was pretty neat."
