The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. proposed guidelines aimed at preventing insiders from reaping excessive profits when certain deposit-or-owned mutual savings banks convert to stockholder-owned institutions.
But two of the three FDIC board members, all of whom voted for the proposal, said it doesn't go far enough in preventing abuses by officers and directors of savings banks undergoing such a conversion.
Many of these insiders have profited handsomely -- at the expense of depositors, critics say -- as they became large shareholders, in effect tapping into the capital of the converted savings bank.
Such conversion windfalls have often gone to officers and directors who have been at the institutions for only a short time.
This has resulted in "a real maldistribution of capital," said Bert Ely, a banking consultant.
The FDIC proposal would set guidelines for conversion from mutual to stock ownership by state-chartered savings banks that are under the agency's federal supervision.
There are currently no guidelines for such banks.
Federally chartered savings and loan associations and savings banks, and state-chartered S&Ls are regulated by the Office of Thrift Supervision.
Among policies to be overseen by FDIC examiners, the FDIC proposal specifies that "adequate protection" be given to depositors in pricing of the new shares, apportioning the stock and timely disclosure of relevant information to prospective stockholders.
It also said that any special deference to insiders be limited, avoiding stock "apportioning that leads to individual windfall gains."
Further, the FDIC could seek changes in the conversion if the transaction raises concerns about the institution's soundness or legal liability.
But Eugene Ludwig, the comptroller of the currency and one of the three FDIC board members, said the staff-written proposal adopted by the board "fails to address the abuses that are now occurring," and would let insiders continue "unjustly appropriating the value of mutual savings banks" that convert to stock institutions.
He said the proposal too narrowly defines the FDIC's role, dealing only with an institution's safety and soundness while ignoring depositor interests.
If a final policy can't be shaped to prevent abuses, legislation should be developed, Jonathan Fiechter, the acting OTS director, and Mr. Ludwig both said.
FDIC attorneys voiced doubts that the agency has authority to regulate conversions such as that held by the OTS.
The OTS limits the amount of stock that officers and directors can buy in a conversion, putting them third behind employee stock ownership plans and depositors.
A bill offered two months ago by House Banking Committee leaders would require that FDIC-supervised state-chartered savings banks adhere to the same conversion rules as OTS-regulated institutions.
