OPEC's oil ministers opened crucial talks on their production levels with a near consensus that the price of crude oil will fall further if they don't reduce second-quarter output.
In a report to be delivered to the ministers today, economists with the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries warn that oil prices could plunge to "single digits" if OPEC production continues at a rate of nearly 25 million barrels a day.
After falling some 25%, or $5 a barrel, in the past year, however, prices recently have steadied.
Yesterday, the futures price of the U.S. benchmark crude for May delivery rose 18 cents on the New York Mercantile Exchange to settle at $15.08 a barrel.
On London's International Petroleum Exchange, North Sea Brent crude for May delivery was up nine cents to $13.89 a barrel.
Buoyed by the recent strengthening in the oil market, several senior delegates attending the meeting here said predictions of a sharp drop in prices were too pessimistic.
This is a view apparently shared by Saudi Arabian delegates, according to OPEC sources familiar with the kingdom's oil policies.
Saudi Arabia, which accounts for nearly one-third of OPEC's output, previously has argued that it wouldn't reduce output unless there were guarantees other producers would share the cuts.
But Saudi Arabia's influential oil minister, Hisham Nazer, who arrived late yesterday, has yet to tip his hand.
Other OPEC delegates suggested, however, that even though the kingdom also wants higher oil prices it still is reluctant to trim its own output of eight million barrels a day.
"I don't think the Saudis are interested in cutting their production," Peter Bogin, associate director of Cambridge Energy Research Associates, said in Paris.
"It's not worth the trouble to cut output for one quarter," he added, implying that demand after the second period will start rising, if only for seasonal reasons.
Some analysts here to monitor the OPEC meeting also suggested that any price decline could be brief.
"Prices won't collapse, but will erode from the $15 level," said Paul Mlotok, an oil economist with Morgan Stanley & Co.
"But if they make a major output cut here, the price could pop up $1 or $2 a barrel," he said.
Still, most of the oil ministers are worried about the price outlook.
"The situation is critical," said Abdalla Salem El-Badri, Libya's oil minister.
"We have to do something," he said.
One reason for the concern is that much of the plunge in prices has come since the oil ministers last met, in late November, and chose not to cut output despite a weak oil market.
