Ralston Purina Co. plans to hold the line on prices for its pet foods and baked goods, but anticipates temporarily lower earnings as it fights to maintain market share in those categories.
The nation's largest maker of pet foods and baked goods, Ralston said it is undertaking comprehensive cost-reduction efforts that eventually should improve profitability in those businesses, as well as in its ready-to-eat cereal operation -- the largest U.S. maker of private-label cereals.
Ralston's senior management also said the company's pending spinoff of its cereal, baby food, crackers and ski resorts businesses should enhance operations for both that group, to be called Ralcorp Holdings, as well as for pet foods.
Currently, there is "negative synergy" between those businesses, one executive said.
Setting a sober tone for the company's centennial celebration annual meeting last Thursday, William P. Stiritz, chairman and chief executive officer, said Ralston finds itself in "a difficult and dynamic operating environment" where all the company's businesses face "extremely competitive" challengers and in some cases "flat to declining consumption patterns."
For its fiscal first quarter, ended Dec. 31, Ralston reported earnings of $133.7 million compared with a year-ago loss of $81.4 million after accounting charges on a 1% sales increase to $2.2 billion.
Ralston no longer reports per-share earnings, after splitting its businesses into two operating groups last summer.
Its Ralston Purina Group, which includes pet and human foods, reported earnings of $133.4 million, or $1.27 a share, compared with pro-forma earnings before special items of $90.7 million, or 82 cents a share.
Sales rose to $1.72 billion from $1.69 billion.
The Continental Baking Group unit reported quarterly earnings of $200,000, but a per-share loss of one cent a share, on a 2.6% sales decline, to $476 million.
A year ago the group reported pro-forma earnings before items of $3.5 million, or eight cents a share.
Accordingly, Continental directors suspended the company's eight-cent-a-share quarterly dividend.
Pet foods has experienced lower operating earnings in the past two years and the company said it is budgeting for earnings declines in the current fiscal year as well, largely because of higher raw-materials costs "which we have elected not to offset by price increases."
At the same time, pet-food advertising will be increased 30% to stimulate sales, the company said.
Still, it expects volumes to be marginally below a year ago.
W. Patrick McGinnis, president and chief executive officer of Ralston's grocery products group, told analysts after the annual meeting that the company believes higher commodity costs for pet foods is an "aberration, so it's better off not to take price increases that could impact volumes."
The company also disclosed for the first time that U.S. pet foods reaped operating profit of $310 million in the fiscal year ended last Sept. 30, while its Eveready Battery Co. unit reported operating earnings of $250 million.
There were no prior-year figures for comparison.
Ralston Purina's biggest problems are at its baking group, which finds itself in a low-growth industry facing high fixed costs and significant excess capacity, the company said.
To maintain market share, "bread prices will be held at fully competitive levels," Jay W. Brown, Continental's chairman and chief executive officer, said.
Competitors' price discount promotions "will be matched completely as needed to protect volumes."
Moreover, there will be no broad-scale snack-cake price increases in the near future, he said.
To stimulate business, Continental has significantly increased promotional spending, thereby "severely" damaging profit margins.
