As Los Angeles residents go about rebuilding their lives and homes after last week's devastating earthquake, the prices of the industrial commodities they use are likely to get a boost.
The most direct beneficiaries of a rebuilding boom in Southern California will be copper and lumber, both basic raw materials of the U.S. housing industry.
In both cases, analysts and economists say, the quake will strengthen already positive market fundamentals and likely push prices higher.
"I'm fairly confident we'll see copper prices climb to as much as 93 cents a pound by the end of the quarter" from Friday's settle price of 85.65 cents a pound for the actively traded March futures contract, says Bernard Savaiko, senior analyst for PaineWebber Inc.
Lumber, over the next few months, could challenge $440 per thousand board feet, up from Friday's settle price of $407.80, analysts say.
The market impact of the quake, some economists add, could even indirectly influence bond prices.
Copper and lumber are among the 21 futures contracts tracked by the Knight Ridder Commodity Research Bureau index.
Economists watch this influential index for hints of changes in the economic cycle.
Bond traders, in particular, pay close attention to the KR-CRB index, because of its well-documented inverse correlation with bond prices.
Strong surges in lumber and copper prices over the next few months would help to push the KR-CRB index higher -- as did grain-price gains related to the flooding of the Midwest last fall -- which potentially could exert downward pressure on bond prices.
The aftermath of the quake also could lend strength to such industrial metals as aluminum, which is used to make aluminum siding and window frames for new homes.
Aluminum futures contracts are traded on the London Metals Exchange.
"Obviously, the rebuilding of the L.A. infrastructure will have a positive impact on prices," says Fred Demler, metals economist for E, D & F Man.
"It will add to the already positive supply-demand balance in both copper and aluminum."
The quake's effect was visible in the lumber and copper markets in the days that followed the California catastrophe.
On Tuesday, the day after the quake, copper for March delivery leaped 1.7 cents to settle at 86.7 cents a pound.
On Wednesday, March lumber followed suit, rising the daily price-movement limit of $10 to $402.40 per thousand board feet.
"If you could draw a parallel it would be to the flooding of the Midwest, where massive rebuilding was necessary," says John Gross of J.E. Gross & Associates, a metals consulting company.
"That had an impact on lumber and copper prices."
To be sure, other market factors are influencing the prices of both these commodities.
"The lumber market is being driven by housing starts, which have continued to be strong," says Bud Merrill, lumber analyst for Smith Barney Shearson.
On Thursday, for example, lumber prices again surged the $10 daily limit after the Commerce Department reported that U.S. housing starts rose to an annual rate of 1,540,000 units in December from 1,450,000 units in November, pushing home building to its highest level in four years.
Copper prices, especially in the U.S., are benefiting from lower production and higher consumption.
World-wide mine production of copper fell 5% in the last half of 1993, to 3.7 million tons from 3.9 million tons a year earlier, according to the American Bureau of Metals Statistics.
Meanwhile, U.S. consumption of copper in the fourth quarter of 1993 rose 9% to 590,000 tons from 540,000 tons a year earlier.
On Friday, the prices of copper and lumber retreated slightly.
Copper's price fell Friday in what analysts said was a technical correction after two weeks of gains, and lumber's price sagged similarly after the two consecutive days of rising by the permissible limit.
Yet these movements appear to be aberrations in upward trends.
In the case of copper, Southern California builders will need to buy big quantities of plumbing tube and electrical wire to rebuild demolished homes.
Kevin Norrish, research manager for copper fabricating at CRU International Ltd., a British metals research and consulting company, says U.S. consumption of copper, which was 2,370,000 tons in 1993, may rise this year as a result of the earthquake.
Mr. Gross says shipments of copper rod in 1993, which account for about 76% of consumption of refined copper, matched or exceeded the 1.78 million-ton record of 1989.
This year, he says, shipments may be higher still, in part because of earthquake-related rebuilding.
"We come into 1994 with very strong order-book demand for copper, consistent with the growth of the U.S. economy," Mr. Gross says.
In lumber, the rebuilding in California could potentially result in supply shortages of some wood products on the West Coast, says Nick Kent of the North American Lumbermen's Association.
"We might find specialty products in high demand," he says.
"Take the freeway repair; they might use timber to shore up highways, or as shoring support for new construction.
That creates a large appetite for a product that might not be readily available."
