In the summer of 1987, Frank J. Biondi Jr. sold his house in Riverdale, N.Y., bought a mansion in Beverly Hills, Calif., and was a few days away from moving to Hollywood to run the television operations of Coca-Cola Co.'s Columbia Pictures.
Then Sumner Redstone called and offered him the CEO post at Viacom Inc. in New York.
Though it caused big real estate headaches, Mr. Biondi's decision to say yes was a smart career move: Columbia was later sold to Sony Corp., which replaced all the top managers.
Now that Viacom has won the battle for Paramount Communications Inc. and is poised to merge with Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., Mr. Biondi will be the chief executive, with day-to-day responsibility for the far-flung operations of the new entertainment, cable and retailing giant.
It's a big job, and the 49-year-old Mr. Biondi will have to stretch to fill it.
Though regarded as a savvy executive with strong financial, deal-making and strategic skills and a knack for managing a diverse group of young executives at Viacom, he has no experience running a movie studio, a publishing house or a retailing business.
"He's a strategic thinker, not a hands-on creative guy," says John Tinker, an analyst at Furman Selz Inc.
On top of melding the operations of three sprawling companies, he says, Mr. Biondi's biggest challenge will be fixing the troubled Paramount studio.
"Paramount is obviously in disarray after this five-month battle, and it will take a long time to sort that out and rebuild morale," Mr. Tinker says.
Mr. Biondi, who chafes at the notion that he hasn't run creative businesses, points to his experience managing creative people in the TV business and says that in any event, his job isn't to decide what movies to make or what books to publish.
"My job is to set goals, find resources in both capital and people, and understand the basic dynamics of the business," he says.
"Aside from that, it's basically to get out of the way."
Though he has had wide autonomy as the chief executive of Viacom, Mr. Biondi has ultimately had to answer to its chairman, the strong-willed, often irascible Mr. Redstone.
The 70-year-old billionaire controls close to 80% of Viacom's voting stock and likes to meddle in virtually every aspect of the business.
If the merger with Blockbuster goes through, Mr. Biondi will have two powerful bosses to contend with: Blockbuster Chairman H. Wayne Huizenga will stay aboard as vice chairman of the combined companies.
But in Mr. Huizenga, Mr. Biondi has an ally who is largely responsible for his current position.
When Viacom and Paramount first agreed to a friendly merger last fall, Paramount Chief Executive Martin Davis was to be the CEO of the combined Viacom Paramount.
Though many industry observers assumed Mr. Biondi would eventually succeed Mr. Davis, his role wasn't clearly spelled out.
Mr. Biondi's situation changed when QVC Network Inc. made a competing offer for Paramount, starting the bidding war that forced Viacom into Blockbuster's arms.
Mr. Biondi had struck up a relationship with Mr. Huizenga a few years before, and the two had chewed over various partnerships and even discussed a possible merger.
Last July, at Allen & Co.'s annual investors conference in Sun Valley, Idaho, Mr. Biondi introduced Mr. Redstone to Mr. Huizenga.
Blockbuster later agreed to invest $600 million in Viacom's Paramount bid; when Viacom needed more cash and a stronger balance sheet to load up with debt, it agreed to acquire Blockbuster in a stock swap.
As part of the agreement, Mr. Huizenga insisted that Mr. Biondi run the combined companies -- including Paramount, should Viacom win that contest.
Mr. Huizenga had good reason to admire Mr. Biondi's skills.
Handsome, athletic and personable, Mr. Biondi is respected and well-liked in the cable and TV industries, where he has spent much of his career.
In contrast to Mr. Redstone, who often loses his temper and yells to make a point, Mr. Biondi is an even-tempered executive who, though toughminded, prefers negotiation to confrontation.
An avid skier and tennis player, Mr. Biondi acknowledges he's "extremely competitive."
Throughout the Paramount takeover battle, Mr. Biondi kept much of his focus on operations, leaving strategizing and meetings with investment bankers to Mr. Redstone and general counsel Philippe Dauman.
A strong family man with two teenage daughters, Mr. Biondi organized -- and carried off -- a surprise birthday party for his wife, Carol, at New York's "21" Club on the eve of the final deadline for bids.
Mr. Biondi is credited with making Viacom one of the few leveraged buyouts of the 1980s that worked.
After Mr. Redstone acquired it in 1987 for $3.4 billion, Mr. Biondi spent much of the next three or four years painstakingly restructuring its debt, getting out of the junk bond market, and shedding nonessential assets.
Meanwhile, he focused on expanding its MTV and Nickelodeon franchises world-wide.
A Princeton graduate with a Harvard M.B.A., Mr. Biondi started his career on Wall Street and did financial consulting before getting into the nascent cable industry.
He held financial posts at cable and television production companies until a friend, Michael Fuchs, then the programming chief at Home Box Office Inc., wooed him to the pay-TV concern that is now a unit of Time Warner Inc.
Mr. Biondi rose quickly through the ranks at HBO, eventually becoming its chief executive.
HBO was in a big growth spurt then, and Mr. Biondi pursued an aggressive strategy of locking up movie rights by signing exclusive contracts, primarily with Coke's Columbia Pictures unit.
The contracts were lucrative for Columbia but proved expensive for HBO when the pay-TV business hit a slump.
Mr. Biondi clashed over his strategy with N.J. Nicholas, then head of Time's video group, and was forced to resign.
But he was quickly offered a job by Coke's entertainment unit as an executive vice president and chief entertainment acquisitions strategist.
As a result, he was closely involved in Coke's $485 million acquisition of Embassy Communications Inc. in 1985 and its purchase of Merv Griffin Enterprises Inc. for $200 million.
When Mr. Biondi took the Viacom job, he moved quickly to put in his own team, hiring several managers from Time and HBO.
But Viacom's Showtime unit was a distant competitor to HBO, and Mr. Biondi and his team were unable to do much to increase its market share.
A simmering feud between the two sides erupted into warfare when Mr. Redstone, against the advice of Mr. Biondi and others at Viacom, filed a $2.5 billion antitrust suit against Time and HBO.
The suit was later settled.
Mr. Biondi's admirers on Wall Street aren't particularly worried about his ability to turn around Paramount and find the right managers for its creative businesses.
"Frank Biondi has all the skills necessary to do a good job -- he's worked with people on the creative side and he understands distribution," says fund manager Mario Gabelli, who tendered his four million Paramount shares to Viacom.
"Remember, this is Hollywood -- talent will queue up to work at Paramount no matter who's running it."
