Following is an exchange of correspondence between Randy Coleman, attorney for David Hale, and Paula Casey, U.S. attorney in Little Rock, just prior to the September indictment of Mr. Hale for fraud concerning the Small Business Investment Corp. he managed.
One of Mr. Hale's loans was for $300,000 to a concern owned by Susan McDougal, a partner with her husband and Bill and Hillary Clinton in Whitewater Development Corp.
Some $110,000 of this money reportedly ended up in the Whitewater account.
Ms. Casey, a longtime associate of the Clintons appointed to her post when the incoming administration fired all sitting U.S. attorneys, subsequently recused herself from the case because of her association with some of the individuals involved.
Independent counsel Robert Fiske has obtained a superseding indictment, and is prosecuting Mr. Hale as his first court case.
This letter is written as a follow up to our recent personal phone conversations. . . .
Fletcher Jackson of your office has previously told me that Mr. Hale will be indicted on one or more charges on the third Tuesday of September, being September 21, 1993.
Since first becoming involved in this matter approximately five (5) weeks ago and being informed of this anticipated event, I have been attempting to reach some form of negotiated plea with your office without any success.
I cannot help but sense the reluctance in the U.S. Attorney's office to enter into plea negotiations in this case.
I cannot help but believe that this reluctance is borne {sic} out of the potential political sensitivity and fallout regarding the information which Mr. Hale could provide to your office, but at the same time it is information which would be of substantial assistance in investigating the banking and borrowing practices of some individuals in the elite political circles of the State of Arkansas, past and present.
I can certainly understand the reluctance of anyone locally to engage in these matters, political realities being what they are.
Would it not be appropriate at this point for your office to consider terminating participation in this investigation and to bring in an independent prosecutorial staff, who are not so involved with the history of the personalities and circumstances of this case?
Such action might serve your office better.
It would certainly serve Mr. Hale better because I feel that he is being prejudiced by not being afforded opportunities that other targets of a potential criminal prosecution are afforded in the process of plea negotiations. . . .
My recollection of our meeting on September 7 is that I told you that I would not consider granting immunity to your client nor would I consider filing only misdemeanor charges.
You made it clear to me that one felony would be as disastrous to your client as multiple felonies.
Therefore, our plea negotiations are at an impasse.
I did tell you that if Mr. Hale was willing to offer substantial assistance in the prosecution of other defendants, I would consult with my Litigation Committee about requesting a motion authorizing a reduction in sentence.
The motion to reduce sentences comes only after a plea of guilty to felony charges.
If your client is interested in cooperating in exchange for such a reduction, he must make himself available to federal agents for questioning so that we can determine whether his proffer merits such a motion.
I will be pleased to arrange such an interview at your earliest convenience.
The fact that I am not willing to enter into any other agreement with Mr. Hale should not be construed as reluctance on my part to prosecute any individual when the situation merits prosecution.
Apparently we are not going to achieve anything further on plea negotiations in this case at the present time.
Time is becoming a precious commodity.
While we do not feel that the Government should proceed with an indictment against Dave Hale, we would suggest that any return of the indictment be sealed to allow the sides further time to negotiate a difficult situation.
Earlier today I phoned you and requested that you provide a proffer of any information your client wished to bring to our attention.
You have responded by letter dated this date in which you indicated that you did not believe we will achieve anything further in plea negotiations.
As you acknowledged, your letter was in response to our earlier phone conversation.
Our position is as we have stated to you before, that is, we are fully interested in all information your client has to offer.
Because of his significant involvement in criminal activity, it is unacceptable to us to grant him immunity.
We are willing to provide your client with a motion authorizing reduction of sentence for substantial assistance upon his plea of guilty to a felony charge of fraud and his providing the substantial assistance.
Of course to date your client has offered no tangible information on which any such arrangement could yet be made.
My understanding of your letter is that he chooses not to do so at this time.
We see no reason not to proceed with the presentation of our case to the grand jury and our other normal process of handling grand jury matters.
Should the grand jury decide to indict your client, we will remain ready to listen to any proffer you or your client have to offer and go forward on the basis that we have outlined above.
Thank you for your letter of September 20, 1993.
The procedures proposed therein are an eleventh hour attempt to do what could and should have been done several weeks ago given some proper inducement to Mr. Hale.
I previously indicated to your office that we were willing to listen to reasonable proposals other than immunity for some time, but did not receive any concrete offers.
Also, I have previously indicated to Fletcher {Jackson} some time ago very definitive areas in which Mr. Hale had knowledge and also reviewed a list of names involved as well.
I made it known that Mr. Hale was willing to participate in undercover operations to develop additional information regarding same.
This is much like the operations in Kentucky conducted by federal authorities which I read about in the morning newspaper.
That opportunity will now be lost.
We remain interested in plea negotiations.
I will be in touch with you later.
This letter is in response to your letter dated today which you faxed to my office.
You comment that the letter you received yesterday from my office is an "eleventh hour" attempt to set forth a procedure acceptable to your client.
You complain that you have not received any concrete offers.
You also complain that, because it is "eleventh hour," it will be too late to go forward to pursue an undercover operation in which your client is willing to participate.
Your references are misplaced.
Our letter dated September 20, 1993, merely recapitulated discussions between you and this office over the last several weeks.
You have sought to delay our proceeding on the aspect of this matter currently scheduled for this session of the Grand Jury.
On each occasion you have rejected any possibility that your client would consider a felony plea and you have insisted on either immunity or, at most, a misdemeanor.
Moreover, you have claimed that your client can provide information and have set forth names allegedly involved.
However, on each occasion that you have been requested to furnish specifics, including again yesterday, you have declined to do so.
Instead, you have responded with another general assertion and self-serving contention about the lack of interest by this office.
Let me again be very clear: this office and the Department of Justice has {sic} been and remains interested and willing to obtain any and all information your client has available.
However, he must provide specifics and be willing to follow through.
General assertions that he knows significant information regarding "important" people serves {sic} no goal other than his understandable, but self-serving, desire to avoid the consequences of his own significant criminal conduct.
As AUSA {Assistant U.S. Attorney} Jackson advised you, the charges presently being considered are only one facet of this case, and your client faces potential criminal exposure on a number of other items.
It is as to those items that your client claims to have information.
Last, as to your contention that our intention to proceed with indictment of your client compromises the potential for an undercover operation, I was contacted by a reporter from the New York Times last Friday.
The reporter indicated to me that he had been in contact with your client and had interviewed him extensively on Thursday regarding this "information."
The reporter also showed me copies of our past correspondence which you had provided to him.
I declined to comment.
Your client's efforts to put this information into the public forum belies any serious willingness on his part to leave open an undercover type of operation.
In short, we remain willing to hear what your client has to offer at such time he decides that he is ready.
WASHINGTON -- Acting Assistant Attorney General John C. Keeney today said the Justice Department's Criminal Division will take charge of the government's investigation into matters concerning former judge David Hale and Capital Management Services Inc., and the now defunct Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan.
The Criminal Division took over the investigation after the U.S. Attorney in Little Rock, Paula Casey, informed the Justice Department last week that she and her staff had recused themselves because of their familiarity with some of the parties and the need to ensure that there be no misperceptions about the impartiality of the investigation.
. . . his entire argument for dismissal of the Superseding Indictment rests on the flawed premise that if Ms. Casey recused herself from this case in November 1993, then her office could not properly have appeared before the grand jury with respect to this case in September 1993.
This argument must fail for three principal reasons.
First, it wholly ignores the fact that Ms. Casey's reason for seeking recusal was not based on any actual conflict, but instead a concern about appearances: and prosecuting these matters competently and dispassionately.
Whether my participation and the participation of my staff raises questions of the appearance of impropriety is a different question."
{Emphasis added.}
(McInerney Affidavit, Exhibit A)
Second, it does not even provide a generalized allegation regarding anything that anyone in Ms. Casey's office may have done in the grand jury that was improper.
And third, it suggests absolutely no prejudice that defendant Fitzhugh may have suffered as a result of the participation of Ms. Casey's office in the grand jury process.
The Independent Counsel, and attorneys working at his direction, have commenced an investigation into President and Mrs. Clinton's relationships with MGSL {Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan}, Whitewater and CMS {Capital Management Services}.
As set forth above, one of the central allegations to be investigated is defendant Hale's claim, as reported in the press, that then-Governor Clinton "pressured" him into causing CMS to extend the $300,000 loan to {Susan McDougal's} Masters Marketing.
In order to investigate this allegation fully, it is imperative that the Independent Counsel interview defendant Hale, or compel his testimony.
This cannot be done until the present case has been resolved.
