In Lawrence, Kan. (pop. 65,600), tourist attractions have long bordered on the desperate.
A museum, for instance, features a tribute to the sole survivor of Custer's last stand -- Comanche, the horse.
Nightlife is "limited to dinner and a movie," says Milan Vinnola, a University of Kansas student.
But municipal officials think they have the solution: The play's the thing.
Specifically, the one-woman plays of local drama professor Kay Kuhlmann.
Since the 44-year-old artist began performing her portraits of Mamie Eisenhower, Bess Truman and other famous women in local theaters and libraries, Lawrence has begun to attract tourists.
For the past two years, Ms. Kuhlmann's performances have been included on historical-theme motorcoach tours through the Great Plains.
Lawrence tour operator Maupintour Inc. says it sold four times more packages last year than in 1992, and 1994 bookings are strong.
Officials at the local Chamber of Commerce, which runs the Lawrence Convention and Visitors Bureau, are relieved.
In April, the convention bureau plans to give Ms. Kuhlmann an award for her contributions to tourism.
"Her shows are real intimate," says Judy Billings, of the chamber.
"They're not a grand production like you'll find in Branson, Mo." (pop. 3,777).
In her performances, Ms. Kuhlmann dresses in period costumes, does her hair in the character's style and adopts her diction.
"I have real versatile hair," she says.
Ms. Kuhlmann didn't begin researching Mamie Eisenhower's life with the aim of becoming a tourist attraction.
But now, with the lives of Hillary Clinton, Tokyo Rose and pioneer women of the Oregon Trail in her repertoire, the playwright is translating local fame into bigger things.
She'll play Bess Truman at the National Archives in Washington this spring.
And on the Fourth of July, she'll perform as Mamie Eisenhower at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in California.
After interviewing the First Lady's press secretary for tips on Mrs. Clinton's demeanor, Ms. Kuhlmann says she hopes to have a chance to meet Nancy Reagan and do a play about her.
For now, the actress is working on a new play about Patsy Cline.
"I've always wanted to be a country-western singer," she says.
