Estranged husbands and wives don't just sue for divorce these days; they sue for damages -- and frequently they win.
Under a developing legal specialty known as domestic torts, claims of injury from wrongful conduct in a marriage are leading to sizable awards for such offenses as assault, intentional infliction of emotional distress, fraud and wiretapping.
"Just about anything that can be a tort between two strangers is now actionable between two spouses," says Edward J. O'Donnell, a divorce specialist at the Livingston, N.J., law firm of Skoloff & Wolfe.
"Your imagination can be your guide."
A decade ago, such civil damage claims were virtually unheard of in matrimonial law.
The main reason was "spousal immunity," a well-recognized common-law doctrine that bars spouses from suing each other.
Under it, a man and woman melded into a single legal entity upon marriage.
But courts in at least 39 states have chipped away at the prohibition as injury claims between spouses have increased.
The advent of no-fault divorce has also fueled the trend.
By eliminating blame as an issue in how property should be divided, no-fault laws preclude financial remedies for spouses who feel they've been wronged, says New York divorce specialist Helene Brezinsky.
The result has been an explosion of civil damage suits.
When a Manila, Ark., woman was beaten so severely by her husband during their pending divorce that she needed extensive reconstructive surgery on her face, she sued for "assault, battery and outrage."
A jury awarded her $10,000 in compensatory damages and $350,000 in punitive damages.
"It is understandable that a jury might wish to punish such conduct and deter others from similar acts," the Arkansas Supreme Court ruled last year in upholding the award.
Another example involved a western Illinois farmer who tried to hire a hit man to kill his estranged wife during their divorce -- a not uncommon event, family-law experts say.
The wife sued for intentional infliction of emotional distress, and an Illinois state appeals panel allowed the case to proceed to trial.
It recently settled out of court for a six-figure sum.
In another case, when a Pennsylvania gas-station owner concealed from his estranged wife that he was negotiating the sale of a joint property for $800,000 -- when the settlement agreement he signed valued the land at $45,000 -- she sued for fraud.
A jury awarded $40,000 in punitive damages and $200,000 in compensatory damages, half the sale's net proceeds.
"This type of outrageous conduct can only be punished and deterred by punitive damages," the appeals court that upheld the award determined.
"This is really hot stuff," says Lee Rosen, a Raleigh, N.C., divorce lawyer and chairwoman of the domestic-violence committee for the family-law section of the American Bar Association.
"Some of the appellate courts around the country are beginning to recognize these creative causes of action."
Of course, it helps when the spouse being sued is wealthy.
Take the case of John Wayne Bobbitt, the unemployed bar bouncer and ex-Marine who was mutilated last June by his wife, Lorena Bobbitt.
She admitted attacking her husband with a kitchen knife but said she did so after he raped her.
In criminal cases, he was acquitted of marital assault in November, and she was found not guilty of malicious wounding by reason of insanity.
Neither has filed a civil suit against the other.
Before their trials brought them lucrative book and movie offers, neither Bobbitt owned much worth suing over.
"It takes the right combination to succeed on one of these" lawsuits, says Houston divorce expert John F. Nichols.
At the top of the list, he says, is "a deep pocket."
Nonetheless, lawyers are beginning to explore new avenues of recovery in domestic torts, particularly under homeowner insurance policies.
These usually exclude coverage for damages from intentional acts.
But intentional acts that result in unintentional consequences might be grounds for coverage, lawyers say.
"That's a very serious open question that nobody knows the answer to yet," says New Jersey divorce specialist Gary Skoloff.
Lawyers also are looking at collecting possible damages from an exspouse's future earnings or pension plan.
Not all courts are rushing to embrace new grounds for domestic torts.
And some claims, particularly emotional distress, are open to highly subjective review.
In Houston three years ago, a Texas appeals court found that the wife of a bank president was entitled to damages because her husband had temper tantrums, doled out stingy amounts of cash, made her wear cheap clothes and belittled her in front their daughter.
The wife was awarded $362,000 for emotional distress, among other claims.
About the same time, a Kentucky appeals court threw out a similar claim by a woman whose husband abandoned her, spent the proceeds from the joint sale of their house, kept their car, tried to cash in her retirement plan, forged her name to cash in a joint tax return and moved to Virginia with his girlfriend.
"Fraud and adultery may be very painful and difficult but does not necessarily implicate the tort of outrage outrageous conduct," the appeal court ruled.
And while some judges and juries may be generous in awarding damages, collecting the money is another matter.
"Most of these people in divorce cases, if you hit them too hard, they just go file bankruptcy," says Mr. Nichols, the Houston lawyer who represented the bank president's wife.
As soon as the judgment was affirmed on appeal, the husband filed for personal bankruptcy, where the damage award is still mired.
As for the Bobbitts, either could sue for civil damages under Virginia law, says Mrs. Bobbitt's lawyer, Lisa M. Kemler.
"Assault for him," she says, "intentional infliction of emotional distress for her."
Neither wants to, lawyers for both sides say -- unless the other strikes first.
"If she brought a suit against him," says Mr. Bobbitt's lawyer, Gregory L. Murphy, "he would definitely countersue her."
A federal appeals court has upheld a jury finding that Pan American World Airways was liable for "willful misconduct" stemming from the 1988 terrorist bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
Monday's 2-1 decision by a three-judge panel of the Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New York brings victims' survivors a step closer to the payment of an estimated $500 million to $750 million in damages.
About 225 cases were consolidated in a 13-week trial in Brooklyn, N.Y., in spring 1992.
That proceeding decided issues of liability common to all the cases and established the extent of damages for three passengers: two lawyers, whose survivors received about $9 million each and an electrician and part-time musician, whose family received $1.7 million.
The appeals court said the standard for those damage awards would apply in the remaining 222 cases.
The appeals court supported the jury's finding that Pan Am and its security arm, Alert Management Systems Inc., permitted a breach of security that allowed explosives to be placed in unaccompanied luggage before Flight 103 left London for New York.
The bombing killed 270 passengers, crew members and individuals on the ground.
Under an international treaty, the Warsaw Convention, an airline's liability for damages is limited to $75,000 per passenger.
But liability is unlimited if there is a finding of willful misconduct.
An appellate court previously ruled that punitive damages may not be collected under the treaty.
Pan Am, which has filed for bankruptcy-court protection and been liquidated since the crash, was insured for up to $750 million.
Its insurers, the largest of which is a consortium of 15 companies known as U.S. Aviation Insurance group, are liable for damages stemming from the bombing, according to Lee S. Kreindler, the plantiffs' lead attorney.
Attorneys for the airline, which could seek a hearing before the full appeals court or the U.S. Supreme Court, did not return calls seeking comment.
Lawyers for an attorney who was fired from Baker & McKenzie because he had AIDS sued the makers of "Philadelphia," the hit movie that relates a similar story.
The lawsuit was filed by the two New York attorneys who represented former Baker & McKenzie associate Geoffrey Bowers on behalf of themselves, Mr. Bowers's family and his estate.
The complaint alleges that details of Mr. Bowers's struggle against his illness and against his law firm were misappropriated by TriStar Pictures, the Hollywood studio that produced "Philadelphia."
Also named in the suit were a producer, Scott Rudin, and the film's screenwriter Ron Nyswaner, producer Ed Saxon and director Jonathan Demme.
Yesterday, a TriStar spokesman said the company had not seen the suit but described it as meritless, saying "Philadelphia" is a fictional story.
"Philadelphia," starring Tom Hanks, has grossed $36.6 million since it opened Dec. 22.
The strong results -- the film was No. 1 in the box office for two consecutive weekends -- have surprised industry executives, who had worried that a sobering account of AIDS discrimination might put off moviegoers.
Instead, the film is doing so well that TriStar, a unit of Sony Corp.'s Sony Pictures Entertainment, is expanding its release.
Mr. Bowers died at age 33 in September 1987, while in the midst of a discrimination hearing against Baker & McKenzie before the New York State Division of Human Rights.
In a recent ruling, the state fined the Chicago-based law firm, the country's largest, $500,000.
The suit against the movie-makers alleges that Mr. Rudin contacted Mr. Bowers's lawyers, Robert Balsam and Daniel Felber, and promised them compensation in return for the sole right to make a movie based on their information.
Mr. Rudin was given unlimited access to the lawyers and family members, according to the complaint, but signed over his rights to Mr. Saxon, who landed the project at TriStar.
The oral contract for compensation had to be fulfilled regardless of whether information about the Bowers ultimately became available from public records, Mr. Balsam said.
Law Note . . . .
RADIATION SUIT: A lawsuit seeking class-action status has been filed on behalf of 800 women who allegedly were victims of Cold War radiation experiments.
The suit, filed in Nashville, Tenn., by San Francisco plaintiffs lawyer Melvin Belli and Lieff, Cabraser & Heimann, alleges that the women, who were pregnant at the time, were exposed to radioactive iron at the Vanderbilt University hospital in the 1940s.
It is believed to be the first class action filed since Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary acknowledged in December that the government had authorized radiation experiments.
Edward Felsenthal and Margaret A. Jacobs contributed to this article.
