A European Union advisory panel, which has studied the airline industry since last July, urged the EU to get tougher on subsidies to state-owned carriers and encourage deregulation.
The committee's report, which isn't binding, also recommends harmonizing EU rules that affect the aviation industry, adopting a single policy regarding operations by non-EU airlines and giving carriers more favorable tax treatment.
The report drew jeers from transport unions, which fear job losses from greater global competition, and it faces certain opposition from protectionist politicians.
But the industry's free-market wing praised the panel's aversion to new taxes and regulations and declared its report a victory for competition and consumers.
Still, some industry officials characterized one of the panel's recommendations as a retreat from strict free-market policies; it would allow state-owned airlines one-time cash injections of state aid in pursuing restructurings leading to privatizations.
China said foreign businesses last year agreed to invest a record $110.85 billion in the country, a 91% increase from a year earlier.
Completed investment last year soared 135% to $25.75 billion, and the number of projects initiated by foreign-funded firms jumped 71% to 83,265, the Economic Daily said.
The huge increases reflected foreign companies' enthusiasm about business opportunities and the government's willingness to grant them greater market access.
The foreign money pumped into China in 1993 alone equaled the total for the previous 14 years under an economic modernization drive.
Australia revised its economic forecasts, underlining a faster recovery.
Annual inflation could run at 2% rather than the 3.5% estimated in August, and the balance of payments deficit may narrow.
For the year ending June 30, the export-paced economy may expand 3.5%, up from a forecast of 2.75% and from 2.5% growth last year.
Retail sales are up, employment is growing, consumer sentiment is higher and lending rates lower, stocks and the currency are strong, and bond yields are the lowest in a decade.
Under a privatization plan the Kuwaiti government is studying, selling off state enterprises would take five years.
The plan includes shedding stakes, valued at $2.68 billion, in 62 companies, and privatizing services that are subsidized or provided free by the government, which employs most of the work force.
Kuwait wants to turn over power production, transportation, communications and some oil dealings to the private sector.
Kuwait's economic problems, such as a budget deficit, were complicated by a sharp drop in foreign-investment earnings that helped balance budgets before the Gulf War.
The Indian government raised prices of gasoline and diesel fuel between 6% and 11% in a bid to cut subsidies and reduce its budget deficit, among economic reforms, and pay for higher exploration and marketing costs.
The increases will boost bus and cab fares and prices of merchandise transported by trucks.
India imports 43% of its petroleum and taxes it heavily.
The fuel action came a day after increases in regulated prices of sugar, wheat and rice sold through government shops to 160 million poor and middle-class customers, coping with a 9% annual inflation rate.
The International Olympic Committee received a record total of 10 potential entries in the race to host the 2002 Winter Games.
At yesterday's deadline, notification of planned bids were filed by Olympic groups in Salt Lake City, Utah; Alma Alta, Kazakhstan; Graz, Austria; Jaca, Spain; Oestersund, Sweden; PopradTatry, Slovakia; Sion, Switzerland; Sochi, Russia; Quebec, Canada, and Tarvisio, Italy.
Bids will be presented later this year and the host chosen in June 1995.
Shoppers in Britain pay an average of 48% more than U.S. consumers do for many of the same products, a BusinessAge magazine survey found.
Goods with such price gaps include autos, computers, compact disks and clothing, the British Press Association reported.
Among the few relative bargains in Britain were condoms and theater tickets.
The magazine termed some of the differences "staggering": The same blue jeans were priced at $90 in Britain and $30 in the U.S., disposable contact lenses $225 vs. $87, and a tennis racket $225 vs. $78.
Defending the price differences, one retailer said manufacturers use the U.S. for launching products and Britain for making profits.
Another said property prices make goods more expensive in Britain.
BusinessAge said the various explanations didn't stand up to scrutiny.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Thailand's cabinet agreed in principle to proceed with an ambitious, long-delayed elevated railway in Bangkok, clearing the traffic-clogged capital's transit agency to negotiate a construction contract. . . .
About 15,000 farmers, students and dissidents demonstrated in Seoul, demanding South Korea revoke or hold a referendum on its decision to open its rice market to imports under the new world trade pact.
The protest turned violent, and about 200 people were hurt, some seriously.
