Flagstar Cos., after nearly four years of losses, said it will close or sell 270 restaurants and swallow $1.7 billion in fourth-quarter charges to shore up its balance sheet.
The Spartanburg, S.C., company, which owns or franchises five restaurant chains, also said it plans to overhaul many of its approximately 1,000 Denny's outlets to meet increased competition.
The charges resulted in a fourth-quarter loss of $1.65 billion, or $38.97 a share.
That compared with a year-earlier loss of $158.2 million, or $5 a share.
Revenue in the fourth quarter rose 9.6% to $1.02 billion from $925.9 million.
The $1.7 billion in charges includes $225 million to cover Flagstar's restaurant restructuring and $1.5 billion for a write-off of goodwill.
That goodwill was incurred in 1989, when Coniston Partners bought controlling interest in the company, which is now controlled by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co.
Goodwill, or the excess over book value paid for a company's assets, is typically deducted from future profits.
But Flagstar said yesterday that its financial results repeatedly had fallen short of the $48 million a year in earnings needed to amortize the goodwill.
"Assuming the continuation of the present trend, we would continue to show a net loss for a long period of time," said spokesman Coleman Sullivan.
Industry analysts said they were surprised by the timing of the write-off.
But they added that the move would help straighten out the company's balance sheet and make it easier for Flagstar to begin posting profits.
Still, they cautioned that the company's huge debt load, some $2.4 billion, and outdated restaurants would make it difficult to post profits this year.
"This is another recognition that the price of the buyout was too high," said Barry Stouffer, an analyst with J.C. Bradford.
Traffic at Denny's, the company's flagship chain, dropped 7% last quarter; diners, analysts said, were abandoning the chain for newer, more eclectic food chains.
Several of the company's recent efforts to win back customers, including an all-you-can-eat promotion, have flopped.
Perhaps more important, the chain's image has been bruised by a spate of lawsuits charging Denny's with discrimination.
Last year, Flagstar signed a pact with the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People to increase minority management and vendors at the company.
To turn the chain around, Flagstar said yesterday that it plans to revamp many of its Denny's outlets over the next two years by adding new facades, more lights, new menus and contemporary logos.
"A lot of those stores haven't been touched in 20 years," said Flagstar's Mr. Sullivan.
Flagstar will also try to weed out the unprofitable restaurants from its other operations, El Pollo Loco, Hardee's, Quincy's and Canteen.
Of the 270 restaurants targeted for sale or closing, 135 are Denny's, 45 are El Pollo Locos and 90 are Quincy's locations.
While some may close, the company said it hopes to sell most to franchisers.
For all of 1993, Flagstar reported a loss, including charges, of $1.72 billion, or $40.93 a share, compared with a year-ago loss of $225 million, or $9.29 a share.
Revenue rose 6.7% to $3.97 billion from $3.72 billion.
In Nasdaq Stock Market trading yesterday, Flagstar shares fell 25 cents apiece to $10.25.
