The Clinton administration is mulling a selective, rather than total, revocation of China's trade benefits if Beijing doesn't show sufficient progress on human rights by June.
Specifically, if China fails to meet a human-rights test set by the administration, U.S. officials are considering revoking favorable trading rules for goods made by Chinese state-owned enterprises, but not for those produced by private ventures.
U.S. officials underscore that no decisions have been made, and they concede that it would be difficult to monitor a partial revocation.
Under an executive order signed by President Clinton last May, the U.S. has said it will renew China's Most Favored Nation trade status only if Beijing significantly improves its human-rights behavior.
But because of the huge economic losses that would be triggered if the U.S. revokes China's status, officials have begun to discuss some less severe penalties.
U.S.-China trade has mushroomed in recent years.
Most Favored Nation status is the treatment the U.S. confers on most of its trading partners.
The idea of a more selective revocation was raised yesterday during an appearance by Winston Lord, assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, before the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
Responding to a question about selective revocation, which previously has been approved by Congress but never put into effect, Mr. Lord said, "In principle, it's a good theory, and one should be looking at it."
He said that the purpose of the earlier legislation was to "lessen the impact of revocation on American business and joint ventures, and lessen the impact on innocent bystanders like Hong Kong and, perhaps, Taiwan."
Later yesterday, State Department spokesman Michael McCurry noted that Mr. Clinton's executive order didn't mention partial revocation.
Mr. McCurry also stressed that the administration still is prodding China to comply with U.S. standards so that its trading status can be renewed.
But the spokesman didn't rule out the possibility of a partial revocation.
"I think that there's some dispute about whether or not it's possible to have such a thing as a semi-MFN, or halfway or partial MFN," he said.
"So I think that's all something that's very much under review, and I don't think there's any definitive view that the U.S. government has on a question like that."
Top administration officials have talked openly about modifying its human-rights standard in future years if China meets this year's test.
The administration would like to remove the annual Most Favored Nation debate from the center of U.S.-China policy -- a place it has occupied since Beijing's massacre of pro-democracy students in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Rep. Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.), a leading advocate of linking China's Most Favored Nation status to its human-rights record, said, "The president doesn't need further authority to revoke MFN in a targeted way."
And she said Congress would be unlikely to object to a partial revocation.
During the Bush administration, lawmakers approved legislation providing for partial revocation, but the president vetoed it.
Congress considered such a bill again last year, but didn't act after President Clinton adopted his executive order.
Rep. Pelosi maintained that partial revocation would still send a stern message to China.
"When push comes to shove, and it usually does in Beijing, they will understand that this is not backing off," she said.
"It says: We're going after your state-run businesses and not the private sector."
