McDonald's Corp. said it will ban smoking, effective immediately, in its U.S. company-owned restaurants and will encourage franchisees, who operate a majority of the 9,100 domestic McDonald's, to follow suit.
While the nation's largest fast-food chain can only suggest policy to the independent operators, many are expected to embrace it, partly because customers will likely now expect all McDonald's to be smoke-free.
"We're doing this because we believe it's the right thing to do for our customers and our employees," said Edward H. Rensi, president and chief executive officer of McDonald's USA.
He also cited pending federal legislation, introduced by Rep. Henry Waxman (D., Calif.), that would prohibit smoking in all public places.
A government-mandated ban is "the only fair way to approach the issue, because it treats all public places equally under the law," Mr. Rensi said.
Several fast-food competitors indicated yesterday they have no immediate plans to join the anti-smoking brigade.
"It just hasn't presented a real concern to our customers," said a spokesman for Wendy's International Inc.
"Maybe we're being conservative, but we make decisions based on what the customer tells us."
Even so, about 100 of Wendy's 3,700 U.S. franchise and company-owned stores are smoke-free.
The company said it has no plans to expand that number.
Other competitors said that while McDonald's announcement brings more awareness to the non-smoking movement, they will await Congress's response to Mr. Waxman's bill.
Going smoke-free "is a matter of when, not if," conceded one chain's spokesperson.
"But we want to be legislated.
Nobody wants to alienate 25% of their customer base."
Burger King Corp., a Miami-based unit of Grand Metropolitan PLC, said about 600 of its 6,000 stores prohibit smoking.
A spokesman said the company's toll-free customer hotline, which handles 4,000 calls a day, has reported "a mixed response" to the non-smoking issue, with "no consensus" that customers are bothered by the smoke.
At KFC, the chicken chain owned by PepsiCo Inc., smoking is banned in only three test markets: Phoenix; Austin, Texas; and Lansing, Mich.; a spokesman said.
"We don't fall into the notion that when McDonald's sneezes, the rest of us all catch a cold," he added.
Still, the trend is away from smoke.
The National Council of Chain Restaurants, whose members operate nearly 90,000 establishments, said a third of its membership has already banned smoking.
McDonald's, for example, which is based in Oak Brook, Ill., has been encouraging nonsmoking policies in many of its restaurants for months.
And already, more than 2,200 have gone smokeless.
However, some have done so to comply with local ordinances.
The company's decision to prohibit smoking in its 1,400 U.S. restaurants follows a similar decision by Arby's Inc. for about 250 of its restaurants.
Company-owned restaurants in Canada also are affected by the new policy, McDonald's said.
Anti-smoking groups applauded McDonald's' announcement, noting several lawsuits pending in Texas and Connecticut that would compel restaurants to prohibit smoking.
