Compaq Computer Corp. is expected to introduce next week its first "subnotebook" computer, joining a throng of competitors hoping for a slice of portable computing's hottest niche.
According to analysts and trade-press reports, Compaq's machine, with the code name Aero, will resemble other subnotebook models, with a weight of about 3.5 pounds, a black and white screen, and many of the same features found on notebook computers that weigh nearly twice as much.
The twist, say the experts, is that Compaq's offering will be priced as much as $1,000 below the competition, at about $1,400, and will be pitched as a PC for the home.
Other subnotebooks, such as those from International Business Machines Corp. and Toshiba Corp., have been marketed to traveling executives or office workers needing a second computer.
Kimball Brown, an analyst at Dataquest Inc., a San Jose, Calif., market research concern, predicts Compaq's prices will hit a sweet spot in the market.
"They're so on track on this that it's disgusting," said Mr. Brown, responding to speculation about Compaq's subnotebook strategy.
"People look at these products and say, `It's little so it should cost less.'
They're doing exactly what they should be doing."
A spokeswoman for the Houston PC giant wouldn't comment on the machine, which is expected to be formally announced Monday.
Compaq's problem, experts say, is that it is a latecomer to a market that is already crowded.
In addition to IBM's Thinkpad and Toshiba's Portege models, Compaq's machine will be competing against similar products from Gateway 2000 Inc., Zeos International Ltd., and Hewlett-Packard Co.
William Bluestein, a director of computer strategy research at Forrester Research Inc. in Cambridge, Mass., says Compaq views the subnotebook market as particularly important, given the company's legacy as a trendsetter in portable PCs.
"Compaq used to be the pacesetter in notebooks and all of the sudden they're getting one-upped," Mr. Bluestein said.
While the subnotebook market is still tiny when compared with bigger machines, analysts are bracing for big gains.
Dataquest estimates that 1.3 million subnotebooks will be sold this year, double from the 613,000 in 1993.
Within five years, Dataquest predicts subnotebook sales will equal those of notebooks.
