New York -- "Carousel" is revived less often than all of the Rodgers and Hammerstein major musicals.
One reason is its darker themes; another is its musical demands.
Last season, however, director Nicholas Hytner mounted a highly acclaimed production at Britain's Royal National Theatre.
Despite the success of this earlier production, the new one at Lincoln Center, also directed by Mr. Hytner, is a distinct improvement on its British counterpart.
In the first place, the striking scenic designs of Bob Crowley come much more into play on the thrust stage at the Vivian Beaumont than they did set behind the picture-frame stage of the Lyttelton Theatre in London.
Mr. Crowley has created a series of evocative set pieces, some of them almost surrealistic, that bring to life a small New England town at the turn of the century: a white church on a hill in the distance; a lighthouse flashing across the water; a frame house that has the foreshortened roofs of other houses sprouting like mushrooms on its main roof.
By bringing both the visual world of Mr. Crowley and the action of the players nearer the audience, Mr. Hytner has made the whole affair more intimate and appealing.
On balance, moreover, the voices are stronger in New York than they were in London.
And for "Carousel" this makes all the difference.
To a greater degree than in any other Rodgers and Hammerstein show, music is the key to its story and emotions.
The opening number is not an overture, but a six-and-a-half minute pantomime set to music.
Mr. Hytner opens with young women operating a loom in the mill where the heroine Julie (Sally Murphy) and her friend Carrie (Audra Ann McDonald) work.
It shows us the drudgery of the life they live.
But soon we are transported to a far happier scene: a fairground complete with a dancing bear, bearded ladies and a carousel with its swaggering barker, Billy Bigelow (Michael Hayden).
The blossoming of the carousel: the horses appearing, the revolving center column and the bright lights dropping from above -- is a magical contrast to the mill.
Later, when Julie and Billy get together, we have 12 minutes of solid music, as these two, meeting for the first time, frightened and alone, reach out to each other.
They express in songs what they could never say in words.
The scene reaches its culmination with the haunting "If I Loved You."
Billy and Julie marry but he loses his job at the carousel and takes up with a ruthless gangster, Jigger (Fisher Stevens).
Jigger gets Billy to join him in robbing the owner of the mill, but they botch it, after which, Billy is trapped and kills himself.
It's a melodramatic scene: Julie kneels beside his body as he dies.
The music raises this out of the maudlin and onto a nobler level with the anthem "You'll Never Walk Alone."
By themselves, the Hammerstein lyrics are saccharine, but the Rodgers music saves them, especially when delivered by a glorious singer.
Shirley Verrett comes to the role from opera, and she knows how to make the song soar.
As Nellie, the older woman who befriends Julie, Carrie and all the girls at the mill, Ms. Verrett delivers not only on that number but also on the boisterous "June is Bustin' Out All Over."
The main storyline of "Carousel" comes from a play written in 1909, the Hungarian popular dramatist Ferenc Molnar's "Liliom."
Even transferred to New England by Rodgers and Hammerstein, and updated in its imaginative new staging, it still has the basic problem it started out with: the husband.
Billy is a spineless drifter, and he beats his wife.
The one day he comes back to Earth, with a chance to redeem himself, he also strikes his daughter.
There is a moment in the play when he can explain himself.
Hearing that his wife is pregnant, he sings a lengthy soliloquy imagining what it will be like to have a boy -- or a girl.
It's a masterful number, but it must be sung full-voiced.
Mr. Hayden is an impressive actor, but he does not have the voice to persuade us he would be right to steal or kill in order to support his child.
He lacks the vocal power that overrides all else, including good sense.
Nothing can really excuse Billy's brutal behavior toward the women in his life.
Yet the Molnar plot attempts to make us believe in him just as Julie does, blindly.
She never gives up on him, but it is ultimately impossible for us to follow her lead.
In the end, it is not Julie who can redeem Billy, but the musical alchemy of Richard Rodgers's score.
For those who have never heard it, or have forgotten how incandescent it can be, this is an opportunity not to be missed.
Like one of his best known plays, Clifford Odets was a golden boy.
In the five years between 1935 and 1940, the Group Theatre produced seven of his plays.
But then he went to Hollywood.
In the remaining 23 years of his life, he wrote only four more plays, of which "The Flowering Peach" was the last.
First produced in 1954, it was unlike all the others, which had been noted for their gritty, contemporary realism.
Based on the biblical story of Noah and the flood, it is set, as the stage directions indicate, "Then, not now."
But though the time and setting are ancient, the characters are a 20th-century Jewish family.
The juxtaposition works surprisingly well.
Noah (Eli Wallach) and his wife (Anne Jackson) are a bickering but affectionate couple.
Their three sons are markedly different from one another: Shem (Josh Mostel) is the materialist, Ham (Steve Hofvendahl) is a ne'er-do-well who drinks too much, and Japheth (David Aaron Baker) is an idealist, who also happens to be handy with tools -- a great help when the time comes to build the ark.
Odets moves just far enough from scripture to make the action interesting: especially the by-play between the agnostic Japheth and his pious father.
At the conclusion it is agreed that everyone has changed, including God.
The revival at the Lyceum Theatre has the charm of a well-told fable, especially in the energetic performances directed by Martin Charnin.
