Three House Republicans asked the Securities and Exchange Commission for information about Hillary Rodham Clinton's holdings in an investment fund that sold short several healthcare stocks early last year.
Mrs. Clinton's holdings in ValuePartners I became public knowledge in May 1993 when she and President Clinton filed federal forms disclosing a variety of investments.
Mrs. Clinton has been a limited partner since 1986 in ValuePartners I, a hedge fund managed by Smith Capital Management of Little Rock, Ark.
Hedge funds are among the most aggressive investment pools because they can buy stocks with borrowed money and can sell stocks short -- that is, borrow shares and sell them at current prices in anticipation of replacing them at lower prices.
Health-care stocks were among the stocks sold short by ValuePartners I last year, when many health-care stocks were falling in value because of the uncertainty about the impending recommendations of the presidential task force on health-care reform, headed by Mrs. Clinton.
In a letter to SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt, Reps. Bob Lancaster of Louisiana, Christopher Cox of California and George Gekas of Pennsylvania asked for information about Smith Capital Management and trading in the hedge fund in the time between President Clinton's election and the transfer of the fund and other Clinton assets to a blind trust in July.
"Both the President and Mrs. Clinton would certainly be aware of the impact on the market of their statements about the Administration's health care proposals," the Republican representatives wrote to Mr. Levitt last week.
"The ability of the President and Mrs. Clinton to affect prices in the securities markets is unique.
The questions already raised publicly concerning their investments, particularly short sales, must be addressed."
SEC officials said they are reviewing the letter but wouldn't comment further.
Separately, Senate Banking Committee Chairman Donald Riegle again rejected Republican requests for a hearing on the Clintons' Arkansas real-estate investment.
The Michigan Democrat said he wouldn't consider committee activity until special counsel Robert Fiske Jr. has completed his investigation of Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan and Whitewater Development Corp.
Sen. Alfonse D'Amato of New York and seven of his fellow Republicans on the Banking Committee have asked for hearings on the Clintons' investment in Whitewater with the former chairman of Madison Guaranty.
REP. BOB LIVINGSTON of Louisiana is one of three Republicans seeking data from the Securities and Exchange Commission about Hillary Rodham Clinton's investments.
An article yesterday incorrectly called him Bob Lancaster.
(WSJ Feb. 2, 1994)
