That legendary Texas confidence is starting to come back -- but minus some of the swagger.
After a long sojourn in the dumps, Texans are finally feeling reasonably good about the economy, according to two separate measures of consumer confidence.
Within the past two months, both the Conference Board's consumer confidence index and a survey by veteran pollster Albert E. Sindlinger indicate Texans may have at last emerged from a recessionary mindset.
That may come as a surprise to many, since Texas is generally considered to have beaten the rest of the nation out of the 1990-1991 recession, and since the state has for some time been generating some of the best job-growth and housingstarts figures anywhere.
But analysts say Texans have been slow to return to optimism, mostly because they're still smarting from the economic debacle of the mid-1980s.
What's more, oil prices remain severely depressed, and recent growth, while impressive, still doesn't approach the sort of expansion that Texans had at one time come to expect.
Finally, corporate layoffs, particularly in the defense industry, continue to take their toll.
Tracking such mood swings is sometimes more art than science, but the New York-based Conference Board, a nonprofit research organization financed by business donations, has been at it long enough to develop a sizable following among economists and policy makers.
The methodology is simple: Each month, interviewers ask 5,000 consumers five basic questions: Are business conditions good, bad or normal at present?
Are jobs plentiful, not so plentiful, or hard to get?
In the next six months, how will business conditions and jobs fare?
Will your family's income be higher, lower or the same in six months?
The results, compiled in index form, have often shown significant differences between the U.S. as a whole and the Texas area -- which also includes Louisiana, Oklahoma and Arkansas.
In the early 1980s, when the rest of the U.S. was caught in the grip of recession, Texans were riding a wave of oil-induced optimism.
In December 1981, for instance, the Texas-area reading stood at 113.3, compared with 66.6 for the nation as a whole.
By December of 1986, the oil crash reversed the situation, putting the U.S. at 93.2 and Texas at 56.2.
The Conference Board typically considers any number between 80 and 100 to be a sign of a healthy, but not spectacular, economy.
Under 80 usually signifies a sluggish or recessionary economy, while over 100 means a boom.
Since 1991, consumers in the U.S. and in Texas have been pretty much equally morose, showing average readings under 70.
But the psyches in both areas appear to be on the mend, at long last: In January, the U.S. reading hit 83.2, up 3.4 points from December, while the Texas-area jumped 11.4 points, to 84.8.
Although analysts caution against placing too much emphasis on one month's figures, the numbers do indicate that the increase in Texans' confidence may have staying power.
A year ago, consumers were over-the-top optimistic about the future, but cautious about their current circumstances.
Now, respondents say their current situation looks pretty rosy, as do their expectations.
"I think {the upturn} is more sustainable than a temporary surge a year earlier," says Jason Bram, a Conference Board economist.
"It's based more on fundamental issues -- things like the job market picking up."
More evidence of improving consumer confidence comes from Mr. Sindlinger, an 87-year-old consultant whose Wallingford, Pa., firm has been taking America's pulse regularly since 1948.
Mr. Sindlinger's approach also involves telephone interviews, to measure what he calls "household liquidity."
For a respondent to have positive household liquidity, he or she must be able to say that total annual household income is at least equal to what it was six months ago; that total household income will be the same or up from now in the next six months; that in the next six months there will be at least the same number of jobs in the area; and that business conditions in the next six months will be the same or better.
By his definition, an area in which fewer than 26% of household heads report positive liquidity is in a depression; between 26% and 29.9% indicates a borderline depression; 30% to 49.9% signals a recession; and 50% or above is a sign of a healthy economy.
Before 1982, Texas tended to far surpass the rest of the country, turning in numbers in the 60% and 70% range.
Through the dark years of the '80s, Texas dipped into the 30% range.
"You were down pretty low, for Texas," Mr. Sindlinger says.
"I mean, Texas has never experienced anything bad since the Alamo."
In the '90s, though, the trend has been up, and Texas has generally ranged about 10 points above the U.S. average.
In December, for the first time since January of 1990, Texas finally cracked the 50% mark; by January, positive household liquidity had reached 53.0%.
By contrast, the U.S. average was still 37.9%, firmly in recession territory -- a conclusion disputed by most economists.
One state, California, was in a "depression," and eight (other than Texas) were considered healthy: Wyoming, Idaho, Nevada, Montana, Colorado, Utah, New Mexico and Arizona.
