The dollar fell sharply against the yen following the collapse of the U.S.-Japan trade summit, but analysts and traders said the U.S. currency's new trading range will be determined by how Washington responds to the trade talks' failure, not by the failure itself.
If the Clinton administration targets currency rates as a way to reduce the U.S. trade deficit with Japan -- an action that administration officials said wasn't planned -- the dollar could drop toward its historic lows against the yen, the market watchers said.
But if the administration pressures Japan through the use of trade sanctions, thus signaling the market that an attack on exchange rates won't be launched, the U.S. currency could start recovering toward the 110-yen level.
Indeed, the U.S. is poised to launch trade-sanction proceedings tomorrow against Japan over cellular telephones.
At a news conference Friday afternoon in Washington, President Clinton and Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa said they had failed to resolve any of the major impasses to a trade accord between the two nations.
Soon afterward, the dollar fell through a key technical support level at 107 yen to an intraday low of 106.80 yen, a level last seen in November.
That was well below the dollar's 108.15-yen level late Thursday in New York.
By late Friday, the dollar was quoted at 106.85 yen, 1.2% below the day-earlier level.
The dollar weakened further in Asian-Pacific trading Monday and reached an intraday low of 106.07 yen.
At midmorning in Tokyo, it stood at 106.25 yen and at 1.7520 marks.
Following the Clinton-Hosokawa news conference on Friday, participants in the foreign-exchange market sold dollars for yen, betting that the U.S. will resume efforts to talk up the Japanese currency.
With the dollar falling below the support level on Friday, these sellers reasoned, U.S. statements in support of the Japanese currency could send the dollar toward the 105.50-yen level, and possibly below that.
Many currency watchers believe the U.S. will again call publicly for a stronger yen as a way of chopping away at Japan's huge trade surplus.
As the yen rises, exports from Japan become more expensive in terms of other currencies, while imports into Japan become less expensive in terms of yen.
In Washington, however, Clinton economic officials said they weren't planning a broad effort to drive up the yen against the dollar.
The global flow of funds is so vast, these officials said, that the U.S. government can't unilaterally push the yen in any direction for a sustained period.
In the foreign-exchange market, too, not everybody was expecting the White House to try to talk the yen higher.
"Talking the yen up at this point would just prolong the recession in Japan," says Earl Johnson, vice president, foreign-exchange trading, at Harris Trust & Savings Bank in Chicago.
A weak Japanese economy wouldn't help narrow the bilateral trade gap, the reasoning goes, because it curbs the Japanese appetite for imports.
On the other hand, should the U.S. impose trade sanctions against Japan, the dollar could benefit, the market participants say.
In a best-case scenario, in the view of people favoring this idea, sanctions could even push the dollar back toward the 110-yen level because they would divert the administration away from exchange-rate policy.
Against the German currency, the dollar was quoted at 1.7543 marks late Friday in New York, up a bit from 1.7533 marks late Thursday.
