The latest attempt to shore up the largest leveraged buyout in corporate history faces a tough sell on Wall Street.
RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. is attempting to raise $2 billion through a preferred stock offering aimed at improving RJR's "financial flexibility," fully five years after RJR's $25 billion buyout by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co.
But investors are wary.
"I don't know who they are going to sell this to," says Gary Langbaum, director of equity research for Kemper Financial Services Inc., a big Chicago investment company.
"I won't put Kemper investors into this."
One of the biggest risk factors is that the new preferred shares are tied to RJR's less-desirable tobacco business if RJR executes a long-contemplated breakup of its food and tobacco units.
The day after the offering was announced on Feb. 24 the Food and Drug Administration released a letter stating that it was considering evidence that may result in the FDA regulating cigarettes as a drug.
While such a step is improbable, the news spooked tobacco investors, helping fuel an 8.5% decline in RJR's stock price since the deal was announced.
Investors are also worried about the future 20% earnings dilution once the shares convert to RJR common.
Analyst Marc I. Cohen of Goldman, Sachs & Co. lowered his 1994 RJR earnings estimate by four cents a share to 40 cents.
Mr. Cohen said he was "somewhat disappointed" that RJR is issuing additional equity, but continues to recommend the stock.
Nor does RJR have a stellar track record on Wall Street.
The shares of a similar RJR offering in 1991 have lost about 30% of their value.
"Those people that lost money in the last deal are certainly not going to re-up," says Mr. Langbaum.
"I invested in this company because KKR was supposed to be the home-run kings of leveraged buyouts," says John E. Brunhammer, an investor in Delaware who owns about $50,000 of RJR stock.
Instead, he says, "the last few years have been extremely frustrating for me."
Some analysts say that in order to complete the deal, RJR may have to offer a rich dividend of 8.5% or more, as well as reducing the issue's ties to the tobacco business.
Mr. Langbaum says it would take a 9% dividend, far higher than those offered on similar deals, to make Kemper rethink its position.
Ever since KKR completed the buyout, RJR has been plagued by financial woes related to its junk-bond financing, deterioration of the tobacco business, and management turmoil.
Chuck Hunter, a senior portfolio manager with the Montana Investment Board, an investor in the KKR partnership that bought RJR, says "KKR is out there scrambling around trying to figure out how to make the buyout work."
The new offering follows last year's aborted attempt to increase the value of RJR's shares by selling separate shares linked to the performance of the food business.
Just after that deal was announced, a cigarette price war broke out, and RJR's former chairman Louis V. Gerstner Jr. bolted to lead International Business Machines Corp.
The new offering of Percs, or preferred equity redemption cumulative shares, is widely seen as a precursor to trying to sell off the tobacco business, or another major transaction designated to lift RJR's stock value.
Percs generally carry all the risk of a common stock without offering all the possible reward.
They convert into shares of the issuing company after three years, but investors' potential for capital gains is limited to 30% to 40% above the common-stock price at the time of the issue.
To compensate for the limited gains, Percs generally carry a relatively high dividend; RJR common shares currently don't pay a dividend at all.
To try to sell the deal, RJR has reconstituted the team that aggressively pushed the failed food-stock deal last year.
Morgan Stanley & Co., which invented Percs, will run the deal, assisted by Smith Barney Shearson Inc.
Robert F. Greenhill, chairman and chief executive of Smith Barney, was at Morgan last year and led the efforts to make the food-stock offering fly.
With the offering in registration, RJR, KKR, and the two investment banking firms declined to comment.
But people close to RJR say that it is premature to speculate about possible changes in the deal because marketing efforts haven't begun.
They also say if interest rates don't rise that the shares will probably carry a dividend of 8.25%.
But even that coupon is tellingly expensive, compared with similar offers.
In 1991, when interest rates were much higher, Ford Motor Co. sold a $2.3 billion preferred issue that offered a yield of 8.4%.
And the dividend on a $1 billion preferred issue also sold in 1991 by General Motors Corp., aimed at individual investors, topped 9%.
The $2 billion RJR Perc in 1991 paid an 8.3% yield.
The yield on the new deal might be substantially lower than that if RJR's business had held up.
People close to RJR say the drop in the share price was expected, given the dilutive impact of issuing 300 million new shares.
But people close to the company say that the deal won't be as dilutive as it appears at face value because the company will put the $2 billion to work earning profits for the company.
"Are you asking me, `Am I happy about them diluting us?'
It wasn't in the game plan.
But it doesn't make me want to back away," says Michael Jamison, a managing director of Brandywine Asset Management, a pension fund management company that owns RJR stock.
Potential investors are troubled by the fact that the new shares are linked to RJR's tobacco business.
The tobacco taint looms so large that Kemper's Mr. Langbaum and others predict that RJR will be forced to restructure the deal, even though people familiar with RJR say that amending the deal isn't even being remotely considered.
"Ultimately, they may be forced to amend it and give you participation in both the food and tobacco business," says Mr. Langbaum.
"Why should I take something that is convertible into the least attractive of the two businesses?"
