Chrysler Corp., which is running out of capacity to meet demand for some of its most profitable products, is in the midst of trying to figure out how and where to make more cars and trucks.
Chrysler's board today is expected to discuss a range of options that are understood to include canceling a scheduled plant closing in St. Louis, expanding output in Mexico and adding work shifts at existing plants.
The company is especially interested in boosting production of its hot-selling Jeep Grand Cherokee and Dodge Ram pickup truck.
"We've got a lot of different studies going," Chairman Robert J. Eaton said in an interview this week.
He declined to discuss specific plans but indicated that he doesn't plan to announce any decisions this week.
Chrysler's board already has approved a plan to spend $1 billion to increase the company's capacity to 3.2 million vehicles a year by 1996 from 2.6 million currently.
Last year, Chrysler's vehicle sales soared 14% to 2.5 million cars and trucks, on the strength of a series of popular new products, aided by an auto-industry recovery.
As Chrysler decides how to spend that money and adds to capacity, the results should show up quickly in the form of higher profits, industry analysts say.
"They have to invest something to get added capacity, but not all that much," said Wendy Needham, auto analyst with Smith Barney Shearson, "so there is significant flow-through to the bottom line."
While Chrysler isn't talking publicly about its plans to add capacity, St. Louis is a likely candidate.
Chrysler has two vehicle assembly plants there, but only one of them is operating, building minivans.
Chrysler had planned to close it down and switch minivan production to the other plant when output of its next-generation minivan commences early next year.
That way, there wouldn't be a loss of production during retooling for the new model.
But now suppliers, union officials and analysts all say they expect Chrysler to keep the existing plant open after the second plant starts running.
Another move Chrysler is considering is to expand production in Mexico, but that could anger U.S. union leaders.
As part of Mexico's efforts to decrease industrial production in the heavily-polluted Mexico City area, Chrysler is moving its Lago Alberto plant to a new site in northern Mexico, where it will build an expanded-cab version of the Dodge Ram pickup.
Thanks to the Ram's popularity, Chrysler is now considering a moderate expansion of Mexican production of the truck as well as building the truck in St. Louis, analysts and suppliers say.
Dealers had a 55-day supply of the Ram in January, according to Ward's Automotive Reports, compared with 75 days for Ford pickups and 60 days for Chevies, which are closer to the industry standard.
Other possible expansion moves are understood to involve a moderate expansion of a plant in Detroit that builds Grand Cherokee sport-utility vehicles.
According to Ward's, dealers have only a 29-day supply of them.
Chrysler is said also to be considerating adding a third work shift to build Neon subcompacts in Belvidere, Ill., and adding output of compact Cirrus and Stratus models to the Newark, Del., plant.
Currently, Chrysler is gearing up to build the vehicles only in Sterling Heights, Mich.
One problem with such ideas, though, is that Chrysler has an engine shortage, too, and the same engines are used across several product lines.
So if Chrysler sharply increases production of Cirrus/Stratus compacts, that could cut into the supply of four-cylinder engines for the Neon and the minivan.
Chrysler is expanding its engine building capacity and also trying to make its engine plants more flexible -- so different products can be built on one line.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, Chrysler rose $1 to $57.375.
Other auto stocks also rose.
General Motors Corp. was up $2.375, to $60.50, after an upbeat analysts meeting earlier in the week at the company's new vehicle launch center in Warren, Mich.
Ford Motor Co. rose $1.625 to $63.875.
