The critics agree: The Academy Award for best picture likely will go to "Schindler's List" tonight.
But worst picture is another matter.
Gene Siskel chooses "The Beverly Hillbillies," while Roger Ebert picks "The Coneheads."
And Michael Medved, who's written four books on bad film, throws his dart at "Body of Evidence."
So perhaps the Golden Raspberry Foundation, made up of 350 amateur critics, is the best authority on bad.
Yesterday, it bestowed its 14th annual Razzie for worst picture -- and three of its nine awards -- on "Indecent Proposal."
(A Paramount Pictures spokeswoman wouldn't comment.)
The award show's site -- the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel, where the Oscars were first presented in 1929 -- may have lent the Razzies some class, but only because the hotel rejected Razzie founder John Wilson's request to use the loading dock next to its dumpster.
"Bottom line, it's a joke," says Mr. Wilson, a film-trailer writer.
The Razzies thrive on publicity, which is why the group opens its envelopes a day before the Academy's.
"But we also do a pretty good job of picking bad films," he argues.
"A Whole New Worst!" was the opening number of the show, for which tacky and tasteless would be terms of tribute.
Razzie masters of ceremony traded barbs about everything from Burt Reynolds's toupee to Sharon Stone's choice in underwear.
No winner has ever showed up to claim one of the chintzy ceramic raspberry-atop-a-film-can statuettes that are kept around just in case.
Mr. Wilson says he got a "frosty" response from Madonna's agency last week when he called to invite her to accept as worst actress for "Body of Evidence."
And Mr. Reynolds failed to claim the worst-actor Razzie for "Cop and a Half," despite Mr. Wilson's urging that there was "enormous favorable publicity in having the sense of humor" to do so.
The group's biggest media coup came when Johnny Carson in 1988 featured Bill Cosby joking about his Razzie hat trick for "Leonard Part 6."
Displaying three gold-plated trophies -- which he'd had made for him for $7,500 each -- he proclaimed: "These are the Golden Raspberries, and I made a sweep."
Mr. Siskel is particularly pleased that Mr. Reynolds won.
"Let the record show that Roger Ebert gave a positive review to `Cop and a Half,'" he says.
"I'm starting to like these Razzies more and more."
