R.H. Macy & Co. is in negotiations with General Electric Capital and Fidelity Investments to put together a plan that would allow the retailer, mired in bankruptcy-court proceedings for two years, to emerge within the next few months.
According to a person familiar with the talks, the plan would value the New York-based retailer at about $3.2 billion, far less than the $3.5 billion the company and some creditors have hoped for.
It also would leave Fidelity owning as much as 40% of the reorganized company's stock.
The talks are still in preliminary stages, and a plan isn't expected to be filed in federal bankruptcy court in the Southern District of New York for several weeks.
But, according to the person familiar with the situation, the parties have already outlined some of the critical terms.
Key to the success of the plan is repaying in full the claim shared by Prudential Insurance Co. of America and Federated Department Stores, which has grown to about $1.1 billion with interest.
Federated, Macy's rival and most senior creditor, has said it wants to merge the two department-store chains.
Federated paid $109.3 million to control half of the Prudential claim in order to gain a seat in the bankruptcy-court negotiations.
Macy declined to comment, and none of the other parties returned calls requesting comment about the talks.
The plan contemplates a modest equity infusion of $50 million to $100 million by GEC, a unit of Stamford-based General Electric Co., and a similar amount from Fidelity, according to a participant in the talks.
GE's talks with Macy about investing in its reorganization were previously reported.
The money would help the retailer and its allies buy back the stakes of other major creditors, many of them banks that are reluctant to hold stock.
According to the person familiar with the talks, Fidelity would be Macy's biggest shareholder with as much as a 40% stake in the the reorganized company.
"Macy wants to stay independent in the worst way," says one secured creditor.
Currently, Fidelity owns $490 million of Macy's bank debt, enough to block or approve any plan.
"If Fidelity picks sides, that would be a major problem for Federated's bid to take control of the company," says Max Holmes, a high-yield bond analyst at Salomon Brothers.
The proposal represents a stunning reversal for Macy, which had stalled last fall in negotiations with Fidelity and other senior creditors, who are owed about $2.4 billion.
And the plan, if it gains approval from those first-ranked creditors, will spell trouble for Macy bondholders, who hold $1.3 billion of Macy securities.
That's because, according to people familiar with the terms being discussed, the plan contemplates a distribution of less than 30 cents on the dollar for the bonds due in 1998, and nothing for the more junior bonds.
Those securities have soared in value since Federated bought its claim and announced its intention to merge with Macy in January, in the expectation of a bidding war for the retailer.
At Friday's close, the bonds due in 1998, a $379 million issue, were bid at 45.
The junior bonds due in 2001 were bid 20, and the zero-coupon bonds due the same year were bid 7 1/4.
For bondholders, the best hope is that Federated wants to own Macy badly enough to come up with a rival plan.
But Federated could lose the right to vote its stake if, under a reorganization plan, it were to receive cash or a debt security equivalent to its current claim.
Macy, meanwhile, is expected to receive a four-month extension of the period in which it has the exclusive right to file a reorganization plan today, when its representatives appear before federal bankruptcy court Judge Burton Lifland in Manhattan.
The exclusivity period currently expires March 15.
But Macy is facing vehement protests to its extension request from states seeking payment of back sales-tax dollars.
When Macy filed for Chapter 11 protection in January 1992, the sales taxes collected during the previous quarter were frozen.
Macy owes about $111 million to the 20 states in which it operates 111 Macy's and Bullock's department stores.
States typically clamor for tax payments in retail bankruptcy-law cases, but in Macy's proceedings, many have turned particularly vocal.
Mark Browning, a Texas assistant attorney general, said that state is owed $4.4 million in back taxes, according to an amended claim filed with the court.
Macy said the state's pre-bankruptcy petition claim was for only $500,000.
Mr. Browning is expected to be joined in court today by representatives of other states, including Pennsylvania.
New York state, which says it is owed $55 million in taxes, joined the Texas objection last week, as did Georgia late on Friday, according to Mr. Browning.
Their protests aren't expected to derail Macy's request for an extension.
Bankruptcy judges typically discount such objections, because states are "priority creditors" and assured full payment once a plan is confirmed.
However, their claims present yet another impediment to bondholders, whose claims are unsecured and therefore paid only after tax claims and secured creditors have been satisfied.
