Ask Daniel Bauer if he wants to buy a Chrysler Cirrus, and the question is met with an awkward silence.
A 45-year-old Toyota Camry driver, Mr. Bauer fits the demographic profile for prospective buyers of the Cirrus, Chrysler's forthcoming curvy sedan.
But his job as senior vice president, marketing, for MasterCard's Cirrus ATM network prevents him from being very enthusiastic about the Chrysler product.
In fact, he's peeved.
He and his colleagues worry that if the Chrysler Cirrus turns into another Edsel it will reflect badly on their company.
The cash network has gotten its lawyers involved and is asking the auto maker to change the name of the new sedan.
But Chrysler is happy with its cloud theme and isn't about to back down.
It's planning on naming the Dodge version of the same sedan the "Stratus."
There's precedent on the cash network's side.
Beretta, the Italian gun maker filed a $250 million suit against General Motors Corp. when it began selling Beretta cars.
GM ended up keeping the name but paying to settle the case.
But Chrysler prefers another precedent.
Mead Data Central's legal research operation, Lexis, lost a suit aiming to stop Toyota Motor Co. from selling Lexus sedans.
Lexis lost in part because it is hard to confuse the products, says Roger Schechter, a professor at the George Washington University Law School.
At least guns and cars are both high-tech metal products, Mr. Schechter says.
"Mead never came forward with a straight face and argued that somebody out shopping for a $40,000 car would end up with a legal printout by mistake," he says.
And consumers won't confuse sedans and cash machines, either, he says.
But Mr. Bauer says the problem is dilution."
You want to control the destiny of a brand, not have another company do it," Mr. Bauer says.
In other words, you don't want an unhappy Cirrus car owner to slice up his cash card in revenge.
Chrysler's real problem may have nothing to do with a potential lawsuit.
After it introduces the Cirrus and also the Dodge Stratus, Chrysler plans on launching a Plymouth version, and there aren't too many cloud names left.
Would anybody really want to buy a Nimbus?
And if Chrysler launches a stormy Cumulonimbus would it throw in the climate control for free?
