Pinnacle Micro Inc. expects to report fourth-quarter net income of between 10 cents and 12 cents a share on sales of about $11 million, Bradley T. Nielson, vice president, finance, said.
Mr. Nielson said the company likely will have financial results out next week.
He was interviewed with William F. Blum, president and chief executive officer, and Scott A. Blum, executive vice president.
Mr. Nielson added that Pinnacle Micro, a maker of optical storage drives for computers, "is on target, as much as I can predict at this point," with what he said are analysts' estimates that first-quarter net income will total about 10 cents a share.
The 1993 fourth-quarter results were likewise in line with analysts' expectations for the company, Mr. Nielson said.
Mr. Nielson said profits currently are somewhat constrained by a lineup of new products that the company is bringing to market.
Included in that lineup is an ambitious new optical-disk storage product designed to challenge the speed and efficiency of current magnetic-disk storage devices but with far more capacity, Scott Blum said.
Also, the men said a product changeover has gone well for the company's new Sierra 1.3-gigabyte drives, which supplanted Pinnacle Micro's older PMO-650, with half the capacity, starting late this fall.
They said unit shipments already are rivaling those of the earlier model, which has been phased out.
A gigabyte is one billion bytes.
The estimate of fourth-quarter net income of 10 to 12 cents a share compares with net income of $547,000, or 14 cents a share, on sales of $7.8 million a year earlier, when Pinnacle Micro was closely held.
The company's stock began trading publicly on July 1, 1993, with an initial public offering of 1.6 million common shares.
The weighted average shares outstanding in the 1993 fourth quarter totaled 5.2 million, compared with 3.9 million a year earlier.
Pinnacle Micro expects to about double research and development outlays this year compared with 1993 levels, Mr. Nielson said.
