Peoria, Ariz. -- A highlight of the last baseball season -- maybe the highlight -- came in the All-Star Game, when Randy Johnson, the left-handed pitcher for the Seattle Mariners, faced left-handed-hitting John Kruk of the Philadelphia Phillies.
Johnson, who stands 6-foot-10 and can throw a ball through a wall, started things off with a pitch that sailed over Kruk's head, causing the barrel-shaped Phillie to roll his eyes in horror.
Johnson then proceeded to whip three pitches past Kruk, whereupon the latter bowed toward the mound and retreated to the dugout.
He was later heard to say that he was glad he was a National Leaguer and didn't have to face Johnson regularly.
At his team's spiffy new spring-training complex here the other day, Johnson grinned at the recollection of the incident.
"That was fun, but I think it said more about him {Kruk} than me," he said.
"That first pitch slipped.
I didn't throw it away intentionally."
American League hitters who must face Johnson regularly will take that disclaimer with a shaker of salt; his intentions on the mound may, indeed, be purely honorable, but fear and loathing follow him anyway.
Teammates have nicknamed him "Big Unit," but take his lanky frame, put it in spiked shoes and place it atop a 10-inch-high pitcher's mound and "The Northwest Nightmare" seems a more appropriate handle.
Before last season, Johnson caused as many bad dreams for friends as foes.
His slants produced strikeouts aplenty, but they also led to numerous walks, enough to lead his league in 1990, 1991 and 1992.
For all his rocketry, his previous four-plus years in the Majors, beginning with the Montreal Expos in 1988, yielded just 49 wins, one more than his losses.
In 1993, however, at age 29, the big fella had the sort of season people had been predicting for him since he started frightening hitters as a Little Leaguer in Granada, Calif.
His won-lost record was 19-8, his 308 strikeouts made him the 11th big-league pitcher ever to top the 300 mark for a season, and his walk total in a career-high 255 innings dipped to 99 from 144 in 210 innings the year before.
One could fill this column with Johnson's dazzling '93 stats, but a few more should suffice.
Right-handed hitters batted just .204 against him, a figure that by itself would have allowed him to lead the league, but left-hand-ers nicked him for but .184.
He was so effective against lefties that most took the day off when he threw: They faced him for only 71 official turns at bat.
Johnson sums up his metamorphosis in a word: mechanics.
It's a word some pitchers would just as soon never utter, believing the less said about their throwing motions the better.
For a hurler of Johnson's great height, though, getting his mechanical act together has been a career-long preoccupation for both him and his coaches.
"I think it's been harder for them than for me," he remarks.
"None of them ever coached a 6-foot-10 pitcher before."
Interestingly, one of the men he credits with putting him on the right track isn't his coach, and another isn't a coach at all.
They are, respectively, the scholarly Tom House, formerly of the Texas Rangers, and Nolan Ryan, the just-retired middle-aged fireballer.
"House introduced me to Ryan a few years ago, and they've both worked with me since," Johnson says.
"I think the breakthrough came before the 1992 season.
I'd been watching how solid Nolan's foot-plant was when he threw, and it made me look closely at my own.
It seemed that I'd been coming down on my heel instead of on the ball of my foot, and that was causing my foot to slide and my release point to be inconsistent.
That had to have been a big factor in my wildness.
"It was harder to correct than you might think, and it took awhile, but things fell together for me last season.
I was putting the ball where I wanted to.
It was exciting to finally live up to what people had been predicting for me."
Johnson and Ryan have continued to confer about pitching, especially its tactical side, and with continued good effects on Johnson.
"Everybody has days when his stuff isn't dominating, and I'm no exception," says the pitcher.
"Nolan's helped me to realize I should try to make the best of what I've got on those days, rather than pretending nothing's wrong.
The statistic I'm proudest of from last year was my 10 complete games in 34 starts.
That meant I was hanging in there, giving myself and my team a chance to win.
Nobody was better at that than Nolan."
Ryan returns the compliment.
"When Randy's at the top of his game, he's pretty darn unhittable," the Major Leagues' all-time strikeout leader has said.
"I see a lot of myself in him."
Seattle fans probably will be seeing a lot of Johnson in the coming years, thanks to the contract he signed with the Mariners during the off-season.
It is for four years and an option for a fifth, and will pay him about $27 million if it runs to completion.
In part, the commitment reflects the pitcher's conviction that better days are ahead for the once-woebegone club, which last season posted just its second winning record in 17 years of existence.
He, Chris Bosio, Dave Fleming and Greg Hibbard give the Mariners a starting-pitching rotation that could make them pennant contenders this term if all stay healthy.
Johnson has been doing his part toward that improvement this spring by working on a change-of-pace delivery.
He's been getting along thus far with two pitches -- a fastball and slider -- and figures it's about time he had a third.
"I've had a change-up for a couple of seasons now -- it's just that I haven't had the confidence to use it much," he confesses.
He says he'd like to be able to summon up the pitch two or three times an inning instead of his past rate of two or three times a game.
If he could do that, his rep around his league would change: It'd go from scary to scarier.
