Badreddin Challah, the 88-year-old patriarch of Syria's most venerable business clan, grew rich amid boggling change.
He began growing citrus when the Ottoman Turks ruled Syria, flourished under French colonialism and became a confidant of President Hafez al-Assad, who lives two blocks away in the capital's elegant Malki neighborhood.
Sitting amid gilded Louis XIV furniture and stern portraits of ancestors in maroon fez hats, Mr. Challah is anticipating the next epic change in the Middle East.
"When you have neighbors and there is war, you don't deal with them at all," he says, referring to Israel.
"But you can imagine what the benefits will be when there is peace and you have business with your neighbor."
He talks of a changing world in which old enemies like Germany and France now are economically entwined: "So what's the difference between us and the Israelis that we shouldn't become friends and work together?"
Such thoughts once were never even whispered in hard-line Syria.
Now President Clinton wants to hear them from the cautious and wily Mr. Assad.
At a summit meeting this weekend in Geneva, Mr. Clinton will urge the Syrian leader to end a long Syria-Israel negotiating stalemate by describing what kind of peace he would offer Israel.
In exchange, Mr. Clinton will dangle before Mr. Assad, whose nation is on the U.S. terrorism list, the prospect of improved U.S.-Syrian relations.
Mr. Assad has demanded that Israel first declare that it will withdraw from the Golan Heights before he talks about peace; Israel insists that Mr. Assad go first.
What the U.S. also wants from Mr. Assad is some public gesture toward Israel that will loosen the impasse.
Syria is the linchpin of Arab-Israeli peace.
From Damascus, the historic capital of Arab nationalism, Mr. Assad has loomed large for a quarter-century as Israel's implacable foe, sending his armies to war against the Jewish state in 1973 to try to recover his land.
When Egypt made peace with Israel in 1979, Mr. Assad refused to set foot in that Arab state for a decade.
"No one in the Middle East would doubt the crucial character of Syria to a comprehensive peace," says Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
Even as Mr. Assad is hesitating, Mr. Challah seems a reliable barometer of the sea change under way in much of the Arab world: the 45-year demonization of Israel appears to have run its course.
Overtures to Israel are now coming from entrepreneurs in Jordan, the resource-rich Persian Gulf and Arab North Africa.
As the rest of the world forms regional economic blocs, Middle Easterners increasingly see the benefits of regional trade and the lowering of barriers -- none of which can happen if peace is postponed further.
There is talk of a World Bank-financed highway connecting Arab states and Israel.
And throughout the Arab world, people are realizing that peace will bring stability and stability will bring badly needed investment.
These economic hopes provide an undergirding for the peace talks that ensures they will proceed, despite inevitable ups and downs.
The change began in 1991, when Arabs and Israelis agreed to meet at the negotiating table for the first time, and accelerated last September when Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat shook hands on the White House lawn.
"I see more and more activity going on, openly but in a very low-profile way, between Arabs and Israelis," says Benjamin Gaon, president and chief executive officer of Koor Industries, Israel's largest conglomerate.
A wealthy Jordanian shipping-company owner recently visited Israel to discuss joint ventures with a major container company and Israel's El Al airline.
Morocco, whose merchants sell Israeli-grown tomatoes in Europe, expects to host 100,000 Israeli tourists this year.
In Saudi Arabia, wealthy traders talk privately about partnerships in Muslim Central Asia with the Israelis, who are making inroads there.
Business executives in tightly controlled Syria are hesitant to take such overt steps.
But even here, where people languish in jail for expressing objectionable views, and the word "Israel" wasn't mentioned in the press until 1991, some prominent citizens feel comfortable talking about reconciliation.
"Let us teach our kids that the Israelis are not animals, and let the Israelis teach their kids that we are not animals," says Muhammad Aziz Shukri, dean of the law school at Damascus University.
"Up to now, unfortunately, our behavior is of animals in the zoo."
Pushing Syrian-Israeli peace is a top U.S. priority.
With Russia looking precarious and Haiti, Bosnia and Somalia sunk in quagmires, Mr. Clinton badly needs a foreign-policy victory.
His Mideast advisers believe the time is ripe for a deal.
Meanwhile, Mr. Assad's world view has been jostled by the collapse of his superpower patron, the Soviet Union.
As Syria's Soviet-made military inventory deteriorates, talks with the Russians about buying spare parts drag on endlessly, diplomats say, because no one in Moscow is listening.
Gone, too, is the barter trade with the Soviet bloc that once kept Syrian textile, pharmaceutical and cosmetic factories humming, and paid for Mr. Assad's weapons purchases.
But while the economies of Cuba and North Korea are withering in the post-Soviet world, Syria is looking to improve ties with the West.
Syrian businesses, having lost Soviet markets, see opportunities in the West.
And the Damascus government is beginning to loosen up enough for businesses to reach out: Last year, businesses won the right to own fax machines.
This year, companies are pushing for satellite dishes.
Underlying the business activity is an assumption of peace.
"Peace means relations in all fields, business and otherwise," says Hisbam al-Hamwy, general director of the Damascus Chamber of Commerce.
What's unclear is just how far the authoritarian Mr. Assad is willing to go in loosening government control.
Although he has played a weak hand shrewdly -- Mr. Clinton's invitation to meet in Geneva attests to that -- Mr. Assad remains a 1950sstyle dictator.
His picture adorns practically every downtown building here, and there are huge, Stalin-like statues of him along major highways.
Taxicabs display bumper stickers showing a red heart alongside a likeness of Mr. Assad.
Elsewhere in the Arab world, businessmen are poised for peace, waiting for the politicians to catch up.
In his office in Amman, Jordan, Dawud Qutub, owner of a large shipping agency, uses a big world map on the wall to trace the route of a ship bound for the Persian Gulf from Europe, via the Suez Canal.
At the northeast tip of Africa, he stops.
From the Suez to Kuwait, he explains, is a nine-day sail, plus the expense of Egypt's ever-rising canal fees.
But from Haifa in Israel to Kuwait: a 72-hour truck ride.
"I believe that once the peace is signed, a boom will hit the triangle of nations -- Jordan, Israel and Palestine -- that will last for 10 years," gushes Mr. Qutub.
A Palestinian refugee, Mr. Qutub in November traveled to Israel, using a family-visit visa, and met with officials at Zim shipping lines in Haifa, where he touted his company, International Freight Services & Trading Co., as Zim's Jordan agent.
He also met with officials of El Al and Unitours, a large tour operator in Tel Aviv, to discuss other ventures.
The Israelis talked about their master peace plan to unite the twin Red Sea ports of Aqaba in Jordan, and Eilat in Israel.
Mr. Qutub toured the Israeli highway network -- "astonishing," he says.
Then he discovered something even more surprising.
Mr. Qutub visited the home he fled as a 16-year-old during the 1948 Arab-Israeli war.
Moroccan Jews now live there.
When he knocked on their door and told him who he was, they asked him if he wanted to stay there during his visit.
Other Jordanians are preparing themselves for similar close encounters with Israelis.
In a tiny classroom at the Al-Jalil Research Center, near Jordan University, nearly 300 businessmen, nurses, engineers, lawyers, college students and others have studied Hebrew over the past two years.
They each pay the equivalent of about $90, reading aloud from the same Hebrew books used to teach Russian immigrants in Israel.
"Where are you from, Menashe?" asks one lesson.
"I'm from Kishniev.
And where are you from, Esther?
I'm from Siberia."
And where is the center's owner, Ghazi al-Sadi, from?
Israel, originally.
An Israeli Arab, he was kicked out for subversive activities in 1977.
Among other things, he now distributes Arabic translations of the Hebrew press to government offices, banks, and private companies throughout the Arab world.
Recently, some Arab clients Mr. Sadi won't name commissioned studies of the Israeli banking, construction and agricultural industries.
The center's biggest job, though, has just come from the Jordanian government: The kingdom's customs authority has hired Al-Jalil to translate Israel's entire 1,800-page manual of trade regulations.
Similar planning for the future is under way even in archconservative Saudi Arabia, according to diplomats.
During the Persian Gulf War, Saudi Arabia cut off its purchases of citrus products from Jordan to punish that nation for its support of Iraq's Saddam Hussein.
The Saudis began buying citrus from California.
But now, some merchants talk privately about the advantages of buying these fruits from nearby Israel.
The fruit purchases would be part of a larger trading relationship that is beginning to evolve.
There have been secret discussions between the head of the Saudi Arabian Chamber of Commerce and his Israeli counterpart, according to diplomats.
One idea being mulled by Saudi entrepreneurs would involve a joint venture with the Israelis in Central Asian republics of the former Soviet Union.
Israel already has sent trade missions to several of the Central Asian nations to sell agricultural technology.
Most of the Central Asian states don't have sufficient cash to pay for such products.
But some Saudi merchants in Jeddah envision setting up joint ventures with the Israelis under which the Saudi partner would take commodities as payment and trade them elsewhere.
Among Persian Gulf states, Qatar has had the most open ties with Israel.
In September, Qatar's foreign minister met Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres in New York.
Mr. Peres was told that once Arab-Israeli peace is achieved, "the sky's the limit on relations," according to one diplomat.
Qatar, which has the world's second-largest natural-gas reserves, would consider a joint venture to transport its natural gas by pipeline across Saudi Arabia to Israel, where it would be liquefied and shipped across the Mediterranean to Europe.
Feasibility studies for such a project already are under way.
Unlike some of their Arab colleagues, Syrian businessmen still aren't willing to talk openly about plans with Israel.
But one young entrepreneur says anonymously that he believes there could be a market for such low-tech products as canned goods, socks and soap.
Sitting behind a desk with a personal computer and a "No Smoking" sign -- two rarities here -- he says that with an official minimum wage of $30 a month for a six-day work-week, Syria should be able to compete on low-cost items.
Other Syrian executives figure a peace dividend could help pay for improvements in the country's roads, electrical system and telephone network.
Saeb Nahas, who works behind a huge desk that holds eight telephones with direct lines to the 26 companies he runs, says, "For 40 years, Syria has been using something like 60% of its budget for defense."
As a result, says Mr. Nahas, one of Syria's richest entrepreneurs, there are chronic shortages of foreign exchange and a paucity of the capital spending needed for roads, modern airports and the facilities to generate more electricity.
Power outages occur every day in Damascus.
For now, though, everyone is waiting for Mr. Assad.
U.S. officials know that after the surprise signing of the Israeli-Palestinian peace accord in September, Mr. Assad told military and Baath party leaders that the time had come to talk about making peace with Israel.
But U.S. officials are unsure if he is willing to offer a deal that Mr. Rabin can sell in Israel.
In meetings with Mr. Christopher and U.S. aides, Mr. Assad asks probing questions about Israeli politics and on one occasion displayed detailed knowledge of political reports from relatively obscure Israeli newspapers.
U.S. officials believe that Mr. Assad understands that he can make a deal with Mr. Rabin, and that if the hard-line Likud party returns to power, the opportunity may be lost.
Now, the U.S. is trying to convince Mr. Assad to offer terms that will bolster Mr. Rabin, for whom returning the Golan to Syria will be a hard sell at home.
Other signals dribble out in the statecontrolled Syrian press.
Last month, for instance, Syrian papers ran a brief story saying that Morocco was on the verge of opening diplomatic ties with Israel.
The story contained neither criticism nor commentary.
By contrast, in 1986, when word leaked that Morocco's King Hassan had met with Israel's Mr. Peres, Syria severed relations with Morocco.
Here in Damascus, there is a feeling that the decision for peace has been made and that all that remains to be worked out are the details.
"It's a poker game, and this son of a gun Mr. Assad knows how to play the game," says Mr. Shukri of Damascus University.
