Who says it's so tough to put a spy behind bars?
As another spy scandal unfolds in Washington, the public may believe that the U.S. is unable to prosecute spies effectively.
But while the government was widely criticized for not indicting Felix Bloch for spying for the Soviet Union in 1989, the Justice Department has an extraordinary win-loss record in spy cases that it has brought to trial.
Indeed, since 1975 federal prosecutors have lost only one trial among the 64 spy cases in which criminal charges were brought.
Thirty-five of the prosecutions resulted in plea bargains and 20 in convictions.
Among the other defendants, one committed suicide, one was declared mentally incompetent, one was traded for another spy and two are fugitives.
Three cases are pending.
The prosecution and defense of Aldrich Ames and Maria del Rosario Casas Ames, who have been accused of conspiring to sell government secrets to Moscow, are expected to follow the usual battle plans.
The government will offer an impressive collection of circumstantial evidence.
But unless prosecutors get Mrs. Ames to turn on her husband, there probably won't be direct documentary or eyewitness evidence of secrets being passed to foreign agents.
Meanwhile, the defense will try to derail the prosecution by insisting on disclosure of highly classified information the government won't want to provide.
In this spy vs. spycatcher give and take, the prosecution generally has the upper hand.
Under the Classified Information Procedures Act, prosecutors may keep sensitive documents out of court proceedings unless defense lawyers show the documents are "essential to a fair trial."
Normally in criminal cases, defendants get broad access to any government records that are "relevant" to the defense.
Also, court orders for wiretaps are easier to obtain in espionage cases than in other criminal investigations, says Catholic University law professor Fred Warren Bennett.
Such wiretaps will play an important role in the Ames case.
And almost always, says Mr. Bennett, alleged spies leave a paper trail of unexplained wealth, as the Ameses have, from which jurors are allowed to infer guilt, even if the actual transfer of secrets isn't proven.
These factors helped the prosecution's case against Jonathan Pollard, the Navy intelligence officer who pleaded guilty in 1985 to charges related to the sale of secrets to Israel.
The government had photographs of Mr. Pollard in his office as he was gathering documents that he was not cleared to possess and obtained cryptic communications he made to his alleged handlers.
In addition, prosecutors homed in on some $50,000 in unexplained cash he had deposited in bank accounts over several years, says Charles Leeper, who prosecuted the case.
In other cases, prosecutors have also won convictions without any physical evidence that secrets were passed to foreign agents.
When former National Security Agency employee Ronald W. Pelton was charged with selling secrets to the Soviet Union, prosecutors presented evidence of suspicious spending as well as a wiretapped recording to the Soviet Embassy in Washington.
"I have something that I would like to discuss with you that I think would be very interesting to you," Mr. Pelton said in one call.
"I'll be there in two minutes," he said in another.
Mr. Pelton was convicted and sentenced to life.
"You don't need the documents if you can conclude circumstantially that documents were transferred," says Mr. Bennett, who defended Mr. Pelton.
Against this backdrop, the Ameses' most effective defense may be to fight hard on their vital need for access to a wide range of government documents.
Mr. Ames's attorney, Plato Cacheris, declined to detail the specifics of his defense but said he would attack the failure of government prosecutors so far to produce any secret documents allegedly turned over by the Ameses or any foreign agent with whom they may have met.
Other lawyers say his best bet may be to insist that the government prove that whatever secrets may have been passed were directly related to national defense.
Intelligence agencies are usually loath to make such information public.
When they fear they will be forced to do so, the government becomes more amenable to a plea bargain, lawyers say.
Fear of public disclosure "is the overriding concern of the government," says former prosecutor Leeper.
Seemingly innocuous material from inside an intelligence agency "might tell something about a source of that evidence or a method by which it was obtained," notes Washington defense lawyer Theodore Olson, who represented Mr. Pollard.
Lawyers watching the Ames case say that if the Ameses are indeed guilty, they could also try to bargain for leniency by offering to assess for the government how much damage they have done.
As a nongovernment agent with no official access to classified data, Mrs. Ames in particular could negotiate quite a favorable deal.
"You can bet the government is letting her know that," says Mr. Leeper.
Despite all the government's advantages, it doesn't always get its spy.
Take the case of Mr. Bloch, the former Foreign Service officer who was videotaped purportedly handing a briefcase with unspecified contents to a Soviet agent in Paris.
Mr. Bloch was subjected to around-the-clock surveillance by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and was fired from his $81,400-a-year job.
But he steadfastly refused to admit wrongdoing.
In the end, the government had insufficient evidence to obtain an indictment.
"Ultimately, every case comes down to two things, witnesses and documents," says Mr. Bloch's lawyer, John Bray, in Washington.
The evidence against the Ameses appears to be more circumstantial than the evidence against Mr. Bloch, but there's more of it and it's potentially more devastating.
Among the items disclosed this week at a bail hearing: a balance sheet addressed to Mr. Ames as "Dear Friend," apparently from a contact in Moscow, that describes $2.7 million in payments; a nine-page assignment list of what the Soviets were seeking; and more than 100 classified Central Intelligence Agency cables in Mr. Ames's home computer.
Also difficult to explain will be the Ameses' financial records.
The Ameses paid $540,000 cash for their suburban Virginia home, ran up $5,000 a month in credit card charges, bought a 1992 Jaguar and maintained 11 bank accounts in the U.S., Colombia, Italy and Switzerland -- all ostensibly on Mr. Ames's annual CIA salary of $70,000.
"If there's no evidence to substantiate family money," says former U.S. Attorney Breckenridge Willcox, whose office in Baltimore oversaw the Pelton prosecution, "then that's a huge hurdle for the defense to overcome."
Both Ameses are being represented by court-appointed lawyers who are among the top criminal defense attorneys in Washington.
Mr. Ames's lawyer, Mr. Cacheris, has defended Sheikh Kamal Adham, the ex-head of intelligence for Saudi Arabia in the Bank of Credit and Commerce International case.
Mrs. Ames's counsel, William B. Cummings, was U.S. Attorney in Alexandria, Va., and in the 1970s won the conviction of a U.S. Information Agency employee accused of passing documents to a source with ties to North Vietnam.
Mr. Cummings, now in private practice in Alexandria, also has the distinction of winning the only acquittal in the past 20 years in a U.S. spy case: He successfully defended former Army counterintelligence specialist Richard Craig Smith in 1978.
A woman has sued her health-maintenance organization for allegedly pressuring her doctor to oppose her efforts to win coverage for an expensive breast-cancer treatment.
The woman, Christine deMeurers, contends that the Health Net HMO threatened to cut off its relationship with her hospital, the University of California at Los Angeles Medical Center, if a doctor there continued to advocate the treatment.
Ms. deMeurers was seeking a bone-marrow transplant, a procedure that many insurers and HMOs consider experimental and refuse to cover.
She had gone to court to try to compel coverage after Health Net declined to provide it voluntarily.
Although many patients have sued seeking coverage for bone-marrow transplants, Ms. deMeurers' case is believed to be the first to allege that an HMO interfered with the relationship between a patient and her doctor.
Ms. deMeurers' lawyer, Mark Hiepler, recently won an $89 million verdict in a separate case against Health Net involving coverage for a bone-marrow transplant.
Specifically, Ms. deMeurers alleges that Health Net's pressure prompted her physician, who had filed a written declaration of support for her position with the court, to file a subsequent declaration supporting the HMO.
The physician, John Glaspy, didn't return a message seeking comment; a receptionist at his office said he was out of town.
Lyle Swallow, a lawyer for Health Net, a Woodland Hills, Calif., unit of HN Management Holdings, said that Dr. Glaspy's two declarations weren't inconsistent.
Mr. Swallow said that in one declaration Dr. Glaspy asserted that the patient might benefit from the treatment and in the other acknowledged that the benefits were unproven.
Chilean grape growers and exporters can sue the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for damages stemming from a 1989 cyanide-poisoning scare, a U.S. appeals court ruled.
The federal appeals court in Philadelphia reversed a lower-court decision that had dismissed the case, which seeks more than $200 million in damages.
The trial judge had ruled that the government couldn't be sued because the FDA was exercising its authority to protect the public.
The FDA ordered an embargo after one of its labs detected traces of cyanide in two Chilean grapes, following anonymous tips of cyanide tampering.
The appeals court, however, said the lawsuit can proceed to determine whether the FDA relied on negligent lab tests in declaring the embargo.
The Chilean growers and exporters claim that the FDA's laboratory procedures were lax and improper, and that it was impossible for the grapes identified by the FDA to have been injected with cyanide in Chile.
"Because there is an obligation to use due care whether in operating a lighthouse or testing a grape for cyanide, decisions arising from the execution of that duty must be based upon the proper performance of that duty," the appellate panel said in a 2-1 decision.
The court added, however, that the plaintiffs still must prove at trial that the allegedly deficient lab work caused the damages.
An attorney for the government said he couldn't discuss whether the decision will be appealed further.
The government, however, has asked the court to give it additional time to decide whether to appeal.
Robert L. Hickok, an attorney for about 2,000 Chilean growers, exporters and shippers, said the FDA's actions had "wiped out an entire market for an entire season."
He said the plaintiffs would show at trial that the FDA lab results "were a physical impossibility and could only have been the result of lab error."
(Fisher Bros.
Sales Inc. vs. U.S., Third U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, Philadelphia, No. 93-1182)
Edward Felsenthal and Wade Lambert contributed to this article.
Help-wanted advertising slumped in January after posting a modest gain in December, as chilly temperatures hampered many regions of the country's job market, the Conference Board said.
The board's seasonally adjusted help-wanted index, an indicator of hiring plans, fell to 106 in January, down four points from December's 110.
In January 1993, the index registered 93.
"Cold weather had a negative impact on job advertising in January -- as it had on most economic indicators," said Ken Goldstein, an economist with the board, a nonprofit business research group that surveys help-wanted ad volume at 51 major newspapers.
In the last three months, advertising volume rose in five of nine areas across the U.S., including the Rocky Mountain region which posted the strongest gain of 5.7%.
The West North Central and New England regions followed with rises of 4.2% and 4%, respectively.
Although the New England region saw heavy snow, it posted a 4% gain.
Four regions experienced declines, notably the East South Central, which tumbled 12%.
The Pacific Coast gained 2.2% but the board warned that effects of the recent Los Angeles earthquake could lead to poorer results.
