Foreign companies are digging in their heels against surcharges imposed on some prices and services for foreigners following January's currency reforms.
Business groups representing hundreds of U.S., European and Asian companies have sent letters to top Chinese leaders to protest what they describe as "discriminatory" 50% increases on phone rates, salaries of Chinese staff and other charges.
The conflict highlights the confusion that has followed China's rushed introduction of a raft of economic reforms early this year.
But for many overseas investors, it also raises questions over Beijing's ability to ensure a fair, rule-by-law environment for doing business.
"It's the greed factor, and right now it's increasing across the board in China," says the Beijing representative of a U.S. services company.
"If discrimination against foreign companies continues here like this, China's investment climate will be affected."
For the usually low-profile foreign business community, the current controversy is bordering on the dramatic.
Business groups are churning out faxes, organizing support among member companies and briefing the foreign media.
The American Chamber of Commerce has conducted a poll of U.S. firms and set up a hotline.
Many U.S. and European companies are refusing to pay the surcharges.
In response, some Chinese organizations involved are turning away any payments that are less than the billed amount.
The Foreign Enterprise Service Corp., which provides local employees for many foreign firms, has threatened to keep workers at home if the firms don't pay.
Officials at the company, known as Fesco, declined to comment.
The immediate cause of the conflict is Beijing's unification of the yuan on Jan. 1.
Previously, China had operated on a two-tier system with one currency, renminbi, for the Chinese and a second, Foreign Exchange Certificates, or FECs, for foreigners.
While the two rates officially were equal, the renminbi actually traded at a lower rate of 8.7 to one U.S. dollar at the country's foreign-exchange trading centers, compared with the FEC's officially set rate of 5.7.
When Beijing unified its currency and pegged the new official rate to the swap market rate, some Chinese organizations raised prices to make up for the difference caused by the yuan's subsequent devaluation.
Underlying the issue is a larger one of what foreign companies see as a policy of discrimination against them.
Foreigners have always had to pay more for services ranging from rent to telephone bills to hotel rates to museum entrance fees.
Because some foreign firms are restricted to hiring local workers through organizations like Fesco, they are forced to pay salaries much higher than the going rate.
For Philip Carmichael's high-technology instrumentation company, the savings from the yuan's devaluation should have been substantial.
His company employs some 35 Fesco employees.
Mr. Carmichael, who serves as American Chamber president here, estimates that his company's annual savings should total $30,000 to $50,000 if Chinese organizations hadn't imposed a 50% surcharge.
He maintains that by Chinese regulations, the surcharges are illegal.
"This issue is at the heart of many, many problems in China," he says.
"It's a question of whether China is willing and able to live by rule of law in this part of its development."
