Is the other shoe about to drop at Aetna Life & Casualty Co.?
Four years ago, the company split itself into 15 business units that report profits independently inside the company.
At the time, Aetna said it would keep the operations that performed well and either fix or dispose of the ones that didn't.
Now it looks as if Aetna, which has turned in sluggish profits for years, is getting ready to make some moves.
Earlier this week, Aetna's board met in a special session to discuss a study prepared by a consulting firm, the Boston Consulting Group, which recommended what Aetna should do.
Aetna, based in Hartford, Conn., said no decisions have been made, and declined to comment further.
But, according to people familiar with the discussions, options include decentralizing its organization and spinning off businesses.
"It would not be surprising to see them get out of one or two businesses in the next year or two," said Alan Zimmerman, a Prudential Securities analyst.
Another likely outcome is laying off employees, according to people familiar with the discussions.
One figure that Aetna is said to be considering is 4,000 layoffs.
The company currently has 42,300 employees.
Analysts expect Aetna to announce some sort of move around the time it reports year-end earnings on Feb. 9.
Any layoffs at Aetna would be surprising, given its earlier staff cuts.
In October 1990, Aetna laid off 3,000 workers when it created the business units.
In June 1992, four months after the installing of Aetna's chairman and chief executive officer, Ronald Compton, the company announced an additional 4,800 layoffs.
The cuts have improved Aetna's profit, but its 7% return on equity -- profits divided by net worth -- is well below the 12% to 15% demanded by investors.
Not surprisingly, the company's stock price has been a disappointment.
Although Aetna stock rose 29.8% last year, compared with a 1.93% rise in the Dow Jones Insurance Index, in the preceding five years, Aetna stock rose only 39%, compared with a 101% rise in the index.
A major problem for Aetna, in addition to high costs, is its portfolio of bad real-estate loans.
Aetna has $15.7 billion of real-estate loans, which represent about a quarter of its invested assets.
Of those mortgages, $1.5 billion are 60 days past due or in the process of foreclosure.
The inability of the mortgage portfolio to earn a decent return has been a drag on Aetna's profits for years.
Analysts say Aetna could fix the problem by taking a lump-sum write-off, and by accounting for its pension business as a discontinued operation, which is what Equitable Cos. did before going public in 1992.
But they add that Aetna is unlikely to do that, because like other insurers, it still hopes for a turnaround in the commercial real-estate market.
Another problem is losses on pollution claims.
Like other insurers, Aetna is plagued by pollution losses on commercial liability policies written in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s.
Such claims against insurers usually end up in court, but as with other insurers, Aetna has had only limited success in avoiding payment.
In 1992's fourth quarter, Aetna posted a $180 million charge to establish reserves for certain asbestos and other environmental exposures.
More charges are expected.
Analysts and investment bankers say the best thing for that business would be a revision in the federal Superfund law that governs pollution liability.
The Clinton administration is readying a compromise solution that promises insurers some relief in return for imposing a $500 million annual tax on the property and casualty insurance industry.
Without some change in the law, insurers could be overwhelmed, according to a report last year by the General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress.
Tillinghast, an actuarial consulting firm, estimates the potential insurance losses in the next few decades could amount to an eye-popping $100 billion.
One option for Aetna in property and casualty is to get out of some lines of insurance.
For instance, it could further downsize its homeowners and automobile business.
It is now in the process of withdrawing from the automobile insurance business in California.
Speculation about Aetna slimming down even further in property and casualty heightened last month after the resigination of David Kocher, who ran the business.
"I wouldn't be surprised to see some major changes in property and casualty business," said Northington Partners analyst Alice Cornish.
Aetna's biggest strength is its individual life insurance and annuity operation, including its overseas businesses and its health-care business.
For example, the life and health operation earned $92 million in the third quarter, up from $88 million a year earlier.
Aetna is rumored to be considering spinning off the business to stockholders in order to let shareholders realize the full value.
But people familiar with the situation say Aetna is unlikely to make such a major move.
A reorganization at Aetna would come just weeks after Mr. Compton set up a horse race to decide who will succeed him when he retires in 1997.
The contenders are Gary Benanav, who heads the company's life insurance business and succeeded Mr. Kocher as head of property and casualty insurance; Daniel Kearney, chief of investments and pension products; and James McLane, who runs Aetna's healthcare operation.
Mr. Benanav, 48 years old, is believed to be the front-runner.
Citing Mr. Compton's retirement date, Sanford C. Bernstein analyst Weston Hicks said Mr. Compton is fighting against the clock.
"If he's going to do something, he better do it quick," he said.
Aetna's problems are similar to those faced by the other major multiline insurers, such as Cigna Corp., TravelersInc.'s Travelers Insurance unit and ITT Corp.'s Hartford insurance group.
Each company has several strengths, but each has exposure to problems, particularly the open-ended question about how big are the ultimate losses on pollution claims.
Analysts point out that each of the companies has a history of trying to be all things to all people, offering every type of insurance that a customer could possibly want.
They also work through independent agents, which gives them less control and higher expenses than companies that sell insurance directly to customers, such as State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. and Allstate Corp., a unit of Sears, Roebuck & Co.
Nowdays, the most successful companies, analysts say, are those that specialize and pay strict attention to costs.
American International Group Inc. and Chubb Corp. are two companies that fit the description.
Consultants say companies such as Aetna, not to mention the big mutual life insurers such as Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. and Prudential Insurance Co. of America, tend to respond slowly to competitive pressures because they are rich in capital.
Capital gives them flexibility, but also makes them slower to respond to change.
"If they have a tremendous amount in capital, it might take 50 years to shake them up," said one investment banker, who asked not to be identified.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Aetna shares closed at $55.50, down 62.5 cents.
