President Clinton may be having trouble selling his health plan to Congress, but a Canadian retailer is betting that he will be great at selling sofabeds and stoves.
For a new series of newspaper and television ads claiming the lowest prices in Canada or the U.S., Bad Boy Furniture & Appliances hired presidential impersonator Tim Waters of Tampa, Fla., to play Mr. Clinton.
The role isn't an exacting one: Mr. Waters stands behind the store's manic owner, Blayne "Bad Boy" Lastman, while the latter offers customers a refund if they can find a cheaper dinette set or mattress.
The fake president's sole speaking line comes at the end when he declaims that "noooobody" offers better deals than Bad Boy.
The White House isn't amused.
In a stiff letter to the retailing chain, which has three stores in the Toronto area, Marvin Krislov, special counsel to the president, asked Mr. Lastman to "cease and desist all unauthorized uses of the likeness of the President of the United States of America in advertising of commercial services or products."
Too bad, says Mr. Lastman.
"Last time I checked, this was Canada, not the fifty-first state," he says.
"Maybe the president is trying to protect American retailers from some tough competition."
But Arthur Jones, deputy press secretary at the White House, says the only thing that's being protected is the president's dignity.
"We don't think it's appropriate for the president's image to be used in this way," he says.
So far, Mr. Lastman isn't impressed by the White House missive -- which included, for his perusal, a copy of the Council of Better Business Bureaus' "Dos and Don'ts of Advertising Copy."
Bad Boy uses politicians' images all the time, he argues.
"Look, we've used the image of the mayor of North York," just outside Toronto.
In fact, the mayor is Blayne's father, Mel Lastman, and pops up frequently on the TV ads.
The younger Mr. Lastman says he'll probably reply to the letter, but doesn't plan to stop running the ads.
Instead, he says, "I'd like to offer Mr. Clinton a great deal on some furniture."
Mr. Jones declines to say what kind of action the White House could take against a foreign retailer.
"In the past," Mr. Jones says, "people of goodwill have recognized the seriousness of this issue."
