PRESIDENT CLINTON VISITED the quake-hit Los Angeles region.
California disaster authorities said damages from Monday's earthquake "conservatively" could range from $15 billion to $30 billion.
The death toll, meanwhile, rose to 46.
The president conducted a town meeting in Burbank, southeast of the temblor's epicenter in the San Fernando Valley.
He announced $140 million in federal funds as the first installment of relief money.
Thousands of commuters, unable to use quake-crippled freeways, spent hours negotiating canyon roads and city streets to get to and from work.
Clinton's approval rating is rising, according to a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll.
Sixty percent of those surveyed approve of the job he is doing, up from 56% last month.
Despite negative news, Americans seem to be basing their impression of him on economic trends and a perception of foreign policy competence.
Attorney General Reno is expected to appoint a former U.S. attorney in New York as the independent counsel to investigate matters surrounding President Clinton's investments in Whitewater Development.
The appointment of Robert Fiske Jr. could come as early as today, according to a law-enforcement official.
Subzero temperatures forced many government offices, businesses and schools to close in the Midwest and Northeast.
The cold crippled transit systems and caused electrical blackouts and brownouts.
Parts of the South were affected.
Yeltsin and his prime minister agreed to form a new Russian cabinet dominated by conservatives who favor a go-slow approach to reform.
The long-anticipated shakeup came amid the ruble's record slide and conflicting reports that pro-reform Finance Minister Fyodorov is about to defect from the cabinet.
Two U.S. senators are criticizing the Clinton administration's management of the multibillion-dollar Russian aid program.
Signaling their discontent with Clinton's Russia policy, Leahy and McConnell urged the administration to make no new commitments of funds until it defends the program during hearings.
Israel's Rabin declared that, despite U.S. assurances to the contrary, he wasn't convinced Syria has accepted the idea of full peace that the Israelis demand in exchange for territory.
Meanwhile, in Taba, Egypt, the chief Israeli negotiator said disagreements over border crossings continued to bog down Israeli-PLO peace talks.
Serbs and Croats signed accords to start normalizing relations, leaving Bosnia's Muslims apparently outflanked by their foes.
The pacts were worked out on the sidelines of another round of inconclusive peace talks in Geneva.
In Bosnia, gunfire hit a U.S. cargo plane delivering aid to Sarajevo, and the U.N. suspended relief flights.
A single gene controls the tendency toward low bone density, known as osteoporosis, in older people, Australian researchers said.
The scientists reported that in a study of 311 women older than 60, 61% with the identified gene had a low bone-density level that put them at risk of having a fracture.
Treasury Secretary Bentsen met with China's Premier Li in Beijing and told him "progress on human rights is basic" to Sino-American ties.
Bentsen said the U.S. wants to revive a joint economic panel, suspended after the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre.
The Supreme Court upheld the congressionally established method for selecting military judges.
The justices rejected the claim that because military judges aren't chosen for life or fixed terms, they lack the independence needed for impartiality.
Tonya Harding's ex-husband turned himself in at the FBI office in Portland, Ore., after a judge ordered his arrest in the alleged plot to injure Harding's skating rival Nancy Kerrigan.
Officials released an affidavit with statements from Harding's bodyguard linking her to the attack.
She hasn't been charged and has denied involvement.
Mandela accused President de Klerk of orchestrating South Africa's township violence to sabotage the chances of the African National Congress becoming the nation's first black government.
