Despite subpoenas for six other White House aides and the departure of the counsel and the Fiske-D'Amato meeting, Patsy Thomasson made it back into the news yesterday.
The New York Post's Christopher Ruddy reports that three anonymous White House sources put her at the middle of a "cats and dogs" scramble to find the combination to Vincent Foster's safe the night of his death.
Ms. Thomasson is director of the White House's Office of Administration, which handles personnel, payroll and computer matters -- and, Mr. Ruddy reports, safe combinations.
The officer in charge of security was out of town, but the safe was eventually opened in the wee hours of the morning, his sources say, and documents were removed and sent to the Clinton's personal lawyer, David Kendall of Williams & Connolly.
Yesterday, White House Chief of Staff Mack McLarty told reporters that to the "best of his knowledge" there was no safe in Mr. Foster's office: "I don't think there was a safe, as I understand it."
Experience with this administration forces us to inquire what Mr. McLarty understands as a safe; previous members of the counsel's office say it always used to have one.
For that matter, even explicit White House denials look thin after one of them was directly contradicted by President Clinton's admission that he knew about White House contacts with regulators over Whitewater matters.
Ms. Thomasson is best understood as the White House Waldo.
It was previously understood that she, Bernard Nussbaum and Margaret Williams, Mrs. Clinton's chief of staff, did visit Mr. Foster's office the night of his death.
Ms. Thomasson was also at the crucial six-hour meeting on May 15 with the FBI and Associate White House Counsel William Kennedy III that led to the firing of the White House travel office's staff four days later.
In October, she appeared before a House Appropriations subcommittee to discuss a General Accounting Office report that criticized the White House for lax personnel policies, including retroactive pay raises, dual payments and the backdating of forms.
This hearing, in turn, led to an extended campaign by Rep. Frank Wolf, a Virginia Republican, over clearance procedures for White House passes, the coveted identification cards that allow wearers to roam the White House halls and receive top secret briefings and documents.
He noticed that Ms. Thomasson still had only a temporary pass, and asked why.
She replied that she was about to get a permanent pass, but when a Wolf aide checked back near the end of January, she still had only a temporary pass.
Ms. Thomasson said that her pass was ready and she would pick it up on January 31, the next Monday; but on February 4, Ms. Thomasson again said her pass "was supposed to have been issued today," but that she "didn't get down to pick it up."
When Rep. Wolf's aide called again on March 2, Ms. Thomasson denied she'd ever said she had been approved for a pass.
Ms. Thomasson, who didn't return a phone call, may indeed finally have received a permanent pass last Friday, when subpoenas started arriving.
This would be after 14 months, vs. the FBI's 45-day target for new employees.
Rep. Wolf's extensive correspondence has been highly instructive.
White House Chief of Staff Mack McLarty rebuffed his letters asking for information on White House security procedures and the proliferation of temporary passes in the hands of FOB.
He wrote that the list of pass holders is confidential.
One letter added that "during the Reagan Administration, the Office of the Legal Counsel of the Department of Justice opined that the White House has authority to accept the services of volunteers, and that these persons may be paid by outside sources."
The Congressman's requests for a copy of this opinion went unanswered (we have some vague recollection of a flaplet about the funding of inaugural balls).
Mr. Wolf did determine, however, that the ultimate decisions on White House passes rests in the office of the White House counsel.
And that it is being handled there by Mr. Kennedy, the former Rose Law Firm partner reprimanded in the Travelgate affair.
Mr. Wolf wrote, "I would like to take this opportunity to express my opinion that this is not the right man for this highly sensitive position."
Since Ms. Thomasson is an old Arkansas FOB, we doubt that the delay on her pass was due to Mr. Kennedy.
We suspect that instead it had something or other to do with her past association with another Arkansas FOB, bond trader and drug convict Dan Lasater.
She worked for Mr. Lasater when his business prospered from handling $664 million in Arkansas bond contracts, and ran his affairs for two years after his conviction on drug charges.
Rep. Wolf doesn't think his questions on security procedures have been answered, especially in the wake of the Aldrich Ames CIA spy scandal.
He sits on a House Appropriations subcommittee where Ms. Thomasson is scheduled to testify on March 22.
When that's over, we expect that who she is will not be much of a mystery.
