In today's poisonous political climate, Glenn English says, the only way he could leave Congress without being criticized "is to have died."
He didn't, but Mr. English found his own version of Beltway heaven anyway.
After 19 years as an Oklahoma congressman, the conservative Democrat resigned his seat this month to take the helm of the National Rural Electric Cooperative Association.
Scores of ex-lawmakers turn to well-paid jobs influencing government, but Mr. English stands out in the capital's revolving-door culture.
He didn't wait, as is typical, for voters to oust him, or even to serve out his term.
When the association asked him late last year to replace its retiring top executive, former congressman and Agriculture Secretary Bob Bergland, he promptly abandoned his Sixth District House seat in midterm.
"Talk about the revolving door," complains Charles Lewis, who heads the Washington-based Center for Public Integrity.
"This one came unhinged."
Mr. Lewis says the lucrative job reeks of a "quid pro quo" for Mr. English's efforts as chairman of a House rural-development subcommittee to fend off White House plans to cut back on Rural Electrification Administration subsidies to the trade association's members.
Mr. English and Mr. Bergland both deny it, insisting the Oklahoman wasn't approached about the vacancy until Congress had completed its work on the REA budget.
Mr. English sees nothing wrong with taking the trade-group job, arguing that "it gives me a chance to do something positive" for rural interests he has long championed.
It holds other allures as well.
Instead of facing a cynical press corps and shuttling to Oklahoma on weekends, Mr. English will work in comfortable obscurity for the Washington-based trade group.
Instead of merely battling to stave off rural budget cuts, he'll soon lobby old friends in Congress as he oversees new rural programs he helped design on Capitol Hill.
And he'll get a hefty raise from his old $133,600 congressional salary; Mr. English won't disclose his compensation, but his predecessor earned $230,000.
But his departure may also fuel public discontent over the influence of special interests on Congress.
"It looks awful," says Brookings Institution scholar Thomas Mann.
Paradoxically, it doesn't look so awful to Mr. English's largely rural constituency.
State Corporation Commissioner Bob Anthony, Mr. English's Republican opponent in a bitter 1992 campaign, declines to criticize the move and calls his former rival "pretty popular."
Though one GOP state legislator says Mr. English should help finance the $250,000-plus cost of the May 10 special election to replace him, Mr. English hasn't caught much flak from Oklahomans.
Many of Mr. English's erstwhile colleagues, aware that unhappy voters could soon send them job-hunting, are envious.
Mr. Lewis's barbs notwithstanding, the new job offers a handsome salary and benefits without the greater stigma that attaches to all-purpose lobbyists-for-hire.
"It's sort of a natural extension of his public-policy work," says retiring Minnesota Democratic Rep. Tim Penny, a deficit hawk who clashed with Mr. English over budget issues while serving on the Oklahoman's subcommittee.
By contrast, Mr. Penny says, many ex-lawmakers "end up landing these cushy jobs that have little to do with their districts or why their constituents sent them here."
For some, Mr. English's departure says less about the revolving door than it does about the diminished attractiveness of life in today's Congress.
Since 1990, increasing numbers of battle-weary incumbents have decided to retire.
Mr. English isn't the first to leave in midterm; a year ago, Republican Willis Gradison resigned his Ohio House seat and a key role in the congressional health-care debate to accept the leadership of the Health Insurance Association of America.
For his part, Mr. English, 53 years old, won't miss the public environment in which "the whole thing is to trash the Congress and everyone connected to it.
I think it's doing long-term damage to our system."
On top of this negative drumbeat, he says, the mounting focus on deficit reduction made the second decade of his career as an advocate of rural development far more frustrating than the first.
Though he says he wasn't looking for a way out, he jumped at the chance when the trade group approached him.
"If I'm going to help people from my hometown, I'm not going to be able to do it from the Environment, Credit and Rural Development Subcommittee," Mr. English insists.
"The federal government isn't going to be where the action is.
If I thought there was a chance in the world we could get new resources for rural development, I'd still be sitting in Congress."
"The job in Congress is getting less and less fun," says Mr. Bergland, who served in the House from 1971 until 1977.
Mr. Bergland acknowledges the revolving door's potential for corruption of government.
He says Mr. English, who will oversee the association's $3 million lobbying budget and political action committee (a relatively small portion of the group's overall activities), will strictly observe the one-year "cooling-off" period in which ex-lawmakers are prohibited from contacting former colleagues about legislation.
Then again, he argues that the specter of ex-House members flowing through Capitol hallways "looks worse than it is."
"There's no such thing," Mr. Bergland says, "as a powerful has-been."
