CLINTON SOUGHT the appointment of a special counsel in Whitewater.
The president, yielding to relentless bipartisan pressure, called for the appointment of a special counsel to look into his controversial investment in the failed Arkansas real-estate company, Whitewater Development.
"We still know the Clintons didn't do anything wrong," asserted White House aide Stephanopoulos.
Attorney General Reno will appoint the special counsel, who will report to her but operate independently of the Justice Department.
The counsel will have the power to issue subpoenas and, if necessary, convene a grand jury.
The White House move didn't mollify Republican lawmakers, who said they would seek to set up special committees to probe the issues surrounding the Clintons' Whitewater investment.
A UKRAINE ARMS ACCORD IS READY for signing, Clinton announced.
After a short meeting in Kiev, Clinton said the agreement on eliminating the Ukrainian nuclear arsenal would be signed tomorrow in Moscow by Ukraine's Kravchuk, Russia's Yeltsin and himself.
In nailing down the pact, Clinton offered increased economic aid and security guarantees for Ukraine.
Clinton later arrived in the Russian capital, saying his "urgent task" there would be to press for reform and against nationalism.
The U.S. plans to hold back commitments of new aid to Russia until it gets assurances that Yeltsin will continue his market reforms.
Clinton won reluctant approval from the leaders of Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia for an offer of a cooperative arrangement with NATO as a first step toward full membership.
President Salinas declared a unilateral cease-fire in southern Mexico and said soldiers were ordered not to fire unless they come under attack.
He urged rebels to turn in their arms and promised to pardon them.
Meanwhile, mediators and rebels reportedly were poised to begin talks.
Secretary of State Christopher plans to meet with China's foreign minister later this month in Europe and is likely to warn that Beijing must improve its human-rights record if it wants to win renewal of its favorable trade status.
Clinton must decide by June whether to renew the preferential status.
China and France announced they are patching up their yearlong diplomatic rift with an agreement under which French companies will be banned from any future arms sales to Taiwan.
In return, China will end its de facto ban on the awarding of big business contracts to French firms.
U.S. military officials in Somalia pulled most American sniper teams off Pakistan's U.N. posts amid Pakistani comments that the U.S. sharpshooters may be too aggressive in firing at armed Somalis.
The American snipers were involved in three recent incidents, including one Sunday in which a Somali woman was killed.
Two medical research teams announced related advances in regenerating severed spinal tissue in rats -- preliminary findings that, if successfully replicated, may indicate possible treatments for people paralyzed by spinal injuries.
Investigators failed to find evidence of illegal payments by Republicans to suppress the black vote in New Jersey's gubernatorial election and have ended the probe, federal and state prosecutors said.
The inquiry resulted from comments made and later recanted by Ed Rollins, campaign manager for GOP Gov.-elect Christie Whitman.
The FBI said it is investigating allegations of a conspiracy in last week's crowbar attack on skater Nancy Kerrigan at the U.S. Figure Skating Championships in Detroit.
The agency refused to confirm news reports that the husband and bodyguard of rival Tonya Harding were questioned.
Both men and Harding herself denied involvement.
Virginia's Gov. Wilder won't challenge fellow Democrat Robb for his Senate seat.
Wilder said he was leaving politics after a 25-year political career capped by a term as the first elected black governor.
He had said in June he would run against Robb.
U.N. chief Boutros-Ghali has issued a reprimand to the French general in charge of U.N. troops in the Balkans for his outspoken challenges to U.N. civilian officials.
The general has argued that decisions on Bosnia air strikes should be left to the military.
