American Express Co., lagging in the credit-card wars, is preparing to do the unthinkable -- combine its name with other corporate names to offer "co-branded" cards.
For years American Express has stood aloof as its competitors, MasterCard and Visa, scrambled to sign up companies to offer credit cards like the General Motors Card and the American Airlines Card.
But now, as the competition among issuers intensifies, the industry giant is about to embark on a new strategy that embraces co-branding.
Company officials say the new approach will lead to the introduction of 10 to 15 new consumer charge and credit cards in the next few years.
The executives also hope that American Express will move away from its traditional emphasis on charge cards to become a major player in the more lucrative credit-card business.
Credit cards, unlike charge cards, allow the user to carry an outstanding balance from month to month.
"American Express arrogantly believed that it was invulnerable to co-branded cards," said Joanne Black, a marketing consultant who has worked at both American Express and MasterCard.
"But now the handwriting is on the wall: If they don't take advantage of strategic alliances of co-branding their business will dwindle to nothing."
American Express's market share among card issuers has been in free fall for more than a decade.
Last year Amex had an estimated 19.5% of the $439 billion charged in the U.S. on Visa, MasterCard and Amex cards.
That's down from 32.5% of the $77 billion charged in 1983.
To issue a co-branded card, a card issuer joins up with a provider of goods or services to sponsor a card that provides users with some incentive to charge purchases on the card.
Consumers using Citicorp's AAdvantage card, offered in conjunction with American Airlines, earn frequent-flier points at the rate of one mile for every dollar they charge on the card.
American Express already offers a cobranded card with American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and it has cards linked to brokerage accounts at Smith Barney and Lehman Brothers.
But otherwise it has ignored the co-branding rush that has led to cards bearing names like Apple, General Motors and Shell.
"We are moving away from a one-product orientation," said Kenneth I. Chenault, the head of American Express's domestic credit and charge-card division.
"The one-size-fits-all approach doesn't work anymore."
Mr. Chenault said the company has already met with a number of potential co-branding partners, including manufacturers, retailers and travel providers.
American Express wouldn't identify the parties.
"Our challenge here is to align with partners where the combination of brand names is logical and reinforcing," he said.
"We are optimistic, based on preliminary partner discussions, that American Express can be a preferred issuer of cobranded cards."
But analysts say American Express has already let some of the best co-branding opportunities get away.
With more than 100 co-branded cards already in the marketplace, "a lot of the best names are already taken," said David Robertson, president of the Nilson Report, a credit-card industry newsletter.
"There just aren't that many General Motors and Fords out there."
Both Exxon and Chrysler, two of the most attractive names that remain available, are believed to be in discussions with card issuers.
Although Mr. Chenault said the new cards will include co-branded cards that carry the names of product providers as well as the American Express name, analysts suggest it may be some time before such cards hit the market.
"They want to play up the benefits that they can derive from co-branding partners, but I don't think they are going to rush to put names of other companies on cards," said Guy Moszkowski, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein.
American Express's international card chief, R. Craig Hoenshell, recently told a group of securities analysts that some of the new cards may be similar to the company's "membership miles" card, which offers holders travel rewards on a number of airlines.
The new cards may enable users to earn free travel as well as discounts for a wide variety of products.
This approach, Mr. Hoenshell said, wouldn't change the appearance of the standard American Express card.
He said users would be provided with "a bank of reward points, where we can offer redemption options based on the customer's behavior and lifestyle," rather than discounts for a single product.
Card-user awards may also be customized for individual retailers, providing American Express with an opportunity to enhance its relationships with store owners by helping them target specific consumers.
A market test now being conducted in Britain suggests just how highly segmented American Express's new approach may become.
In the experiment, which involves card users who shop in Harrods, American Express identified customers who purchase food in the giant department store's food hall but who have never bought a bottle of wine from the nearby wine department.
By offering those card members a discount on wine purchases, Mr. Hoenshell said American Express was able to help Harrod's to better exploit its existing customer base.
Wall Street analysts say American Express has been slow to respond to increasing segmentation of the card industry in part because of its overconfidence in the American Express brand name, but also because of corporate priorities, such as the disposition of its Shearson and Lehman Brothers subsidiaries.
Now that charge and credit cards are clearly the company's core business, analysts say that a growing responsiveness to competitive pressures is probably inevitable.
"They know that the American Express card can't be a monolith anymore," said James Hanbury, an analyst with Wertheim Schroder.
"It has to be sliced and diced."
