Every other Tuesday, in the basement of an old laboratory building here, Hope Sweet searches for deviants.
Clad in a lab coat, her hair pulled back in a knot, Ms. Sweet moves briskly from table to table, pausing at each to pluck wriggling mice from paper buckets.
Of the 20 examined this week -- culled from a breeding colony of half a million -- 19 are rejected.
They are too normal.
But as the lid is popped on the 20th container, a murmur ripples through a group of lab workers looking on.
"Wow," Ms. Sweet exclaims.
"These are head-bobbers all right," possibly related, she decides, to another strain called "the circling mutants."
Four tiny mice move their heads up and down, as if listening to a rhythm only they can hear.
Experiments on weird and afflicted mice are considered vital to medical research.
And nobody has weirder mice than Ms. Sweet's employer, the Jackson Laboratory (phone: 800-422-MICE).
Over 50 years in the business, Jackson scientists have bred and sold millions of furry mutants: diabetic mice, mice with goiter, lung cancer or high blood pressure; nervous mice, fat mice, mice with psoriasis.
Spontaneous mutations -- including the ones found by Ms. Sweet's practiced eye -- have often played important roles in understanding disease in human beings.
Now, biotechnology is making the laboratory mouse still more useful: By injecting genes into mice embryos or by knocking genes out, scientists can create custom mutants with humanoid ailments.
New government regulations and animal-rights activists, meanwhile, have made research on rabbits, dogs and monkeys more of a headache.
All the excitement led the Harvard Health Letter to call the 1990s "the Decade of the Mouse."
Grants and donations to Jackson are on the rise after years of barely squeaking by.
The National Institutes of Health recently gave money to the nonprofit institution to help establish a national center for breeding genetically engineered mice.
Employees take particular pride in foiling the forces of natural selection.
"This is mouse mecca," says Priscilla "Skippy" Lane, 72, who has been cataloging odd mice for 42 years.
"We've got the best selection of mutants in the business."
In a noon meeting over sandwiches, in a conference room with a view of Acadia National Park, talk turns to the lack of cooperation creeping into the world of mouse research as more companies seek to profit from patented mice.
"These biotech companies all want to be the first to come up with the million-dollar mouse," complains Muriel Davisson, a senior scientist.
At Jackson, they like to chat about mousy freaks of nature.
"The best one I ever saw was a five-legged mouse a few years back," says Claudia Basso, who has been rearing rodents here for 13 years.
"It had feeling in the leg and everything."
That's nothing, counters another staff member.
"We still have a six-legged skeleton."
Neither mouse was of much medical interest however, and they didn't reproduce.
Searching for mutants with genetic defects worth studying "is a little like gold mining -- you never know when you'll find something valuable," Ms. Davisson says.
Ms. Lane, whose genetics career began about the time the molecular code of life was discovered in twin strands of DNA, describes the thrill of finding a new strain: "You'd see a new behavior -- such as constant circling in a cage -- and say, `Aha, this may be an interesting mutant.'"
The lab sells nearly two million mice a year, bringing in $20 million and engaging the efforts of 200 of the lab's 560 workers.
Three times a week, 18-wheeler trucks ferry thousands of live mice to Boston's airport for shipment around the world.
These mice sell for as little as $8 apiece, as much as $72.80 for a breeding pair.
Jackson is "the mouse-genetics capital of the world," says Melvin Balk, scientific director at Charles River Laboratories Inc., Wilmington, Mass., (phone: 800-LAB-RATS) which is Jackson's largest for-profit competitor.
Charles River also stocks many of the hot new genetically engineered strains, including OncoMouse, which is designed to contract cancer.
Mice mutants "give us a window on the unknown," says Jackson Lab director Kenneth Paigen.
Consider Stargazer, whose trance -- like, skyward stare was first seen in 1985 in a single male in Jackson's colony.
When that mouse was studied with tiny electroencephalograph wires taped to his head, he became an experimental model for studying the role of defective genes in certain cases of epilepsy.
Stargazer "was my first deviant," Ms. Davisson explains.
Her cramped office is filled with tiny stuffed mice, mouse art, a mouse letter opener.
"People give them to me," she says with a sigh.
Serendipity has played a role in many mice discoveries.
In 1946, a researcher walked into a room here, idly jingling his keys, and was startled by a commotion in one of the mouse cages.
Looking into it further, he identified and began breeding a new strain with a hereditary seizure disorder triggered by sound.
Over the years, promising mutants have included the Nude Mouse, a hairless variety that usually is born without a thymus, giving it severe immune deficiencies useful to AIDS researchers.
An inbred cousin -- the Streaker -- has a thymus but reliably develops thymus lymphomas.
The Shaker has a neurological defect, as does its cousin the Waltzer, which has a mutation affecting its inner ear and sense of balance.
Another, more recent mouse is Flaky.
The poor fellow seems to have a bad case of dandruff -- which is being explored as a model for psoriasis.
Once researchers have decided that a mouse is worthy of further study, the stock is bred to strengthen the characteristic.
That frequently involves inbreeding with littermates for several generations.
With so many mice scurrying about, one might wonder, does anybody get attached to them?
"No, they don't really make good pets," Ms. Lane says.
"Rats are better.
They're smarter."
