Last week, Marine Corps General Joseph Hoar of the U.S. Central Command in the Middle East testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee that the U.S. lacks the airlift to sustain even one major regional conflict.
He was the latest in a long line of military leaders to testify about the service's inability to move troops quickly and sustain them on the battlefield.
Put another way, the ghost of Les Aspin still haunts the Defense Department.
Back in March 1992, then-House Armed Services Committee Chairman Aspin began pressing his "Option C" plan to cut the U.S. military.
During congressional hearings then, the Chiefs of Staff of the Army and Air Force, the Secretary of the Navy, Joint Chiefs Chairman Colin Powell and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney all criticized the Aspin plan as cutting too deep, too fast.
Colin Powell predicted "a hell of a lot of casualties" in a war under the Aspin plan.
Air Force Gen. Merrill McPeak was less polite, saying the Aspin plan was "designed by someone who must be in a position of not having to take responsibility for the combat results."
Despite all this, the plan moved ahead, and when Mr. Aspin became Defense Secretary, it became the blueprint for the Clinton military "restructuring."
Last September, Secretary Aspin and a departing Colin Powell presented the administration's "bottom-up" review of military readiness.
The plan promised to do more with less.
But the bottom-up review was significant for more than just its force-cutting.
For the first time the U.S. changed its standard for meeting threats abroad.
Before Aspin, the U.S. prepared to meet two simultaneous major regional conflicts (MRCs) with the objective of "Win-Win," or winning both.
Under the Aspin plan, the U.S. would meet two "near simultaneous" (whatever that means) MRCs, with the objective of "Win-Hold-Win."
In other words, plan to beat Saddam Hussein while hoping to stiff-arm the North Koreans.
In his testimony, Gen. Hoar told of a recent military exercise with Egypt that took place at the same time the U.S. was reinforcing troops in Somalia.
"It was all we could do to run one moderate reinforcement and one medium-sized exercise at the same time," he said.
"This was nickel and dime" compared with the two MRCs the Aspin plan outlines.
The keys to improving airlift and sealift are the C-17 cargo plane and a new fleet of Fast Sealift Ships.
The C-17, while originally slowed by structural difficulties and cost overruns of about $1 billion, is back on track and many agree the best option to replace our aging fleet of C-5s and C-141s.
The C-17 is especially important now because its improved lift for short takeoffs and sturdier landing gear opens up 10,000 more airfields around the world, including those in Bosnia.
But the Clinton Administration is decrying the C-17's unit cost, about $498 million, at the same time it's cutting orders for the cargo plane.
It was originally estimated that McDonnell Douglas would build about 240 C-17s, but that number has dwindled to 40.
Most agree that we need at least 120, but market analysts say even 80 planes would decrease unit cost significantly, and there's little disputing that we need the planes.
In fairness, the Clinton Administration has been consistent in maintaining funding for the Fast Sealift Ship program.
The Aspin plan increases the number to 24 from 19.
But the Administration has become obsessed with maintaining what it calls the "defense industrial base," using this to justify building another aircraft carrier and the Seawolf submarine.
While we could be convinced that another carrier could be useful, the Aspin plan doesn't provide the planes to man it, a point flagged by a defense analyst during the bottom-up review press conference.
Secretary Aspin said he could "perhaps" pick up a reserve air wing or "an active air wing that happens to be in the continental United States at the time working up for another carrier deployment."
Impossible, says Senator John McCain, a former Navy flier himself.
When a carrier air wing is at a shore installation for routine maintenance after a carrier deployment, some of the planes are in a million pieces.
As for the Seawolf, Senator McCain notes that that program is simply fulfilling a Clinton campaign promise.
He argues that the Seawolf should be cut in favor of improved sealift.
We agree.
The National Defense section of the fiscal '95 budget starts out with a quote from President Clinton: "Our forces . . . will remain the best equipped, best trained and best prepared fighting force on the face of the earth."
This won't happen if the Administration doesn't change its overstretched plans for moving soldiers by air and sea.
