Federated Department Stores Inc. is expected today to name Harold Kahn, a former top executive of R.H. Macy & Co., head of its Abraham & Straus/Jordan Marsh unit, its largest division.
Mr. Kahn will be named chairman and chief executive of the unit, which had sales of $1.42 billion in its most recent fiscal year, or about one-fifth of Federated's annual sales of about $7 billion.
A Federated spokeswoman wouldn't confirm the appointment, which had been rumored earlier this week.
The 48-year-old Mr. Kahn would take over an under-performing division that Federated executives are hoping to resuscitate.
In 1992, Cincinnati-based Federated merged the headquarters operations of A&S and the Boston-based Jordan Marsh units in a cost-cutting move, but the unit's operating profits are believed to be the lowest in the Federated chain.
That weak performance may have led to the departure last week of Chaim Y. Edelstein, chairman of the Brooklyn, N.Y.-based Abraham & Straus unit since 1985, who suddenly resigned as head of the unit "to pursue other interests," according to a company statement.
Mr. Kahn's appointment comes at a crucial time for Federated, which has bought a large chunk of Macy's debt while it operates under bankruptcy-law protection.
Federated has said it wants to merge with Macy to form the country's largest department-store chain.
Federated is hiring a man with extensive knowledge of Macy's operations, at least before the retailer filed for federal bankruptcy-law protection in 1992.
Mr. Kahn joined Macy in 1975 and worked as a chief merchant in several key merchandise areas.
He became chairman of Macy's South division in 1989.
Mr. Kahn left Macy in February 1992, and later that year became corporate president and senior merchant of Chicago-based Montgomery Ward & Co.
But last December, after 14 months as Montgomery Ward's No. 2 executive, Mr. Kahn unexpectedly resigned from the closely held retailer.
Most recently, industry executives said, Mr. Kahn was being considered for the job of chief executive of Zale Corp., the country's largest retail jeweler based in Dallas.
According to people close to the situation, Mr. Kahn was almost approved by the Zale board but his appointment ran into complications at the final hour.
Earlier this week, Mr. Kahn confirmed he had talked with Zale.
A spokeswoman for Zale said while the company is still searching for a chief executive, it doesn't comment on any executive searches.
