The Japanese personal-computer price war, ignited more than a year ago by U.S. companies, is taking a toll on NEC Corp.'s huge market share, an influential market research firm said.
Apple Computer Inc. racked up a huge gain in share, while Compaq Computer Corp. performed better than analysts' expectations, and International Business Machines Corp. performed worse.
NEC, which has controlled nearly half of the Japanese PC market for almost a decade, saw its market share fall to 49% in 1993 from 52% in 1992, the Japan unit of International Data Corp. said.
The company shipped more computers than ever before -- 1.2 million units, according to IDC -- but was unable to keep up with 15% growth in the overall Japanese PC market.
"We don't foresee NEC getting any worse; their shipments will stay roughly the same," said David Kellar, an IDC analyst.
"The market, in a word, is going to expand around NEC."
That expansion is largely due to demand created by low-priced computers from Compaq, IBM, and Dell Computer Corp. when they crashed into Japan in late 1992 and early 1993.
Capitalizing on their economies of scale and the cost and performance advantages of the world-wide IBM PC standard, the U.S. firms hoped to undercut NEC's high prices and erode its market share.
That strategy appears to be working.
"The reality is that NEC's architecture can't be competitive with a world-wide standard in the midst of a severe price war," Mr. Kellar said.
Results for the U.S. companies, however, have been mixed.
IDC said that Compaq shipped 45,000 PCs in 1993, for a 2% share of the market, up from 11,000 units and an 0.5% share in 1992.
IDC attributed that performance, which was better than the firm earlier forecast, to Compaq's continued price-cutting in the latter part of the year.
IBM, by contrast, slid to a 6.8% share in 1993, from 8% in 1992, IDC said.
The market research firm blamed IBM's decline on difficulties in shipping its low-priced PS/V desktop and ThinkPad laptop computers, and on a large inventory that skewed the company's shipment figures.
IDC didn't calculate Dell's PC shipments separately.
One unexpected beneficiary of the price war was Apple, whose computers have long been popular but expensive in Japan.
IDC said Apple's share increased to 13% in 1993, from 8.8% in 1992, mostly because an aggressive price-cutting strategy made Apple's computers more affordable.
