The dollar rose against most currencies yesterday on fresh evidence that the U.S. economy is vulnerable to inflationary pressures, renewing speculation of more tightening of liquidity by the U.S. Federal Reserve.
The speculation allowed the dollar to recover strongly from an earlier drop against the mark, which was prompted by indications that Germany's central bank isn't in any hurry to ease interest rates.
That signal from the Bundesbank's money-market operations had pushed down the dollar to lows for this year against the German currency.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7095 marks, up from 1.7041 marks late Monday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 104.60 yen, up slightly from 104.50 yen Monday.
Sterling was trading at $1.4895, up from $1.4855.
About noon Wednesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 104.58 yen and at 1.7098 marks.
The dollar clawed back from earlier lows against the mark on revised data on the U.S. gross domestic product, or total value of the nation's goods and services, that showed surprisingly strong growth of 7.5% in 1993's fourth quarter.
The U.S. Commerce Department's figure far surpassed market forecasts of 6.7% growth, as well as the department's own earlier provisional estimate of 5.9%.
With the release 90 minutes later of National Association of Purchasing Management data, the dollar galloped toward even higher ground.
The managers group's February composite index actually fell to 56.6% from the previous month's 57.7%, but the market was focused on the crucial price-index component, which soared to 67%, from 59.8%, the highest level since October 1990.
The foreign-exchange market "is less focused on growth than it is on price pressure," said Eric Nickerson, senior economist at the Bank of America in San Francisco.
Traders said the market interpreted that component to mean renewed pressure for further interest-rate increases by the Federal Reserve, despite comments by Fed Governor Lawrence Lindsey Monday indicating the agency isn't in any rush to raise rates.
But the dollar's rise was capped by the sharp sell-off in the U.S. bond and equity markets, prompted by those same inflation fears following the purchasing managers' data and the GDP growth figures.
Mr. Nickerson said the drop in the bond and equity markets pushed the dollar off its highs, in step with dollar weakness last week amid turbulence in U.S. financial markets.
Weakness in the bond and equity markets leads to a flight of capital out of the U.S., and thus hurts the dollar.
Earlier yesterday, the dollar took a pounding against the mark after the Bundesbank shaved only three basis points off its rate for securities-repurchase agreements, or repos, lowering the rate to 5.97% from 6%.
The dollar dropped to an intraday low of 1.6955 marks, its lowest level since Dec. 27, when it touched 1.6950 marks.
The Bundesbank uses repos as its primary instrument in influencing money markets.
While it was the first cut in the repo rate since early December, "three basis points was kind of skimpy, to say the least," said Christopher Bourdain, corporate trader for Credit Suisse in New York.
But Mr. Bourdain noted that the move assured the market that Germans would be very cautious in future lowering of rates and that the Bundesbank was keen on ensuring a strong mark.
