Sentiment improved in the battered bond market yesterday as traders gave the government's auction of new 10-year notes a decent reception.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond rose more than 1/2 point, or more than $5.00 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 97 28/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, dropped to 6.40% from 6.45% on Tuesday.
The improvement in prices yesterday broke a four-day losing streak that snowballed when the Federal Reserve pushed short-term interest rates slightly higher last week.
"The auction went reasonably well," said Mark Grant, managing director of fixed income at Josepthal, Lyon & Ross, a New York investment-banking firm.
It went "a lot better than the dealers on Wall Street were expecting."
The Treasury Department's $12 billion offering of 10-year notes was the highlight of an otherwise uneventful session.
The Treasury awarded the 10-year notes at an average yield of 5.92%, with a high yield of 5.93%.
The coupon was set at 5.875%.
Going into the auction, traders had fretted that demand for the 10-year notes would be weak.
With the 30-year bond auction still ahead today and the producer price index data due tomorrow, they reasoned that few investors would be likely to venture out of their foxholes.
In fact, they were right.
But sufficient demand emerged from arbitrage trades and from dealers covering shorts that the auction went fairly well.
In a short sale, a trader bets that prices will fall by selling borrowed securities in the hopes of being able to replace them at a lower price and pocketing the difference.
"You would have thought that the 10-year was going to be the ugly duckling, but it turned out to be a bit of a Cinderella story," said Lawrence Leuzzi, head of fixed income at S.G. Warburg.
"The 10-year note went fairly well."
Mr. Grant says he thinks the $11 billion auction of 30-year bonds will meet with strong demand and garner a yield between 6.45% and 6.50%.
But worries about the January producer-price index, which is a popular measure of inflation, could damp enthusiasm, says Mr. Grant.
Many economists expect the price index to post an increase of 0.3% when the volatile food and energy sectors are excluded.
Bond investors fear inflation because it reduces the value of investments with a fixed rate of return.
At yesterday's auction, the bid-cover ratio, which is a measure of demand comparing the number of bids received and those accepted, came in near average at 2.58-to-1.
Noncompetitive bids, which typically reflect bids placed from outside the Wall Street dealer community, were on the soft side at $466 million.
Although the results weren't stellar, traders said they had to be looked at in the context of the bearish tone in the market in the last few days.
"There was a good bid for the 10-year," said Paul McCormack, manager of government securities trading at Chase Securities.
Reflecting follow-through buying after the auction, the when-issued 10-year note yielded 5.87% late Wednesday, down from 5.92% at the time of the 1 p.m. EST auction deadline.
The three-year note auctioned on Tuesday was yielding 4.78% in when-issued trading while the 30-year bond slated to be auctioned today was yielding 6.41%.
Today's 30-year bond auction isn't expected to pose much of a problem for the market.
With the Treasury Department having scaled back the amount of 30-year securities it sells and bonds only being sold twice a year, traders expect solid demand for the issue.
At the same time, analysts say the bond market is probably already priced for bad news from the PPI.
Most economists are forecasting a 0.4% rise in the overall PPI and a 0.3% gain once the frequently volatile food and energy components are factored out.
"We believe that institutional investors have stayed on the sidelines during this refunding and we also believe the market has priced in a 0.6% increase in the PPI," said Kathleen Camilli, chief economist at Maria Fiorini Ramirez.
"So customers have cash to be invested and that cash will be invested following the PPI Friday."
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The notes are dated Feb. 15 and mature Feb. 15, 2004.
Nextel Communications Inc. appeared to find good investor demand while raising $700 million in a junk-bond offering that was priced late yesterday.
Trading in the investment-grade market was light with prices following Treasurys up about 1/2 point.
Trading was also slow in the junk-bond market, with prices unchanged.
However, bonds of USAir Inc. traded down, while the bonds of NL Industries Inc. and Venture Holdings Trust rose.
Nextel's offering went "very, very well," said an official at lead underwriter Merrill Lynch, who noted that the proceeds from the offering were increased from an originally planned $400 million.
The face value of the offering was $1.13 billion.
Nextel provides specialized mobile radio networks for taxi cabs, plumbers and truckers across the country.
Nextel sold 10-year senior redeemable discount notes at 62.143 to yield 9.75%.
The notes are noncallable for five years and no interest will be paid during that time.
Nextel pushed up the expected yield of the notes to compensate for the deal's large size.
Rising interest rates in the Treasury market also contributed to the decision to boost the yield from its original 9.375% level, syndicate officials said.
While there has been strong interest in specialized mobile radio networks, some market watchers are skeptical about the industry's outlook.
"These companies have a lot of promise, but not a lot of money generated," one syndicate official said.
"There's not a lot of favor toward technology investments right now.
There's a kind of `tech wreck' going on in the equity and debt markets."
In the junk-bond market, the price of USAir bonds dropped on news that the airline is slashing rates by as much as 50% on some East Coast routes.
USAir's 10% coupon guaranteed senior notes maturing in 2003 dropped 1.75 points, or $17.50 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 98.
The yield rose from 10.03% to 10.30%.
Two units of Northwest Airlines Corp. have begun marketing nearly $400 million in debt securities in the company's first return to financial markets since a near brush last summer with bankruptcy.
The debt offerings are designed to set a positive tone ahead of Northwest Airlines's planned initial public stock offering -- as well as a junk-bond sale by its operating unit, Northwest Airlines Inc., next month.
Those two transactions will total nearly $1 billion.
The early response by investors has been positive, according to persons familiar with the transaction.
"It's a sign of confidence in the financial markets, and confidence begets more confidence," said Glenn Engel, an equity analyst at Goldman Sachs.
The debt offerings provide financing for the nation's fourth-largest airline at attractive rates and boost its liquidity, the analyst added.
Goldman, Sachs isn't involved in the securities sale.
However, the offerings are only a first step in Northwest's efforts to reduce its large debt burden, which totals about $4.5 billion.
Investor confidence has risen as the airline has posted two consecutive profitable quarters.
The Northwest subsidiaries currently are marketing a $243 million structured aircraft-finance transaction and a $150 million structured accounts-receivables financing, according to a person close to the transaction.
Proceeds from the Minneapolis-based airline's financings are expected to be used primarily to pay down debt at Northwest, which was taken private in 1989 in a $3.65 billion leveraged buyout.
Company officials declined to comment.
Municipal-bond sellers took a breather yesterday after dumping munis for four consecutive sessions, and prices were narrowly mixed.
The New York Triborough Bridge & Tunnel Authority's 5.00% bonds due 2024 were 1/8 point lower at 93 7/8 in late dealings, yielding 5.39%.
With the tax-exempt bond market jittery about the Treasury's debt auctions and the coming producer-price index report, some muni specialists were reluctant to read a lot into the session's scattered gains.
In primary dealings earlier yesterday, a Merrill Lynch group won Boston's $85 million of refunding general obligation bonds with a bid setting the true interest cost at 4.8192%.
Yields range from 2.40% in July 1994 to 5.15% in 2011.
Mortgages made late-afternoon gains with U.S. Treasurys yesterday after the successful auction of a new Treasury 10-year note, which acts as a price benchmark for 30-year mortgage securities.
Prices had been slightly better throughout early trading.
But it was the decent reception Wall Street granted the note sale that made for the brunt of the gains in both mortgages and Treasurys.
Most of the day's trading, though, took place between dealers.
Retail investors weren't active, says Allen Siegal, head of mortgage-backed securities trading at CS First Boston.
Among prices of 6.5% securities for March delivery, Ginnie Maes were up 12/32 at 98 24/32.
Freddie Mac Golds were at 98 28/32, and Fannie Maes changed hands at 98 22/32.
More proof of an ebbing homeowner refinancing came from the Federal National Mortgage Association.
The agency reported that its January commitments to purchase mortgages fell to $6.2 billion in January from $8.5 billion in December, while mortgage purchases fell to $7.9 billion in January from $12.1 billion in December.
Thomas T. Vogel Jr. contributed to this article.
