MANY FOOD MARKETERS grumbled about redesigning packages to meet the federal government's new labeling rules, but a few companies are turning the rules to their advantage.
While the deadline for relabeling is May 8, packages that meet the Food and Drug Administration's rules on nutritional labeling are already hitting store shelves.
Celentano, a Verona, N.J., maker of Italian frozen foods, uses its packages to tell customers that "As Always," its products don't contain additives, chemicals, preservatives or artificial ingredients.
And while ingredients are listed on the back of the box, meeting FDA requirements, the company uses graphics on the front -- pictures of tomatoes, parsley, onions and other ingredients.
The pictures create a "billboard effect," says Celentano Vice President Domenick Celentano Jr., highlighting the natural ingredients in the products.
"It goes back to the old expression `A picture is worth a thousand words.'"
Companies also are exploiting the FDA's allowing statements linking certain nutrients to health benefits.
Last fall, Quaker Oats began putting statements on some oatmeal boxes that diets low in saturated fats and cholesterol and high in fiber can prevent heart disease.
Pillsbury's Green Giant vegetable packages show the Little Sprout cartoon figure atop the government's food pyramid, which urges people to eat three to five servings of vegetables a day.
"Vegetables may help prevent cancer!" the label states.
John Lister, chief executive of Lister Butler, a New York brand-identity consultant, advises marketers of foods like cereal and vegetables, "If you've got it, to the legal extent possible, flaunt it."
TAINTED BY SCANDAL in the 1980s, the Beech-Nut baby-food brand is moving aggressively to try to recoup lost market share.
In an unusual marketing ploy, Ralston Purina's Beech-Nut division is proposing to turn rival Gerber Products' baby food coupons into "even sweeter deals."
Beech-Nut says it will give shoppers $1 in Beech-Nut baby-food products, up to $10, for every Gerber baby food, juice, cereal or Graduates toddler-line coupon mailed to it by May 31.
It doesn't specify a face-value limit on the Gerber coupons.
Beech-Nut declines to discuss its strategy.
But Laurie Petersen, editor of the Cowles Report on Database Marketing, calls the deal a "smart" marketing tool for Beech-Nut because it allows the company to rapidly locate Gerber customers and woo them with coupons, discounts and promotional material.
"It involves the whole feeling of making people feel warm and mushy about Beech-Nut," she says.
"This strategy is more focused than just running an ad and saying, `Buy our stuff.'
Beech-Nut is adding to its database by poaching Gerber users."
Beech-Nut had more than 20% of the baby-food market in the mid-1980s.
But its reputation took a hit from the publicity over the sale of fake apple juice for infants, and its sales slid.
The company, then owned by Nestle SA, eventually pleaded guilty to federal charges and agreed to pay a $2 million fine.
In the year ended Jan. 30, Beech-Nut's market share had recovered a bit, to 14.6% from 13.7% a year earlier.
Gerber's 71.6% share was down slightly from 72%, according to Information Resources Inc.
Next month, Gerber says it will turn up the heat with a new $15 million advertising campaign, about four times last year's ad budget.
The campaign will place greater emphasis on print and television advertising.
WHY DID YOU GO to see "The Paper" instead of "The Getaway" last weekend?
Perhaps because of the reviews.
About a third of moviegoers surveyed chose films because of a favorable review, according to a December telephone study of 928 people by market research firm Bruskin/Goldring Research.
Of the 305 who cited a review, 20% were influenced by a newspaper review, while 18% were inspired by a television critique.
Television ads stirred 20% of those questioned to see a movie; newspaper ads were less effective, prompting 10% to go to the movies.
The Edison, N.J., firm measured respondents' answers over the course of a film's life, rather than its debut week.
This is a key distinction when determining how people make their movie picks, says Chris Pula, director of theatrical marketing at New Line Cinema.
Although reviews may increase a movie's run, he notes, television advertising is the "backbone" of a movie marketing campaign.
"Advertising completely opens the movie," Mr. Pula says.
"One of the challenges is to create brand awareness very quickly.
If we don't hit after the first weekend, we're like spaghetti sauce that will be on the shelf for a long time."
Other influences on moviegoing include word-of-mouth recommendations and big-name stars.
In the Bruskin/Goldring survey, about 20% say they go to a movie based on a friend's suggestion.
A well-known actor or actress stirs interest 10% of the time.
Trailers influenced about 5% to go to the movies, while convenience of show times brought in just over 1% of respondents.
HUNGRY GAMBLERS are sure winners in the Whole Lotta Scratchin' Going game created by the Louisiana Lottery and Popeyes Chicken & Biscuits restaurants.
Any winning or losing lottery ticket qualifies for $1 off a family box of chicken pieces at Popeyes. . . .
Former airline employee Stella Seitz markets Stellair Shoes -- nonscuff, hypo-allergenic, antibacterial foam-padded shoes for women on their feet 10 hours a day or longer.
She says they were developed over nine years based on comments from flight attendants on their footwear needs.
CHRIS PULA is president of theatrical marketing at New Line Cinema Corp.
A Marketing column Friday incorrectly identified him as director of theatrical marketing.
