Horsham Corp. agreed in principle to acquire 43% of Trizec Corp., a debt-plagued real-estate concern controlled by Toronto financiers Peter and Edward Bronfman, for 600 million Canadian dollars (US$436.1 million).
The move would place Horsham, a holding company, in control of one of North America's largest portfolios of office buildings and shopping centers.
The portfolio would include Hahn Co., a shopping-mall concern in San Diego that is considered Trizec's best asset.
The real-estate company also owns office properties in Houston, Los Angeles and other cities.
Horsham, controlled by financier Peter Munk, recently amassed a US$1 billion cash hoard to expand its interests beyond gold mining and oil refining and marketing.
"We've always had a strategy of looking for good-quality assets and management.
We think we can help the management of Trizec revitalize the company and make it one of the premier real-estate companies it once was," said Gregory Wilkins, a Horsham executive director.
But the proposed acquisition still could founder on Trizec's financial difficulties.
Before completing the deal with Horsham, Trizec must win agreement from its creditors to restructure some C$1.9 billion of debt.
Senior creditors, who hold C$1.2 billion of debentures, have so far resisted the Calgary, Alberta, company's plan, which calls for exchanging all its debt for new shares.
After senior creditors demanded repayment of their debt last week, Trizec obtained a court order blocking any moves against the company's assets.
Even if Trizec succeeds in restructuring its corporate debt, it still has C$3.3 billion of subsidiaries' debt that is secured by various property holdings.
Of this, about C$850 million must be refinanced this year and next.
Mr. Wilkins said Horsham supports the operating plans of Trizec's existing management.
He said he expects Horsham's backing will enable Trizec more readily to secure refinancing commitments, and at a lower cost.
"Trizec is limited on its own because of the financial difficulties it has gone through," he said.
About three-fourths of Trizec's property holdings are in the U.S., with the rest in Canada.
"I think Horsham is buying the Trizec stake at a relatively conservative valuation of the assets, with a significant appreciation value," said Julian Schroeder, an analyst at BDS Securities in New York.
Investors at first were leery of Horsham's proposed investment in Trizec, driving Horsham shares down more than 5%.
The shares then recovered most of this, closing in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange at $15.125, down 12.5 cents, or 0.8%.
Horsham, has made out well by taking long shots in its investment strategy.
A US$30 million investment in gold-mining concern American Barrick Resources Corp. in the mid-1980s is today worth over a billion dollars.
Horsham also owns Clark Refining & Marketing Inc. of St. Louis, which it bought out of bankruptcy court.
"All of their moves have been risky.
But I don't know anyone who has made any money betting against Peter Munk," said Tony Hine, an analyst at ScotiaMcLeod Inc. in Toronto.
Under terms of the agreement with Trizec, Horsham initially would invest C$500 million to acquire some of the outstanding senior debentures.
The debentures, to be purchased at less than face value, have recently traded in the secondary markets at about 90 cents for every dollar of debt and accumulated interest.
Horsham would then exchange its debentures for new shares as part of Trizec's restructuring plan, which also needs the approval of other creditors.
Horsham would end up with a 43% stake after investing another C$100 million as part of a proposed rights offering that Trizec expects will raise C$200 million, to be used to strengthen its balance sheet.
The rest of Trizec's shares will be held by other creditors and shareholders.
Following the restructuring, the Bronfmans' holding would be less than 10%.
Trizec said the family has been "very supportive" of the company's restructuring effort.
Peter and Edward Bronfman are cousins of the Montreal Bronfmans, who run Seagram Co.
The two families have no business interests in common.
