The woman is a real pro, but she has children and can only work part-time.
To many employers, she's the worker from hell.
Margaret Johnsson built a business around her.
All but one of the workers Ms. Johnsson hires to do consulting work are women who juggle motherhood and careers by working part-time.
A former corporate manager, Ms. Johnsson started J & A Corporate Financial Solutions three years ago by tapping into two workplace trends: the increasing number of corporations seeking outside help with high-level projects, and the growing ranks of professional women looking for flexible, part-time work.
"You have a lot more highly qualified women in the work force who are looking for a balance between family and work.
It would be a mistake not to tap these resources," says Bryan DeLoatch, a financial manager of a Philip Morris Cos. unit that has retained Ms. Johnsson's company.
Indeed, other employers are also trying to do exactly that, but Ms. Johnsson's approach is far more flexible than most.
The economics of the operation make J & A a formidable competitor for larger companies.
Ms. Johnsson pays her consultants $30 to $50 an hour, which allows her to attract highly qualified candidates.
All seven of her current consultants have at least 10 years of work experience, all are certified public accountants, and most have a master's degree in business administration.
Six are mothers; the seventh is a single man who takes a lot of time off to travel.
(There's also an office staff of three salespeople and an office manager.)
Amy Schroeder, who lost her $88,000-a-year job as a corporate treasurer while on maternity leave, says she feels "very fortunate" to be making nearly as much an hour as she did before.
While her consultants are paid at a high rate, Ms. Johnsson pays them only when she has work for them to do, so she is able to keep costs down.
And because all of her consultants are independent contractors who do much of their work via home computer and modem, she doesn't have to pay Social Security taxes or provide benefits like health insurance.
(Most of the consultants don't need insurance anyway, since they are married to men with good benefits packages, but they can buy into a group plan if they need to.)
As a result, she says, she undercuts her competition, charging about $100 an hour, compared with $250 for a major full-time consulting firm.
Ms. Johnsson expects 1994 revenue to double to $750,000 from last year.
And she plans to start expanding her business beyond Chicago to other cities this year.
But her unusual arrangement creates unusual problems.
Gil Gordon, a Monmouth Junction, N.J., consultant on flexible-work options, says she must find ways to manage both the "unpredictable" needs of her clients and the "uncontrollable" availability of her work force.
For example, he suggests that she increase the number of her consultants -- a step that she says she plans to take this spring.
She has also set up a system to avoid delays and disruptions.
For each project, she assigns a primary consultant and a backup.
If home obligations force the primary consultant to miss work, the No. 2 takes over.
The contingency planning paid off when Laura Avril, the primary consultant on a project, faced a family emergency the night before a crucial conference call with a client.
Ms. Avril's dog, a Shar Pei, had attacked her 16-month-old son, leaving head gashes that required 17 stitches.
After spending all night in an emergency room, Ms. Avril called to tell Ms. Johnsson she was too upset to handle the conference call.
Ms. Johnsson, who in this case was the backup herself, called the client, ready to take over, but he agreed to postpone the call.
In the end, Ms. Johnsson says, the client was so impressed with her system that he decided to expand his project.
In talking with prospective clients, Ms. Johnsson stresses her consultants' professionalism before spelling out their flexible working arrangements.
And even though they aren't always reachable immediately, she guarantees that they will return calls within two hours.
She also insists that her consultants maintain a professional tone in their dealings with clients.
They take business calls at home through Ms. Johnsson's switchboard.
They also avoid taking breaks while at a client's office, and leave the kids at home.
Scheduling remains Ms. Johnsson's trickiest challenge, but she thinks she has found a solution.
"Every one of the consultants tells us their day-care schedule -- and what days or hours they can't work, rather than days they can," she says.
One mother of three can't work Tuesdays or Thursdays because she attends an early intervention program for her Down Syndrome infant.
Another with school-age children can work Monday through Friday, but wants to be home by three.
Once a month, Ms. Johnsson calls a staff meeting for her consultants to assign new projects, based on their skills and schedules.
Making the match isn't always easy.
Sharon Porter, a Park Ridge, Ill., mother, for example, was recently assigned to a 50-hour-a-week, month-long project even though she wants to work only three days a week.
"I am basically working five days a week on this project, which I don't really want to do," Ms. Porter says.
She tolerates the extra work in hopes of landing a project with fewer hours next time, but she is more exhausted than she would like, she says.
On the flip side, keeping the consultants busy can also take some doing.
Rita Gallagher, the mother of two young children, wants to work three to five days a week.
Last fall, Ms. Johnsson assigned her to a month-long project to set up a budgeting system for a local candy manufacturer.
It was supposed to take 140 hours to complete -- more than enough to meet Ms. Gallagher's objectives.
But the client switched some of the work in-house, and Ms. Gallagher was able to finish it in just 90 hours, she says.
To make matters worse, one job that Ms. Johnsson then lined up for Ms. Gallagher was postponed, and the other was put on hold.
As a result, she was idle for three weeks.
"If this goes on for a month, it'll be a problem," Ms. Gallagher said at the time.
Shortly thereafter, Ms. Johnsson came through with more work.
