Outside the neon-lit entrance to Fatty's Restaurant, a poster informs diners that a 15% discount is offered to men who weigh more than 207 pounds, and to women of more than 183 pounds.
Inside, the tables are full.
A plump 23-year-old entrepreneur named Zhang Weiping takes his turn on the bathroom scale near the door.
His rather slimmer companions shriek with delight as he weighs in at 221 pounds.
"This is the first time I've weighed myself in a while," Mr. Zhang blushes.
The weighty discounts aren't just a gimmick, says manager Zhang Yan, himself all of 209 pounds -- they're just one weapon in the battle for customers.
"In the market economy you have to do something special to attract customers," he says.
"There are too many restaurants and competition is fierce."
So fierce, in fact, that Beijing's restaurateurs are dreaming up ever more novel concepts to attract customers.
The Remembering Bitterness, Thinking of Sweet Things Restaurant, which opened in October in Xidan, Beijing's busiest shopping area, used to be a kindergarten.
Now its menu, based on the hardship food of the darkest days of the Cultural Revolution, is packing in crowds of diners.
Its name has a history.
During the Cultural Revolution, young people sent to the countryside would be expected to attend meals once or twice a year known as Remembering Bitterness, Thinking of Sweet Things.
"The food was almost inedible, but nobody dared to say so, and we had to shout out loud `Down With the Landlords!' during the meal," recalls a middle-aged civil servant, Mrs. Wang.
That is exactly the sort of memory Manager Duan Yunsong aimed to conjure up when he named the restaurant -- though he himself, at 23, is too young to share in the nostalgia.
"The first thought people have when they hear the name must be that it sounds interesting and they should give it a go," says deputy manager Zhang Shusen.
"Never mind whether or not it turns out to be any good."
The concept's working: Diners must queue for a table at Remembering Bitterness.
Once through the door of the picturesque courtyard, they step back in time.
Corn cobs hang from the eaves, incense burns in front of a statue of the god of wealth, and the restaurant even offers free shoeshines.
First-time diners may arrive expecting starvation rations, but in fact the food is quite tasty.
"We can't really expect people to eat husks," explains the restaurant's adviser, Liu Zhengjing.
The food is northern home cooking, offering willow leaves, wild greens, corn bread and -- insects?
Yes, insects.
There are sauteed caterpillars, still fat and creamy white on the plate.
If these do not appeal, there's the crisp blackened shell of a deep-fried locust, which tastes of nothing much in particular.
A plate of silkworm chrysalides, scorpions or cicadas fills any gaps.
"They are full of protein," explains one enthusiastic and rather drunk diner, popping a caterpillar in his mouth.
"And they are not polluted by anything."
Nor are they traditional northern fare.
"We ate grasshoppers during times of famine," says Mr. Liu, "but people only started eating the other insects recently."
"It's a southern habit, eating insects," sniffs one middle-aged man.
Eating such creepy crawlies seems to be a fashionable symbol of machismo, amply demonstrated by a table of policemen who tuck into a selection while pouring glasses of erguotou, the clear grain liquor so popular among Beijing's serious drinkers.
Once finished, residents of Remembering Bitterness's Xidan are offered a free ride home in a restaurant-owned pedicab, which is decorated with bunches of plastic grapes, as well as copious advertising.
In the north of the city, a birdlike 64-year-old peasant woman with gray hair has also discovered that history makes good marketing.
Tang Ruiren has set up a restaurant on the strength of one photograph taken more than 30 years ago, when Chairman Mao visited his hometown, Shaoshan, in Hunan Province.
Mrs. Tang was one of many people working the nearby fields, but she had the luck to be photographed standing with a few others, her son in her arms, little more than three feet from the Great Helmsman himself.
Not long afterward she set up the Mao Family Restaurant in Shaoshan.
Now she has opened a branch in Beijing's Dongcheng district.
The facade is of wooden logs, in the style of Mao's birthplace, and a giant copy of the famous photograph is given pride of place in the dining room.
Mao would turn in his crystal sarcophagus if he could see the rest: several private banquet rooms, a karaoke room complete with flashing disco lights, a bar, an illuminated dance floor, and drinking booths lit by a soft red glow.
"I am not a capitalist, I don't do this to make money," protests Mrs. Tang, as she eats an evening bowl of rice and plate of red chilis.
"There are lots of veteran revolutionaries and their children who haven't been to Shaoshan, they don't know whether the food Chairman Mao ate was good, whether the wine he drank was good, so I've brought them to Beijing."
In fact, she is making enough to pay thousands of yuan in taxes every month and to make donations to the Communist Party, in return for which the Communist Youth League and others heartily endorse her restaurant.
In the restaurant's drafty public dining room, the food at least is hot, employing the chilis so beloved of Hunan Province, which are reputed to breed fearless revolutionaries.
The most popular dishes are those which Mao is said to have enjoyed.
One is huobeiyu, an anchovy-like fish that lived in the pond outside Mao's house.
They're cooked dry, then smoked and fried with chili.
Another is hongshaorou, great lumps of fat bacon in a rich red sauce.
Despite such tempting fare, cynics believe that the Mao Family Restaurant's success owes less to the popularity of Mao than to its sheer novelty value.
"Right now in Beijing," says one patron, "you could open a restaurant called Hitler's and people would go to it."
Ms. Sampson is a journalist in Beijing.
