Chengdu, China -- "We found a bee-guh-er," the voice over the phone sang in Chinese at 7:45 in the morning.
"He has long ears.
Can you meet me under the bridge at 4 this afternoon to have a look?"
The sterilization of life that accompanied the rise to power of the Chinese Communists in 1949 brought with it an abolition of prostitution, opium use and the unequal distribution of poverty.
It also brought -- for health reasons -- a prohibition against dogs as pets in China's teeming cities.
For the next 40 years, the only Chinese permitted to keep dogs were peasants.
Some were raised as pets; others to satisfy China's appetite for dog meat.
Within the past two years, however, as China has loosened its noose around most nonpolitical areas of life, puppies have begun to pour into China's cities, to the delight of millions of Chinese children -- just in time for The Year of the Dog, the lunar new year that began last week.
Intelligence about "nouveau riche" China's latest craze had reached me in New York in a letter from Sichuan province earlier in the year.
But in staid Beijing, I found on arrival, it wasn't so easy to make a canine connection.
Fuchengmen Station, on Beijing's loop subway line, proved to be a stop too soon.
At the next stop, a fruit peddler advised that the Guan Yuan Agricultural Market, which in the past had offered puppy dogs, had been torn down to make way for a new high-rise.
The present puppy location, she counseled, was adjacent to the bird market at the Xi Zhi Men Bridge.
Colorful birds and aquarium fish are China's traditional house pets, and at the Xi Zhi Men Bird Market dozens of vendors in outdoor stalls were selling canaries and parakeets in cages, cages without birds, birds without cages, and birdseed.
But puppies were nowhere to be seen.
"What kind of a dog are you looking for?" asked a man straddling a bicycle who later gave his trade name as Mr. "Puppy Sales" Xu.
"An American dog," I answered, presenting myself as a Beijing-based businessman who dealt in industrial plastics.
"How about a Chinese dog?" he replied.
And he zipped open his jacket pocket and out poked a pug-faced pooch just a few weeks old.
"Something with longer ears," I said.
"How about this?" a colleague a few steps away by the name of Guo broke in.
He opened a canvas bag and out peeked a tiny terrier.
Mr. Guo, starting to get silly, said he had a dog with an American passport.
"If he has a valid passport," I said, "I will pay $500 sight unseen."
Mr. Guo, who unlike Mr. Xu sells dogs as a sideline, asked what kind of a dog I was really interested in.
Without a clue as to what dogs other than Pekingese are called in Chinese, and not finding the picture I was looking for in 100 Famous Breeds, the standard dog reference in Beijing, I started to describe a dog about a foot high, with five-inch ears and brown, black and white coloring.
I needn't have worked so hard.
"Bee-guh-er" is a working term in Chinese dog circles.
The discussion turned to whether I preferred a cropped tail.
"Dogs, especially beagles, don't like their tails lopped," I argued.
"They don't care," Mr. Guo countered.
"A tail is like a rudder on a ship," I retorted.
"How is a beagle going to chase rabbits through the woods without his tail?"
If he could locate a beagle, Mr. Guo said, he would give me a call.
The price would be 1,000 yuan ($180), with or without.
That was 200% or more below the beagle market in China, I later learned.
"Beware of bait and switch," a Beijing friend warned.
"Because China as yet has no kennel clubs which certify breeds," 120 Famous Breeds (another standard reference) exhorts, "authenticating pure breeds can be a problem."
Most of China's big cities now have dog markets, but few beat the bustle in Chengdu.
On Wednesdays, the Green Sheep Palace Dog Market draws dozens of merchants and hundreds of buyers; and on Sundays, 10,000 customers, little boys and girls in tow, slither shoulder to shoulder through the aisles and lanes.
The market begins on the main avenue, where mixed breeds -- displayed in satchels, wicker baskets, bicycle baskets and on ribbon leashes -- are offered at pavement's edge for $100 or less.
Most are just weeks old; sometimes a complete litter is huddled in a box.
The half-mile-long earthen lane that leads from the avenue to the heart of the market is where dog accessories -- cages, baskets for sleeping, leashes and dog food -- are sold.
With no domestic pet-food industry, the most affluent Chinese feed their dogs off of their plates.
For many dogs in China, though, food is butcher shop "unconsumables," sold by weight out of bulk containers.
The more carefully bred dogs in Chengdu are sold by professionals in covered, licensed stalls.
Here you can find better mixed breeds at $500, Shih Tzus for $1,400 and Pekingese for $5,000.
Many merchants are quite satisfied to sell just one dog a week.
The stall area also includes imported dog perfumes and other grooming aides, imported dog food and toys for pups.
The most expensive dogs in China, such as all-white breeding female Pekingese, are offered privately for $15,000 and more.
Local governments in Chengdu and elsewhere in China make little effort to regulate the health of dogs for sale.
Dog licenses exist, but few purchase them.
Chengdu maintains a publicly run pet clinic at the entrance to the Green Sheep Palace Dog Market, where for $15 a puppy can be innoculated.
But there is no monitoring, and most owners choose to save the fee.
With little health supervision, cuddly balls often later emerge as sick pups.
In fact, many new dog owners, eager to please an only child, have no idea at all what they are getting into.
A few months after purchase, they unload their furry bundle at a steep discount.
Many Chinese have as little as 100 or 200 square feet to live in.
Further, with few open outdoor spaces or even empty sidewalks, China's dogs are rarely taken out for walks.
Instead, they are trained to visit pans that are left for them in their cages or in a corner of the apartment.
Accuracy isn't always the best.
With the pool of breeding stock still tiny, many Chinese pet dogs come from long distances.
A woman in her 20s I met standing in front of one of Beijing's most chic department stores cradling a puppy in a basket had traveled 33 hours on the train to Beijing from Canton.
She had brought along four young pups, which she was selling for $100 each.
Her dogs came from Shenzhen, adjacent to Hong Kong.
Other dogs come over the border from Russia.
Still others are bred locally or in other parts of the country.
In today's money-oriented China, where almost everyone is angling to become an entrepreneur, breeding puppies at home provides an additional opportunity.
Breeding stock is often what can be borrowed.
I found that out first-hand.
Lan Lan, an almost-Lhasa Apso one-year-old, purchased for $450 from beauty-salon profits, was unable to meet me at Chengdu Airport.
Rong Rong, his mistress, who first clued me into China's puppy-dog rage from afar, explained at the gate that Lan Lan was away on loan, on breeding business, courting two girlfriends.
He would be allowed home when posterity was served.
Mr. Kolatch writes frequently about China.
