National Medical Enterprises Inc. and Charter Medical Corp. said they are in "serious negotiations" for Charter's possible purchase of about 50 psychiatric hospitals from National Medical.
Analysts said the hospitals could command as much as $200 million.
The facilities represent the bulk of National Medical's 61 psychiatric hospitals, which have operated under a cloud in recent years.
National Medical paid hundreds of millions of dollars to several insurance companies last year to settle charges of billing fraud and mistreatment of patients.
Last August, the Federal Bureau of Investigation raided many of the hospitals and National Medical's Santa Monica, Calif., headquarters to gather evidence of what the agency described as "suspected criminal misconduct."
National Medical has said it is in talks with the Justice Department to settle those allegations.
National Medical put the psychiatric operations up for sale last year and has said it wants to focus on its acute-care hospitals.
In the second quarter, ended Nov. 30, the company took a $287.4 million charge related to disposal of the psychiatric operations.
"Based on that write-down and discussions with the company, it appears they might get $200 million for the hospitals, including about $30 million to $40 million of working capital," said Edwin H. Gordon, an analyst at Morgan Stanley & Co.
E. Mac Crawford, Charter's chief executive officer, said the National Medical hospitals would fit in nicely with Charter's new corporate strategy of expanding its patient base and entering new markets.
"Those facilities are well-located," he said.
"They'll give us entry points into several markets."
Charter, back from the brink of collapse just three years ago, plans to reclaim its dominant role in the psychiatric hospital industry through a two-prong strategy of entering new markets and expanding the services it offers.
To that end, Mr. Crawford said, one of the National Medical facilities that Charter is eyeing is a physician group.
Such groups of psychiatrists, who see patients who don't need in-hospital care, would allow Charter to enter the scene much earlier in a patient's life.
Charter, based in Macon, Ga., operates 75 psychiatric hospitals in the U.S. and Europe.
Investors reacted positively to news of the negotiations.
National Medical shares rose 87.5 cents, to $16.375, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
On the American Stock Exchange, Charter shares jumped $1.50, to $24.
