The winter storms that battered parts of the U.S. have proved a mixed blessing for Akzo NV, the big Dutch chemical company.
Akzo is the largest producer of salt products in the U.S., including road salts.
And with all the snow and ice this winter, salt has been selling like mad.
But at the same time the extreme weather has made it harder for Akzo to do business.
"Yes, we're going to be more profitable because of the storms, but costs have also gone up," says Catherine Bolton, a spokeswoman for Akzo Salt in the U.S.
Akzo doesn't break out division sales, but analysts say the U.S. salt operations are substantial.
The U.S. accounts for about one-quarter of Akzo's annual worldwide sales of more than 16 billion guilders ($8.25 billion).
Those sales totals exclude the company's recent acquisition of Nobel Industrier AB of Sweden.
Ms. Bolton says Akzo has shipped a third more road de-icing salt than usual so far this year, a total of 3.5 million tons of rock salt since Jan. 1.
"It has been an unprecedented winter, with record snowfall since Dec 15.
We've had storm after storm after storm," she notes.
But, she adds, "it costs more to transport the salt.
And while we make more profit, we can't produce the salt as economically."
To replenish depleted customer stockpiles, Akzo has been hustling to move salt "to the market as quickly as needed.
It's been like fighting a war," Ms. Bolton says.
To offset the problems of moving rock salt de-icers by road and rail, Akzo already has shipped a "couple thousand tons" of sea salt-based deicers via boats from its Caribbean unit at Bonaire.
Akzo has three rock salt mines in the U.S., with the main mine in Retsof, N.Y.
Akzo's U.S. salt operations got a big boost in 1987, when the company acquired Diamond Crystal Salt.
Akzo is scheduled to report its 1993 net profit next week, with analysts' estimates roughly between 525 million and 600 million guilders after extraordinary charges of more than 100 million guilders.
That would be down from 1992's net profit of 646 million guilders on sales of 16.9 billion guilders.
