Mr. Brennan, the controversial former head of now-defunct First Jersey Securities, proposed that International Thoroughbred Breeders Inc., which he controls, gain control of all five New Jersey horse-racing tracks, two of which are owned by the state's sports authority, the New Jersey Sports and Exhibition Authority.
Some state officials have said Mr. Brennan's proposal is unlikely to gain acceptance.
It envisions "riverboat" gambling on man-made lakes at Garden State Park, which Mr. Brennan's company owns, and at the Meadowlands, the northern New Jersey sports complex that also has an outdoor sports stadium and an indoor arena and is run by the sports authority.
New Jersey's new governor, Christine Todd Whitman, has advocated privatization of government entities.
And the sports authority appointed a task force to explore possible sales after she named a new chairman.
Mr. Brennan's proposal, presented to the sports authority, faces several major hurdles, including adoption of a constitutional amendment to expand legalized gambling in the state.
And a sale could affect holders of about $450 million in sports-authority public bonds.
Meanwhile, Mr. Brennan and companies with which he has been involved are embroiled in litigation.
A Securities and Exchange Commission lawsuit alleging price gouging and unfair markups by First Jersey in the penny-stock market is pending in federal district court in Manhattan.
And International Thoroughbred, Mr. Brennan and others have been accused in federal court in New Jersey of misleading investors in public offerings in the mid-1980s made by First Jersey.
The company has agreed to a proposed partial settlement in this suit calling for payment of more than $7 million, including directors' liability-insurance coverage.
The company has maintained that the shareholder suit is without merit.
Mr. Brennan defended his professional record, saying "I have never been found to violate any securities laws.
I have, on occasion, defended myself, like anyone else, against lawsuits.
But I think ultimately you have to take it to the bottom line -- allegations are cheap."
In the fiscal year ended June 30, 1993, International Thoroughbred, which owns and operates Garden State, had a loss of $29.4 million, or 40 cents a share, on $41.9 million in revenue.
Mr. Brennan said that while his track has had difficulty, the entire industry has been adversely affected by the growth of casino gambling.
In composite trading yesterday on the American Stock Exchange, International Thoroughbred shares rose $1.125 a share, or 16%, to close at $8.125 on sharply higher than usual volume.
