In the latest management shift at one of the casino industry's most successful operators, Circus Circus Enterprises Inc. said company co-founder William G. Bennett has stepped aside as chief executive officer.
Clyde T. Turner, 57 years old, will succeed Mr. Bennett, 69, as chief executive and retain his current position as president.
Kurt Sullivan, 41, who has been director of operations, was named executive vice president and chief operating officer, and was elected to the board.
Separately, the company reported net income of $25.5 million, or 30 cents a share, for the fourth quarter ended Jan. 31, up 28% from $20 million, or 23 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue was $272 million, up 42% from $191.1 million.
For the year, Circus reported net income of $116.2 million, or $1.34 a share, down less than 1% from $117.3 million, or $1.37 a share, a year earlier.
Revenue for the year rose 13% to $955 million from $843 million.
The fiscal 1994 results include preopening expenses from the Luxor casino-resort of about $16.5 million, or 12 cents a share, as well as a $3.7 million increase in taxes.
In its first 3 1/2 months of operations, the Luxor generated revenue of $89.3 million and operating cash flow of $27.6 million.
The company as a whole generated operating cash flow of $276 million for the fiscal year.
Mr. Bennett's decision to leave the chief executive's post came as somewhat of a surprise, although it's not the first time the tough but publicity-shy executive has announced plans to relinquish some control.
"I feel like I've got a real good team in place, and I'm not going to step completely out," Mr. Bennett said in an interview.
He said he made the decision out of a desire to spend more time with his wife and to enjoy his hobbies of boating and sailing.
He also conceded that health problems, including chronic pain in his back and feet, were a minor factor.
Mr. Turner was reserved in laying out plans for further executive changes.
"I have broader responsibilities now, but I'm a team player," said Mr. Turner, who joined Circus last year after 14 years as a financial executive with rival Mirage Resorts Inc.
"I'll be asking Mr. Bennett for a lot of guidance, and he's still chairman."
Indeed, industry observers privately questioned how much influence the strong-willed executive will yield to Circus's senior managers.
Mr. Bennett announced plans to retire in 1991 but quickly changed his mind, triggering the departure of his designated successor, Rick Banis.
Several senior managers have left Circus since then, raising substantial concern on Wall Street about the company's ability to manage its aggressive growth in the face of mounting competition worldwide.
They include Mel Larson, the company's top marketing executive; James Muir, chief operating officer; and, most visibly, Glenn Schaeffer, who left a year ago as president and chief financial officer and who also had been groomed to succeed Mr. Bennett.
And last month, William Paulos, the veteran operating executive who oversaw the opening of the Luxor, announced his departure to become chief operating officer for Crown Casino Ltd., an Australian concern.
The company's stock has been performing poorly over the past few months, which analysts attributed to general caution toward casino stocks, discomfort with Circus's continuing management upheaval and other issues.
The announcement came after the close of the markets, where Circus shares closed at $36.875, down 62.5 cents, in composite New York Stock Exchange trading.
