Dealing with regulation can be a zoo.
Consider the predicament of the famous San Diego Zoo.
A patron has accused it of violating the Americans with Disabilities Act because of restrictions placed on assistance dogs in the park.
The canines, not surprisingly, have a disquieting effect on several of the animal species.
So much so that the U.S. Department of Agriculture has put San Diego's and other zookeepers on notice that they will be cited for any harm to captive wildlife caused by seeing-eye or other such dogs.
Meantime, the Justice Department is pondering what action to take on the ADA complaint.
It involved an epileptic who couldn't gain access for her "service" dog.
This kind of four-legged helper causes zoo officials even more anxiety than the certifiably trained guide dogs typically used by the blind, but both can be a bad match for some birds, cats and primates.
Even the barking-seal pen is a trouble spot.
San Diego had a policy of asking that all dogs be checked at an on-site kennel, with a zoo employee then assigned to escort each impaired visitor.
Now, "trying to err on the side of access," says spokesman Jeff Jouett, it is allowing trained dogs on to most of the grounds, with a staffer still alongside to monitor.
If the dog proves disruptive, it has to leave -- just as would a person who was disturbing the animals.
Zoo officials hope this will pass muster in Washington.
If not, and perhaps in any case, the zoo is studying ways to modify its layout to accommodate the dogs.
This not only could be expensive, but in some situations contravenes the existing intent, which is to get guests as close to the "natural habitat" of the exhibits as possible.
Everyone involved recognizes the importance of a guide or service dog to the disabled person, including the sense of independence that such assistance affords.
But here, as in so many potential rubs with the disabilities law, the situation cries out for common sense, including a realization that nature will not allow all the disabled reasonably to join in every single activity that they might wish.
Mr. Jouett says about five visitors a month bring assistance dogs to the zoo and affiliated wilderness park, against more than 350,000 who don't.
At some point, able-bodied people's prerogatives count, too.
As we said, the nature of today's litigation- and politics-driven regulation often is enough to make one want to go bananas with the monkeys.
At the San Diego Zoo, which coincidentally is also doing loops trying to get the Fish & Wildlife Service to allow in a couple of domesticated Chinese pandas, it's getting harder and harder to tell who's marveling at whom.
