How many employees does it take to run a 5,000-room hotel, casino and theme park named MGM Grand?
Too many, groan some analysts who are shaving their profit forecasts for the company.
Smith Barney Shearson and Bear Stearns both cut their MGM earnings estimates this week because of higher-than-expected expenses at the company's one major business, its mammoth new Las Vegas complex.
The stock promptly was down $1 intraday on Wednesday on the New York Stock Exchange, but ended off just 1/8 after MGM announced plans for a million-share buyback.
Yesterday it rebounded 1 1/4 to close at 30 1/2.
The worst may not be over for MGM Grand, say a few skeptics who question the company's resolve to cut costs.
And if MGM stumbles, it won't help other gambling stocks, which are widely held by "momentum" investors who tend to dash for the exits at the first sign of a misstep.
Wall Street's estimate-shaving analysts are still largely bullish on MGM.
The stock has a thin "float" because it is 73%-owned by financier Kirk Kerkorian.
Like other gambling stocks, it is prone to zigzag a lot.
And MGM has been a favorite target of short-sellers, who bet on a stock's decline.
MGM's megacasino in Las Vegas opened in December.
This is the one you've read about with the 5,000-room casino-hotel and 32-acre theme park, the one with the enormous lion statue that welcomes visitors.
Hoping to make a good first impression, MGM went into a hiring frenzy last year, bringing on about 8,500 employees for the grand opening.
It's not unusual for companies to overhire at times like this.
Cutbacks in employment typically follow quickly.
But there are a lot of beds to make in a 5,000-room hotel.
Costs may be hard to cut.
"It is in management's interest to bring the staff levels down," says Steven Eisenberg, an Oppenheimer analyst who turned neutral on the stock in January.
"Our only question is when."
And until the company bites the bullet, he says, operating-profit margins will be depressed.
So, too, may the stock price.
A spokesman for the company said attrition, rather than layoffs, would take care of overstaffing, which he wouldn't quantify (nor would he confirm the number of employees).
Most of the attrition is behind the company, he said, adding that advertising and other costs fattened expenses in the project's initial months.
In the first quarter, says analyst Jason Ader of Smith Barney, the company spent $127.3 million running the 171,000-square-foot enterprise.
The casino cost was about $10.4 million more than he expected.
The company also is taking longer than expected, he says, to work out bugs in its "player-tracking" systems, designed to help the company spot free-spending types at its 3,500 slot machines.
Once the big spenders are identified, the company dispatches marketing people whose challenge it is to woo them.
Eventually, this tactic will boost revenue.
But the system isn't working yet, analysts say.
The company spokesman disagrees, saying the bugs have been worked out.
Neither Smith Barney nor Bear Stearns have changed their "buy" recommendations on the stock.
Smith Barney's Mr. Ader says it's still cheap, despite his shaving of his first-quarter estimate to 15 cents a share from 35 cents.
The stock trades at around 20 times his new 1994 earnings estimate of $1.50 (lowered from $1.75).
Revenue at MGM Grand isn't a problem.
Mr. Ader now expects first-quarter revenue of around $166 million, ahead of his earlier expectations.
That's about $2 million a day, thanks in part to an average 8,000 visitors to its theme park on Saturdays since opening day Dec. 18.
But this is MGM's first plunge into the sometimes perilous theme-park business, and it's unclear if attendance can stay so strong.
Even more important for MGM Grand is bringing down expenses.
Small changes in costs make a big difference in the bottom line.
"No one has ever tried a project of this magnitude before," says Mr. Eisenberg.
As a result, past rules-of-thumb may not apply.
One rule that still does fit MGM Grand (and other casinos): Expenses are fixed.
As a result, Mr. Eisenberg looks for a first-quarter operating-profit margin of 26% or 27%, rather than the 28% or 29% he had hoped for.
In his view, too much of MGM's profit is being eaten away by expenses.
Says Mr. Eisenberg: "The Street will need evidence of a change in that" before it gets dazzled by MGM again.
