Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc., the troubled retailer of youth fashions, filed for protection from creditors after failing to win concessions from lenders and encountering difficulty in getting shipments of spring merchandise for its stores.
The bankruptcy filing, made in Maryland under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code, follows poor Christmas sales for December, a month in which the company missed payments to suppliers and reported a fiscal third-quarter loss that placed it in violation of credit pacts.
The Joppa, Md., company, which has annual sales of about $750 million, said in an announcement yesterday it filed for bankruptcy protection after it was unable to reach an agreement with lenders "to obtain waivers of existing covenant violations and to amend or restructure the company's borrowing arrangements."
Despite "intense" negotiations with its bank and institutional lenders, the company was unable to develop a financial restructuring plan that was "satisfactory to all parties involved," the company said.
At a time when retailers are stocking their stores with crucial spring merchandise, Merry-Go-Round said it hoped the filing and planned reorganization would "regain the full confidence" of its vendors and lead to receiving "inventory at adequate levels for the spring season."
Merry-Go-Round, which sells fashions to young men and women in 1,445 stores in 44 states, filed in U.S. Bankruptcy court for the District of Maryland.
In its filing, the retailer reported that as of Nov. 27, 1993, it had total assets of $463 million and total liabilities of $265 million.
Merry-Go-Round's bankruptcy filing is the second in a week from a retailer that grew quickly in recent years by following fashionable trends.
Last Friday, Conran Stores Inc., the once trendsetting home furnishings retailer, filed under Chapter 11 in New York.
The filing brought yet another change in management for Merry-Go-Round, which in recent months dismissed several of its merchandising executives.
One of the company's founders and its chairman, Lenny Weinglass, has assumed the title of chief executive.
Mr. Weinglass had recently returned to the company's operations to take over its merchandising strategy.
Michael D. Sullivan, who had been chief executive, will retain the title of president.
Isaac Kaufman remains executive vice president and chief financial officer.
Analysts and industry executives, however, were not impressed by Mr. Weinglass's re-emergence.
"Merry-Go-Round should go out and find a merchant to lead the company," said Peter Schaeffer , a partner with Johnson Redbook Service, a retail-analysis firm.
"They need somebody who has his finger on the pulse of fashion.
Lenny's not the guy."
Added Richard Posner of Credit Exchange Inc., a credit-monitoring agency for apparel businesses, "I'm not impressed by Weinglass's new position.
He's out of touch with the market.
He doesn't have that magic touch and I don't believe he will come and save this business."
The retailer had been hammered in recent months by poor results at stores open a year or longer, in part because of a slowdown in overall apparel sales.
But analysts also said that Merry-Go-Round stores, which also operate under the names Cignal and Chess King, featured clothes that young shoppers no longer considered hip.
Under Chapter 11, a company can keep operating without paying its creditors while it reorganizes.
The bankruptcy filing actually puts Merry-Go-Round in its best position in months.
Because the company has not been paying suppliers, the merchant is sitting on a mound of cash, which the company said yesterday totaled $90 million.
Typical for a retail bankruptcy, Merry-Go-Round said it received a commitment for debtor-in-possession financing that will allow it guarantee the shipment of spring goods.
The company said it has a commitment from CIT Group/Factoring to provide DIP financing in the form of a $125 million revolving line of credit, including a subfacility for the issuance of letters of credit, which is subject to bankruptcy court approval.
The company said it believes DIP financing along with its available cash should enable it to meet its foreseeable financing requirements.
Still, some suppliers were hoping for a better outcome.
"I am shocked that they filed," said Carl Jones, president of Cross Colours Inc., a Los Angeles maker of young mens' wear.
"They were talking to us recently about a moratorium" on what they owed us, he said.
"We have orders for them in house for spring, but we didn't know what to do with it."
Merry-Go-Round stock had been falling in the last year from a 52-week high of $17.625 to a low of $1.50.
Yesterday, in composite New York Stock Exchange trading its shares stopped trading at $2.625, unchanged, prior to the announcement of the bankruptcy filing.
