That strange sound you hear in the winter skies about "three-strikes-and-you're-out" is the honks of liberal wonks, as they are driven off the crime issue.
Until recently, they'd grown content occupying the hallways of the U.S. criminal justice system, filing lawsuits into an understanding judiciary for 30 years and prettying up the Constitution with penumbras and other elaborate fretwork.
Police work became proceduralism, with intricacies that were mastered by young prosecutors doing deals for cheap pleas.
Laughing while they worked, criminals hit their victims harder, and a lot, and often killed them.
If you need numbers, the arrest-to-whack ratio is depicted in the accompanying charts, compiled by the FBI.
Remember that wonderful word that the drive-by shooters coined for the suddenly dead in L.A.?
Then this past November, the voters of the state of Washington gave 76% support to a home-grown initiative called "three strikes and you're out."
That is, after the third major felony, the thug is lifted out of the community forever.
Keep in mind that three strikes wasn't something that Jesse Helms introduced.
It was an initiative first proposed in a sophisticated, liberal state in the northwest corner of the country, not some bayou.
It passed easily and migrated quickly.
Then Bill Clinton grabbed it and shoved it into the federal anticrime bill.
But now a great liberal chorus has formed up to thunder against the idea.
The low and somber voices of the first choir warn that putting young criminals in prison for 50 years will be too expensive.
Striking the proposal with their pocket calculators, they estimate that it costs $25,000 a year to imprison, and so 50 x $25,000 x n-criminals is too much.
We'll return later to this sudden interest in being fiscally correct.
Then there is a second choir of sopranos, singing that the Senate anticrime bill is a mindless "get tough" measure by spooked Washington politicians (we hope they're scared; the people in nearby Anacostia sound pretty frightened, too).
The choir sings that mandatory sentences for first-time drug offenders are clogging the system (no doubt true), that sentencing guidelines turn judges into robots, that intervention and prevention programs were never adequately funded and so on.
We have been in and out of these arguments with liberal criminal-justice specialists for years.
Especially remembered are the debates after Attorney General Ed Meese began calling for some contraction of the expansive requirements of the exclusionary rules on police arrests and searches.
For suggesting this, Mr. Meese and his conservative supporters were vilified as coldhearted or stupid.
The leadership of various police associations or unions was brought forward to say that, really, all these procedures (the paperwork for a New York City arrest can consume an entire workshift) were not a problem.
(We guess not, with so many well-paid cops filling out forms behind desks, rather than risking the streets to catch the 45%-87% of criminals who aren't arrested).
We were told that, in fact, the 25-year edifice of litigation, though at times arduous, had nonetheless brought more equal justice under the law.
Notions of what constitutes justice have served as interesting debate fodder for centuries, but there has never been any serious challenge to the proposition that a government's most fundamental responsibility to its citizens is to provide for their security.
People voluntarily convey enormous powers and authority over their behavior to public officials -- mere people, really -- in return for the guarantee of a secure civil order.
What has happened with "three strikes" is that the people have withdrawn their consent to let their communities be further governed, or at least administered, by a liberal ethos that had been given 30 years to introduce its own ideas of fairness and justice while also ensuring public safety.
Had liberalism succeeded, had there not been so many endless stories of little girls shot dead in grade-school playgrounds during gang gunfights, there would be no three strikes initiative, no crime bill and no such devastating political issue for incumbent liberals.
Three strikes is a rough but proper response to a massive political and philosophical failure.
Oh yes, the pocket-calculator worries about overloading the prisons: The old guys get to go home.
