While proponents of health-care reform clamor for cuts in red tape as a way to help control the nation's medical bills, larger savings may be available in the way hospitals manage their patients, according to a new study.
The report, by HCIA Inc., a health-care information concern in Baltimore, indicates that hospitals in the U.S. could save as much as $12 billion a year by following the practice patterns of health-care facilities in Minneapolis and St. Paul, Minn., one of the most aggressively managed health-care markets in the country.
There, hospital patients are discharged about 1 1/2 days sooner on average than in hospitals elsewhere in the U.S.
Moreover, those facilities produce outcomes, in terms of mortality and surgical infection rates, that are equal to or better than rates at hospitals throughout the country.
Using Minneapolis-St.
Paul as a benchmark and comparing Medicare data from hospitals nationwide, HCIA calculated that almost 20% of patient days in 1992 were clinically unwarranted in the study's sample.
That would translate to excess costs of about $12 billion annually.
"We hear much about administrative waste in the health-care industry," said Robert Leary, vice president of research and development for HCIA.
"But the realizable savings on the clinical side are far greater and more attainable."
Squeezing waste and inefficiencies from the U.S. medical system is a cornerstone of President Clinton's plan for health-care reform.
The savings, in turn, would be used to finance expanded benefits.
Some of the changes envisioned by the Clinton team include switching to a single reimbursement form for insurance claims and scaling back federal oversight of clinical laboratories.
Those steps and others, the White House estimates, could produce savings of as much as $50 billion a year.
But some health-care economists question whether Mr. Clinton's plan will simply replace existing red tape with new red tape.
Under the administration's proposal, most people would eventually buy health insurance through large purchasing groups run by the states.
Experts estimate there could be as many as 250 of these regional alliances -- each with its own costly bureaucracy -- depending on how the states set them up.
Hospitals in several markets -- notably in Florida, Oregon and Southern California -- already are pushing to streamline their practice patterns and operations, and, thus, reduce charges and expenses, said Saad Allawi, vice president of Mercer Management Consulting Inc. in New York.
Indeed, in a second study, by HCIA in conjunction with Mercer, of the 100 best-performing hospitals in the country, researchers found that expenses per admission at the top facilities were as much as 15% lower than their peer groups.
If anything, Mr. Allawi said, calls for health-care reform and cost-effective care will accelerate hospitals' push for improved performance.
"We're going to see these changes take place much faster in the next five to 10 years."
