ELECTRONIC bill-paying gains ground despite some embarrassing glitches.
Despite last week's multimillion-dollar goof by Chemical Bank cash machines in New York, banks, utilities and insurers say many consumers like electronic fund transfers.
BankAmerica customers, users for years, now zap funds to 41,000 recipients -- from mortgage bankers to dentists.
First Federal Savings Bank, La Crosse, Wis., says its fund transfers rose to 4.7 million in 1993 -- equivalent to the work of 78 tellers.
First Chicago and two others join Microsoft in a home-banking program.
First Chicago says 25% of its clients have PCs, and some have modems, too.
"The information highways are out there.
It's just a matter of connecting them," says banker Charles Shoemaker.
Still, not all are convinced.
Routings can get mixed up-and so can users.
Illinois Power notes many folks continue to prefer checks.
Meanwhile, State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance and John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance say 50% of all their new clients pay electronically.
Hancock says the share may rise to 65% by year end.
"People like to do their bill-paying at midnight," says Zions Bancorp in Utah where its fees average less than stamps.
BETTER BOWLING through science is the aim of new high-tech balls.
"Reactive" bowling balls -- so called because a resin additive allows better "reaction" on lanes -- give bowlers more strike-power, says Bowling Magazine.
Unlike regular urethane balls that carry oil from the treated front-end of the lane to the dry back end, resin balls absorb the oil, grab the wood better and "hook" harder into the pins.
"There's no question that skilled players are scoring higher" with reactive balls, says Bill Vint, the magazine's editor.
With dozens of models to choose from, many serious bowlers now own two or three balls.
Brunswick Corp. just added a new technological twist with a mushroom-shaped core that it says adjusts weight so a 12-pound or a 14-pound ball can handle the same way as a 16-pounder.
At $200, the Quantum balls score high-end prices.
Gordon Pennock, a professor of mechanical engineering at Purdue University, says, "Lots of claims are going around."
But he notes that even the best design is subject to arbitrary skills of driller and bowler.
COTTON'S HIGH but the livin' ain't easy for textile firms these days.
Over the past two months or so, cotton-futures prices have jumped more than a dime per pound to 74 cents as bad world weather disturbs markets.
Most major mills have hedged their cotton costs through the third quarter, says Prudential Securities analyst Deborah Bronston.
But if cotton prices keep rising and can't be passed on, all firms that buy raw cotton will "likely feel the pinch of higher prices in 1995," she says.
Ditto says Goldman Sachs analyst Jay Meltzer.
"We're keeping an eye on all the companies we follow," Mr. Meltzer adds.
Both analysts recently trimmed their outlooks a bit on Cone Mills, a Greensboro, N.C., firm they feel isn't hedged as far out as some others.
Cone says it doesn't comment on analysts' estimates.
Besides, a Cone official notes that hedging "is all relative," and that sooner or later all the companies have to buy raw cotton.
The nation's purchasing agents said cotton-fabric prices rose for the second consecutive month in January.
FINANCIAL COUNSELING by the Consumer Credit Counseling Service rose 25% last year to a record as more than one million consumers sought help with their personal financial problems.
Meanwhile, the number of personal bankruptcies filed for the fiscal year declined, says the National Foundation for Consumer Credit in Silver Spring, Md.
PHONE THE FED FOR THIS?
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York offers an electronic bulletin board that carries on-line, among other reports, the full text of speeches by its senior officers.
CHANGE FOR GOOD, a fund-raising campaign to aid Unicef, takes off aboard British Airways' long-haul flights.
Flight personnel will collect unwanted foreign coins and notes from passengers and give the money to the U.N. charity for children.
SINGING THE BLUES, French radio stations ponder quotas for pop music.
A controversial law requires France's 1,300 FM stations starting in 1996 to use playlists made up of at least 40% French songs.
It adds more friction to the U.S.-French media tug-of-war; discord is audible as stations try to figure out just what makes a song French.
"This is a big mistake," says Laurent Bouneau of trendy station Skyrock, based in Paris, which plays 80% American or U.K. hits.
"English is the international language, but you can't say so," he adds.
Meanwhile, authorities are racking their brains to find a reliable way to enforce the rules.
The French Audiovisual Council hasn't yet decided whether the radio stations themselves should be allowed to provide information about what songs they broadcast or whether independent monitors should be hired -- at potentially huge costs.
Critics point out definitions are dicey: How do you classify Franco-Algerian pop stars singing in Arabic to France's large North African community?
BRIEFS: For the hypochondriac who has everything, Rx for Organization Inc. in Canoga Park, Calif., offers a medicine cabinet organizer. . . .
Royal Viking Line teams up with Golf Digest Schools for cruises to exotic golf courses.
