Oil prices rose yesterday as demand projections increased slightly and supplies of North Sea crude oil appeared to tighten.
The OPEC Secretariat in Vienna released estimates indicating that the call for crude produced by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries would be slightly higher than anticipated through the remainder of the year.
In fact, first-quarter demand has turned out to be 25.2 million barrels daily, 170,000 barrels a day more than OPEC initially forecast.
And the number of North Sea cargoes produced is expected to shrink because maintenance schedules will force the closure of a major production platform.
Forty-five cargoes of North Sea Brent Blend crude are scheduled to be loaded in April, down from 51 cargoes in March, according to Dow Jones International Petroleum Report.
The price of crude oil for April delivery increased by 34 cents a barrel to finish at $14.83.
Heating oil and gasoline prices rose as well in moderate activity.
Despite the bullish news, wariness over the outcome of the OPEC meeting scheduled for late next week still pervades the market.
And it is likely that prices will trade within a tight range until the meeting ends.
Industry analysts believe that the most likely action by OPEC will be to roll over its previous agreement and keep its output ceiling at 24.52 million barrels a day.
Such an outcome could "cause crude prices to erode to $12.50 a barrel," says Cyrus Tahmassebi, chief economist for Ashland Inc. based in Ashland, Ky.
Mr. Tahmassebi, who has worked out several scenarios that could occur at the meeting, says that if no agreement is reached, oil prices could tumble to as low as $11 a barrel.
A pact to cut output by 1 million to 1.5 million barrels daily could boost prices to levels as high as $17 a barrel.
"But a cut is the most unlikely outcome," he says.
Statistics released after trading yesterday will likely give a boost to oil prices today.
The figures, compiled by the American Petroleum Institute, show that while distillate inventories grew slightly last week, gasoline and crude oil stocks declined.
The decline in crude supplies, which fell by 5.3 million barrels, was considered especially sharp.
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Prices of corn and soybean futures contracts fell as traders took profits on Monday's big rally.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the corn contract for May delivery fell 2.75 cents a bushel to settle at $2.8425 a bushel.
The soybean contract for August delivery slipped 0.5 cents a bushel to settle at $6.83 a bushel.
Prices were also depressed by a National Weather Service 30-day forecast for below average precipitation in such western corn belt states as Minnesota and Iowa.
The soil there is so saturated in the wake of last year's record floods that farmers need a relatively dry spring to work in their fields.
The National Weather Service is forecasting normal precipitation in such eastern corn belt states as Indiana and Ohio, which escaped last year's excessive rains.
Traders said grain prices didn't fall further in part because many farmers are resisting the impulse to sell what little crops they have remaining in storage after last year's crop disaster in the Midwest.
According to some traders, many of their farming clients are waiting for the cash price of corn to hit $3 a bushel and the cash price of soybeans to top $7.15 a bushel.
PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices continued to firm on indications that the U.S. economy remains bouyant.
"Economic strength persists, and that is helping the metals," says Stephen Platt, futures strategist for Dean Witter in Chicago.
Economic data, including industrial production figures, released yesterday "suggest a pretty strong base for precious metals demand, particularly as we move into the second quarter," Mr. Platt said.
The second quarter is usually bullish for metals as demand tends to improve on a seasonal basis, he explained.
On New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery gained 40 cents to settle at $387.60 an ounce, while silver for May delivery edged up 1.5 cents to $5.488 an ounce.
The gold market is being held back from sharper gains, Mr. Platt said, because of "ongoing concern over the strength of Far Eastern investment demand at current price levels."
