In response to Dennis Prager's "Word Abuse -- A Lexicon" (editorial page, Jan. 21): A proper English lexicon -- not to mention a fair one -- should include at least one alternative set of meanings.
Conservative: A person who believes in minimal governmental interference in our lives (except in the bedroom, of course).
Liberal: A bleeding heart who wants to parole all criminals.
Christian Right: Upright, God-fearing citizens whom God has called to political action to save us all (with minimal governmental interference, of course).
Abortion: Murder.
Women's Rights: The right to love, honor and obey one's father, brother or husband.
Animal Rights: Supporting the rights of hunters to thin wild-animal herds so as to save animals from starvation.
Fetus: An unborn child whose rights supercede the rights of its mother.
Baby: A blessed event for which all women are naturally grateful.
(Life is a wonderful thing, always to be pictured on television in an attractive middle-class setting, never in a slum or tenement.)
Woman, Authentic: All good wives and mothers.
Woman, Inauthentic: All members of NOW and similar radical groups.
Sexist: A notorious womanizer.
Victims: Those deprived of life, liberty or particularly property, but only through natural upheavals such as brush fires, floods, earthquakes or volcanic eruptions.
Ideal Family: Mama, Papa and at least four children.
Grandma and Grandpa can be included if they are not in a home for the aged.
(Exception: A married couple with children who are on welfare are not considered an ideal family.)
Progressive View of Humanity: Rich people and truly religious Christians are to be respected.
All others are tolerated, but only if they know their place.
Reactionary View of Humanity: All men are created equal.
Blacks (Authentic): African-Americans who have achieved middle-class or upper-class economic status and who now vote Republican.
Blacks (Inauthentic): Any black who does not realize what a great deal the white majority is giving him.
Black Racist: A black person who publicly states that blacks are superior to whites.
(He is either crazy or a dangerous radical.)
Poverty: The economic status of lazy people.
Greed: The motive of muggers, thieves and burglars, all too lazy to work.
(White-collar embezzlement or cheating is of course simply business.)
Minorities: Individuals or groups unwilling to work hard in order to become part of the majority.
Community: Formerly a group of people living in the same locale.
Now a bunch of commies, lessies or gays living together.
Feminist Organizations: Organizations of frustrated manhaters too lazy to cook their husbands' dinners.
Universal Health Insurance: Socialism.
