CBS: Saturday, Feb. 12, 8-11 p.m. EST.
Opening Ceremonies from Lillehammer, Norway.
Contrary to appearances, a great deal else will be going on in Lillehammer beside Women's Figure Skating, and the Nancy Kerrigan drama.
CBS will air a total of 120 hours, live and taped.
Events coverage begins Sunday, Feb. 13, 9 a.m.
Weekends: Saturday program runs from 1-6 p.m., and continues from 7-9 p.m., with late-night wrap-ups to follow.
Sunday program runs from 9 a.m.-noon, followed by midafternoon coverage till 6 p.m.
Prime-time show runs from 8-11 p.m., followed by wrap-ups.
Weekdays: coverage includes two hours in the morning, 7-9 a.m., a prime-time program beginning at 8 p.m., to be followed by wrap-ups in the late hours.
TNT: Turner Network will broadcast five hours of the games, weekdays only, from 1-6 p.m. (excluding Monday, Feb. 21, President's Day, when CBS coverage will take over the 1-6 p.m slot).
This film, shot on location in a Los Angeles hospital, aspires to serve as a testament to conditions in emergency rooms, and to the life-and-death choices confronting doctors working in what have come to be known as "war zones."
The first half-hour or more is all battlefield atmospherics, and so shrilly apocalyptic in tone it takes patience to stay with it.
Still, the show's vital signs begin to revive soon enough -- which owes much to the presence of Joe Mantegna, grim and scathingly believable as an emergency-room physician who must make one of the life-or-death choices for a patient with a critical head injury.
Paul Dooley is altogether unsettling in his dead-on portrayal of the patient in question -- a citizen who insists, while lying unattended in a corner of the war zone, on behaving like a man still connected to civilization.
There is some cumbersome speechmaking and palaver about politics, none of which, fortunately, detracts from what is, in the end, powerful drama.
-- 8-9:30 p.m. EST, on HBO.
A Yorkshire mill owner's daughter enters a convent only to discover, 16 years later, that the great world outside has a claim on her.
Thus does Sister Gabriel become entangled in a chain of events involving her brother's family, the survival of the mill, and temptations of the flesh -- all of which naturally call into question her suitability for the cloistered life.
This four-part "Masterpiece Theatre" presentation is based on a novel by Marcelle Bernstein, who seems to have gone around the world interviewing nuns.
Indeed, the portrait of life within the convent here is significantly richer and more telling than the scenes outside which dominate the action.
For all that, this is a sturdy tale, made engrossing by Kristin Scott Thomas's delicate and probing performance as the luminous Sister Gabriel.
-- 9-10 p.m. EST, on PBS.
PBS air dates and times vary so check local listings.
Sean Young plays a hard-pressed TV executive who hits on the idea of airing a live execution, while Tim Daly stars as the executee.
The film has excited charges of sensationalism.
It is, in fact, a send-up coupled with a plot turning on the question of the doomed con's guilt.
It would have been more entertaining without the undergraduate wit which lies heavily over it, especially at the unspeakably silly ending.
-- 9-11 p.m. EST, on NBC.
Here we have a documentary about the tabloids, both TV and print, and about the mass media generally as they followed the case of Michael Jackson vs. the orthodontist.
This chapter of "Frontline" positively palpitates with self-righteousness as it carries on about the terrible tabloids and how they fed on the Jackson story.
Meanwhile, of course, "Frontline" producers have cut themselves a piece of the action in the guise of media criticism.
Correspondent Richard Ben Cramer manages to sound, in fact, like a quintessential tabloid-tough when offering the confident -- if vapid -- observation that, "Australians are just Brits with bad accents."
The net effect of all the sanctimony here is to make some of the tabloid journalists -- especially one enterprising British cutthroat from "The Sun" -- seem models of wholesomeness.
-- 9-10 p.m. EST, on PBS.
