"At some auctions, they raffle off whole days with celebrities."
-- Corky Sherwood on "Murphy Brown," Jan. 3, 1994.
At the risk of fueling even more cynicism about journalists, I want you to picture this: It was the 20th anniversary of the Watergate scandal, a high point for First Amendment advocates if there ever was one.
At that very moment, a year ago November, the Society of Professional Journalists was holding its annual convention and hoping to raise money with the auction of some historic items: the "Nixon Resigns" front page of the Washington Post, autographed by Ben Bradlee, and a first edition of "All the President's Men," autographed by Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein.
High-quality journalistic memorabilia, in other words, should have been the big-buck items at this auction.
But the big-buck journalists -- a mere handful, of course -- were sitting on their wallets.
It turns out that they were waiting to bid on a true high point of journalism: a cameo appearance on "Murphy Brown," the six-year-old television sitcom that has placed Candice Bergen among the ranks of the most respected real, or virtually real, journalists in the country.
Watergate mementos might as well have been Holiday Inn bar napkins to this crowd.
The first two bids topped the highest offers for Bradlee and Woodward and Bernstein.
The bid jumped to $1,000. $2,000.
I dropped out at $2,500. $3,000. $3,500.
SOLD, for $4,000 to Ruth Ann Leach, a columnist for the Nashville Banner.
"You can't buy publicity like this.
Wait a minute.
I just did."
-- Marty Crane on "Murphy Brown," Jan. 3, 1994.
In the year after the auction, Ms. Leach and the Society of Professional Journalists got more publicity for the "Murphy Brown" bid than any story she ever wrote or any public-access battle the society ever fought.
The news made the Associated Press wires, CNN, the Dallas Morning News: "Real journalist to appear with actress playing journalist."
I was astounded at the brouhaha, and I'm the one who had arranged with the show to have the cameo role donated.
Why would real journalists go bananas and even shell out $4,000 to be on a TV show?
My theory is that most journalists can be counted on to like three things: their bylines, seeing themselves on TV and seeing actors portray journalists on TV.
For a journalist, landing a "Murphy Brown" guest shot is like hitting a grand slam in the media league softball tournament.
Maybe it's because Hollywood historically has made us hacks more romantic and glamorous than we really are.
Think of the great onscreen journalists: Tracy and Hepburn in "Woman of the Year."
Lou Grant and Mary Richards on the "Mary Tyler Moore Show."
Lois Lane and Clark Kent in "Superman."
Ruth Ann Leach and me on "Murphy Brown."
"Fascinating, provocative and eminently watchable."
-- Murphy Brown quoting TV Guide about herself, Jan. 3, 1994.
When the producers of "Murphy Brown" finally settled on a date for Ms. Leach's debut, they told her she could bring a guest.
She made it into my personal journalism hall of fame by inviting me on account of my being auction chairman, thinking up the idea of a "Murphy Brown" cameo and, as she said, "wanting it so bad," even if I did wimp out when the bidding passed $2,500.
I accepted the invitation with the coolness befitting a professional print journalist.
I canceled the fourth day of a long pre-Christmas weekend with my family; I cashed in frequent-flier miles I'd been saving for a trip to Europe with a friend; I flew the red-eye from Washington to Los Angeles.
I tried to sleep but only managed to ensure that some chiropractor's kid will make it through college.
We were allowed on the set at Warner Brothers at 10 a.m., shortly before rehearsals began for filming that night.
Seeing the cast do their bit on the set of "FYI" was like watching real reporters in action: well-dressed, good-looking people engaging in witty repartee while producing great journalism.
And I am Marie of Romania.
Most reporters miss polyester, if they don't still own and wear some.
Good-looking reporters work for television; the rest of us try to do all interviews by telephone.
Newsroom conversations will produce the occasional clever riposte, but sustained reporter humor is more likely to mean 15 minutes of farm-animal noises on deadline.
Nevertheless, the "Murphy Brown" cast does a pretty darned good job of imitating journalists, especially when an actor blows a line and invokes another farm product.
Now that's journalism.
"Have you no shame?
As a member of the media you have a chance to uplift the public. . . ."
-- Jim Dial to Marty Crane, "Murphy Brown," Jan. 3, 1994.
While waiting for the rehearsal of our scene, Ms. Leach and I interviewed everyone who could talk: the production crew, security guards, paid extras, winners of other auctions, each other.
Everyone but the cast.
When it came to the actors, these two long-time journalists were both starstruck and dumbstruck.
The episode, appropriately, revolved around a charity auction and the Howard Stern-style shock jock who pays $10,000 to spend the day and have dinner with Murphy Brown.
Ms. Leach and I were cast as restaurant patrons in the dinner scenealso appropriate because journalists value free meals almost as much as their bylines.
Our parts were so small that none of us restaurant patrons, even the paid professionals, were called extras.
We were "background" or "atmosphere," subject to such inspirational directions as, "OK, background, move."
The filming of our scene went without a hitch, except for those few panicky minutes when I couldn't dislodge my fork from a potato croquette, which had turned into library paste under the studio lights.
But no one yelled cut, and the terror in my eyes is barely noticeable in the finished product.
As a matter of fact, unless you were really watching for us last week, neither Ms. Leach nor I was particularly noticeable in the finished product.
I know lots of people who watched the entire episode and never recognized my frizzy hair sticking out beyond Candice Bergen's forehead.
That's the way it should have been.
After all, I'm a professional.
I know what background means.
Ms. Harlan is a reporter in the Journal's Washington bureau.
