Apple Computer Inc., moving to recover from the marketing disaster that accompanied the launch of its Newton MessagePad, is unveiling a new version that is cheaper and corrects some shortcomings in the original product.
The new MessagePad 110, which Apple will begin shipping today, contains improvements in a handwriting recognition system that had been widely ridiculed by users and the press after the first MessagePad hit the market last summer.
The latest product also makes it easier to keep and send files in handwritten form, as "electronic ink."
It is far faster to recharge, contains as much as four times longer battery life and comes in a sleeker design.
Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., appears to be repositioning the product.
For one thing, it is releasing the new MessagePad at a lower price than the original.
Apple's price for MessagePad 110 is $599, compared with the $699 price on the first version, which analysts say hindered sales.
Apple is also offering a MessagePad 100 that looks just like the original, but contains upgraded software and is priced at $499.
Owners of previously bought MessagePads can get their machines' software upgraded with the new features for $99.
In interviews, Apple officials stressed that as many as 70% of software developers working on Newton products are corporations or institutions interested in customized applications, such as using the Newton as a data-entry device for utility meter-readers or hospital nurses.
Apple originally marketed the Newton as more of a consumer device.
Some analysts say the changes are an important step in making the Newton a useful tool for corporations to improve their ability to capture and manage data.
But Motorola Inc. on Monday is expected to announce a $1,500 handheld communicator that has built-in wireless capability, which is considered a must for these kinds of products.
The Newton still has to be hooked up to an external wireless modem that costs about $500.
Analysts say the Newton will really become marketable when it becomes fully wireless, as the company promises, within the next two years.
"People are mistaken about Newton, assuming it will never improve," said Charles Wolf, an industry consultant and business professor at Columbia University.
He asserted that Apple is pursuing a winning strategy by positioning the Newton as a platform for many uses, as opposed to Microsoft Corp., which he said is developing an operating system for handheld devices that wouldn't allow development of many varied products.
Other analysts said the latest MessagePad is just a "tweaked" version of the original, and that a big leap in the product's popularity and usefulness probably won't come until September or early fall, when Apple said it will start shipping a larger tablet-sized Newton product, codenamed "Bic," which would provide full-page viewing.
The tablet computers would come in handy for such work as a doctor on hospital rounds needing to check a patient's full medical sheet.
"This MessagePad 110 is not going to make them sell 500,000 new Newtons this year," said Mark Macgillivray, managing director of H&M Consulting in Sunnyvale, Calif.
Gaston Bastiaens, an Apple general manager overseeing Newton products, said the company considers its reported sales of 80,000 units from August through December to be "a great success," compared with the initial launch of other new electronic products such as CD players.
However, he declined to disclose sales figures for January and February.
Analysts have asserted that Newton sales fell sharply after the Christmas season.
Mr. Bastiaens conceded that there has been a "seasonal" sales drop.
Despite the adverse publicity about MessagePad's handwriting recognition software, Apple has lined up a number of companies who are testing the product for implementation in their businesses.
Mr. Bastiaens said the approximately 100 large corporations involved in the testing want tailor-made programs for their own use.
Industrial conglomerate Monsanto Co., for instance, said it is completing plans to buy an undetermined number of MessagePads after the St. Louis concern used the computers for such things as having a technician perform plant inspections.
"Our conclusion is that the MessagePad had delivered," said Marc Vanacht, a project leader for the Newton tests at Monsanto, who added that handheld computers are a lot cheaper for the company than having to buy $2,000 laptops.
MessagePad's most notoriously flawed feature has been its inability to recognize the handwriting of users by comparing written words to an internal dictionary.
The software has trouble deciphering sloppy writing, and the dictionary was limited, failing to recognize many proper names.
So Apple has changed the feature to recognize letters as well as words.
This means an unusual name is converted into text exactly as written, rather than what the computer thinks the word should be.
An Apple official said the new system doesn't necessarily lower the error rate, but gives the user much more flexibility.
