Tonight, 1,100 members of the New York media will enjoy a freebie -- a special preview of a movie about an aggressive tabloid newspaper.
Trouble is, another 1,000 journalists will be mad as hell, and they'll just have to take it.
It's not because the movie, "The Paper," produced by Universal City Studios, criticizes the media.
It's because when many newspaper and broadcast reporters and editors tried to accept the invitations they had received, they were told that "the theater was already booked."
Big movie previews are often overbooked, but rarely to this degree.
"I've been personally abused on the phone for days by dozens of media members who were invited and then disinvited to the movie," says Marlene Sanders, who works for the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, which co-sponsored the preview.
Universal just invited "too many people" and "didn't say `first-come, first-served' on the invitation," she says.
"It's a real goof and embarrassment."
Mark Kalish, managing editor of the New York Post, one of the newspapers the movie is modeled on, is especially distraught.
"Last June, the movie makers tied up our newsroom and pressroom and I personally filled in Michael Keaton, one of the stars, on how a newspaper like ours is put together," he says.
"And I didn't even get an invitation.
All I got was an autographed picture of Ron Howard, the director."
As a result, Mr. Kalish says he's "disinclined to put feature stories in the Post about the movie."
One reporter phoned the R.S.V.P. number on the invitation at least a dozen times just after getting the invitation last week.
The line was busy.
When it finally cleared, the man who answered said, "Sorry, we're already booked."
Tina Crepatschko, a public relations assistant with Universal, isn't offering any apologies.
"Columbia University should have been a little more selective in sending us such a big list," she says.
"This is an event, not a benefit."
Ms. Sanders of Columbia University says that as a result of the overbooking, six members of the School of Journalism's faculty have had to surrender their tickets to the media, and they're pretty upset.
"Universal should have booked it at Shea Stadium instead of a midtown theater," she says.
THE NEW YORK POST's managing editor is Marc Kalech.
His name was misspelled in an article yesterday about a preview of the movie "The Paper."
