There's gold in China, and N.M. Rothschild & Sons Ltd. wants a slice of the action.
Joining the throng of international financiers moving into China, the U.K. merchant bank next week will inaugurate a representative office of its Hong Kong subsidiary in Shanghai.
The attraction is what Rothschild's chairman, Sir Evelyn de Rothschild, describes as China's "terrific potential."
Given the size of the Chinese market, he predicts, Shanghai's nascent stock exchange could one day "rank among the top three stock exchanges in the world," he said in a interview.
In this heady atmosphere, Rothschild, says Sir Evelyn, is "interested in the gold business, in natural resources development, in project financing and in share issues that may come about."
With an Asian network that includes subsidiaries in Japan, Singapore, Malaysia and Australia, he adds, "we hope there may be cross-fertilization opportunities in China for other members of the Rothschild group."
As the U.K. banking arm of the international Rothschild family, Rothschild has specialized for more than a century in bullion trading and the financing of mining ventures.
It played a leading role in Britain's privatization strategy during the 1980s and it has been involved in privatization projects in eastern Europe.
In China, one of its most probable contributions will be assistance in getting Chinese companies listed internationally, as well as in Shanghai and Hong Kong.
But it also aims to play a pivotal role in organizing foreign industrial and financial participation in developing China's natural resources.
On the bullion side, China has drawn up a list of mining companies in which it would be willing to allow foreign participation.
Following a pattern already set in the oil industry, however, Rothschild officials say they expect China to offer the most difficult mining concessions first, holding more attractive opportunities in reserve as it waits to see how the market develops; Rothschild plans to offer tailor-made financing and marketing arrangements for foreign firms interested in participating.
China's rulers, comments Sir Evelyn, "are very interested in our know-how and in what we can bring from London."
One of only a handful of Western investment banks to figure by name in Chinese dictionaries, Rothschild first got involved with China in the 19th century when it helped finance trade in cotton, silk and tea and dealt in Mexican silver in Shanghai.
Its links with modern China date from 1953, when it began trading gold with the Bank of China.
Since then, through its Hong Kong unit, it has played an active role in the so-called commercialization of Chinese companies.
In 1992, Rothschild advised China in one of the first sales of so-called B shares -- a Chinese firm's shares available to foreigners -- in Shanghai Wingsung Stationery Co.
More recently, it co-led placings of B shares in three other companies listed on the Shanghai exchange and it has underwritten the issue of shares in one of six Chinese companies listed in Hong Kong, Maanshan Iron & Steel Ltd.
Looking ahead, Sir Evelyn acknowledges that the speed at which the Chinese market will open up is still unclear.
Rothschild first started talking seriously with the Chinese in 1985 about listing shares in Chinese companies, he notes, but it wasn't until seven years later that a flotation took place.
"Your time factor is completely different in China," he observes.
"You have to be very patient.
They don't think in terms of a deadline."
Gradually, however, he predicts, "as the renminbi becomes more convertible, A and B shares shares in Chinese companies sold to Chinese residents, on the one hand, and shares sold to non-residents, on the other will probably merge."
With that in view, Rothschild hopes soon to organize a flotation on the Shanghai stock exchange that will effectively be "an A share issue buyable by foreigners," Sir Evelyn says.
Further afield, he adds, "we are discussing at a very senior level the possibility of Chinese listings in London."
With one Chinese company already listed in New York and another in Vancouver, he notes, China is also looking at the possibility of obtaining listings in Singapore and "wherever they can elicit some capital."
