Nynex Corp. said it will slash its work force by 16,800, or more than 20%, over the next three years, and take a $1.6 billion charge, resulting in record losses for the fourth quarter and the year.
Separately, BellSouth Corp. reported a loss of $276 million for the quarter, reflecting its previously announced plans to cut 10,200 jobs by the end of 1996 and restructure certain operations.
Southwestern Bell Corp., meanwhile, reported record earnings for the quarter.
Nynex's move follows that of several other Baby Bell companies that are reducing their work forces, making massive investments in high-speed data and voice networks and gearing up to fight off aggressive telephone-service competitors.
For the fourth quarter, Nynex reported a loss of $1.24 billion, compared with profit of $324.2 million a year before.
Without the huge charge, Nynex would have still posted lower profit of $265.5 million, or 64 cents a share.
"We did a little worse in the quarter than we expected," said Ivan Seidenberg, vice chairman of Nynex.
Not counting the charge, operating expenses rose 5.6% to $2.85 billion from $2.70 billion, reflecting steeper marketing costs and added expenses due to winter storms.
Previous reports had suggested that Nynex had been weighing plans to cut 22,000 jobs to reduce its payroll, the fattest among regional phone companies, as it braces for competition in the lucrative New York market.
The $1.6 billion charge comprises $700 million for severance, about $400 million for "re-engineering" to consolidate operations and train workers, $270 million to reflect the company's exit from information products and services operations, and $200 million for accounting changes.
"This is a significant step," said William C. Ferguson, chairman and chief executive of Nynex.
The company is intent on "driving costs down in an increasingly competitive market . . . .
As painful as these steps are, we have to do this to be a viable company going forward."
Nynex faces one of the most formidable environments among regional phone companies: a slowly reviving New York-New England economy, tough regulators and several upstart fiber-optic phone-service competitors bent on capturing chunks of the region's coveted business market.
"Our approach is that although we'll lose market share to new entrants, we'll still be growing" overall, Mr. Ferguson said.
Revenues rose 2% to $3.39 billion from $3.32 billion in the quarter.
Nynex has been criticized in the past for being slow to respond to challengers and doing little to improve its phone service.
Like its Baby Bell siblings, it now hopes to become more agile by slimming down.
"This initiative helps us put some teeth into our goal" of improving productivity by about 30%, Mr. Seidenberg said.
The company expects to reap enough savings from its moves by the end of 1996 to offset the $1.6 billion charge.
In addition, it expects to notch up pretax savings of about $1.7 billion annually thereafter.
Mr. Seidenberg also revealed that Nynex plans to spend $150 million to $200 million to install 1.5 million to two million "broadband" lines in its region over the next two years.
These lines, mostly to households, would allow the company to provide high-speed voice, data and video programming.
Nynex provides phone service to about 12 million home customers.
"This is where the relationship with Blockbuster and Viacom come in," Mr. Seidenberg said.
Last year, Nynex invested $1.2 billion in Viacom Inc., and Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. recently agreed to be acquired by Viacom.
A strengthening economy in the Southeast helped bolster fourth-quarter results for BellSouth.
The Atlanta-based company took a $1.14 billion charge to trim its work force and for other restructuring costs.
In addition to the $1.40-a-share restructuring charge, the quarter's loss included nine cents a share related to a Florida rate-case settlement and five cents a share for debt refinancings.
But without the special charges, BellSouth said, the company would have reported the strongest operating quarter in its 10-year history.
BellSouth's Access line growth, a good barometer for telephone-company performance, rose 179,200 in the fourth quarter, 38% more than the increase of 130,100 a year earlier.
Access lines for the year grew 684,600, to 19.4 million.
BellSouth's U.S. cellular business rose 39% to about 1.6 million customers at the end of 1993, from 1992.
Revenue rose 6% to $4.13 billion.
Separately, Southern New England Telecommunications Corp. reported a loss of $224 million, or $3.51 a share, for the fourth quarter, including a restructuring charge of $204 million, or $3.21 a share, for previously announced job cuts of 2,500 employees over the next two years.
The remainder of the charge relates to discontinued operations and debt refinancing.
Net income a year earlier was $40 million, or 64 cents a share.
The company, based in New Haven, Conn., said the weak regional economy and intensifying competition "continue to pressure earnings."
Revenue rose about 5% to $426.5 million from $405.9 million.
WHO'S NEWS: James Platt, senior editor of Fox Broadcasting Co.'s news magazine show, Front Page, was named vice president, special media projects, for News America New Media in New York.
Mr. Platt, 37, succeeds Jaan Torv, who was recently named senior executive vice president of programming and development for News Corp.'s Delphi Internet Services.
Separately, Fox Broadcasting said KARD-TV in West Monroe, La., formerly an ABC network affiliate, will move to the Fox network on April 17, bringing Fox's number of affiliates to 142.
