Katherine LeBlanc used to stock the shelves at Trinity Valley Medical Center with hospital supplies that would last between 45 and 60 days.
Now, Ms. LeBlanc, who is director of materials-management at the Palestine, Texas, hospital, strives to keep enough supplies on hand for just three days.
"So when the truck drives up to our doors, we really need the stuff," she says.
Ms. LeBlanc's hospital, operated by OrNda HealthCorp., is not alone.
In the midst of debate over national health-care reform, health-care providers grew thrifty in 1993.
Hospitals reduced their costs, for example, by cutting money and space allotted for scalpels and other supplies.
(The space was then utilized for other purposes.)
"Maintaining low inventory is a tool to control costs," says Michael Neely, director of materials-management at Egleston Children's Hospital in Atlanta.
"If hospitals manage their inventory efficiently, overall costs come down, and that will ultimately benefit the patient."
Although patients may not suffer, the makers of billions of dollars in goods that used to stock those shelves already feel the effects.
"It's created a slowdown in business, which accelerated during the first quarter of 1993 and continued forward," says a U.S. Surgical Corp. spokesman.
Sales of U.S. Surgical, which makes surgical staples and other products, slipped 19% in the 1993 third quarter to $238 million from $293 million a year ago.
At Acuson Corp., a maker of ultrasound imaging systems, third-quarter sales fell 26% to $67 million.
Sales were down also at Becton-Dickinson & Co. and were mostly flat at larger medical suppliers such as Baxter International Inc. and St. Jude Medical Inc.
Analyst Sam Navarro of Furman Selz Inc., who calls 1993 a "tough" year for the industry, expects most companies to show financial performances below projected numbers.
Mr. Navarro blames the poor performances on pending health-care reforms, which caused many hospitals to freeze their budgets.
At St. Luke Medical Center in Pasadena, Calif., one of 12 hospitals operated by Summit Health Ltd., workers now make every attempt to use existing supplies before any new purchasing is allowed, according to Jeffrey Gall, St. Luke's director of materials-management.
"We used to stock all different sizes of grafts, but now we don't," Mr. Gall says.
"We used to do a lot of hip cases and neurosurgery, and had custom packs of instruments for them; but now we tend to keep only one set and then order more."
Mr. Gall says Summit signed a joint contract at the beginning of 1993, reducing purchasing costs by 9% to 12% annually.
That contract is evidence of another phenemenon changing medical-supply sales: Hospitals are combining forces to cut costs.
For the period ended Sept. 30, 1993, the Justice Department reported 56 filings of hospital mergers, more than double the 21 for fiscal 1992.
In early December, OrNda announced that it's acquiring Summit, citing the single biggest advantage of the consolidation: saving money.
The previous month, OrNda announced plans to merge with American Healthcare Management Inc.
Before Summit's one-year-old contract was signed, Mr. Gall says he was "paying big-time dollars" to keep up his inventory.
For example, he says that before the purchasing agreement, sutures cost between $100 and $500, depending on the size of the box.
Under the contract, prices dropped to between $50 and $300.
"Over the next several years, more mergers will happen, so hospitals can grab on to these kinds of contracts," Mr. Gall says.
"I'm in awe watching my spending being reduced."
