I am responding to two Feb. 16 editorial-page articles under the headline "Killing Drug Research Kills People," by Richard Kogan, president and chief operating officer of Schering-Plough, and J.D. Kleinke, a principal with HCIA, a health care data-analysis and research firm.
Both indicated that President Clinton's Advisory Council on Breakthrough Drugs, contained in the Health Security Act, would kill the manufacturers' financial incentive to search for and develop breakthrough drugs.
I am concerned that such emotion-based letters do not properly inform the public or policy makers.
R&D spending for breakthrough drugs will always be the priority of pharmaceutical manufacturers.
Breakthrough drugs are the very lifeblood of manufacturers whose fortunes rise and fall on these discoveries.
According to the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, manufacturers increased their spending on R&D last year even though their prices were increasing at a substantially lower rate than in previous years.
Therefore, manufacturers have shown by their actions that there is no direct relationship between high prices and R&D spending.
Economics belie Mr. Kleinke's assertion that "government-mandated price controls promise . . . producing low-risk commodities indistinguishable from each other. . . ."
There is insufficient return on investment for a manufacturer to become a producer of only interchangeable commodities.
The goals of the President's Advisory Council on Breakthrough Drugs are laudable.
The council's primary goal is to examine the reasonableness of launch prices.
By comparing taxpayer contributions to research and international pricing, the council also helps drug purchasers make informed decisions.
This will help assure that taxpayers' money is wisely spent.
Conserving revenues to purchase more health care leads to the opposite conclusion of Mr. Kogan's letter, entitled "Clinton Rations Future Cures."
For the government not to assure reasonable prices would be irresponsible.
The functions of the advisory council are very similar to the current market-created review committees that have existed for years in hospitals and HMOs -- the pharmacy and therapeutics committees.
Physician and pharmacist members of the P&T committees review the relative value of drugs before making a decision to purchase.
Many of the "pink slips" referred to in Mr. Kleinke's article went to people who were hired to sell and market only marginally different drugs.
P&T committees have decreased the demand for these indistinguishable commodities and the need for many of the drug manufacturers' salespeople who sold such products.
Articles that attribute value to the drug product alone are misleading if they do not address the importance of professional pharmacy services that often need to be provided with the product to assure that health-care costs will be reduced to the greatest extent possible.
Although a drug often has the potential to lower health-care costs, those savings will not be realized unless physicians and pharmacists help assure that the patient takes the drug properly.
Patient compliance is essential to maximizing the potential value of a drug.
In 1990, the federal government acknowledged the value of pharmacy services by requiring that pharmacists provide drug-utilization review and counseling to Medicaid recipients.
Virtually all state boards of pharmacy, to avoid creating two levels of pharmacy care, subsequently expanded these Medicaid mandates to all patients.
The potential value of prescription medications are realized when the pharmacist works closely with the physician and the patient to ensure optimal drug-therapy compliance.
Only then will pharmacy services save peoples' lives, improve the quality of care and save money.
Ronald L. Ziegler
Alexandria, Va.
