The Clinton administration, deferring plans for its own telecommunications reform bill, this week will offer only light criticism of two measures in the House, government officials said.
Administration officials had said they would file legislation early this year to remove some barriers to competition among cable, telephone and long-distance companies, but now say they will hold off until the Senate takes up legislation several months from now.
The strategy, in addition to giving the administration more time to work out details, reflects a fear of slowing the House bills, even though some administration officials think the bills need to include stronger consumer protections.
"We have some things we'd like to address at the margins," one administration official said, "but the reality is, we don't want to stand in the way of a freight train."
House leaders have set aggressive timetables for the telecommunications bills, so they can begin considering health-care reform and other initiatives in March.
Rep. John Dingell (D., Mich.), chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, and Jack Brooks (D., Texas), chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, have warned the administration not to derail their compromise bill, which they filed in December after nearly a year of delicate negotiations.
Larry Irving, assistant secretary for communications and information at the Commerce Department, and Anne Bingaman, the Justice Department's top antitrust official, are expected to testify today on the Brooks-Dingell bill, which allows Baby Bells into the long-distance, manufacturing and information-services businesses if they get approval from the Federal Communications Commission and the Justice Department.
Mr. Irving and FCC Chairman Reed Hundt are scheduled to testify tomorrow on a bill sponsored by Rep. Edward Markey (D., Mass), chairman of the House telecommunications subcommittee, that would give cable and local-telephone companies greater freedom to compete in each other's businesses.
Administration officials say they have greater differences with the Markey bill, which is co-sponsored by Reps. Jack Fields (R., Texas), and Rick Boucher (D., Va.).
In particular, the administration wants a more sweeping prohibition against telephone companies buying cable systems in their service areas, the officials said.
The Markey-Fields bill allows a telephone company to buy a cable system that serves fewer than 10% of the households in its service area.
The Markey-Fields bill also allows the FCC to grant a waiver if the cable operator "would not be economically viable" on its own.
Also, the administration is seeking stronger provisions to ensure that telephone companies give competitors access to the local phone network, one official said.
But he said the administration agrees with the Markey-Fields proposal that telephone companies should be allowed to provide video service immediately, rather than waiting as long as seven years, as the cable industry has requested.
The administration and Congress are under pressure to reform telecommunications laws this year because the courts have already started striking down some barriers, and recent corporate combinations threaten to do the same.
John Malone, chairman of cable-TV giant Tele-Communications Inc., which is seeking approval to be acquired by Bell Atlantic Corp., gave a blunt view of the changes during a speech here yesterday; he said customers will eventually choose from competing "oligopolies" that will give them lower prices if they order cable, telephone, long-distance and text-retrieval services from a single source.
He said "small" companies -- including TCI -- would be left behind if they don't forge alliances.
"The only other approach is for the government to Balkanize it to the degree that we don't have an industry," Mr. Malone said in the speech, sponsored by the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
But the government disagreed.
"Our whole goal is to increase the number of players in every field, and to make competition fair," one official said.
"Oligopoly is not competition," another added.
