MANY CHILD-CARE programs for school-age kids fall short on quality, a national study finds.
Before- and after-school programs are multiplying fast, with more than 1.7 million children enrolled by working parents trying to avoid the home-alone syndrome.
But the first national study of school-age child care, an Education Department survey of 1,304 sites, raises questions about facilities and activities.
While the programs studied keep children safe and supervised, many lack adequate space for varied activities.
Many don't provide a quiet area for rest or separate space for snacks, active play, drama or creative arts.
In one program, children just sit in a cafeteria, with no play equipment.
In more than a quarter of the programs, children don't have weekly access to a playground or park.
Researchers described such programs as "too confining" and "not pleasant places to be for children."
Many programs don't offer math or science activities, and less than half try to provide remedial help for children having trouble in school.
Staff pay and turnover are warning signals as well.
Pay for senior program staff, at $6.77 an hour, is even lower than the dismal $7.49 average hourly pay for preschool teachers.
And more than half the programs lose 60% of their staff annually, forcing directors to spend a lot of time training new employees.
For employers, the study provides a glimpse of some of the issues parents face in finding care for school-age children, says Dianne Kaplan deVries of RMC Research, the Portsmouth, N.H., concern that conducted the study.
WORK-FAMILY issues, long pigeonholed by academia in the sociology or women's studies departments, are starting to surface at business schools.
Academics and business leaders will gather for the first time on Feb. 18 at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School to talk about how to add material on work-family role conflicts to the business-school curriculum.
Professors from nine universities, including the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the University of Michigan and the University of Virginia, as well as managers from Xerox, Merck and several consulting firms, are expected to attend.
Stewart D. Friedman, a Wharton management professor who organized the meeting, says participants will discuss how to make work-family issues "fit in a systematic way into the cultural mainstream of MBA life."
Wharton is one of the first MBA schools to include work-family issues in its required coursework.
Students examine case studies on issues faced by dual-career couples juggling multiple roles.
They also break up into groups based on sex, marital and family roles and "talk to each other" about the tensions that can arise among those groups, Dr. Friedman says.
"It can get pretty hot," he says.
"The men might say, `Yeah, I want my wife at home having babies.
What's it to you?'
And women might say they resent stereotypes around family roles, or `I'm not planning to have kids and don't castigate me for that,'" he says.
One manager who plans to attend the meeting, Perry Christensen, Merck's director of human resource strategy and planning, says companies would benefit if business-school students were "sensitized" to differing viewpoints on work-family issues.
Sharon Lobel, a management professor at Seattle University who also will attend, adds: "I think we'll see more and more of this kind of material in the curriculum" at MBA schools in the future.
THE AX FALLS on work-family programs once deemed immune from cutbacks.
Though work-family programs are so high-profile that they typically are seen as sacred cows, a few employers are subjecting them to cost cuts.
Kohler, a Kohler, Wis., plumbing-fixtures maker, closed its four-year-old child-care center this month, citing operating losses.
Enrollment at the center, long troubled by financial woes, had fallen sharply, a company spokesman says.
Last year, Apple Computer of Cupertino, Calif., reduced funding to its child-care center, requiring the center to raise employees' tuition by 20% and increase enrollment.
The computer maker says it is maintaining its commitment to work-family programs generally.
Pacific Gas & Electric laid off its family-care coordinator during a downsizing.
A spokesman says the San Francisco utility is continuing all its work-family offerings, including a child-care center and job-sharing, adoption reimbursement, flexible scheduling and dependent-care referral programs.
Wells Fargo, a San Francisco banking concern, also laid off a part-time work-family coordinator; a spokeswoman says it is expanding work-family programs under a reorganized employee health-and-wellness unit.
SEVEN THOUSAND callers swamp Work/Family Directions, Boston, with requests for its home-safety kit for elders.
Designed for working people worried about aging relatives, the kit includes nightlights, adhesive grips for throw rugs and other devices to prevent home accidents. . . .
"Live via baby link from suburban New Jersey," is radio newscaster Liz White's sign-off for WMXV-FM in Manhattan -- to the sound of a baby gurgling in the background.
Since shortly after giving birth to her daughter in October, Ms. White has been broadcasting daily from her laundry room in northern New Jersey using equipment installed by her employer.
Not only is Ms. White happy, but WMXV's heavily female audience of baby boomers "can all relate to" her role-juggling, says Robert Dunphy, WMXV's vice president, programming.
Any drawbacks?
"The basset hound is a nuisance," a producer says.
"If someone comes to her door, all of New York knows it."
