Every businessman knows that when the Enviromental Protection Agency or some other government department issues a regulation, it passes along compliance costs.
So it makes sense for the EPA to find out how much its regulations will cost, right?
Most Americans -- including most members of Congress -- think so.
But the Clinton administration and the rulers of the House disagree.
They've worked overtime recently to stymie attempts by me and other Republicans to introduce amendments that would force EPA to quantify the relationship between environmental risks and cleanup costs, a process known as risk assessment.
The forum for this debate has been legislation that would elevate EPA into our 15th cabinet department.
I proposed a simple amendment that would require EPA to look at the risk of individual threats and analyze the costs and benefits of imposing regulation.
(The Senate passed a similar amendment last year).
But getting the House to consider such a measure was not easy.
Although my colleague, Rep. Gary Condit (D., Calif.), and I had the votes to include this sensible reform in the Government Operations Committee, our amendment was rejected on technical points of order.
Next, the powerful gatekeepers, the Rules Committee, rejected an effort by fellow freshman Karen Thurman (D., Fla.) and me to offer the amendment on the House floor.
Then, just two hours before the floor vote, Vice President Al Gore and EPA Administrator Carol Browner met with Democratic freshmen to ensure their support for the status quo on environmental regulations.
Despite the heavy lobbying against us, something strange happened on Feb. 2.
The House voted, 227 to 191, to send the EPA bill back to the Rules Committee.
This was a milestone for several reasons.
First, it signaled that many rank-and-file House members are rethinking stifling and costly regulatory enactments.
It also seriously challenged the high-handed manner in which Hill barons operate.
The wide margin of opposition to the restrictive rule also reflects the frustration felt by state and local governments and businesses that bear the costs of carrying out federal regulations that produce few benefits.
State and local governments spend up to $40 billion a year complying with unfunded federal mandates.
One of the more ludicrous but not unusual requirements forces every water system in the nation to monitor for DBCP, the herbicide used on pineapples.
As most people (excluding EPA bureaucrats) are aware, the only state that grows pineapples is Hawaii.
EPA's efforts often seem to miss real problems.
While the agency regulates 83 specific chemical contaminants which may not even be in our water, it doesn't regulate many contaminants that occur and pose a serious health threat.
Example: the absence of a federal standard for cryptosporidium, the organism that killed 40 in Milwaukee.
Regulations that do not create tangible benefits are strangling our economy and costing us jobs.
As a result, the National Governors' Association, U.S. Conference of Mayors, National Federation of Independent Business, and many other groups joined with us in letting Congress know that enough is enough.
The public backs risk assessment, too.
When the Harvard Center for Risk Analysis surveyed 1,000 Americans, 83% agreed "the government should use risk analysis to identify the most serious environmental problems."
Ninety-three percent agreed that "when adopting an environmental regulation, the government should inform the public of the benefits and costs that are expected to result from the regulation."
The Rules Committee is now scrambling to issue a new rule to bring the EPA bill to the floor.
The power brokers are working behind the scenes to concoct substitute language for real risk and cost analysis.
I hope the taxpayers -- and my colleagues -- see through these brazen attempts to misdirect reform.
Rep. Mica (R., Fla.) is a freshman.
