NBC's "Homicide" is a police-crime drama that gleams with polish and life and talent -- none of which could save last week's episode from the effects of its socially redeeming mendacity.
The special problem the show's producers faced here relates to the fact that there are now some subjects, notably crime and murder in the streets, about which it is no longer possible to lie with success.
On Thursday, the show began a brief return run with an episode about a tourist robbed and murdered on the streets of Baltimore.
The victim, killed before the eyes of her children and husband, is white, while the killer and his accomplices are black teenagers.
With the introduction of such a story line and its inevitable racial element, it was clear that producers Barry Levinson and Tom Fontana had waded into deep waters.
This was, of course, not entirely accidental, deep political waters and the appearance of riskiness being as they are, nowadays, essential elements of crime-and-cop programs -- the grit in all those gritty police dramas.
Nevertheless, and grit notwithstanding, it became obvious before the midpoint of this episode that the producers were going to find a way to get this program and its sensitive story line settled on safely correct ideological shores.
How to do it?
To appreciate the dimensions of the tortured creativity required for the solution, it's necessary first to note how much punctilious effort goes into this show, and others like it, in the interest of authenticity.
So much care, so much study of nuance and accent are deployed in order to give all the various social types the aura audiences recognize as the real and the true.
Everyone gets the reality treatment, except, in this episode, the perpetrator.
The creative solution to the producers' problem turned out to be simple enough.
Yes, the teenager is guilty of shooting the woman and devastating her family.
But, as we also learn, this killer is so tenderhearted he could not bear -- as one line in the script actually informs us -- the death of a rabbit.
Not only is he tenderhearted, but, we learn at the show's conclusion, this youth took charge of the gun only in order to make sure no one else in the gang did anything bad with it.
In short it was out of his very goodness that he ended up killing the woman.
Who, listening to this, would not be seized by transports of compassion for the scriptwriters obliged to come up with such lines and with such a solution?
Ten years ago, such flimflam about "life on the street" and about the young out blowing people away on the street might have passed without raising an eyebrow.
Not now: not after all the coldblooded executions/robberies in housing-project elevators and bodegas, after all the murders of unresisting cab drivers and fathers on their way home from waiter's jobs, of tourists and everyone who didn't hand jewelry or jackets over fast enough, or who did and were annihilated anyway.
"Masterpiece Theatre's" much anticipated continuation of Prime Minister Urquhart's adventures is quite a different dish, packed though it is with rightmindedness.
"To Play the King," a four-part series about a murderously scheming conservative PM (and the sequel to last season's "House of Cards"), begins Sunday on PBS (9-10 p.m.; check local listings).
At the end of last year's final episode, recall, the PM tossed his lover, young investigative reporter Mattie Storin, off the roof of a government building.
Unknown to Urquhart, Mattie's secret tape recording of the PM's incriminating prior comments (to say nothing of the recording of the poor woman's screams as she is hurled to her death) hits the ground with her and is picked up by persons unknown.
Urquhart (Ian Richardson) and his still more homicidally ambitious wife, Elizabeth (Diane Fletcher), have a potent new enemy in this sequel -- none other than the newly installed young monarch.
The new king (Michael Kitchen), dead set against Urquhart's hard-nosed social policies, makes lengthy speeches about compassion.
Implacably earnest, the king wants to go out and about on the streets, and give interviews on TV about the politics of caring, which have been abandoned by the Tory likes of Urquhart (for which read Thatcherites).
For a while it seems possible -- one can hope, anyway -- that this humorless clod of a monarch is meant to be taken satirically: for a while, but not for long.
The king's views, and much else in the script, are all meant to underscore the moral difference between conservative rotters and the higher humanity of their opponents.
There are, we come to see, even two different (morally speaking) kinds of homosexuals: those of the right and those of the humanist-progressive left.
The king's close friend and press aide, the sensitive, principled and monogamous Mycroft, belongs to the latter category.
The vicious conservative politician and enemy of the good and the true is, on the other hand, the kind of homosexual who goes about corrupting the young.
In what surely ranks as one of the script's most idiotic scenes, the good homosexual Mycroft breaks down and tells his gorgeous lover he wants to bolt, so ashamed is he of doing the same thing sexually as the bad conservative homosexual.
What rich satire this would all be -- if only it were not meant in dead earnest.
Still, all the political twaddle can't diminish -- not by much, anyway -- the charm of the series, which is, like its predecessor, lively and clever to the end.
This is due mostly to Mr. Richardson, whose malignantly knowing smile is more potent than any piece of dialogue.
Altogether, Mr. Richardson, who may also be the most convincingly sexual actor of advanced years around (as Urquhart's scenes with the new young thing in his life show), is a still more heroically villainous Urquhart this time around than the last.
