They are cultural oddities: Barneyless toddlers, teens without MTV, grown men who spurn the Super Bowl.
But for the relative handful of American families who unplug for good, life after television goes on -- quite happily at that.
Deborah Feldman of Highland, Md., made the decision 10 years ago, when she was nursing her infant daughter in front of the TV.
She says Rachel would "whip her head away from me and stare fixated at the screen.
We figured if she was doing it at that age, what would she do when she got older?"
For Richard Mendez, a father of six in Oakhurst, Calif., the flash point came on a Saturday three years ago.
"I turned on the set in the early morning, and that night realized I'd lost maybe 14 hours watching sports.
It hit me between the eyes -- I was the problem, not my kids."
Helen French of New Preston, Conn., simply grew weary of negotiating with her children.
"We made deals and schedules, the rules kept changing and bending.
It became such a power struggle that it was easier not to have it."
In many households, the rising public clamor over televised sex and violence has only intensified longstanding living-room skirmishes over how much and what children watch.
Still, few parents have taken to heart the broadcasting industry's standard answer to its critics: If you don't like what's on television, turn it off.
Those with the spine to ban or stringently restrict TV attest to the tribulations of what some call "detoxification," most notably, testy children at loose ends.
But even their children say that being media-impoverished has its compensations.
For about a month after the set went dark at her house, Charis Mendez, now 17 years old, recalls, "It was terrible -- I hated it."
She and her siblings schemed to get the cable company to reconnect them, to no avail.
Then, she says, "after a while, we all kind of got used to it."
Charis, who had clocked six hours a day in front of TV thumbing through magazines ("I just looked at them, I never read them") discovered books, playing the saxophone and listening to jazz -- especially Billie Holiday, whose biography she tracked down at the library.
There was more time for conversation at home.
"Before it was, like, mostly we'd see Dad before he left for work.
When he came home he'd watch TV with us, and then it was, like, `Goodnight Dad.'
Now we talk all the time, we're really close."
And Charis, who two years ago was failing four of her seven classes, today has a B average.
"When I have a family, I'm not going to have TV," she says.
After her fleeting fixation with TV as a baby, 10-year-old Rachel Feldman is flourishing without it.
It is sometimes difficult, she admits, when her friends natter on about TV shows she has never seen.
But, she says, "I have better things to do than sit around watching a box."
She reads a book a day, plays outside, is active in drama and chorus at school and brings home straight A's.
When Rachel and her five-year-old sister Leah visit their grandparents two weeks every year, they get their annual TV fix, though Rachel says, "It makes my head hurt and gets boring."
Research comparing TV-free kids with heavy viewers is scarce, partly because exposure to television is so pervasive.
One study of a remote town in the Canadian Rockies before and after TV arrived in the mid-1970s showed a decline in children's standardized test scores within two years.
But a U.S. Education Department-funded review of scientific literature a few years ago concluded that TV habits had little effect on children's cognitive development or school performance.
"This medium is here to stay," says John C. Wright, co-director of the University of Kansas' Center for Research on the Influences of Television on Children.
"Kids are going to process information more and more from screens and less from paper.
To think you are doing your child a favor by making him cherish the old things to the exclusion of things he'll really need is incomplete parenting."
For better or worse, kids raised without television do spend their time differently than their media-saturated peers.
Beckie McNeill, Helen French's 14-year-old daughter, admits that she once had friends give her telephone play-by-plays of "Beverly Hills 90210."
But she has noticed that when she visits friends' houses, they first ask, "What do you want to watch?"
She replies pointedly: "You mean, what do I want to do?"
Her friends join her hiking or skating, she says, but "they always think first of TV."
Such observations come as no surprise to Chicago public-relations consultant Suzanne Shelton-Foley whose seven-year-old twins are enrolled at the private Chicago Waldorf School, which discourages television viewing.
When they began preschool, Elizabeth and Bucklin didn't watch TV on school days.
Ms. Shelton-Foley says that she and her video-producer husband noticed that on days when TV was permitted the twins were more quarrelsome and less interested in creative play.
"I really didn't want to believe it," Ms. Shelton-Foley says.
"It's so much easier just to turn on the TV when you need to make dinner."
But the behavior changes were so marked, she says, that the rule soon became: no TV.
After initial protests, the twins gave up asking to watch TV.
Says their mother: "It didn't take long. . . .
We just gave them a zillion other things to do."
At the Waldorf School, where most children are TV-free, teachers say heavy viewers stand out.
"If you see kindergarteners playing superheroes and pretending to kill and slice and hurt, it's a dead giveaway," says Joan Ingle, a therapist at the school.
Not only do TV and video games encourage aggressive behavior, she argues, they tend to impair a child's memory, attention span and imagination.
One who has witnessed lots of TV-conditioned kids is professional storyteller Odds Bodkin, who performs before some 10,000 people a year, most of them children.
"Like clockwork, after seven minutes a ripple goes through the crowd," he says.
"Their inner clocks expect a commercial."
That's his cue to step up the story's pace with music or one of his 100 character voices, he says.
Mr. Bodkin, who lives in Bradford, N.H., restricts his three young sons' TV watching to weekends.
Parents say it becomes harder to keep TV at bay once children reach early adolescence.
Jay Voss of Chicago says he has begun to ease up on his 13-year-old son Hartley's TV restrictions.
"Teenagers need exposure to mass culture so they can form their own conclusions," he says.
Hartley and his friends watch "Saturday Night Live" and mimic the jokes, "and if he doesn't watch," Mr. Voss says, "he's the odd guy out."
But Hartley's sisters, aged 10 and five, aren't interested in TV and don't watch.
Nell Spekman of New York City has reached the age of 16 without succumbing to the TV habit.
When she was a baby, her family's set burned out and was never replaced.
Though friends wonder how she fills her spare time, Nell says she is rarely bored.
Instead of watching sitcoms, she says, her family often reads aloud.
"We went through the Tolkien trilogy and Sherlock Holmes," she says.
"It brought our family together."
Still, opting out of the cultural mainstream requires a thick skin.
After Suzanne Shelton-Foley joined a health club, she asked that the TV be turned off when she left her children at the club's nursery.
"It was, `Sure, no problem,' and as soon as my check cleared I was a lunatic," she recalls.
She stopped taking her children there.
When Ann Potts proposed a TV-free week last year at Pointers Run Elementary School in Clarksville, Md., she says it "was not an easy idea to sell" to parent-teacher association board members, who initially fretted about missing favorite shows.
But more than 70% of the school's 400 students complied with the blackout; and since then, Ms. Potts says, many parents report that viewing in their homes is down.
Experiments like the one at Pointers Run are springing up with increasing frequency.
Afterward, parents and teachers consistently report better homework, improved family relations and other positive results, according to Marie Winn, author of "The Plug-In Drug," a book about TV addiction in children.
"Families are often euphoric about how wonderful it was," she says.
"But then they sheepishly turn the TV back on and look back on their time without it as an oasis in the desert."
