Duff & Phelps Corp. said it plans to spin off its credit-rating operation to shareholders, a move that would free it from conflict-of-interest concerns that have restricted the parent company from managing open-end mutual funds.
Although Duff & Phelps is best known for its credit-rating operation, the company's largest and most profitable segment is its investment-management business, which last year generated about 48% of its revenue and more than half its earnings.
The credit-rating operation produced about one-third of the company's 1993 revenue of $101 million, Duff & Phelps said, and an official said that its operating profit was about proportional.
The parent had net income for the year of $23.1 million, or $1.30 a share.
The management business operates three closed-end utility funds and also manages funds on behalf of pensions and other institutional investors.
Assets under discretionary management at the end of last year totaled just under $20 billion, compared with a year-earlier $16.5 billion.
A decade ago, Duff & Phelps agreed to be acquired by the bank holding company then known as Security Pacific Corp., but the Los Angeles concern called off the deal because of restraints the Federal Reserve Board put on the transaction: The Fed approved the transaction, but conditioned it on Duff & Phelps's no longer issuing public credit ratings, contending such rating activity represented a possible conflict of interest with certain banking activities.
Francis E. Jeffries, Duff & Phelps's chairman and chief executive officer, said yesterday in an interview that mutual funds "have banking powers for the management of money-market funds, because of the check-writing privileges.
If we were to set up a family of open-end funds," he said, "we would want a similar type of arrangement."
A closed-end mutual fund issues a set number of shares, unlike an open-end fund, which creates and redeems shares in response to investor demand.
The investment-management company hasn't been hindered in operating its closed-end funds or its other current businesses, he noted, but its "flexibility has been hampered" because it can't have bank powers as long as the credit-rating business is attached to the company.
But Duff & Phelps noted yesterday in a news release that after the spinoff, it "would be able to explore relationships with banks regarding the management of mutual funds and other investment products."
The company also said it might consider in the future affiliating with a broker-dealer, saying it would have a beneficial effect on the marketing and distribution of open-end funds and investment-research products.
Such arrangements are also subject to potential conflicts of interest with credit-rating services.
However, Mr. Jeffries said that once the spinoff is complete, the company would also be free "to establish ourself as broker-dealer."
Conversely, he noted, the credit-rating business "would like to get into the area of rating mutual funds," but would likely be constrained from doing so by conflict-of-interest concerns if it were associated with Duff & Phelps and the parent was managing mutual funds.
Besides the investment-management company, the planned tax-free spinoff would leave Duff & Phelps with an investment-research operation and a service that provides consulting and valuation services.
