Let's put class struggle aside for a moment and look at Olympic figure skating from a different angle.
How come skiers look like the future and figure skaters look like the past?
Outdoors, the white slopes of Norway swarm with flashy, glitzoid Terminator Insects from Space festooned with stealth-tech gear.
Indoors, on steel blades screwed into black or white cow-leather boots with laces -- equipment essentially unchanged since before the American Civil War -- figure skaters jump, spin and glide like good little Jacks and Jills in a time warp.
Sure, figure skates have been tinkered with a lot -- stiffer boots, for example, made triple jumps possible.
But they are by far the most advanced obsolete piece of equipment in the Winter Games.
The result is that figure skating is perhaps the only event in which athletic performance is being held back by equipment performance.
Surya Bonaly, a 20-year-old gold-medal favorite from France, for example, is a gymnast who can do quadruple jumps -- if she can find a pair of skates that would let her.
Lately, she says, she can't.
Every other Olympic sport has nests of biomechanical engineering mavens manipulating graphite laminations to improve performance and slice hundredths of a second off times.
(Lately, there have been fears athletes are going too fast.)
Not figure skating.
Figure skating has Sidney Broadbent.
He's a 72-year-old retired aerospace engineer for Martin Marietta who helped to put the Viking lander on Mars.
He's also an avid skater who took a nasty spill 17 years ago, the result, he says, of an "atrocious" sharpening of his blades.
This eventually led not only to his acquisition of an artificial hip but also his invention of a machine that is the official skate sharpener of the Winter Games and practically every other important skating competition.
It's called, simply, "The Iceskate Sharpener," and costs about $1,800.
Mr. Broadbent also designed a skate called the "co-planar" and was experimenting with graphite toe and heel mounts when the United States Figure Skating Association cut off his research funds, citing other needs for $5,000 in seed money that would have kept U.S. Olympic Committee funds flowing.
The USFSA, which rules American figure skating, has been very busy of late, and not just second-guessing the American legal system on matters such as felonious assault.
It has also busy celebrating its 73rd birthday.
Critics say that's 73 years of tradition unhampered by progress.
Thanks to enormous effort and endless committee meetings, the USFSA and its umbrella group, the Luddite-infested International Skating Union, have successfully prevented figure skating from becoming the multimillion-dollar economic dynamo that promoters of sports like skiing, tennis and golf claim it could be with bigtime competition, endorsements and TV.
For half the American people -- the female half -- it's the most popular spectator sport.
It could be the female couch potato's NFL.
While skiers can festoon themselves with trademarks to earn money instead of working third shift at the doughnut shop, the ISU rulebook limits skaters to two trademarks no bigger than silver dollars.
But skaters live in mortal fear that ISU judges will punish them for doing so, even in what the rulebook calls the "kiss and cry" postperformance area where the TV cameras hang out.
"The only thing amateur about amateur sports like this one are the people who are running them," says Nye Lavalle, chairman of Sports Marketing Group, a Dallas market research firm.
Mr. Broadbent prefers to politely refer to the USFSA as conservative, and has been known to use the word "bureaucratic."
Sergei Aleshinsky puts it another way: "Don't get me wrong.
I'm proud to be an American, but this situation really stinks."
Mr. Aleshinsky wasn't always an American.
He grew up in Russia and won the Soviet national juniors figure-skating championship in 1962.
He got his Ph.D. in mechanical engineering at Moscow University, specializing in human body mechanics.
Using precision cameras to get three-dimensional views of body mechanics, he worked with skaters, cosmonauts and even piano players to improve performance.
In 1984, he defected, and spent nearly a year in Turkish jails and refugee camps before coming to America.
In 1985, he became the USFSA's sports science director, and set about with Mr. Broadbent and Daryl Phillips, a Des Moines, Iowa, podiatrist, to move figure skating out of the Dark Ages.
Four years later he quit in disgust.
What this trio found was an organization fixated on form, prettiness, artistry and presentation and with an appalling lack of knowledge about the mechanical or technical means of achieving them.
"There are lots of engineers involved in skiing, for example," says Mr. Aleshinsky.
"But engineers and figure skaters are like, well, like fire and ice."
Most skaters and coaches, for example, had only vague ideas about what constituted a proper sharpening and no understanding of how to get one other than turning their skates over to some old guy in the back room.
They know nothing about blade alignment, ice-blade interface, coefficients of friction, lean angles, blade-boot attachment variables, torque and a host of other elementary scientific principles any budding 12-year-old ice princess, or her coach, should know.
(Mind you, these people know all about how to covertly spill a Pepsi into a competitor's boot or dull an unguarded blade's edge with a flick of a quarter.
And they're experts at psych outs.)
Figure skates have a concave bottom edge, the sides of which bite into the ice.
On them, competitors used to perform "school figures," or geometric patterns like an 8 and were judged on precision and grace.
Figure skating became an Olympic event at the 1908 Summer Games.
The Americans didn't really embrace it until a Norwegian teenager named Sonja Henie won 10 straight world championships and three Olympic golds and went on to be a movie star.
Her skates in those movies look pretty much like today's skates.
That is, a boot with a curved sole and angled heel made for walking to produce a walker's gait, with a blade mount on it.
As skaters got more athletic, the boot leather got stiffer (and heavier).
But until Mr. Broadbent's co-planar came along, little else changed.
The co-planar is a flat-bottomed boot better for skating than walking.
Skaters who try them like them.
Boot and blade makers have started making them.
Coaches are resistant, but Darwin lives on ice!
Incidentally, those deadly dull compulsory "school figures" weren't dropped by the ISU until four years ago.
The U.S. association, along with Canada, Britain and New Zealand, voted against dropping them.
