Let the record show that on March 17, 1987, the first 15 minutes of work was recorded on a lawyer's time sheet in a dispute over child-proof window guards.
The fancy metal bars had cost $909 to purchase and install across 32 windows of an apartment in Manhattan.
The owner of the flat had wanted the cost covered by his co-op.
The co-operative's board had said the owner had to pay.
As disputes go, this one didn't seem to amount to much.
But in the ensuing seven years, the legal meter has kept on running -- and running and running.
In their quest for a $909 victory, both sides have paid many times as much.
The adversaries have fought over who should pay.
They have paid lawyers to contest other lawyers' fees.
Virtual slaves to the litigation, they continue to shell out money.
Though it has all gotten a bit out of hand, the case began simply enough.
After New York passed a law requiring window guards for apartments with children under 10, the co-op board at 360 W. 36th St., a converted zipper factory in the borough's garment district, voted to charge the equipment to the residents who needed it rather than to spread the cost around.
Alec and Suzi Diacou, who live in a ninth-floor loft and whose third child was a month old at the time, refused to pay.
The co-op board asked its law firm, Gallet Dreyer & Berkey, to look into the dispute.
By October 1987, after devoting three hours and 25 minutes to settlement efforts and other communications with the defendants, the firm billed the co-op for $315.
By June 1988, after more settlement attempts, the tab had climbed to $1,015more than the cost of the window guards.
But there was, after all, still the principle of the matter at stake: The co-op insisted that if the Diacous weren't forced to pay, it would set a costly example for other residents to follow.
Two months later, the price of principle was up to $1,974, mostly as a result of a landmark event in the litigation: The board filed a three-page lawsuit against the Diacous on July 26.
Bills for drafting and serving the complaint had come to $254 a page.
(The Diacous' own bills aren't broken out in the court record.)
After the Diacous responded to the suit, the billing picked up.
The Diacous' counterclaims had to be addressed, and the co-op asked the court to decide the case without a trial.
Researching and drafting related motions took more than 24 hours and cost the co-op $2,700.
A senior lawyer then edited the documents, adding $600 to the tab.
When an associate lawyer went on vacation, a colleague had to be briefed on the case: The board was billed $42.
By November 1988, the co-op was out $5,504 in legal fees.
The lawyers were just warming up.
Through the holiday season, they drafted, edited and served their documents.
By January 1989, they had added $3,996 to the bill.
Already, the co-op board had invested 10 times as much as they had at stake.
But vindication seemed at hand: On Jan. 26, New York Civil Court Judge Richard Lane found that "logic and substantial justice as well as lease provision" required the Diacous to pay the $909.
End of story?
Even a victory had to be scrutinized.
The co-op board's attorneys billed 20 minutes for reviewing Judge Lane's decision and added $45 to their legal fees.
As of February 1989, they had billed $9,759 to the client.
Then came the Diacous' appeal, which was complicated by the fact that there was no court precedent for the legal question: Could the cost of complying with regulations such as the window-guard law be charged to just the residents who are affected or must the cost be shared by everyone in the building?
Because of the novelty of the issue, the co-op's lawyers decided to conduct a practice oral argument to prepare for actual arguments before an intermediate appeals court.
Preparing for the appeal resulted in a bill for $5,282.
Total fee to the co-op as of March 1990: $19,328.84 and climbing.
Mr. Diacou, who works for Sumitomo Bank, and his wife got some good news that May.
The first appeals court to rule on the issue overturned Judge Lane and said the cost of the window guards should be shared.
Later that month, Gallet Dreyer billed the board $1,388 for reviewing the appellate setback and for counseling the client on whether to settle.
The bill also included a half-hour's work-costing $80 on the question that would dominate the case: Who would pay the legal fees?
Under the ownership contract, if there was a dispute between the co-op and a unit's owner, the loser had to reimburse the winner's legal fees.
That gave the board extra incentive to take the case to the next appellate level -- and try both to win and get its legal fees covered.
That step required 42 1/2 hours of work, costing $6,242.
By the end 1990, after more filings were made to the appeals court, the tally stood at $43,099.
A new year dawned.
In February 1991, the appellate judges ruled unanimously in the co-op board's favor.
Out of concern for the rising legal fees -- and because such rulings are rarely cleared for further appeal -- the Diacous didn't challenge the decision.
The dispute over the window guards had reached its end.
But the fight over legal fees was just beginning.
First, though, a preliminary matter: What court would hear the dispute over which party should pay the fees over a claim that, after all, was still worth only $909?
Because of the size of the fees, the co-op's lawyers argued that the original court -- New York Civil Court -- didn't have jurisdiction.
The co-op board's attorneys sought to take the case to a higher trial court -- State Supreme Court -- and charged $1,310 for that action.
The co-op's lawyers also presented a $2,500 bill for "fees incurred in preparing for hearing on fees."
The all-inclusive total as of October 1991: $53,405.
Two months later, the co-op's lawyers completed the legal work necessary to make their claim that the Diacous should, under their contract, reimburse the co-op for its legal fees.
The lawyers presented details of the 411 hours and 42 minutes logged by associates and partners, for a total of $59,439, plus $1,967 in expenses.
That included $1,500 for the very document used to make the request.
The co-op's lawyers also asked the court for a $5,000 bonus for work done over the years but never actually billed to the client.
As of December 1991, the tab stood at $61,406.
In September 1992, referee William Rothberg found that the "reasonable attorneys' fees" at issue exceeded the civil court's jurisdiction.
He rejected the requested bonus of $5,000 as "ludicrous."
Lawyers on both sides, he said, have "lost sight of the amount in controversy."
Nine months later, the co-op's lawyers presented additional bills to their client for $12,141.
The new bills were for fees to collect fees.
The June 1993 total: $73,547.
In July, Mr. Rothberg concluded that the co-op board couldn't reasonably pass on all of Gallet Dreyer's fees to the Diacous.
"The parties and their attorneys demonstrated a lack of common sense and a lack of practicality and allowed a claim for $909 to escalate into an attorneys' fee claim exceeding $70,000," Mr. Rothberg said in his report to the court.
He concluded that the board should be able to recover $30,000 for its legal fees from the Diacous.
Last month, the referee's recommendation was adopted by the trial judge, clearing the way for the co-op to try to collect the $30,000.
The co-op board won't be reimbursed for the remaining $43,000 in fees, most of which the lawyers have already collected.
David Berkey, a lawyer for the co-op, defends his firm's work.
"I think the expenditures here were appropriate and were kept pretty much to a minimum," he says, adding that his client is pleased with the outcome: "Every step of the way they had an idea of what was going on. . . .
There were no surprises in this case."
For the Diacous, who have paid $30,000 to their own lawyers, the case has proved to be an expensive lesson in keeping things in perspective.
"I'm a man converted," Mr. Diacou says.
"Anything you can possibly do to avoid a lawsuit, do it."
