The Clinton administration proposed the first defense budget shaped specifically for the post-Cold War world.
The congressional debate over the proposed Pentagon budget for fiscal 1995 is less likely to focus on its size -- at $252.2 billion, requested budget authority is actually up $3.2 billion from the current year -- than on the administration's radically different priorities.
The proposed budget would buy no fighter jets for the Air Force, no tanks for the Army, and only six ships for the Navy.
It would spend as much on environmental cleanup jobs as on the Army's entire acquisition plan, and more on peacekeeping than the Marines spend on weapons and ammunition.
And while spending $725.9 million to bolster the U.S. ballistic-missile arsenal, it would spend about half that amount on dismantling the old Soviet nuclear stockpile.
It is a stand-down budget, but not a plan for wholesale demobilization.
It would trim the size of the military and spend enough on operations, maintenance and training to keep that smaller force ready.
But it is really designed for the future, cutting weapons procurement to invest billions in defense research and subsidize key parts of the defense industry.
"There are no Cold-War relics in this budget," Defense Secretary William Perry told reporters at the Pentagon yesterday.
Much more than the fiscal 1994 "treading water" defense budget, which was partially a Bush administration document, the fiscal 1995 spending request reflects the priorities of the Clinton administration.
Offering an expanded view of national security, the budget states that the administration's first priority in foreign and defense policy is "the health of the American economy and its competitiveness in a healthy global economy."
It calls, for example, for an increased but undisclosed amount of intelligence spending on monitoring international trading practices, "including unfair foreign competition and foreign government efforts to acquire sensitive U.S. commercial information."
The budget is designed to produce a ready, technologically superior force, but not a military that will be the world's policeman.
"The United States cannot and should not shoulder a disproportionate share of the human and economic costs of maintaining international peace and security," the budget states.
Most notably, the budget would spend at least $3.46 billion in implementing the Pentagon's new defense industrial policy to ensure that U.S. industry will be capable of outfitting the forces of the future.
This new policy, aimed at keeping alive "defense-unique" sectors, such as nuclear-submarine yards, while helping the rest of the defense industry shrink, is probably the Clinton administration's biggest departure from the past at the Pentagon.
The single biggest item in the new industrial policy is CVN-76, the Navy's next aircraft carrier, which is expected to cost about $4.48 billion, half of that coming out of 1995 spending.
Aides to then-Defense Secretary Les Aspin late last year considered delaying the start of its construction, but ultimately decided that doing so could diminish the capability of Tenneco Inc.'s Newport News Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Co., which will build the carrier, to construct nuclear-propelled vessels.
In addition, the budget calls for spending $335 million to upgrade FMC Corp.'s Bradley Fighting Vehicles and General Dynamics Corp.'s M-1 Abrams battle tanks in order to sustain a production capability for tracked combat vehicles.
Similarly, $75 million will be spent to preserve the capacity to make ammunition.
This year's budget also includes $600 million to build "strategic sealift" ships, part of the $3 billion that will be spent during the remainder of the decade to subsidize the U.S. shipbuilding industry.
Indeed, the Navy's ship-building plan over the next six years is driven far more by industrial concerns than by war-fighting considerations.
That plan calls for the carrier to be built in fiscal 1995, the third and final Seawolf attack submarine to be built the following year by General Dynamics Corp.'s Electric Boat unit at a cost of about $2.8 billion, and then, in 1998, for construction of a new class of attack submarines to begin.
In other spending devoted to easing the transition into the post-Cold War world, the budget calls for spending $2.8 billion to help close military bases, $1.2 billion to help defense personnel learn new skills and find new work, and $2 billion to help develop "dual-use" technology that can be used by both the defense and commercial sectors.
It isn't clear whether Congress will prove willing to spend the billions of dollars needed to support this industrial policy.
Over the past two years, many liberals, especially those from California, have been deterred from cutting big-ticket programs by the need for jobs.
But with the U.S. economy resurgent, they may no longer feel that the defense budget needs to be supported as a jobs program.
Some conservatives, meanwhile, watching nonwar-fighting programs proliferate in the defense budget, are beginning to ask whether the president's promise against cutting defense spending is a hollow one.
But the budget unveiled yesterday generally insulates the administration from political attacks.
Conservative criticism thus far has concentrated on military readiness.
The budget addresses that worry by actually boosting spending on operations and maintenance -- that is, everything from fuel for tanks to training time for pilots -- by nearly $5 billion to $92.9 billion.
Some liberals, meanwhile, will likely be assuaged by the continued decline in the Pentagon's procurement budget, which would drop $1.2 billion to $43.3 billion, about one-third of its level during the Reagan administration's military buildup in the mid-1980s.
"I believe we will get agreement in the Congress that these are the right themes, the right priorities," Secretary Perry said.
The consolation prize for the defense industry is that spending on research and development, which was once dwarfed by procurement, is close to catching up with that account, reaching $36.2 billion in 1995.
One of the biggest development programs is the Air Force's F-22 advanced tactical fighter, which is being built by Lockheed Corp. and Boeing Co.
Some $2.47 billion is requested for the F-22 in fiscal 1995, up from $2.08 billion this year.
Another major development program is Lockheed's Milstar military communications-satellite system, on which spending would be cut sharply to $648 million.
The program apparently is being terminated at six satellites, smaller than was originally envisioned.
Once envisioned as the Pentagon's means of global communication during a nuclear war, it is now being described as a stopgap while a new communications system is developed.
In addition, the former Strategic Defense Initiative, which last year was renamed the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization and oriented away from "Star Wars" space-based satellite activity and more toward regional missile defenses, is budgeted for $3.25 billion, up from $2.74 billion.
Most of its spending is in R&D.
This year's budget calls for terminating dozens of smaller procurement programs and letting the shrinking military live off the stock built up during the Reagan buildup.
The most significant cuts end a few obscure helicopter programs.
Cumulatively, the savings total $3.9 billion, a senior Pentagon official said.
In addition, the military construction budget was slashed by $1 billion.
The helicopter cuts leave only three major aircraft programs in place: The F-22, which won't begin delivery for several years, and two McDonnell Douglas Corp. programs.
The Navy plans to spend $2.58 billion buying 24 F/A-18 strike fighters and developing the new version of that aircraft.
The Air Force, meanwhile, is slated to spend $2.99 billion on McDonnell Douglas's troubled C-17 military cargo-jet program, which in December was put on an unusual probation by the Pentagon.
The fine print of the budget documents released by the Pentagon states that the cost of each of the C-17s being delivered in fiscal 1995 has risen to $461.4 million, far higher than past estimates, and likely to provoke howls in Congress.
