In an unusual enforcement action, the Securities and Exchange Commission accused a securities analyst of helping a now-defunct company disseminate false financial data.
The charges were filed last week against analyst Suzanne L. Cook, a specialist in oil-services companies who once worked for Merrill Lynch & Co.
The charges relate to Ms. Cook's work on behalf of Barton Industries Inc., a valve manufacturer that twice sought bankruptcy-court protection before its assets were liquidated late last year.
An enforcement action against an analyst is "somewhat unusual, but we think it's appropriate," said Rudolph Gerlich Jr., an SEC assistant enforcement director.
"Given the role of analysts in the marketplace, we think it's fairly significant."
Ms. Cook is contesting the charges, Mr. Gerlich said.
Her lawyer didn't return calls.
Ms. Cook couldn't be reached for comment.
The SEC alleges that Ms. Cook was well aware of Barton Industries' financial troubles in December 1990 when she helped the company's management draft a news release projecting rosy earnings for the company's fiscal year.
At the time, Ms. Cook's husband, Spencer Cook, was working as a consultant to the firm, which was based in Shawnee, Okla.
"The proposed release contained materially false and misleading statements and omissions concerning Barton's financial condition," the SEC alleges.
Ms. Cook, the SEC says, "had not done any independent research into the figures in the release, which were provided to her by Barton."
Ms. Cook allegedly vouched for the numbers -- which she claimed were backed by four months of personal research -- at a meeting of Barton Industries shareholders.
The SEC said just two shareholders attended the meeting, but the news release later was disseminated to the public.
"At the very least, Miss Cook was reckless, basically promoting Barton's future prospects," said Mr. Gerlich, the SEC enforcement lawyer.
"An analyst who is putting out reports better have a reasonable basis for them."
A month ago, the SEC charged two of the executives who worked with Ms. Cook with issuing false financial statements, among other things.
The executives -- the company's former chairman, chief executive and president, C.W. Earl Johnson, and its former chief financial officer, Victor Joyce -- also are contesting the SEC charges.
Although Ms. Cook was working in Merrill Lynch's Dallas office at the time, a spokeswoman said the firm "never issued any research regarding Barton Industries."
She said the company was never a client of Merrill Lynch.
Ms. Cook, who joined Merrill Lynch in 1988, left the firm in December 1992, the spokeswoman said.
