The Temple doesn't have quite so many secrets any more.
The Federal Reserve Board pushed up a key short-term interest rate yesterday morning, but no one was surprised: The Fed had announced that it was going to do so the day before.
It was the end of an era when only Wall Street professionals could surmise what the Fed was doing, and even they couldn't always be sure.
The change is small, and the Fed won't pledge to do it again.
But it is a manifestation of a more significant shift at the world's most important central bank.
Under pressure from Congress, the Fed is gradually becoming more open: announcing rate moves, talking more freely about its actions and even releasing transcripts of its closed-door meetings, albeit five years after they have occurred.
The result is a slow lifting of the veil at a particularly vulnerable moment.
The Fed is now in the process of increasing interest rates, never a popular course.
And it doesn't have a clear compass to rely on.
The ups and downs of the money supply are no longer reliable as a guide to future inflation.
And neither gold, commodity prices nor anything else has emerged as an acceptable substitute.
As a result, the once-secretive Fed is being forced to acknowledge that its policy meetings are little more mysterious than a bunch of people sitting around talking about the economy.
And the less inscrutable those meetings are, the more open they become to criticism.
It is akin to "The Wizard of Oz," when the curtain is pulled and Dorothy sees that there is no wizard, just a man frantically yanking on the levers.
As recently as five years ago, Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan could talk soberly in congressional testimony about the growth of the money supply as if that were the pre-eminent guide to monetary policy.
It wasn't really, and recently released transcripts of Fed meetings show that.
But at least the money supply provided convenient cover for Fed officials: It enabled them to tell the public that they were doing what their analysis of this arcane statistic told them they must do.
In December 1988, as Fed officials dickered over a largely technical issue, involving whether to manipulate interest rates directly or to move them indirectly by targeting the amount of money banks borrow from the Fed, the president of the Chicago Federal Reserve Bank, Silas Keehn, suggested that Mr. Greenspan tell Congress what the board had decided.
Mr. Greenspan balked.
"We've stayed within our money supply target ranges, which we have defined to the Congress. . . .
We don't have anything to explain," he said.
An official, unidentified in the transcript, explained that it was mere happenstance that the money-supply numbers were behaving so well.
"We are here by accident, Mr. Chairman," the official said.
Mr. Greenspan didn't respond.
"The Fed always got people, including bond traders and financial reporters, to focus obsessively on the `intermediate targets' like M2 a money-supply measure.
They got very esoteric," says journalist William Greider, author of a book about the Fed titled "The Secrets of the Temple."
"There is a need to believe in the technical rationality rather that saying that this is a bunch of people with different biases making judgments about the economy."
In such an environment, where number crunching isn't a useful way to predict what the Fed will do next, there is an even greater premium on the most trivial bits of insight into the thinking of Fed officials.
After all, a Wall Street investment house can make -- or lose -- millions of dollars when the Fed moves short-term interest rates by a mere 1/4 percentage point, as it did yesterday with the benchmark federal-funds rate.
So former Fed governor Wayne Angell, who left the Fed board earlier this year, has been in hot demand on Wall Street.
So hot that he is actually charging some analysts $100 a minute for advice.
A Wall Street stock analyst said she recently talked to Mr. Angell for 13 minutes to get his views on interest rates.
A day later, she received a bill for $1,300.
"I would probably say he's worth $100 a minute right now," says Edward Yardeni, chief economist for C.J. Lawrence & Co., "but he is going to decay pretty quickly."
However, Elaine Garzarelli, Lehman Brothers Inc.'s influential stock strategist, says she would happily pay Mr. Angell $100 a minute.
She says the former Fed governor gave her some lucrative advice -- for free -- when he appeared with her at a seminar in Chicago.
"He told me three days before the Fed was going to raise rates in early February that he thought they were going to," she says.
"I didn't believe him, but he was right."
Impressed by that, Ms. Garzarelli decided to talk to him one on one.
She won't say what she paid, but she says it was worth it.
"He told me the Fed would probably tighten again," she says.
And he predicted that the bond market would react positively.
"And that's exactly what happened," Ms. Garzarelli says.
Of course, if the Fed isn't watching anything in particular then there isn't any point in paying smart economists and technicians to predict what is going to happen to whatever it is the Fed is supposedly watching.
Back in the early 1980s, when the Fed relied heavily on changes in the money supply, William Jordan of Ried, Thunberg & Co. lived for Thursday afternoons at 4:30 when the Fed announced the latest data.
"In those days, being accurate on money-supply forecasts was enough to make a living," recalls Mr. Jordan.
"Nowadays, it isn't enough to buy a cup of coffee."
Based in Connecticut, Ried Thunberg, which built its reputation on interpreting central-bank policy, has had to branch out to other areas of economic analysis to stay in business.
"It's frustrating to predict Fed policy," laments Mr. Jordan.
"Basically they can pick an economic indicator that supports what they want to and focus on that," he says.
"But by looking at everything, they're not looking at anything, and that makes it somewhat frustrating to operate under such a regime."
Until now, Fed watchers, as they are known, still performed the somewhat valuable function of keeping an eye on the New York Federal Reserve Bank's buying and selling of Treasury securities, which is the way the Fed actually implements its interest-rate decisions.
By distinguishing between transactions that were simply aimed at keeping interest rates steady and those designed to move them, Fed watchers told the world whether the board had made a decision to alter rates.
And until the late 1980s, says Kathleen Camilli, chief economist at Maria Fiorini Ramirez Inc., "We actually had to sift through the tea leaves and figure out by looking at the daily open-market operations and bank reserve flows . . . if they had changed policy."
It wasn't unusual for the Open Market Committee to vote to change rates on a Tuesday and Fed watchers to take until Friday to figure out what had happened, she says.
In the past several years, the Fed has made it easy for Fed watchers -- and the media -- to discern such decisions.
But until last month, it refused to say so in public, so there was always some doubt.
No longer.
Although Fed spokesman Joseph Coyne says that policy makers haven't made a decision to disclose all future interest-rate moves, it will be difficult for the Fed to justify keeping mum.
If the two announcements this year are any guide, the Fed appears to be doing what the German central bank does: Announcing after each committee meeting whether it has decided to change rates.
(But Bundesbank officials meet every other week; those at the Fed meet every six weeks or so.
And to the frustration of the Fed watchers, the Fed hasn't said what it will do if Mr. Greenspan makes an interest-rate move before the next meeting, scheduled for May 17.)
The change, even if permanent, probably won't ease congressional pressure on the Fed to disclose still more about what goes on behind the closed doors.
It has merely whetted the appetite of House Banking Committee Chairman Henry Gonzalez, who has proposed legislation that would force a variety of changes, including the videotaping of Fed policy meetings.
"Next, I want the Open Market Committee to agree to a timely release of the complete minutes of each of its . . . meetings so that the American public can have a full accounting of the decisions of the individuals who run this powerful decision-making committee," the Texas Democrat said Tuesday.
Unable to appease Mr. Gonzalez, Mr. Greenspan clearly is trying to undermine support for the feisty congressman by making modest moves in his direction, including the recent decision to release transcripts of old Fed meetings.
Mr. Greenspan has told legislators that he worries that if Congress ever takes up seemingly innocuous proposals to require more disclosure, it could end up compromising the Fed's independence.
But some friends of the Fed are less worried about that and argue instead that openness will yield favorable effects.
If the Fed routinely announces the decisions of its policy-making committee, says Allan Meltzer, a monetary economist at Carnegie Mellon University, it "is going to be very hard for them to give discretion to the chairman, which means that the committee is going to have to make the decisions.
People will come to the meetings much better prepared.
I hope it'll force them to focus more on what is their objective and how are they going to get there."
It also means that the Fed can spend less time talking about "the gong."
Transcripts of the Fed's 1988 meetings record several discussions about the relative merits of raising the federal-funds rate (at which banks lend to each other) vs. the discount rate (at which the Fed itself lends to banks).
The federal-funds rate is more important economically, but changes in the discount rate have been more visible -- until now -- because they were announced immediately.
Among the Fed members, raising the discount rate is known as ringing the gong.
So, just before Christmas 1988, Fed governor John LaWare said, "Let me just suggest that instead of ringing the gong, that . . . we might just jingle the bell -- that's a seasonal pun -- and perhaps not move the discount rate a full half point, but rather move it a quarter point."
Thomas T. Vogel Jr. contributed to this article.
