The chicken pox vaccine made by Merck & Co. won't pay for itself in savings to the health-care system, researchers predicted.
But if costs such as parents' lost work days are included, the researchers claim the drug will benefit society.
The chicken pox vaccine, Varivax, is under Food and Drug Administration review after an FDA panel last week found the vaccine safe and effective.
Some important medical questions remain unresolved, however, such as whether the immunity will wane over time, allowing the disease to strike in adulthood, when it is more serious.
The FDA committee recommended that the agency look into these issues before making its final decision.
If the drug clears the regulatory hurdle, the vaccine will then confront the larger question: Will the market accept it?
That will in part depend on whether physicians and health insurers decide that the drug's benefits are worth its cost.
In a study published in today's Journal of the American Medical Association, researchers conducted a mathematical analysis of the economic consequences of a chicken pox vaccination program.
The study included costs arising from the disease, including medication, hospitalizations, emergency-room visits and physician visits.
Those costs were then compared with the cost of a vaccination program, estimated at $88 million annually (or $35 a dose).
The vaccination program would prevent 3.7 million chicken pox cases, 9,300 hospitalizations and 52 deaths annually, the researchers predicted.
The program, however, would cost $8 million a year more than it would save in direct medical costs, the study found.
A chicken pox vaccination program won't save health insurers money, said Tracy A. Lieu of the University of California, San Francisco, the study's lead researcher.
Many medical interventions cost money, but because they achieve a benefit, they are judged cost-effective, she said.
When the researchers included indirect costs of chicken pox, such as work days lost when parents stay home to care for sick children, the program moved into the black, producing savings to society of $384 million a year.
Such an analysis might appeal to employers who are sensitive to the cost of absenteeism, said Miriam Jacobson of the Washington Business Group on Health.
But Alan L. Hillman, director of the center for health policy at the University of Pennsylvania, said the study assumes the vaccine will work in most people over the long term, which hasn't been proven.
If the vaccine's immunity wanes and adults develop chicken pox, the more serious complications can be far more costly, he said.
Anthony Masso, senior vice president of the Health Insurance Association of America, an industry group, said health insurers would view a chicken pox vaccination program as beneficial for society and would recommend that employers cover preventive services such as the chicken pox vaccine.
