A ground battle has erupted at USAir, with three major unions fighting to represent 13,500 of the carrier's ground workers in one of the biggest contests in years.
Officials of the Machinists, Teamsters and United Steelworkers unions say they will file separate petitions tomorrow with the National Mediation Board for an election to represent 8,000 fleet-service workers.
Each union pledges to go after inside passenger-service workers after that.
The unions say they account for another 8,000 workers, but USAir says the number is more like 5,500.
The three-way battle shows how anxious organized labor is to sign up new members after years of decline.
It also illustrates that the unions believe USAir is vulnerable due to recent layoffs and wage and benefit concessions at the airline, a unit of USAir Group Inc. of Arlington, Va.
All three unions have seen substantial drops in membership since the 1970s, and place the USAir campaigns among their highest priorities this year.
"This is a big one," George Kourpias, president of the Machinists union, said in an interview.
This week, the Steelworkers claimed that 60% of the fleet-service workers had signed authorization cards, and asked USAir Chairman Seth Schofield to waive an election and recognize the union.
A USAir spokeswoman said yesterday the airline is rejecting that request because "it's up to an employees' vote to determine a union."
Unions have struck out in recent attempts to organize USAir's fleet-service employees, one of the last big plums in the heavily organized airline industry.
The Teamsters have represented fleet-service workers at USAir units in the past, but lost a representation election in 1990.
The Steelworkers union, which is based in Pittsburgh, site of USAir's biggest hub, narrowly lost a 1992 election.
Although it prevailed in a vote against the Machinists, the Steelworkers failed to get the majority turnout required by the National Mediation Board, which oversees transporation labor relations.
In planning to file with the board for another election as soon as possible, the unions are showing that they believe the outcome will be different this time.
But even before the filings, the unions are jockeying for position.
Teamsters President Ron Carey kicks off his union's campaign today with a news conference and rally in Washington, D.C.
He's likely to boast that the Teamsters are back with a reformed, democratic union that already represents workers at Northwest Airlines and Southwest Airlines.
The Steelworkers, claiming they have the most signed authorization cards, asked the other two unions to bow out, a request that was quickly rejected.
The Machinists, meanwhile, note that they are the largest airline union with 105,000 members in the industry, including 8,000 mechanics at USAir.
All three unions are using USAir's recent cutbacks as a weapon against the carrier.
Layoffs announced in September are claiming the jobs of some 1,800 non-union ground workers, while unionized pilots, flight attendants and mechanics have job security clauses in their contracts.
"It's crystal clear to these workers that when you're non-union, you're first in line to make sacrifices," said Bob Callahan, who heads the organizing drive for the Steelworkers.
