DAMAGE ESTIMATES ROSE from the California quake and the death toll hit 34.
Aftershocks rumbled through the Los Angeles area, hampering efforts to clear rubble from Monday's earthquake that also left more than 2,600 injured and 20,000 homeless.
Up to 120,000 remained without power or water, and officials closed portions of 11 major highways.
As emergency teams studied the weakened state of roads and buildings, insurance experts sharply escalated their damage estimates from the $1 billion suggested a day before.
Housing Secretary Cisneros and Transportation Secretary Pena flew to the city, and President Clinton will go there today to inspect the damage.
INMAN WITHDREW his name from consideration for defense secretary.
Retired Adm. Bobby Inman attributed his surprise move to a "new McCarthyism" in Washington, saying he was "distressed and distracted" by attacks on his character and reputation.
The announcement by the former deputy CIA director, coming just one week before he was expected to be confirmed, was an embarrassing setback for Clinton.
The president accepted Inman's withdrawal and began a new search for Aspin's successor.
Among people listed as potential nominees are Deputy Defense Secretary Perry, former New Hampshire Sen. Rudman and CIA Director Woolsey.
A PROSECUTOR ALLEGED there was a coverup in the 1980s Iran-Contra affair.
Independent Counsel Walsh concluded that members of Reagan's cabinet protected the president and themselves by withholding data on arms-for-hostages deals with Iran and portraying the affair as a rogue operation by White House aides.
Former Attorney General Meese is accused of leading a "damage control" effort when the controversy broke in 1986.
Walsh found no criminal violations by Reagan or then-Vice President Bush.
Walsh's report has provoked angry denials from scores of former officials, whose written responses fill an accompanying 1,150-page volume.
Russia's finance minister turned down an offer to remain in Yeltsin's cabinet.
Fyodorov announced his resignation two days after reform czar Gaidar quit.
Separately, Foreign Minister Kozyrev said Russia needs to maintain a "military presence" in former Soviet republics to protect Russian interests.
Syria's foreign minister condemned Israel's cool response to the U.S.-Syrian summit and said Israelis had no right to hold a referendum concerning the future of the occupied Golan Heights.
Meanwhile, a number of Israeli politicians also objected to Prime Minister Rabin's plans for the vote on a possible land-for-peace swap with Syria.
Sunscreens prevent sunburn but may not provide protection against the potentially deadly melanoma skin cancer.
Researchers said that mice exposed to ultraviolet rays developed melanoma tumors despite the use of sunscreens, which are acknowledged to be effective in preventing non-melanoma cancers.
The Supreme Court rejected an attempt to let states limit the benefits paid to some welfare recipients based on how long they have been residents.
The high court, without comment, let stand rulings that had struck down a Minnesota law as a violation of new residents' equal-protection rights as well as their right to travel.
France will replace the commander of U.N. peacekeeping forces in the former Yugoslavia at the request of Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali, the French defense ministry said.
Gen. Jean Cot earlier this month publicly criticized the U.N. chief's refusal to permit him to order air strikes.
The U.N. must deploy more soldiers in future interventions, place them all under U.N. control and keep the troops in a country even if some get killed, the outgoing U.N. commander in Somalia said.
Because it failed to do those things in Somalia, the U.N. may never be able to leave that country with a lasting peace, Cevik Bir of Turkey said.
Rehnquist cleared the way for Shannon Faulkner to become the first woman to attend day classes with cadets at The Citadel, an all-male military academy in Charleston, S.C.
The Supreme Court chief justice set aside a temporary stay he had imposed last week.
