The escalating Japan-U.S. trade war may deprive America of cutting-edge melon technology.
Deep inside Japan's Ministry of Agriculture, four scientists have spent five government-funded years developing a machine to determine melon ripeness.
Imagine: No more standing in the produce section, fruitlessly tapping for that a point cantaloupe.
By itself, it's one small slice for the breakfast table.
But it's also part of one giant Japanese government budget -- $675 billion for 1994.
And during recent weeks of agonized debate over tax cuts, tax hikes and budget deficits, no one ever asked whether such projects -- and there are plenty -- are really necessary.
Japan has no equivalent of the golden fleece award, honoring great U.S. government boondoggles.
Instead, everyone appears to agree that Japan's budget is lean, mean and squeaky clean.
Which brings us to the melon machine.
It looks like a miniature set of monkey bars, plus a pendulum and microphone.
Insert melon, hit it, measure thump: If sound passes through at 57.8 meters (190.7 feet) per second, it's perfection.
"We're beyond the experimental stage, now we're ready to bring the machine to market," says Junichiro Sugiyama, senior researcher in the Ministry of Agriculture.
But the trade-barrier scrutinizers in Washington may want to consider this: choosing a retail price is still a problem.
"Maybe over a million yen" or $10,000, says Mr. Sugiyama.
"Maybe under 100,000 yen.
It's tough to say, since we don't know how much we spent."
There are larger examples of budget buta, or pork.
Two hours from Tokyo, the tiny village of Kawai is finishing a $46.4 million multilane bridge between two poky roads.
"It's necessary," says an anxious village official.
"The kids across the river need it so they can walk over to the junior high school."
Total school population: 176.
Meanwhile, engineers in Niigata recently spent $1.2 million on designer manhole covers.
"They're really eye-catching," boasts planner Michihiko Matsuoka.
"This way people understand the utility of sewage.
We think it will enlighten people not to drop stones into sewage."
