When the Irish Republican Army started launching mortars at London Heathrow Airport late last week, two unlikely things happened.
First, the vast majority of the flights from Europe's largest airport took off with only minor delays.
Second, the airport's owner, BAA PLC, withstood the attack with little damage to either its prized asset or its high-flying stock price.
In fact, at the lowest point in the crisis, the company's stock traded a mere 20 pence (30 cents), or 2%, off its price the day before the first mortars were fired.
It traded yesterday at 999 pence ($14.96) a share, up 10 pence on the day.
Undoubtedly, such good fortune can be attributed in part to British travelers being "a resilient lot," as one industry official put it.
But much of it can also be attributed to the resilience of BAA itself, a company that enjoys warm relations with the City of London.
BAA operates seven U.K. airports, yet Heathrow makes up 61% of the company's operating sales and 70% of its operating profit.
The reason for BAA's resilience is simple.
Despite the worst recession in the history of the world's aviation industry, the company formerly known as British Airports Authority clearly has figured out how to make money.
BAA claims to be the world's biggest independent airport group.
But a look at its revenue figures shows that most of its income stems from retailing rather than traditional airport activities, such as landing fees.
And by 1996, BAA plans to double the amount of space devoted to selling perfumes, chocolates and other goods.
"Retailing at airports used to be a rip-off," says BAA's chief executive officer, Sir John Egan.
"We drive out retailers who do not offer value for money.
If they're not satisfying the customer, then we don't want them."
It may seem a strange way to run an airport, but it works.
BAA's pretax profit grew 49% to #285 million in the year ended March 31, 1993, from #191 million the year before.
And analysts expect a further surge of about 10%, to about #315 million, in the year that ends this month.
"There has been a general transformation at BAA under Sir John from being an airport company to being a retail company," says Richard Hannah, an analyst with UBS Phillips & Drew.
"Ten years ago, they would talk about the depth of concrete and length of runways.
Now they talk about the sort of goods on offer."
It shouldn't come as a surprise.
Since his arrival as chief executive in 1990, Sir John has set about doing what he's famous for: transforming companies and injecting them with vigor.
In the 1980s, Sir John rescued British car maker Jaguar PLC from the brink of bankruptcy, led it through privatization, and then in 1989 oversaw its purchase by Ford Motor Co.
Along the way he earned a knighthood and the moniker "England's Lee Iacocca."
Under Sir John's direction, BAA gave up its earlier diversification efforts into hotels, property and freight handling.
The focus turned to the company's core businesses of seven U.K. airports: the three major London airports -- Heathrow, Stanstead and Gatwick -- plus the airports at Edinburgh, Glasgow, Aberdeen and Southampton.
Together they handle 73% of the U.K.'s passenger traffic.
Sir John also brought to BAA an obsession with customer satisfaction unusual at monopoly, or quasimonopoly, businesses like airports.
In his office in downtown London, he displays the reams of data he receives each month from the company's constant customer surveys.
This year, they will question about 120,000 passengers on everything from an airport's security to the selection at duty-free shops.
But it's the emphasis on retailing that has been the company's master stroke.
By guaranteeing that everything sold at a BAA airport store will be priced at or below the price in regular U.K. stores, and by advertising the fact throughout the country, the company has boosted sales.
