At the first whiff of inflation in a big survey of purchasing managers last week, the bond market promptly plunged.
It's the kind of reaction normally reserved for changes in the consumer price index.
Economists say all the furor was misplaced.
The purchasing managers' price index is no consumer price index, in their view.
In fact, one economist's report points out that the purchasing index seldom even mirrors the consumer price index.
According to a Merrill Lynch & Co. report, core inflation fell to 2.7% from 3.2% from September 1993 to February 1994.
During the same period, the purchasing managers' price index shot up to 67 from 47.4.
"Spikes in the NAPM National Association of Purchasing Management series bear little resemblance to underlying inflation," the report concludes.
"Inflation fears are overblown."
The survey, called the National Association of Purchasing Management Report on Business, asks purchasing executives at 300 manufacturers to report on eight areas of business, including employment, production, inventories and prices.
While economists have long followed the 40-year-old purchasing managers' survey as an indicator of trends in domestic manufacturing, it's only been during the last year that the survey's price index has caught the eye of markets nervous about inflation.
In its monthly survey released March 1, the purchasing managers' price index for February rose to 67 from 59.8 in January, the highest reading since October 1990.
The market apparently believed that the rise signaled a resurgence of inflation that would drive up interest rates and depress prices of fixed-income debt securities.
Bond prices plunged 1.5 points, or $15 for a bond with a $1,000 face value.
Many economists' contend, however, that the purchasing managers' index doesn't reflect overall inflation at all but rather only price increases in a small part of the economy.
The purchasing managers' price index "has no relation to any other known inflation indicator," says David Wyss, research director at DRI/McGraw-Hill.
The problem is that the survey's respondents buy mostly commodities.
While commodity prices are in fact watched closely for signs of future inflation, they are particularly prone to sudden, radical price shifts, and so aren't a reliable indicator of imminent inflation in finished goods and services.
What's more, big chunks of the economy like retail and finance, are not included in the survey.
The purchasing managers' survey, moreover, doesn't ask respondents whether they pass on the increased costs to their own customers.
And there's a good chance they won't for the short term.
"Price increases for raw materials may be offset in productivity gains and increases may not be passed on," says Robert Bretz, chairman of the business survey and the corporate purchaser at Pitney Bowes Inc.
The survey is "a very good indicator of inflation at the loading docks, but not for lots of goods and services, and not for labor costs," says Ed Yardeni, chief economist at C.J. Lawrence.
"I'm not sure if people recognize some of its drawbacks."
Economists also point out that the survey doesn't actually sample prices.
Instead, respondents are asked if prices are higher, the same or lower than last month.
In February, 28% of respondents said prices increased, 6% said prices decreased and 66% said they remained the same.
"In other words, inflation at most loading docks is zero," says Mr. Yardeni.
So why the sudden, recent impact?
Thank the Federal Reserve Board, economists say.
Recent statements by Fed governors that they neither discount nor focus on any particular indicators have left traders groping for clues to future Fed actions.
"The market is looking for any scrap of inflation information because the Fed said it would do so," says Donald H. Straszheim, chief economist at Merrill Lynch.
"The price index is the data du jour," says DRI's Mr. Wyss.
Moreover, bond traders paint a picture of a bond market on a hair trigger as it grapples with rising interest rates and fears of a bull market turning bearish.
"The index was yet another reason to sell," says Peter Hirsch, head trader at Salomon Brothers Inc.
"It was the final straw on top of many straws already on the market's back."
