India proposed a budget that once again signals the government's determination to press ahead with its ambitious economic-reform program.
But the move also represents a gamble on faster economic growth and taxpayer compliance to buoy revenues and control the deficit.
The plan for the year starting April 1 includes a sweeping tax-system reform and sharp reductions in tax rates and duties to align them with those in competing economies.
It lowers interest rates and makes the rupee fully convertible on the current account, covering trade-related transactions, for example.
The budget slashes the corporate tax rate for Indian companies to 46% from a range of 51.75% to 57.5% and for foreign firms to 55% from 65%.
And it continues reducing import duties toward regional parity while adjusting tariff distortions.
Reaction, while guarded, was generally positive; businesses lauded simplification of indirect taxes, especially excise duties on industrial products that have sparked corruption and litigation.
Kazakhstan will offer to sell minority stakes in 38 of its largest companies to foreign investors this year.
The latest round of these deals, which the former Soviet republic began last year, includes oil producers and refiners, metal plants, farm and machine-tool producers, and big retail stores.
Investors may acquire 49% stakes and negotiate later for full ownership.
Western-style closed tenders will be evaluated based on cash offered, a business plan and investment commitments.
Russia scheduled a new auction of stock in AO Gorkovskii Avtomobilnyi Zavod, or GAZ, the country's third-largest auto maker, in the wake of a scandal involving misuse of government funds.
The sale of 50.8% of GAZ for privatization vouchers will be held May 15.
The initial offering was annulled after an investigation found that GAZ had bought vouchers on the open market with billions of rubles in government debt-forgiveness money that was to have been spent to build a diesel-engine production line.
Russian law bars state-owned firms from buying their own shares in privatization auctions.
President Fidel Ramos signed the Philippines' assent to an international copyright accord, the 1971 Berne Convention, and asked the Senate to ratify it quickly.
At a Manila meeting on intellectual-property rights, Mr. Ramos promised protection of Filipino and foreign copyrights, trademarks and patents, and action against piracy and counterfeiting.
Any laxity, he said, could result in trade sanctions by the Philippines' top export markets.
Mr. Ramos said he favored a proposal to set up special courts to hear intellectual-property infringement cases exclusively.
In Moldova's first legislative elections since independence in 1991, voters shunned nationalist parties that favor unification with Romania.
In early returns, the Agrarian-Democratic Party, which wants to join other former Soviet republics in the Commonwealth of Independent States, led with 42% of the ballots.
A like-minded coalition of ethnic Russians and Ukrainians unexpectedly garnered 25%.
The results were a defeat for two nationalist parties, with 15% each, that want Moldova to reunite with neighboring Romania, to which it belonged until the Soviets annexed it in 1940.
A Brazilian inflation index goes into effect today under a program to stabilize the economy and reduce inflation through a balanced budget.
The "real value unit" was initially valued at 647.5 cruzeiros reais, or about one U.S. dollar.
The value will vary, reflecting daily devaluations for inflation, now running at 38% a month.
The unit, eventually to replace the cruzeiro real currency, will be linked to three inflation indexes to adjust wages to price increases and prevent pay erosion.
VIETNAM, U.S. OPEN TALKS
Negotiators for Vietnam and the U.S. met in Hanoi for the first major political and financial talks in two decades.
The two sides hope to open liaison offices and eventually establish full diplomatic relations and embassies.
The negotiations initially were intended to resolve $230 million in U.S. financial claims, mostly business investments, dating from 1975, when the Vietnam War ended.
The agenda, broadened after the U.S. lifted a 19-year economic embargo against Vietnam on Feb. 3, also includes the status of seized U.S. government buildings and $290 million in Vietnamese assets frozen in the U.S.
Liaison offices would deal with trade and issues including Americans missing in action from the war.
Vietnam's agency that oversees foreign investors said the World Bank soon will offer insurance against noncommercial risks, such as war, nationalization and profit repatriation, by making Vietnam a member of the bank's investment-guarantee arm.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
A Romanian trade union said two million workers staged a one-day strike to protest lack of economic reform and low wages. . . .
Germany's market-economy system was viewed favorably by only 35% of eastern Germans surveyed by the Allensbach Institute in December, down from 77% in the first poll in February 1990, the German Economics Ministry said.
