After years of filling their advertising with long-legged foreign models and exotic international locales, Japan's marketers are discovering a new culture: their own.
With the Japanese economy in a recession and consumer spending slow, the trendy internationalism of the bubble years is giving way to a new, inward marketing style of modesty and conservatism.
The change is apparent on the streets.
A popular Tokyo eatery touts noodles, known as ramen, that have a unique "Japanese" taste -- although such noodles are actually a Chinese specialty.
The popular woman's magazine Hanako offers long articles on finding Tokyo's best-value sushi instead of where to find Tokyo's best French restaurant.
Japan Railways is urging customers to abandon overseas holidays and visit their own country.
Its omnipresent billboards feature scenes from some less-visited rural areas, with fishermen, schoolgirls and that very Japanese symbol, the bullet train.
The logo: "Bound for the Heartland, Japan."
Another railway campaign -- for the ancient capital Kyoto -- instructs Japanese on the proper way to sit on a cushion.
"Japanese businesses are restructuring, and the government is restructuring.
So people are doing the same thing," says Tetsuji Shimizu, spokesman for advertising giant Dentsu Inc., which created the railway account.
Adds Clay Gary, a Dentsu marketing planner, "Now, the reaction is not to say foreign things are bad but to say, wait, there are also some aspects of Japanese culture that are great."
Market research supports the view that the Japanese are looking homeward.
A list of Japan's most popular products in Nikkei Trendy magazine recently included green tea, Japanese food from outdoor pushcarts and the best-seller "Seihin no Shiso," or "The Concept of Honest Poverty."
"Young people are increasingly eating bentos {traditional lunch boxes} for lunch, and they want to drink Japanese tea," says Masatoshi Yamaguchi, assistant marketing manager in the food and beverage division at Suntory Ltd.
Nationwide, canned versions of the traditional beverage are booming: Last year's sales were up 45%, analysts estimate.
Suntory, which increased its market share 10% in 1993, tries to capture the "Japanese feeling" of the drink with its packaging, Mr. Yamaguchi says.
The product comes in a pine-green can that displays the character for "tea."
Even the language used in ads is turning back to Japanese.
A few years ago, English words like "trendy" and "exciting" were used frequently to connote freshness and pizazz.
Now, marketers say, people want words like "value," "natural" and "pure," usually written in Japanese rather than English.
Nowhere is the back to Japan mood more apparent than in fashion.
Last summer there was a surge of media interest in yukata, cool robes of printed cotton donned after the evening bath.
Kimonos, too, are back in style.
The October issue of Hanako had 18 pages of information on kimonos.
Kyo Kane Corp., a Kyoto-based clothing retailer, in January introduced Western-style wedding dresses made from the material of the obi -- the intricately embroidered sash worn with kimonos.
The dresses, which appeared on national television, have proven popular in their three-store trial run in Kyoto, said spokeswoman Junko Tsuji.
And two Japanese retailers recently started a joint venture that sells an easy-to-wear, low-priced kimono meant to lure those who prefer the ease of Western styles.
Some American and European multinationals are trying hard to catch the Japanese wave.
People are "too used to the international approach," says Michiko Egawa, corporate relations manager for Philip Morris K.K. in Tokyo.
The company made its name here with rollicking ads filled with adventure reminiscent of James Bond movies.
But to introduce its low-tar cigarette to the Japanese market, it has adopted a new, almost Zen angle.
In a broadly distributed poster, for example, a hand holds up a single finger to drive home the uniqueness of the product.
The message, moreover, appears only in Japanese -- unlike earlier commercials.
Foreign models have been hard hit by the switch to Japanese metaphors and faces.
"A few years ago, there were enough jobs to go around for everyone," recalls Sandra Stieir.
Now, the 23-year-old Canadian says, the pickings are far slimmer: "Companies are using a lot fewer foreigners overall, and pay has gone down by about half."
Ms. Stieir will be leaving shortly to work in Taiwan, where she says the foreign model market is better.
Some people believe the trend may be a harbinger of a new burst of patriotism.
Visits to local shrines in Tokyo reached records this New Year, according to television reports, though the recession took a bite out of contributions.
And novelist Kunio Tsuji, in a recent essay in the Yomiuri Shimbun, says that with the recession forcing people to re-examine their lives and aspirations, "the Japanese have come to experience the antagonistic nature of cultural conflict for the first time."
As a result, he says, "a growing number of young people are developing a strong interest in Japanese traditions."
Mariko Fujiwara of the research group Hakuhodo Institute of Life and Living doubts the marketing fad will stoke the kind of political nationalism that accompanied Japan's grim soul-searching in the 1930s.
"For some people, this is a very good opportunity to reassess," she says.
"But among many it's simply a depression; they can't afford what they thought they could."
