The fans, squealing, clapping and dancing, push toward the stage at the convention center here.
As security guards try to keep order, groupies reach over the barricades to squeeze and kiss the superstar.
The object of all this attention: a clumsy, 7-foot-tall, pear-shaped piece of pink-foam rubber whose entire vocabulary consists of one word, "blobby."
Mr. Blobby, as he is known to all, first appeared as a candid-camera gag on a BBC television show.
Now he is the land's leading celebrity.
Britons can't get enough of his yellow spots, green, wandering eyes, silly grin and penchant for tripping, bumbling and knocking over stage sets.
His smash-hit single defied 33-to-1 odds to top the Christmas pop charts, costing the William Hill betting firm $120,000.
Mr. Blobby was a cover-boy for the Economist, and tabloids have nominated him for everything from prime minister to manager of England's national soccer team.
"People just go ballistic for Blobby," says Michael Dinning, who, as the man appearing publicly in the Blobby costume, recently had to outrun 750 stampeding children at a schoolyard photo-shoot.
"It's gone from being enthusiastic to being maniacal."
This has caused some soul searching: How could the land of Milton, Shakespeare, Byron and Dickens produce this?
Some think Mr. Blobby is just the latest display of British eccentricity, in the mold of Monty Python and Benny Hill.
"It's a bit of escapism, really," explains Charles Spungin, a finance student who keeps an inflatable Blobby in his car.
Others are sure he is a big, pink symbol of national decline.
Mr. Blobby's critics say the affection for this large piece of rubber, lacking both personality and motor skills, is a sign of Britain's cultural and political malaise.
The Conservative government is scandal-ridden, the royals are out of favor, the national soccer team is out of the World Cup.
In this environment, a bumbling oaf who mutters "blobby, blobby, blobby" speaks the national mind.
"It is a nihilistic comment on the vacuum of British politics and all the other things we're disappointed in," asserts Peter Collett, an Oxford University social psychologist.
"At this juncture in history, where things are bad, and people are walking around with long faces, and nothing seems to be working, Blobby seems a solution to the vacuum."
Still others are more acerbic in their Blobby analysis.
"I think it's nonsensical and absurd, and I don't care to discuss it," declares Lord Stoddart of Swindon.
Harrods department store refuses to sell Blobby merchandise, calling it "rather tawdry," and the BBC's own Radio 1 declined to play Mr. Blobby as his song climbed the charts.
A tongue-in-cheek commentary in the Times of London argued that Mr. Blobby reveals Britons are really as low-brow as Americans and Japanese, creators of Mario Brothers, the Simpsons and Ninja Turtles.
"This is supposed to be the land of the sainted Bard, not bloody Mr. Blobby," it said.
Mr. Blobby's handlers think the critics are taking the inarticulate icon too seriously.
"He's a celebration of British life," says his creator, the BBC's Michael Leggo.
"He's an enthusiast about everything, he's filled with delight, he wears his heart on his sleeve and acts on impulse.
There's a little of that in all of us."
Mr. Blobby's public appearances cause traffic jams, and security guards say he outdraws the royal family.
Mr. Blobby's video has sold more than 330,000 copies, and Mr. Leggo says he is considering plans for a movie.
Some Blobby backers just announced plans to build a "fantasy village" featuring Mr. Blobby.
There have been reports of Blobby cars, Blobby tattoos, a Blobby copter and, in Warwickshire, a statue of a deceased lord dressed as Mr. Blobby.
Mr. Blobby debuted in 1992 as a series of eight "gotcha" segments on "Noel's House Party," a popular television variety show.
Celebrities were lured into the setup thinking they were guests on a new children's show.
But then Mr. Blobby, played on the show by Barry Killerby, a Shakespearean actor, abused them by tripping over the set and destroying the props.
Rugby player Will Carling became so frustrated that he kicked the character and told him to "shut up."
Blobby now appears on the show every other week.
Mr. Leggo thinks the House Party, already broadcast in New Zealand and Australia, could be the vehicle to bring Blobby to the U.S., but it's not at all clear Americans would fall for Mr. Blobby -- nor how long he will last in Britain.
Jackie Ferguson of Leisure Concepts International Inc., a company that licenses similar fantasy characters, predicts Blobby will burn out soon.
Americans, she thinks, would find him pointless.
"I don't honestly see him moving Stateside," she says.
But with Mr. Blobby already netting some $15 million in Blobby paraphernalia, merchandisers aren't likely to let him die without a struggle.
"There's no reason why Mr. Blobby can't go on well into the '90s," says Alistair Tonnison, whose Gift Corp. in Northampton has sold 250,000 Blobby, Mrs. Blobby and Baby Blobby dolls, pajama cases and car decorations.
In Manchester, where Mr. Blobby is visiting a trade show for mobile homes, some 2,000 children and their parents have come to see him rather than the homes.
As fathers snap pictures, mothers sing the Blobby tune with the children, who swarm around booth No. 50, the Mr. Blobby Merchandising Unit.
"I like him when he goes `blobby, blobby, blobby,'" says Francesca Murray, age 6, wearing Mr. Blobby face paint.
Adds Victoria Newton, 8, sporting a Blobby Is Best button: "I like it when he attacks people, and I like his yellow spots."
After the Manchester performance, he gets a love letter from Julie Hayden, 10, who encloses her phone number, and a note from Ashleigh, in Tyne and Wear, asking him to tea.
And it's not just kid stuff.
John Redwood, the Secretary of State for Wales, told a group of businessmen that he aspired to Blobby-like popularity.
"Mr. Blobby is a round, nice person, and no one has a bad thing to say about him," he explained.
A tabloid, the Daily Mirror, proclaimed Mr. Blobby prime minister one day when John Major was out of town, saying Blobby would "drag us out of the red and into the pink."
A spokesman for the prime minister says Mr. Major is still in charge: "The prime minister has many things on his mind, but Mr. Blobby is not foremost among them."
