CONFUSION GROWS among Social Security recipients about new tax rules.
Accountants say many people are baffled by a provision in the 1993 tax law raising the amount of Social Security benefits subject to tax, effective Jan. 1 this year.
Some retirees mistakenly assume the change was effective for the 1993 tax year, IRS officials say.
Also, calculating the tax increase can be "very complex," warns Andre Fogarasi of Arthur Andersen in Washington.
Many retirees are now discovering that as they work on 1994 estimated-tax payments due April 15.
Under the new law, the top percentage of Social Security benefits subject to tax rises to 85% from 50%.
This applies to taxpayers with income above certain levels ($34,000 for unmarried taxpayers; $44,000 for couples filing jointly).
Sounds simple, but some retirees wrongly assume this automatically means 85% of all their benefits will be taxed, says Clint Stretch of Deloitte & Touche.
It is more complicated than that; IRS Publication 553 and its work sheet can help -- or seek professional advice.
Most Social Security recipients don't have enough income to worry about all this, an IRS spokesman adds.
A TAXING DILEMMA: Michigan voters face a tough choice Tuesday.
On the ballot in a special election is "Proposal A," which includes raising Michigan's sales tax to 6% from 4%.
This would offset cuts in school property taxes approved last year, reduce the state income-tax rate slightly and raise the cigarette tax by 50 cents to 75 cents a pack, among other things.
If voters reject it, they would get a backup plan that includes raising the state income-tax rate to 6% from 4.6%, lifting a business-tax rate to 2.75% from 2.35%, and increasing the cigarette tax by 15 cents a pack.
As painful as raising the sales tax may be, it is better than lifting the income tax, says Tom Bray, editorial page editor of the Detroit News.
At least some of the sales tax would be paid by out-of-staters visiting Michigan, he says.
Gov. Engler campaigns hard for Proposal A. "It's the best plan for Michigan, and we think the voters will approve it," an aide says.
PRIVATE TAX COLLECTORS may help many states, but would they help the IRS?
A survey by the General Accounting Office, a congressional watchdog agency, says many states use private collection companies and praise their work.
The GAO says 14 states that used private companies to chase individual taxpayers found the agencies effective.
Six others said they weren't, eight were neutral.
But 12 states said collectors were ineffective on corporate income taxes.
Only six said they were effective.
The White House Office of Management and Budget urges the IRS to launch a pilot program involving private collection agencies.
It also suggests the IRS "explore funding options" for using the private agencies.
But the IRS has no such plans.
"We have concerns about it," such as how to guard privacy of taxpayer records, a spokesman says.
"We'd need to learn a great deal more about the ramifications of this before we proceed."
Many states rely on private agencies to handle out-of-state cases.
ARTFUL MOVE: The IRS renews the charter of its "Art Advisory Panel" for another two years.
The panel of private experts, headed by an IRS official, helps evaluate taxpayer claims on the value of art subject to income, estate or gift taxes.
HEFTY TAB: If every man, woman and child were billed for a share of the federal public debt, the bill would come to $13,345 a person, or $53,380 for a family of four, the Tax Foundation says.
By 1999, the foundation says, those figures will rise to $16,281 a person, or $65,124 for a family of four.
THE WHITE HOUSE plans to nominate Victor Zonana as IRS chief counsel, filling a slot that has been vacant for about a year.
Zonana, a 53-year-old New York tax partner with Arnold & Porter, a Washington law firm, is on sabbatical from the firm and is a visiting professor at New York University School of Law.
MASTERPIECE OR FORGERY?
An art gift leads to courtroom battles with the IRS.
George and Emilia Doherty of Missoula, Mont., paid $10,000 in 1969 for a painting they were told was by the artist Charles M. Russell.
In the early 1980s, they gave "Attacking Stagecoach" to the Russell Museum and claimed a $350,000 deduction.
But the IRS said it was a forgery worth no more than $100.
The Dohertys cut their claim to $200,000.
In 1992, a Tax Court judge, after listening to conflicting views of two art experts, didn't rule on the painting's authenticity but allowed $30,000, citing "doubt" about the work and its "poor quality."
The couple appealed, saying the authenticity hadn't been questioned before the time they donated the painting.
But the U.S. Appeals Court for the Ninth Circuit recently upheld the Tax Court.
"If we were to accept the Dohertys' position, taxpayers would be entitled to undisputed acceptance of their or their chosen appraiser's valuation of artwork merely by avoiding others' scrutiny of the work prior to its donation," the court said.
"We decline to adopt this view."
The Dohertys are "surprised" by this "unfair" verdict but won't appeal, says Daniel C. Doherty, their son and lawyer.
BRIEFS: Lapsley W. Hamblen Jr., 67, is re-elected by his fellow Tax Court judges to a two-year term as chief judge, starting June 1. . . .
Margaret Milner Richardson says she has discovered two instant conversation-stoppers: Her birthplace (Waco, Texas) and her job (IRS commissioner).
