Two rival real-estate developers with wealthy backers are launching ventures to offer cash-starved biotechnology companies a new way to finance their research laboratories and pilot manufacturing plants.
BioPlex Group Inc., bankrolled by Boston's Gosman family, plans to invest $300 million in biotech real estate over the next 18 months.
Health Science Properties Inc., San Diego, said it has begun negotiations to acquire biotech properties for a specialized real-estate-investment trust.
The companies, just now getting off the ground, hope to purchase facilities and then lease them back to their biotech tenants.
Since banks and other financial institutions rarely lend money for specialized biotech lab construction, companies typically are forced to use high-cost venture capital or proceeds from stock sales.
These "bio-industry companies have had to put their hard-earned cash into bricks and mortar.
Our approach is to free up that cash and allow the companies to do what they do best -- product development," said Kendell R. Lang, BioPlex chief executive officer.
Besides sale/lease-back transactions, BioPlex is offering to finance new construction.
Health Science Properties is "the only real estate investment trust specializing in biotechnology and pharmaceutical facilities," said President Alan Gold.
"We're currently negotiating three transactions with a combined value of about $50 million."
The trust was capitalized last month by a private group including Jacobs Engineering Group Inc., a large Pasadena, Calif.-based construction and engineering concern.
Mr. Gold declined to specify the size of the investment.
Biotech executives and consultants say it can cost hundreds of dollars a square foot to install specialized air, water and other systems needed to convert industrial space into biomedical research and manufacturing space.
"Some companies have had to give up a huge percentage of the business to get facilities built," said Ray Dittamore, a consultant with Ernst & Young in San Diego.
"The real question is what rents would be charged to give the investors an appropriate rate of return."
Until now at least, institutional investors have shied away from financing such improvements because of the uncertain future of their tenants.
But there is growing demand for biotech facilities as the industry matures, and more prospective new tenants to replace those that fail or move up to bigger facilities.
"We're attempting to educate the banks and insurance companies," Mr. Lang said.
Mr. Gold and Mr. Lang were partners until last year when they split up and went their separate ways with different investor groups.
The venture they worked on together tried unsuccessfully to attract underwriters for a public stock offering.
Mr. Lang is a former director of corporate real estate in the Los Angeles offices of KMPG Peat Marwick.
Mr. Gold, a long-time San Diego real-estate financing executive, was a client of the firm.
Mr. Lang said that the bulk of BioPlex's funds are coming from the Gosman family, whose interests include Meditrust Mortgage Investments, a real-estate investment trust.
"If you look at the history of Meditrust in the health-care industry, we are following that pattern; we're applying that strategy to an emerging industry," Mr. Lang said.
BioPlex offices are in Wellesley, Mass. and La Jolla, Calif.
