He claims that even at $50 apiece his sculptures sell like hot cakes.
While he did not make a sale in the half-hour I was watching him, Mr. Dominguez claims that on a typical day he sells 10.
And he is harboring grander ambitions: "I need a hand.
If we were two, I'd sell 20."
While his claims may be exaggerated, Mr. Dominguez's unbridled enthusiasm for the marketplace is genuine.
His stand is a product of the government's experiment with private enterprise launched last summer.
He is one of thousands of Cubans feverishly running small businesses to earn dollars.
Those dollars buy commodities available only in tourism shops.
Of course, along with these cottage industries have sprouted social ills that have made the government pause in its reformist tracks.
Prostitution, crime, gambling and black marketeering are rife in the country, stirring Marxist hard-liners to exclaim that the reforms -- and in particular the new dollar-dominated economy -- have gone too far and need to be checked.
Antireformists are bothered further by shortages of government-subsidized commodities (especially food) that they blame on tourism and private businesses.
But everywhere the Cuban entrepreneurial spirit hums on.
Cubans' zest to start and run their businesses, with or without government blessing, cannot be stopped.
Despite a shortage of cash for start-up costs and erratic government policies, Cuba has sprouted small-business men of many varieties -- from the mechanic at a government car body shop who fixes motorcycles at his home to a Communist Party youth member who smuggles food from the countryside and sells it in Havana for a profit.
Self-employed shoe-shiners accost passersby outside empty government-owned food stores in cities.
Hairdressers and cosmeticians hang crudely handwritten signs advertising their services outside their apartments.
The origins of this capitalist boom lie in the Cuban government's decision last summer to allow its citizens to use and save U.S. dollars.
It was a desperate attempt to dent the U.S. embargo and halt the economic slide that began with the fall of the Soviet Union (which, together with its allies, was subsidizing nearly 25% of Cuba's national output).
But it was also a liberating opening for the Cuban people, who hitherto would have been imprisoned for possessing U.S. currency.
Later in the year, with much fanfare, the government also unveiled a package of reforms that included letting Cubans work for themselves in more than 140 private occupations.
Importantly, farmers would be allowed to grow and sell crops for a profit through new cooperatives.
Cubans immediately badgered the government with applications to open restaurants, barber shops, taxi services, and plumbing and mechanical shops, among others.
The government quickly realized it had opened a Pandora's box of capitalism and started reversing itself on some of the occupations, especially the restaurants and farm cooperatives.
Nevertheless, these enterprises were beginning to ease the hunger in cities by providing much-needed food.
Now, the nation is holding its breath as a special session of the National Assembly considers the next set of economic reforms and adjustments in the spring.
The changes under consideration, government officials in Havana insist, won't be a package of shock therapies of the kind adopted by several former Soviet Bloc countries.
Instead of currency devaluations and crippling tax policies, a set of decrees probably will be passed aimed at improving Cuba's worsening internal finances by paring subsidies.
In the meantime, the government's nervousness that the imminent onslaught of capitalism and individual initiative may replace its collectivist policies is evident in the televised public debates aimed at venting the public's anxiety about the pace of reform.
Such debates by workers and farmers are aired daily.
The participants on these shows call for more economic freedom -- at least as much as that enjoyed by the foreigners who come to their country as tourists or investors.
That view is strongly supported by the country's farmers, who have been working on empty stomachs.
Because of the government's dire need for foreign currency, farmers have been forced to increase their quotas of sugar, coffee and tobacco.
Their circumstances were worsened by a severe drought that ended a year ago and an acute lack of fertilizers.
On top of that, the promised reforms that would allow them to sell their produce at the market rather than to government middlemen never took place to a meaningful degree.
The farmers' open resentment of the government is a surprising development given that farmers were the bedrock of the revolution.
On a sugar cane plantation in Quivican, about two hours from Havana, a group of farmers, including a former Castro enthusiast, openly expressed contempt for the government.
"We don't care what they do to us.
They have done enough," one farmer said.
These days, the farmers don't work the collective farms.
They are waiting and hoping for the reforms to allow them to grow what they want and sell it for a profit.
These peasant farmers don't need lessons about supply and demand.
An older farmer complains that he can't get sugar for his grandchild.
The sugar sells for a government-regulated eight Cuban centavos (a mere fraction of a U.S. cent) a pound, but at that price it's rarely available at government food ration stores.
"Here," said the old man as he pulled out a wad of peso notes from his pocket and threw up his arms.
"Take it all, and give me a pound of sugar."
Mr. Bushaija is a reporter for the Cape Cod Times, published by Dow Jones & Co.
