Michael Baker Corp., a construction and engineering concern, said fierce winter weather has pummeled some of the company's operations and will have an adverse impact on the first quarter.
In an interview, Richard L. Shaw, chairman, president and chief executive officer, said the current quarter's weather woes come on the heels of a tough fourth quarter.
In that quarter, Michael Baker recorded a $13 million restructuring charge, stemming from the company's decision to leave certain construction and telecommunications businesses.
The company has said it expects a loss for both the quarter and the year.
Getting more specific, Mr. Shaw said the company expects to report for the fourth quarter a net loss of about $12 million to $13 million, or about $1.45 to $1.50 a share, on contract revenue of about $122 million.
For the year, the company expects to report a net loss of about $15 million, or about $1.81 a share, on contract revenue of $430 million to $435 million.
In the year-earlier fourth quarter, the company reported net income of $1.6 million, or 20 cents a share, on revenue of $99.6 million.
For 1992, Michael Baker reported net income of $4.4 million, or 67 cents a share, on revenue of $355.8 million.
The company expects to report its fourth-quarter and year-end earnings today.
Mr. Shaw said the company has had to halt projects because of the weather, especially in western Pennsylvania.
"The weather has been a disaster," said Mr. Shaw.
Two units "have significant operations around here, and as might be suspected, the weather has shut the construction business down, which isn't really normal for us.
For the past 10 years, we have worked right through the winter.
I can assure you, we'll see some impact in the first quarter."
Mr. Shaw said he believed construction projects stymied by the weather would be up and running again by March 1.
Despite the difficult earnings picture, Mr. Shaw said record backlog, about $588 million at the end of 1993, along with the recently announced restructuring, should bolster the company's performance through the rest of 1994.
