Active computer-aided program selling led by Kidder, Peabody & Co. took place during the March 2 morning market plunge, according to New York Stock Exchange statistics.
In one of Wall Street's most volatile days in 1994, the Dow Jones Industrial Average on March 2 plunged 50 points in the first hour, before rebounding strongly to finish the day with a gain of nearly 23 points.
Investors have been curious about which program traders were active during the plunge.
Program trading is the rapid buying or selling of a group of at least 15 different stocks with a total of $1 million or more.
The statistics released yesterday provide ammunition for both program-trading critics and defenders.
The numbers show program trading could have accelerated the market's decline; yet program traders were also buyers during the first hour of trading on March 2, perhaps helping the recovery that began at the end of the hour.
All told, 18 firms reported doing program trades during the hour.
Overall, there were 10.3 million shares traded as part of program trading strategies (6.1 million buys; 4.2 million sells), or 11.6% of the exchange's total for the hour.
Most of the trading was part of index arbitrage, in which traders buy and sell stocks along with stock-index futures and options.
Critics blame program trading for accelerating market movements, and several brokerage firms cut back on index arbitrage in particular after the 1987 stock market crash.
Kidder Peabody, a unit of General Electric Co., reported nearly 1.5 million shares sold during the March 2 opening hour, virtually all of it as part of index arbitrage trading for the firm's own account.
(Kidder also bought 219,000 shares.)
The most-active program trading firm was Susquehanna Investment Group, with 1.7 million shares traded, but 1.6 million of that was on the buy side.
Asked for comment on the selling, Kidder Peabody said it doesn't discuss its trading as a matter of policy.
But the firm did assert that during the first 20 minutes of trading on March 2, it was buying, not selling, and that its selling occurred while the market was going back up again.
The next-heaviest seller was Nomura Securities (621,000 shares sold, but 487,000 bought), followed by CS First Boston Inc., with an even amount of buying and selling.
All these firms traded for their own accounts, rather than for customers.
The Big Board releases these special breakdowns of program trading, along with its regular weekly program-trading tally, whenever the industrial average moves up or down at least 50 points within an hour.
The exchange briefly stopped releasing the special breakdowns, but decided to reinstate the information after a Wall Street Journal article reported on the cutback last week.
