There is a wide gender gap in education in many countries around the world, a new study shows.
The study, by Population Action International, a family-planning group, ranked 112 countries and found significant differences in male-female enrollment in 50 of them.
It found that 76 million fewer girls than boys enrolled in primary and secondary schools in those countries in 1990.
The gender gap is largest in Sub-Saharan Africa, North Africa, South Asia and the Middle East.
In India alone, 33 million fewer girls than boys are enrolled in school, according to the study.
"In many developing countries, girls take a back seat to boys in access to schooling," said Shanti Conly, the group's research director.
Parents often give priority to their sons' education, the study said, because they think it will bring the family greater economic benefits.
Girls drop out more often to help at home, to get married, or because they get pregnant, it said.
Women's low education levels contribute to high infant-mortality rates, the group said, estimating that each additional year of schooling for girls is associated with a 5% to 10% decline in child deaths.
Closing the gender gap would cost $6.5 billion, it said; the 50 countries now spend a total of $41 billion on education.
Girls get the least amount of schooling in Chad, where adult women have an average of less than one month of education, according to the study.
There are only 22 females for every 100 males attending high school there, the report said.
And in Africa, the number of males enrolled in school is also quite low.
In Mali, for instance, only 30% of boys were enrolled in grade school and 9% in high school.
France scored highest among the 112 countries on the group's education index, which rated countries on five measures.
Nearly all females in France attend high school, and women have an average of more than 11 years of education.
American women had the highest number of years of schooling, an average of 12.4 years.
But the U.S. ranked sixth on the study's overall female education index, in part because it had a slightly lower ratio of females to males in high school.
France, Canada, Finland, Norway and Belgium all were rated slightly higher than the U.S.
