One year after moving to shed its unprofitable computer-manufacturing operations, Tandy Corp. is on the rebound, with strong fourth-quarter earnings and predictions of a surge in sales for 1994.
John V. Roach, chairman of the Fort Worth, Texas, consumer-electronics retailer, said in an interview that Tandy expects to report fourth-quarter earnings from operations of about $1.02 a share, up 21% from 84 cents a year earlier.
He said the fourth-quarter results also included a 20-cent-a-share gain from the completion of the company's divestiture program.
That operating-earnings estimate, on the high side of analysts' estimates, caps a turnaround year for the parent of the Radio Shack electronics chain, which sold its computer-manufacturing business to AST Research Inc. last year and has since focused its efforts on electronics retailing.
"Tandy has undergone a metamorphosis," said Robert Roth, an analyst at Merrill Lynch in New York.
"They really are shaking up the company."
In addition to spiffing up Radio Shack with revamped floor plans and a slew of new service offerings, Tandy has tapped into the boom in home personal computing through its Computer City chain of high-tech superstores.
A third chain, called the Incredible Universe, sells home appliances and other electronics and, Mr. Roach says, has benefited from a spurt of new home sales that has increased demand for refrigerators, dishwashers, and other home furnishings.
Mr. Roach said continuing strong showings at all three chains could push 1994 sales up 30% from the $4.1 billion generated last year, a forecast well above the 19% sales gain predicted by most Tandy watchers.
Mr. Roach noted that the sales predictions include a continuing turnaround at Radio Shack, which has seen its same-store monthly sales recover from no year-to-year growth this time last year to about 7% today.
Leonard Roberts, Radio Shack's president, said the unit will launch a new gift-delivery program on Father's Day and will soon begin test-marketing a service offering in-store repair of electronics.
For the year, Mr. Roach said Tandy expects to report earnings from operations of about $2.42 a share, compared with $2.14 a share a year earlier.
Tandy's stock, which slipped to as low as $25 a share this time last year, closed in composite New York Stock Exchange trading at $44.50 a share, down 75 cents, or 1.7%.
