In the first appearance of a British prime minister before an investigative tribunal, John Major testified yesterday that he wasn't informed about a 1988 government decision to ease restrictions on arms sales to Iraq.
The testimony came before a tribunal that the prime minister himself set up in 1992 following revelations that the British government had secretly approved the export to Iraq of sophisticated equipment used to make weapons.
The British manufacturer of the exports, which Iraq used to helped construct its war machine, faced criminal charges until proving during trial that the sales had the approval of Margaret Thatcher's government.
In contrast with Mrs. Thatcher's combative appearance last month, Mr. Major was calm and cooperative.
He also took every opportunity to remind his inquisitors who hired them.
When they asked Mr. Major to try explaining the decision of those who relaxed the arms restrictions in 1988, he said, "It is not for me to reach the conclusion that I have invited this inquiry to reach."
Although the scandal largely occurred on Lady Thatcher's watch -- Mr. Major became foreign secretary in 1989 and prime minister in 1990 -- he had made himself vulnerable by initially denying that the government ever relaxed its policy of exports to Iraq.
When the opposite proved to be true, critics accused him of a coverup, and it was that charge that he took pains yesterday to deny.
But pleading ignorance left him open to criticism, too.
After listening to Mr. Major's testimony, Robin Cook, the Labor Party's shadow trade and industry secretary, said: "His alibi is that he did not know what was going on in the department for which he was responsible.
The departments through which he passed appear stuffed with documents he never saw or which he saw but did not read to the end or which he read but did not act on."
The Iraqi arms scandal has prompted critics to contend that Mrs. Thatcher's government privately catered to the wishes of Britain's defense industry to earn big profits from exports to Iraq.
In her appearance last month, she haughtily dismissed such accusations.
When it is completed, the inquiry will culminate in a report to the government.
The inquiry has no prosecutorial powers, and most witness testimony isn't useable in any criminal court.
