"Faster, higher, stronger" is the motto of the Olympics.
At these Norwegian Games, it inspires both athlete and sardine.
In this country of voracious fish eaters, sardines haven't been moving well in recent years, lagging behind salmon and mackerel.
Sales of the tiny tins were as squeezed as the little fish inside.
Then last May, Procordia Food Norway, one of the Olympic sponsors, put the logo of the Lillehammer Winter Games on its sardine cans.
Almost overnight, sales doubled, then tripled.
"Sardines used to be a product that older people ate," says Alf Johan Svele, the company's president.
"Since the Olympic marketing program, sardines have become trendy."
Transforming sardines from eek! to chic is testament enough to the power of the Olympic five-ring logo.
But sales of other pedestrian items such as ketchup, caviar paste, mashed potatoes, goat cheese, sheep bells and pins -- anything bearing the Olympic seal -- have also been soaring faster, higher, stronger.
And this in a land where sales gimmicks are usually run out of town faster than stray moose.
"It is strange, I must admit," says Sigmund Thue, marketing director of the Lillehammer Olympic Organizing Committee.
"We could never have predicted the success of our program."
More records have been set in LOOC's marketing arena than on Lillehammer's snow and ice.
The licensing program, which markets officially licensed Olympic products, has so far yielded $170 million in total retail sales (with LOOC garnering royalties over $15 million).
These are Winter Olympic records.
Most impressive has been the sales of pins bearing the LOOC look.
So far, more than 17 million have been sold in this country, which is about four pins per Norwegian.
It is a performance that the organizers of the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta will be hard pressed to match.
"I've told my Atlanta colleagues that when they have sold 750 million pins they will be near the same level as us," laughs Mr. Thue.
"And then they will have paid for the Olympics, as well."
It seems only natural that if 100,000 Norwegians stand in subzero temperatures to watch Olympic cross-country races they would also be attracted to sardine cans sporting the Olympic rings.
And the Lillehammer logos, with the prehistoric pictograms and abstract Northern Lights, appeal to the Norwegians' strong bond to tradition.
But the licensing success also comes from a shrewd strategy to profit from an oft-neglected part of Olympic marketing.
Past Olympic organizers advised LOOC to concentrate its revenue gathering on broadcast rights, sponsor fees, ticket sales and traditional frills like stamps and coins.
"The conclusion was that a licensing program is little money and a lot of problems," Mr. Thue recalls.
Duly warned, LOOC orginally budgeted $3 million for licensing income.
But, blessed with a handsome, eye-catching design, LOOC put together a licensing package that included the logo, mascots and colors, as well as the ubiquitous pictograms and snow crystal patterns.
It then limited the licensing to "high-quality" products from 36 companies, rejecting any proposals for cheap plastic products.
First to hit the stores were items like sweaters, T-shirts, backpacks and skis to get Norwegian consumers familiar with the logos.
Then LOOC launched a nationwide Olympic torch relay that passed the flame to 75 towns, stretching far above the Arctic Circle.
Two pin peddlers and trucks jammed with 10 licensed products followed the torch and the resulting Olympic fever.
In November and December alone, LOOC pocketed some $4 million in licensing royalties.
Even on the Arctic Ocean island of Svalbard -- "Next stop is the North Pole," says one of the residents -- Olympic merchandise is as thick as the snow.
When the torch came to town, it left behind a dozen pin traders, including 12-year-old Silje Solend, whose collection is nearing 200.
Her father, Amund, smitten by Olympic fever, ordered a set of some 50 Olympic pins where the Norwegian flag is matched with the flags of other countries.
"I figured this was the only chance for Norway to have the Olympics in our lifetime," says Mr. Solend.
