One of Canada's most overlooked public companies is controlled by one of its most high-profile citizens: press baron Conrad Black.
The company in question is Hollinger, which is 45%-owned by Mr. Black and is trading at temptingly cheap levels right now, analysts say.
Mr. Black's holding company has been making headlines around the world, thanks to newspaper acquisitions such as the recently proposed purchase of the Chicago Sun-Times, and successes such as the turnaround of Britain's prestigious Daily Telegraph.
But the stock hasn't kept pace.
Even Hollinger's 89 million-share stake in London's Daily Telegraph currently has a market value higher than Hollinger itself -- about #526 million (1.07 billion Canadian dollars) for the stake compared with Hollinger's market value of C$868 million.
This state of affairs has analysts shaking their heads.
How can Hollinger be trading at only 15 1/2 (Canadian) in Toronto and 11 1/4 (U.S.) on the Nasdaq Stock Market?
"This means you buy the Telegraph dirt cheap, then get everything else as a bonus," says Marianne Godwin, analyst at BBN James Capel Inc. in Toronto.
"And these are good-quality assets, with solid growth prospects."
Hollinger has about 140 U.S. newspapers, two Canadian newspaper chains, 99% of the Jerusalem Post and 9.35% of the publicly traded printer and publisher Southam.
Why is Hollinger stock on the ropes?
Hollinger's complex web of holdings in North America, Europe and Australia can be tough for analysts to track.
Moreover, Hollinger's debt is high.
Standard & Poor's recently said it might downgrade Hollinger's double-B subordinated-debt rating because of the proposed Sun-Times acquisition.
The move would affect about C$220 million (US$170 million) of debt.
Bulls say the skeptics are overlooking the ability of Mr. Black and Hollinger to cut costs and boost profit margins at newspapers they acquire.
The prime example is the Daily Telegraph.
Once a struggling paper with declining readership, it's now a flourishing enterprise valued at some C$1.6 billion.
Even the tiny U.S. newspapers have seen their pretax profit margins expand since being bought by Hollinger's U.S. unit, American Publishing.
For instance, newspapers the unit acquired in 1991 had an average pretax margin of 14%, a return that had jumped to 26% by 1993.
"One of the biggest problems Hollinger has had in the financial markets has been educating investors on how to value their assets," says Andrew McCreath, an analyst with Gordon Capital in Toronto.
"They've got assets in several different countries, reporting results in several different currencies, and then there are convertible securities out there which could dilute existing shareholders."
Bargain-hunters aren't deterred.
"This is very, very cheap," says Frank Mersch, who runs the flagship stock fund for Toronto's Altamira Management.
He values Hollinger's assets at C$19 to C$20 a share.
He admires Mr. Black's ability to get stronger performance from assets bought cheaply, and figures he can do the same with the Chicago Sun-Times.
To catch investors' eyes, the company recently hatched plans to offer the public stakes in American Publishing and one of its two Canadian publishing chains, UniMedia.
The UniMedia IPO of a 30% stake is already launched.
The American Publishing offering of 32% has been delayed for a new prospectus including the Chicago SunTimes.
The new U.S. newspaper flagship within American Publishing could draw institutional attention to the stock, analysts say, and boost the offering size sharply.
Ms. Godwin expects the two IPOs will buoy the stock toward what she feels is a conservative short-term target of C$17 a share.
"Giving people a market value for two more of its main assets will help considerably," she says.
She adds that last year's earnings setback owed much to exchange-rate zigzags and one-time acquisition costs.
Net income was C$31.4 million in 1991, and more than doubled to C$74 million in 1992.
But costs of acquiring the Southam stake and unusual items held 1993 profit to C$25.3 million.
Hollinger says earnings before unusual items and the costs associated with acquiring its stake in Southam actually rose, to C$45.6 million from C$44.6 million.
"The company has shown pretty consistent growth in revenues and cash flow," says Mr. McCreath.
"I see the current situation as a window of opportunity for investors."
C$1.01 a share diluted.
