The White House, citing a "brighter economic forecast," now is projecting a fiscal 1995 budget deficit of less than $180 billion.
The new deficit estimate is $10 billion smaller than a recent public estimate by the Clinton administration.
It is also much narrower than the $300 billion-plus fiscal 1995 deficit forecast by the White House just a year ago, although that forecast ignored spending caps imposed by the 1990 deficit-reduction law.
President Clinton unveiled the revised deficit projection in his weekly radio address Saturday, saying he had "just learned" from White House Budget Director Leon Panetta that "the deficit projection for next fiscal year is now under $180 billion."
The president credited his economic policies with shrinking the deficit, saying that "step by step we are reviving our economy."
For the revised fiscal 1995 deficit estimate to hold up, the economic recovery will have to stay on track and Congress will have to comply with new spending ceilings that were enacted last summer.
The budget for fiscal 1995, which will begin next Oct. 1, is to be released Feb. 7.
Mr. Panetta, who not long ago said the fiscal 1995 deficit would be less than $190 billion, said in a brief statement issued over the weekend that the deficit has narrowed primarily for two reasons.
The first was the "specific deficit-reduction measures" in the administration's economic plan, the budget director said.
The second was the "brighter economic forecast, which is directly related to the success of the president's plan in reducing deficits, making key investments, and expanding trade markets."
Mr. Panetta provided no details on revised spending and revenue projections or on the brighter economic forecast.
He also wouldn't say exactly how much under $180 billion the fiscal 1995 deficit would be.
According to one White House official, it could be as low as $175 billion.
The budget deficit has gone from a record $290 billion in fiscal 1992 to $255 billion in fiscal 1993.
Some private-sector economists see it falling to $235 billion or so in the current fiscal year, and perhaps lower if economic growth continues to accelerate.
Senate Republican Leader Robert Dole of Kansas said he hopes the new deficit projection is correct, but added in an appearance on CBS News's "Face The Nation" yesterday that the recovery helping to push the deficit lower began during the Bush administration.
