The Canadian government dealt a blow to Maclean Hunter Ltd.'s efforts to offer shareholders an alternative to Rogers Communications Inc.'s 2.79 billion-Canadian-dollar (US$2.08 billion) bid to acquire the company.
In Tuesday's budget, the government said it will close an obscure tax loophole that Maclean Hunter had planned to use to maximize proceeds from any sale of its U.S. cable assets.
The Toronto cable television, printing and publishing concern had hoped to spin off those holdings into a separate company, which could then proceed to sell them under the so-called "butterfly" tax provisions without incurring a big capital gains tax.
"Certainly, this is potentially a very serious setback for the folks at Maclean Hunter," said Barry Gruman, an analyst at First Marathon Securities in Montreal.
"It's looking more and more as though this is a deal that will be done right at about C$17 a share."
As reported, Rogers is offering C$17 a share for Maclean Hunter, a bid that Maclean Hunter's board has described as inadequate.
In a message to shareholders, to be mailed today, Maclean Hunter directors had planned to address in some detail the ways in which they could generate more value for shareholders than the Rogers offer does.
Rogers is a Toronto-based cable TV and telecommunications concern.
Topping the list of options available to Maclean Hunter was expected to be a special dividend to shareholders in the wake of a sale of the U.S. cable assets, for which the company already is seeking buyers.
But without being able to use the butterfly maneuver to protect the company from capital gains taxes, Maclean Hunter could face a tax burden that analysts estimate at anywhere between C$200 million and C$400 million on a sale of C$1.5 billion to C$1.75 billion.
Robert Furse, chief financial officer of Maclean Hunter, said the company still plans to issue a response to shareholders, but said it now will be "more general" in nature.
"It's just being written now, and it's being revised hour by hour," Mr. Furse said.
He declined to comment on the content of the response, adding that the company and its financial advisers are "studying" the changes to the butterfly strategy announced in the budget.
Other strategies that Maclean Hunter is expected to pursue include new debt financing in order to pay a special dividend to shareholders, and selling other assets, including the Canadian cable operations, which are the company's main attraction for Rogers.
As reported, Rogers has asked the Supreme Court of Ontario to order Maclean Hunter to give it access to any data being provided to potential bidders for these operations.
An inability to use the butterfly tax loophole would mean Maclean Hunter directors would be under pressure to come up with additional value in other parts of its business.
"That's going to be tough to do," Mr. Gruman said.
In trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange yesterday, Maclean Hunter closed at C$16.50 a share, off 25 Canadian cents.
Rogers Class B shares rose 37.5 Canadian cents to C$22.125.
Greg Boehmer, tax partner at the Mississauga, Ontario, office of Ernst & Young, an accounting firm, said that under the new tax rules, a company won't be permitted to spin off assets into a separate concern if the purpose of the exercise is to sell that division to a third party.
"If you've got two shareholders who want to divide up the business, that's fine, but if you're doing this to facilitate an asset sale, forget it," Mr. Boehmer said.
The loophole has been closed for all companies that hadn't a legal commitment to proceed with such a transaction prior to Tuesday's budget announcement.
While Maclean Hunter sought an early ruling on its proposed strategy from the government late last week, it hadn't committed itself to that course of action.
Rogers has said its own tax position would allow it to sell the U.S. cable assets without incurring a big capital gains liability.
