A MAGISTRATE ORDERED accused spy Ames and his wife held in jail.
After listening to government prosecutors, a federal magistrate in Alexandria, Va., ruled there was sufficient evidence to send the case to a grand jury.
He ordered the couple held without bail, saying there was an unacceptable risk that Ames would flee the country.
According to court testimony, FBI searches have shown that Ames provided Moscow with some of the CIA's most delicate espionage data, including military information.
Some of the most incriminating evidence in the case against Ames comes from his wife.
Russia announced the arrest of a senior defense industry official on charges of spying for the British government and passing secret weapons information to the West over the past year.
Bosnian Muslims and Croats agreed to form a "binational" state, increasing pressure on Bosnia's Serbs to seek peace.
The U.S.-brokered accord is intended to lay the basis for an economically viable, if smaller, Bosnian state.
Separately, Serbs said they would allow aid flights into the Muslim town of Tuzla.
Israel freed more than 500 Palestinian prisoners in an effort to bring the PLO back to peace talks, and said another 500 will be released by this weekend.
Many Palestinians scoffed at the gesture, with one PLO official calling it "cosmetic surgery" to curb violence that has erupted since Friday's massacre in a Hebron mosque.
The EPA issued a regulation that it said will require chemical plants to reduce emissions of airborne toxic wastes by 88%.
The rule is expected to affect about 370 plants, primarily in Texas, Louisiana and New Jersey.
The agency said the rule will require firms to spend $450 million for equipment.
Denver's Mayor Webb said late Monday that the opening of the city's new airport will be delayed more than two months, to May 15, so that its $200 million baggage system can be repaired.
The opening of the $3.2 billion airport had been scheduled for next Wednesday following two earlier postponements.
Medical researchers found that niacin, a vitamin that people use to lower cholesterol levels, is too toxic to be sold as a nonprescription drug.
The researchers said niacin taken in dosages to reduce cholesterol produces more adverse side effects than experimental cholesterol-lowering drugs they tested.
Four people were wounded in New York, two of them critically, when a van carrying Hasidic Jews was hit with bullets from a car, police said.
The motive was unclear.
Mayor Giuliani said there was "no piece of information" linking the shooting to Friday's West Bank massacre, but "obviously that's something you can't exclude."
Physicians more often request that a hospital approve the use of specific drugs when the doctors have had contact with the drugs' makers, such as accepting dinners or money from the companies, according to Cleveland researchers.
The study fuels a controversy over the influence of marketing practices on doctors.
Russia's Yeltsin warned the leaders of last October's Moscow uprising, who were freed from prison Saturday by an act of parliament, that he would order their rearrest immediately if they attempted to stir up any conflict.
The president reportedly described the release of the seven political opponents as illegal.
Inkatha party leader Buthelezi told reporters his group would consider provisional registration for South Africa's first all-race election in April but would retain the option of a future boycott.
Buthelezi made the announcement after meeting with rival black politician Mandela.
One in seven cases of TB is resistant to drugs that previously cured the disease, according to a government survey of TB cases nationwide.
Health officials called for intervention to prevent the further spread of drug-resistant TB.
Tuberculosis had been considered under control until the mid-1980s.
Nuclear experts arrived in North Korea to begin a long-delayed inspection of nuclear sites.
The six inspectors, who plan to be in the country for two weeks, are due to fly to Yongbyon today to begin work there.
