As most major global bourses powered to solid gains Monday, Tokyo equities rallied 2%, marking their third gain in a row and pushing the main index to its highest finish in six months.
London stocks surged 1.3%, helped by strong stock-index futures and bond prices.
Frankfurt shares jumped 2%, partly on a German wage settlement with a labor union that fueled hopes for reduced interest rates.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.90, up 0.43, reflecting higher markets in all regions.
Air freight stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 152.87, up 4.26, or 2.9%, with Federal Express of the U.S. posting a 4.4% gain in its local currency.
Advanced technology/medical devices stocks trailed at 69.50, down 1.32, or 1.9%, with Stryker of the U.S. sliding 6% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which rose 24.60 points Friday, jumped 410.84 to 20526.15, the highest close since Sept. 14.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei index rose 58.01 points to close the morning session at 20584.16.
Monday's first-section volume was estimated at 480 million shares, down from 738 million shares Friday, when turnover was exaggerated by a futures and options deadline.
Gainers clobbered losers, 882-194.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which edged up 3.39 points Friday, climbed 19.97, or 1.2%, to 1639.87.
Sentiment that the market is heading higher improved markedly following the U.S.-Japan weekend accord on improving foreign access to Japan's cellular-telephone market, which averted a potential trade conflict, as well as Wall Street's climb Friday.
Some investors are increasingly optimistic about a Japanese economic recovery.
Strong buying by overseas investors, dealers and individual investors Monday combined to overwhelm corporate investors' sales of stockholdings to dress up profits ahead of March 31, the end of the fiscal year.
As futures prices surged, index-linked arbitrage buying of stocks also gave a broad boost to Nikkei issues.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index advanced 41.5 points to 3233.4, breaking above a perceived barrier of 3200 and finishing near the session peak of 3236.1.
The FT 30-stock index raced up 26.5 points, or 1.1%, to 2546.2.
Volume was 556.3 million shares, compared with 776.5 million shares in the previous session.
Despite the sharp gains, strategists said the London market still is being strongly influenced by the bond market's direction.
Several British economic indicators to be released tomorrow will be scrutinized for signs of inflation.
British producer-price data yesterday morning showed February increases were smaller than expected and indicated inflation wouldn't prevent further cuts in Britain's base lending rate.
Yesterday's stock rally was driven by a soaring stock-index futures market and aided by gains on overseas bourses late Friday and yesterday; this helped the London market shrug off a 12.7-point hit on the 100-stock index from issues from going ex-dividend at the start of a two-week trading account.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index, which slid 37.61 points Friday, soared 41.68 to 2145.17, near the intraday high of 2150.83.
Investors were cheered by Friday events, including Wall Street's gains and the settlement with Germany's OeTV public-sector and transportation union.
The low-wage accord, the third reached recently involving major unions, as well as the German mark's strength in currency dealings, signaled further easings in Germany's benchmark interest rates.
In Paris, prices were propelled to a 1.8% gain, following four losing sessions in a row; dealings were dominated by Euro Disney, which gyrated on news of a settlement to keep the company's financially ailing French theme park in business.
In Amsterdam, stocks rose sharply on higher Dutch and German bond markets and in line with other European bourses; cyclical shares' strength continued and financial issues began to rebound on hopes for lower German and Dutch lending rates.
In Milan, the index including electronically traded shares chalked up a 1.3% gain, after Italy's prime minister said Europe not only didn't need to follow U.S. monetary policies but should stake out independent positions; this was viewed as a suggestion that European interest rates would continue to decline.
In Stockholm, prices climbed 1.6%, supported by a drop in bond yields and advances in major bourses abroad, but trading was thin to moderate, and a defining trend wasn't evident.
In Zurich, equities surged 1.4% in moderate trading, as investors who dumped stocks last week on weakness in the Swiss bond market, which showed signs of stabilizing yesterday, scrambled to buy back positions, with banking shares leading the advance.
In Sydney, shares rallied 1.2%, taking the market to its highest level since March 1.
The gains were spurred by strength in U.S. stock and bond prices Friday, a stronger Australian bond market Monday and an easing of worries about possible interest-rate increases.
In Hong Kong, stocks rebounded powerfully in afternoon dealings to end with their first gain in four sessions.
Initially, investment sentiment was hurt by Sino-U.S. friction last weekend about linking China's human rights to trade, pushing the main index down as much as 2.7% to levels last seen in mid-December.
But the market picked up and popped into positive territory on a slightly more positive tone in Beijing talks Monday, as officials mentioned some common ground between the U.S. and China and announced a few human rights-related agreements, such as on prisoner-made products and emigration.
In Taipei, prices surged 1.2%, recouping Saturday's 1% loss, but turnover was low, and stocks were in negative territory until a rally emerged in the final half-hour to rescue the market from a three-month low; financial issues continued to be the center of attention.
In Seoul, stocks gained 1%, partly on speculative buying led by individual investors, as some market fundamentals remained vulnerable; the advance was helped by the South Korean government's removal of some market-cooling measures, effective Monday.
But in Bangkok, shares dived 1.7%, as participants became jittery about renewed talk that a major political party might pull out of the Thai governing coalition.
And in Mexico City, stocks tumbled 3.2%, amid low volume, as investors continued to see dangers in the August presidential election and the peso currency's volatility against the U.S. dollar.
The market has retreated 15% from its record set Feb. 8, but is still up 15% from mid-November, after U.S. legislators passed the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
