Clearly, the Bill Clinton-Alan Greenspan honeymoon isn't over yet.
And it seems likely to continue as long as the Fed does what government officials here now expect: keep short-term interest rates below 4% for the rest of the year.
When the Fed broke with tradition Friday and publicly announced the rate increase, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and chief White House economist Laura D'Andrea Tyson were preparing to brief reporters on new unemployment figures.
Mr. Bentsen had eaten breakfast with Mr. Greenspan, but says he avoided asking whether the long-advertised rate increase was coming.
Alerted by the Fed moments before wire-service headlines carried the news, Mr. Bentsen first huddled with Ms. Tyson, White House economic adviser Robert Rubin and presidential image meister David Gergen.
He then talked by phone with President Clinton.
Around noon, the Treasury secretary went to the White House press room.
Choosing his words more carefully than usual, he emphasized that inflation is "well-contained," but said that the Fed's "pre-emptive strike against inflation" wouldn't "inhibit growth."
On Saturday, the Treasury secretary and the Fed chairman played tennis.
On Sunday, Mr. Bentsen said on NBC's "Meet the Press" that "the biggest controversy that I have with the chairman of the Federal Reserve was expressed . . . on the tennis courts."
(Mr. Bentsen won the first set 6-2; Mr. Greenspan the second in a tie-breaker.)
Ms. Tyson practically thanked the Fed.
"This move today is consistent with the continuation of a solid and sustained economic expansion," she said Friday.
She reminded reporters that the new White House economic forecast anticipates that the Fed will raise rates by one-half percentage point this year.
Friday's increase goes halfway, though Mr. Bentsen said in an interview that, unless inflation becomes more worrisome, "I don't see any reason for another quarter-point increase."
Behind this unusual coziness is an alliance that has become critical for both the Fed chief and the president.
"The Fed holds in its hands the future of President Clinton -- to exaggerate it just a little," Rep. Lee Hamilton, an Indiana Democrat and former chairman of the Joint Economic Committee, said recently.
"He's not going to pick a fight. . . .
He's got too much at stake."
Meanwhile, Mr. Greenspan needs White House support in fending off congressional and Treasury proposals to curb the Fed's independence and weaken its regulatory clout over banks.
Mr. Clinton has at least one big advantage over George Bush in dealing with Mr. Greenspan.
With the economy slumping, Mr. Bush needed the Fed to cut interest rates swiftly.
All Mr. Clinton needs is for Mr. Greenspan to do what comes naturally: move very slowly.
And he is.
The increase in the federal funds rate (which banks charge each other for overnight loans) to 3.25% is probably the first installment.
But in the Fed's last round of rate increases beginning in 1988, it increased them by more than three full percentage points within a year.
Unless inflation surges, or the economy takes an unforeseen dip, the Fed is likely to keep the fed funds rate around 4% through 1994.
Partly because of uncertainty about how far the Fed will go, the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 96.24 points, or 2.4%, to 3871.42 Friday.
The yield on 10-year Treasury securities -- the benchmark rate for fixed-rate mortgages -- rose by nearly one-tenth of a percentage point.
Economists believe banks are sure to raise the rates they pay on short-term deposits, but aren't likely to boost their prime lending rate, widely used as a benchmark for home-equity loans and some business loans.
Some Fed officials think Mr. Greenspan is moving too slowly.
By waiting so long to increase rates, he has fueled criticism that he is beholden to Mr. Clinton and soft on inflation, while pushing up rates too modestly.
At recent closed-door meetings of Fed officials, Fed Vice Chairman David Mullins and Wayne Angell, a Fed governor, have argued that when the Fed finally moved, it should raise rates a full one-half percentage point, signaling a one-time adjustment that wouldn't be followed by a series of small moves.
When the Fed policy makers assembled Thursday afternoon, neither Mr. Mullins nor Mr. Angell was there; both are leaving the Fed.
The session -- interrupted by a fire alarm -- was dominated by Fed economists, who said that the U.S. economy is picking up momentum, despite weak demand for U.S. exports and tax increases and defense cuts at home.
Although Mr. Greenspan got his customary advance peek at the Labor Department's employment report late Thursday, the rest of the world didn't learn until Friday morning that employers added a fewer-than-predicted 62,000 workers in January.
Some Fed watchers quickly concluded that the Fed would have to pick a more propitious day to raise rates.
"Weather-distorted jobs report delays Fed tightening," Merrill Lynch & Co. economists declared in a bulletin.
But at the Fed, it was clear that the time had come.
The traditional morning discussion of the Fed's objectives for the year was deferred until afternoon so the committee could vote on the immediate question.
Mr. Greenspan had explained the Fed's rationale in advance, first to Mr. Clinton and his senior economic advisers at an unannounced meeting at the White House on Jan. 21 and then to the public in congressional testimony last Monday.
The Fed, Mr. Greenspan said, had been holding rates down so the economy would grow as companies and families paid off debts from the 1980s.
Adjusted for inflation, short-term interest rates have been near zero since September 1992.
(Fed policy makers voted 10-2 to hold rates steady at their December meeting, the Fed disclosed Friday; Mr. Angell and governor Lawrence Lindsey dissented in favor of higher rates.)
The Fed figured that with the economy finally picking up speed, the time was nearing not to slam on the brakes but to lift its foot off the accelerator.
Waiting for inflation to show itself would be a mistake, Mr. Greenspan has said, since it would risk a damaging increase in the long-term interest rates that financial markets set.
Although some Fed policy makers wanted to raise short-term rates by one-half percentage point now, Mr. Greenspan's cautious quarter-point increase won unanimous approval.
Had it stuck to past practice, the Fed would have signaled its decision only by privately ordering technicians to drain credit from the banking system.
Instead, the Fed issued an unprecedented statement "to avoid any misunderstanding."
The Fed said the move was made "to sustain and enhance the economic expansion," trying to make clear that it doesn't see any inflationary pressures building.
The decision to go public drew almost as much attention as the rate move itself.
There was speculation the Fed was angling to placate House Banking Committee Chairman Henry Gonzalez, a Texas Democrat who has introduced a bill that would, among other things, require the central bank to liberalize disclosure.
Mr. Gonzalez was quick to claim credit for Friday's disclosure and urged Congress to adopt his plan lest "the monks at the Fed . . . recede behind their ivory gates."
Many on Wall Street were quick to applaud the Fed.
Merrill Lynch economists agreed that "a tightening move was needed at this time."
The president of the National Association of Manufacturers, Jerry Jasinowski, blessed the modest move but said the Fed shouldn't do more.
However, Sen. Paul Sarbanes, a Maryland Democrat, likened the Fed to "a bomber coming along and striking a farmhouse . . . because you think that the villain inflation is inside . . . when in fact what's inside . . . is a happy family appreciating the restoration of economic growth."
But there was no such view within the Clinton team, which has avoided the slightest criticism of the Fed ever since Mr. Clinton's first meeting with the Fed chief in Little Rock, Ark., in December 1992.
"I think they have taken a very constructive attitude toward dealing with the Fed, toward monetary policy and toward economic policy making in general," says the Fed's Mr. Mullins.
When the Fed chairman last July loudly warned that short-term rates would have to rise, the bond market pushed up long-term rates in response.
In a preview of tension that could still occur if the Fed moves too aggressively, Mr. Greenspan's comments led shortly thereafter to a tense exchange between assistant Treasury secretary Alicia Munnell and Mr. Greenspan at a lunch with other Fed and Treasury officials.
By provoking an increase in long-term rates, Ms. Munnell complained, the chairman had undercut the administration as it was trying to get its deficit-reduction scheme through Congress.
Mr. Greenspan denied that, and said he had a responsibility to warn people that rates would rise.
But Mr. Greenspan is relying on Mr. Clinton, perhaps more than past Fed chairmen have relied on past presidents.
An increasingly hostile Congress threatens to restructure the Fed and force it to be more open.
And even Mr. Bentsen's Treasury has proposed a regulatory reorganization that would yank away much of the Fed's authority over banks.
Messrs. Clinton and Greenspan make an odd couple.
The Fed chairman, who turns 68 next month, is a Republican stalwart who came to Washington as President Ford's economic adviser 20 years ago and was an early influence on President Reagan's economic strategy.
His early mentor was philosopher Ayn Rand, who once wrote that "every government interference in the economy consists of giving an unearned benefit, extorted by force, to some men at the expense of others."
Mr. Clinton, 47 and a Democratic baby boomer, got his early political education from now-Labor Secretary Robert Reich, who believes in activist government.
Mr. Greenspan, a consummate insider, hasn't had any difficulty mixing with the new Washington elite.
He mingled with Clinton appointees at major league baseball's all-star game in Baltimore and showed up at the New Year's version of Renaissance Weekend, a talkfest that for years has served as the premiere networking event for the Clinton crowd.
Some at the central bank fret that the alliance may be too close.
The grumbling at the Fed began a year ago when Mr. Greenspan turned up at Hillary Clinton's side when the president unveiled his economic plan to Congress and the nation on TV.
"My jaw dropped about a foot," says the president of one Fed regional bank.
Then, appearing before the Senate Banking Committee days after Mr. Clinton detailed his deficit-reduction proposal, the Fed chairman thrilled the White House -- and infuriated Republicans -- by declaring Mr. Clinton's plan as "serious," "credible" and "detailed."
Whether because of his nature or his view of his role, Mr. Greenspan seems drawn to the presidency no matter who occupies it.
In the Bush years, Mr. Greenspan drew fire from inside the Fed when he accepted Mr. Bush's request to chair a commission (which was never formed) to resolve technical questions surrounding politically contentious proposals to cut capital-gains tax rates.
And back in 1989, he told Congress that Mr. Bush's mini-budget, which wasn't even intended to be a meaningful attempt at deficit reduction, was "significant enough to have a major impact on the economy."
Veteran Greenspan watchers say all this reflects the Fed chairman's personality: He likes being a Washington insider.
"He knows everybody on a first-name basis.
He has been in and out of various administrations.
When he had his New York consulting firm, he was in Washington more than in New York," says former Fed Vice Chairman Preston Martin.
Notwithstanding Mr. Greenspan's connections, the Fed was unable to head off a Treasury scheme to consolidate federal-banking regulation in a new super-agency, which would assume many of the Fed's current regulatory powers.
After laborious negotiations, Fed officials thought they had reached a compromise with the Treasury in November and were stunned when the Treasury disowned it; Treasury officials deny they had actually reached an agreement.
But, for reasons that still puzzle Fed insiders and White House officials, Mr. Greenspan failed to sound alarms at the White House when the Treasury told him it was proposing a plan that would cost the central bank up to 15% of its employees.
Then, after 10 days of silence, Mr. Greenspan and other Fed officials mounted a public-relations blitz through interviews and op-ed pieces.
Mr. Bentsen, who says he was surprised by the Fed's "strong resistance," replied that the central bank was just protecting its turf.
Mr. Clinton's White House economic advisers were aghast that the relationship they had carefully cultivated had turned to open warfare.
Then Mr. Clinton weighed in.
Asked about the Fed's fears in an interview last December, Mr. Clinton referred to the banking plan not as his own, but as Mr. Bentsen's, and added, "I know that he would not normally do anything that would make them less able to do what they're supposed to."
Later, at a meeting with his economic advisers, the president only half-jokingly asked Mr. Bentsen for reassurance that the plan wouldn't undermine the Fed.
Mr. Bentsen blushed and nodded in affirmation, according to an official who attended.
Mr. Bentsen's banking plan didn't get a mention in Mr. Clinton's State of the Union speech.
And at last report, White House economic advisers were sounding out the Treasury to see whether a compromise might be reached.
