Clint Bolick's mean-spirited attack on Deval Patrick, nominated by President Clinton to head the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division, contains an erroneous description of a case and an erroneous reference to me ("Civil Rights Nominee, Quota Clone," editorial page, Feb. 2).
The erroneous description is of McCleskey v.
Kemp, the 1987 decision in which the Supreme Court rejected evidence of racial discrimination in the administration of the death penalty in Georgia.
(Mr. Patrick served as counsel in the case.)
Mr. Bolick suggests the case was really about assuring equal-sentencing outcomes -- a kind of quota for capital punishment -- but this is wrong.
Mr. Bolick, as a devotee of the original understanding in constitutional adjudication, is doubtless aware that a principal concern of the framers of the 14th Amendment was protecting black citizens against the unequal administration of justice.
I fear that the data suggest that this is precisely what has been going on in Georgia.
To take one example, it may be that Mr. Bolick is able to offer an alternative explanation for the fact that a black person who kills a white person is 24 times as likely as a black person who kills a black person to be sentenced to death in Georgia, but to me it looks as though sentencing juries do not value the lives of black murder victims very highly.
Of course, one does not want a capital sentencing quota -- but one also does not want to pretend that such stark figures as these are simply a statistical glitch with no story to tell.
When the Supreme Court decided in favor of the state, it -- like Mr. Bolick -- simply ignored the numbers, rather than trying to figure out what might be causing them.
The erroneous description of me is one that Mr. Bolick has, unfortunately, repeated in other forums, including television interviews.
He has suggested, because of some writing that I have done, that I would be a better candidate to head the civil rights division than Mr. Patrick.
That is absurd.
I have zero background and experience in the field.
The litigation of civil rights cases, like the litigation of cases involving antitrust, environmental law, or any other specialty, is complicated; I would prefer to leave it to the experts.
An awful lot of those experts work for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund -- an excellent organization that has fought the battle for racial justice for six decades, but which Mr. Bolick treats with unexplained and unwarranted contempt.
This is no way to run our confirmation process.
Mr. Patrick has a fine record and he deserves to be confirmed.
Stephen L. Carter
New Haven, Conn.
Contrary to Mr. Bolick's statement, the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights is neither moribund nor irrelevant.
The agency's major problem is not the left-wing ideology of its new chairman, Mary Francis Berry.
In fact, there is an appropriate ideological balance among the commissioners, and the liberal members of the commission have shown a willingness to work with moderate and conservative commissioners in developing valuable new approaches to civil rights.
The real civil rights issues of the 1990s and beyond are different from those of the 1960s.
They include, first, empowerment strategies for minorities and the poor, and second, the growing threat of religious discrimination.
The virtual elimination of legal barriers to full participation in political and social life by minorities testifies eloquently to the moral and political effectiveness of the movement's post-World War II leadership.
At last June's hearings in Los Angeles under the skillful chairmanship of the Rev. Art Fletcher (who remains on the commission), we turned our attention to expanding access to private-sector jobs, home ownership, educational choice, and seed capital for new enterprises and mortgages in inner cities.
Taking advantage of the expertise of Commissioner Russell Redenbaugh, we are examining private market-based methods to empower the poor and urban minorities, such as enterprise zones, capital-gains tax cuts and reducing government regulations.
These next-generation civil rights concerns, which were reported on The Wall Street Journal editorial page, will be reflected in the commission's report on Los Angeles.
The commission has also begun to call attention to the frightening rise in attacks on houses of worship, disruptions of religious services, and discrimination against Christians, Jews and other believers.
At our January meeting we held a valuable public briefing with a diverse group of experts on religious discrimination.
Commissioners are taking the initiative in denouncing the overt, and exposing the subtler, forms of religious intolerance.
These issues are hardly uncontroversial.
In some government, media and academic circles, anti-Catholicism, antievangelicalism and anti-Semitism have been given a new lease on life.
And regrettably, empowerment strategies for blacks, hispanics, other urban minorities and the poor would not be welcome by certain ideological elites whose real interests are served by maintaining the status quo.
In fact, one would hardly be surprised if the commission's boldness in confronting the civil rights problems of the '90s provoked an attack on the commission's independence.
Such an attack must be firmly resisted by all conservatives and liberals who are sincerely concerned for the future of civil rights.
A strong and independent Civil Rights Commission can, and I believe will, lead both the fight against religious bigotry and the struggle for economic empowerment of those who have been twice victimized; first by discrimination and then by misguided policies that lock them into a life of dependency and despair.
Robert P. George
