The morning before the gavel came down marking the end of world trade talks last month, U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor assembled wood-product and paper-product lobbyists in Geneva and presented them with some disappointing news.
Although he had won a phaseout of paper tariffs, Mr. Kantor told them, he couldn't get Japan to lower wood-product tariffs -- yet.
His message: The U.S. effort wasn't over.
This month, senior U.S. trade officials reassembled many of those same lobbyists in Washington.
The news: They were pressing hard for the lower tariffs in bilateral talks with the Japanese.
Early next week, U.S. officials plan to push the issue further with Japan in so-called quad meetings including the U.S., Japan, Canada and Europe.
It is a pattern that may repeat itself with a number of industries.
With the North American Free Trade Agreement battle finally won and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade talks concluded, Japan has taken the spotlight as the central trade issue facing the Clinton administration.
And many of the industries that were disappointed at the results of GATT, or that wanted more than they got out of it, are now pinning their hopes on the results of talks with the Japanese.
Establishing a "framework" for the U.S.-Japan trade relationship was supposed to be one of the administration's top trade priorities when it took office a year ago, but it took a back seat to other trade issues.
Now, though, "the arrow is pointing directly at Tokyo," Jeffrey Garten, Commerce undersecretary for international trade, says as he swings his hand clockwise.
The GATT talks took care of some of the complaints U.S. interests have about doing business in Japan.
Most notably, Japan agreed to lift its ban on foreign rice imports.
But the talks didn't resolve everything, and a number of issues continue to vex relations between the two countries, including complaints from the insurance, automotive, auto parts, computer software, semiconductor and leather and wood products industries.
The corporate interests involved are some of the biggest names in U.S. business, including the Big Three auto makers -- Chrysler Corp., General Motors Corp., and Ford Motor Co. -- as well as such high-tech stalwarts as Microsoft Corp., Intel Corp., Motorola Corp. and Texas Instruments Inc.
The U.S. hopes to wrap up some of the knottiest of the issues between the two countries -- including those involving autos, auto parts, insurance and government procurement -- before President Clinton's scheduled Feb. 11 meeting here with Japan's Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa.
On Monday, a number of senior trade officials from both sides gather in Washington to thrash out differences.
In an interview, Mr. Kantor said the framework talks are "a major priority" for the Clinton administration.
"We believe Japan has the same responsibility as the European Community and Canada to open their markets and lead global growth.
That's in Japan's interest."
Mr. Kantor indicated that U.S. cabinet officials would soon get involved in the negotiations, which so far have been carried on at the deputy-ministerial level.
"There has to be full engagement at every political level," he said.
The U.S. officials likely to participate include Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, National Economic Council chief Robert Rubin, Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown and Mr. Kantor himself.
U.S. officials believe the summit could become an important symbol for the easing of U.S.-Japan trade tensions.
"There is a desire to make this summit a success," says William Watts, president of Potomac Associates, a policy research company.
"It's viewed as a moment of great opportunity."
But there is just as good a chance the summit could wind up a dud because the political and economic turmoil within Japan won't allow the Hosokawa government the flexibility it needs to resolve disputes.
One key issue involves computer software.
The big U.S. software companies walked away from the GATT talks in Geneva satisfied with intellectual property provisions; it was the first time a GATT agreement had included such rules, and software was accorded as high a level of protection as literary work.
But even before the GATT talks had concluded, industry officials were dispatched to Tokyo to testify against proposed changes that they argued would limit copyright protection.
Japan is considering allowing increased "reverse engineering" of software, a process that allows a company to take a software program, break it down into the ones and zeros of computer language and then essentially duplicate it.
That has such U.S. companies as Microsoft, Apple Computer Inc., Novell Inc. and Lotus Development Corp. up in arms.
"We think that GATT was good for the U.S. software industry," says Kimberly Ellwanger, a trade specialist and director of corporate affairs at Microsoft, which has said it might curtail shipments of software in Japan if reverse engineering became widespread.
Japan's proposal would be "a step back" for U.S. software makers, Ms. Ellwanger says.
Robert Holleyman, president of the Business Software Alliance, an industry lobbying group, says his group is arguing that the proposal "is fundamentally inconsistent with the U.S.-Japan framework talks."
Meanwhile, U.S. semiconductor companies say that while the world trade agreement lowered various tariff barriers, it didn't deal with most nontariff barriers.
And the U.S. claims such obstacles block U.S. semiconductor sales in Japan, which lifted tariffs on foreign semiconductor imports in the 1980s.
"We still face market access problems vis-a-vis Japan," says John Boidock, vice president and director of government relations at Dallas-based Texas Instruments.
"These issues weren't negotiated or discussed or debated in Geneva."
After the foreign share of the Japanese market fell below 20% in recently released third-quarter 1993 figures, U.S. Trade Representative Kantor called for "emergency" talks, which began yesterday.
"We're hopeful that we'll get something out of it," says Mr. Boidock.
Other industries have cases to press, too.
Executives from financial service industries, including securities, insurance and diversified financial firms, left the world trade talks unhappy over not winning increased access to Japan, and that issue hangs over the two sides.
Opening Japan to U.S. insurance companies is the most pressing because that sector is supposed to be resolved by the time of the summit meeting; among the companies vying for more access to the Japanese market are American International Group Inc., Cigna Corp. and Chubb Corp., as well as brokers such as Marsh & McClennan Cos. and Alexander & Alexander Services Inc.
They want Japan to broaden efforts under way to deregulate its insurance business.
Auto and auto-parts companies are pressing, too.
The parts companies want Japan to agree to increase its purchases of U.S.-made auto parts by about 20% a year, an annual increase Japan has been realizing over recent years.
The Big Three auto makers, meanwhile, want Japan to open its distribution system so they can make more vehicles available to the Japanese.
Andrew Card, former Transportation secretary during the Bush administration and chief executive of the American Automobile Manufacturers Association, is taking his spiel to Tokyo later this month, via talk-show appearances, lectures and even a town-hall meeting.
Still another industry seeking to make up for GATT is leather-product manufacturers, who failed to win an increase in the amount of goods they can ship into Japan or the reduction of tariffs.
Japanese officials have argued that the tariffs and quotas are in place to protect a class of Japanese who are regarded in much the same way as the "untouchable" caste in India, and who traditionally hold jobs as tanners.
But Grant Hanson, assistant general counsel and director of government affairs at Nike Inc., which has been pushing for more access to the Japanese market for its Cole Haan shoe subsidiary, says that "since the concessions weren't made in GATT, we're going to continue to pursue them bilaterally."
