The pharmaceutical industry has been taking plenty of lumps lately, but it still seems a paragon of prosperity to Michel de Rosen.
Mr. de Rosen spent five turbulent years at the helm of Rhone-Poulenc SA's fibers and polymers division before being named chief operating officer of pharmaceutical unit Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. late last year.
"When you come from fibers and polymers to pharmaceuticals," he says with a chuckle, "you are flabbergasted by the way drug people are depressed."
With governments and other providers around the world taking draconian action to curb health-care costs, many analysts fret that drug makers' halcyon days are over.
But Mr. de Rosen and other Rhone-Poulenc executives argue that even reduced drug-industry growth rates of 6% to 8% can produce fat profits.
Indeed, with many major diseases lacking cures, innovative medicines will command profit margins as lush as during the heady 1980s, the executives add.
Two novel though unproven treatments are cell and gene therapy, processes on which Rhone-Poulenc is betting hundreds of millions of dollars.
In cell therapy, cells are removed from a patient, treated outside the body, then reinfused as a treatment for cancer or AIDS.
Gene therapy, also in the experimental stage, promises to go a step further by adding missing genes or turning off defective ones that cause disease.
It's a bold, new form of medicine, and one with huge commercial potential, though analysts expect the market to grow slowly at first.
Cell therapy, despite its currently limited uses, could represent a $1.2 billion annual market by the end of the decade, or as much as $3 billion if regulatory approval and product development advance rapidly, a market analysis by U.S. consulting firm POV Inc. predicted.
The larger goal is to find treatments for common ailments such as breast, lung and colon cancers and other diseases.
Gene therapy could grow into a whopping $50 billion-a-year business by 2010, POV believes.
Rhone-Poulenc grabbed an inside track in cell and gene therapy through a worldwide collaboration with Applied Immune Sciences Inc., a pioneer in both fields.
In a transaction that raised eyebrows in the pharmaceutical industry last year, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer paid $115 million for a 37% stake in AIS -- and an option to boost the stake to a controlling 60% before 1997.
Rhone-Poulenc's total investment in the U.S. affiliate could approach $400 million by the end of the decade.
Company Research Director Manfred Karobath says cell-therapy and gene-therapy projects are gobbling up 10% of his $560 million annual budget.
But he pledges "all the support . . . the program needs," acknowledging the financial risk of the business.
Many analysts agree.
"Life is going to change in the pharmaceutical industry and if you're not in the top 10, you've got to do something dramatic or you're not going to make the cut in five years," says Jo Walton, a London-based analyst for Lehman Brothers.
Most big pharmaceutical companies remain wary of cell and gene therapy.
While dozens of fledgling upstarts hope to exploit the techniques, the only other major cell-therapy acquisitions have been by Switzerland's Sandoz AG and Corange Ltd., the Bermuda-based parent of Germany's Boehringer Mannheim Group, which late last year unveiled a $220 million alliance with Seattle-based CellPro Inc., one of AIS's biggest rivals.
"Maybe Rhone-Poulenc just saw the wolves earlier, but they've been imaginative and done the sort of deals other people wouldn't," says Ms. Walton.
"Their view is that cell therapy could be a whole different way of providing health care by the end of the decade -- and they've bought into a band-width of technologies, not simply a bag of products."
The vanguard of its strategy is a string of cell-therapy and gene-therapy centers.
Leading another revolution in the healthcare industry, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer and AIS will own and operate these clinics as well as develop some of the therapies used in them.
Dr. Karobath is confident the centers will deal a knockout blow to prospective rivals.
"How many organizations will there be in the world providing this service?
We think two, maybe three, and from then on it will be very tough to get in," he says.
Ironically, it was a desire to reduce risk that fueled aggressive expansion of Rhone-Poulenc's lackluster pharmaceutical business in the late 1980s.
An acquisition spree of more than $3 billion vaulted the French chemical giant's drugs business from a sleepy, domestic player to a trans-Atlantic powerhouse.
In the first nine months of 1993, health-care operations grew to almost 40% of the group's sales and 90% of its operating profit, from 29% of sales and 44% of profit for 1990.
"It's basically what saved us in this downturn of the chemicals cycle," says Igor Landau, an executive management committee member who oversees healthcare activities.
The crucial move was a merger with Rorer Group Inc. of the U.S. in 1990, securing a coveted foothold in the huge U.S. market.
But government efforts in Germany and Italy to shrink national drug bills slashed $200 million from Rhone-Poulenc Rorer's 1993 sales.
Full-year revenue was virtually flat at $4 billion, while pretax profit inched up only 1.5% to $590 million.
And management cautions that 1994 will be a year of transition, which analysts interpret as anemic profit growth.
Sales last year already were 24% below forecasts by management at the time of the merger, while the pretax profit shortfall was an embarrassing 35%.
For investors, this is a sore spot.
Before buying Rorer Group, Rhone-Poulenc had been saddled with both heavy exposure to slow-growing European markets and an aging portfolio of drugs; no single product had annual sales above $250 million, and its three top sellers, such as the antacid Maalox, were at least 20 years old.
Coming up with new products and bolstering research clout were key motives for the Rorer deal.
But even though Dr. Karobath's general research budget has grown 20% since the merger, most analysts agree there are no potential blockbuster drugs in the pipeline.
It will take years for that investment to generate new drugs.
Cell therapy could pay off much sooner.
While researchers in the AIS unit develop and test cell therapies, a joint venture called Applied Care Laboratories is rushing to set up Rhone-Poulenc Rorer's network of cell-therapy centers in the U.S., Europe and eventually Japan.
Applied Care expects to open its first facility in a Los Angeles suburb in May.
And a pilot operation at the Institut Pasteur in Paris will relocate by the end of the year.
The Paris operation is part of a joint venture between AIS and Caremark International Inc. devoted to AIDS-related cell therapy.
Some analysts fret that Rhone-Poulenc and AIS are rushing, spending heavily to get their centers ready before the first cell therapy has even won regulatory approval.
A full-fledged cell-therapy center with capacity for treating 20,000 patients a year will cost as much as $20 million though initial investment will be considerably lower.
And snags in regulatory approvals could balloon capital costs.
Nonetheless, a key U.S. Food and Drug Administration ruling last year giving cell-therapy centers the regulatory status of minipharmaceutical factories was a potential windfall.
Most analysts had expected the FDA to limit its scrutiny to devices used by cell-therapy developers to separate and process cells.
AIS also has reached an advanced stage of clinical trials of a cell therapy against Kaposi's sarcoma, an opportunistic infection accompanying AIDS.
Another AIS therapy has had promising effects in bonemarrow transfusions to treat leukemia.
Dr. Karobath expects several gene-therapy programs to get under way this year.
Potential applications are vast, but several technological hurdles must be cleared before clinical work on gene therapy gains momentum on a broad scale, analysts say.
