Relax, the bear is still in his den.
Investors pondering the turmoil in the stock market for the past few weeks may be forgiven for thinking this could be the start of something bad and bearish.
After all, the good times have rolled for so long that it's about time for some bad news.
But with a few exceptions, analysts surveying the market figure this is just a long-overdue correction, requiring some moderate defensive moves, and not the beginning of a full-blown bear market.
The typical reaction to a bear market, which usually drags down stock prices 20% or more over a prolonged period of time, is to load up on usual defensive stocks like utilities and consumer nondurable shares.
Since bear markets generally occur because investors expect corporate profit growth to slow sharply, buying stocks with fat dividend yields like utilities offer a better cushion in a sluggish earnings environment than economically sensitive stocks, which carry skimpier dividends.
But that's usually the wrong reaction in a correction.
Unlike bear markets, corrections are less prolonged, far less tortuous and generally amount to a brief interruption in the overall bull market trend.
Right now estimates are that stock prices in the current correction will drop anywhere from 5% to 15% below the peaks set earlier this year.
"If you are in a bull market and the economy is still in the early stages of recovering, the stocks that hold up the best during a correction are different than when you are in the early stages of a bear market," says Charles Clough, stock strategist at Merrill Lynch.
Like most stock analysts, Mr. Clough thinks that the recent blast of selling, which has driven the Dow Jones Industrial Average down 3.5% from its peak of 3978.36 earlier this year, is just a correction.
Credit growth is moderate, inflation isn't a problem yet and the Federal Reserve hasn't raised interest rates to the point of slowing economic activity.
Moreover, with the economy revving up, corporate profits, which have been stunted until now by sluggish business activity, are likely to remain strong, providing a solid underpinning for the continuing bull market.
"This correction is certainly different from 1989 and 1990," says Mr. Clough.
Back then, Mr. Clough says stock investors were facing an economy that was headed into recession.
As a result, when stock prices pulled back in both those years, utility stocks and consumer nondurable shares generally fared better than the broader market.
But today, with the economy squarely on the expansion trail, Mr. Clough thinks that "deeper" cyclical stocks, or sectors that tend to crest late in the economic cycle, will wind up outperforming the overall market.
"Understand that there are some stocks that have probably peaked for the cycle, like utilities, most financial stocks and credit-sensitive stocks like home builders," says Mr. Clough.
"But deeper cyclical stocks like autos and trucking will go higher."
So will publishing stocks, capital spending-related companies and real estate investment trusts, or REITs, says Mr. Clough.
Unlike utilities, REITs offer much juicier yields and are likely to benefit as property values recover with the improving economy.
To some stock strategists, it's only logical that economically sensitive stocks will be the stars going forward.
David Shulman, chief equity strategist at Salomon Brothers, says this correction has been precipitated by a strengthening economy that is pushing interest rates higher.
That's why he's betting on sectors of the market that seem more risky, such as technology and shares of economically-sensitive companies, while shunning usual havens like utility stocks and consumer nondurable shares.
"If this was a full-blown bear market, I think the economically sensitive stocks would get hit hard," says Mr. Shulman.
"But since I think the weakness in the market is coming from a strengthening economy, I want to play on that strength."
Though economically sensitive stocks tumbled during last week's sell-off, cyclical shares generally performed better than utility and gold stocks, the usual standbys for conservative investors.
Elaine Garzarelli, stock strategist at Lehman Brothers, is so confident that the current correction is a mere blip in the bull market that she isn't recommending any defensive measures.
She figures the downturn will be over in a few weeks.
In the past, she notes, an increase in short-term rates by the Federal Reserve has typically triggered a four-week to eight-week retreat in stock prices that averages about 5%.
And with stock market sentiment as cautious as it is now and short-term rates still low by almost any measure, she thinks stocks are poised for further gains.
Of course, some stock strategists like Gail Dudack of S.G. Warburg think the stock market is so treacherous today that there are no sectors that offer comfort.
She started raising cash in late December and early January in anticipation of a correction that would take stocks prices lower in the first quarter.
"People have been asking me all day about safe havens but quite frankly I don't see any great ones out there," says Ms. Dudack.
Not surprising, says Gary Shilling, who heads a consulting company that bears his name.
"I think we've probably entered a bear market," says this longtime grizzly.
"By raising short-term rates, the Fed hoped to head off increases in inflation and, ironically, I think they will get the boom-bust scenario they hoped to avoid."
Mr. Shilling says the prospect that rates are rising will send consumers rushing out to buy houses and cars, bolstering the economy over the next few months.
But, by year end, consumers will be spent and interest rates will be higher, forcing a sudden slowdown in economic growth.
Trouble is, "people have been so successful with buying these last couple of years that it may take a long time before they are disabused of their hope," says Mr. Shilling.
Stocks ended mixed as bond prices stablized.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 1.12 points to 3838.78.
Standard & Poor's 500-stock index gained 1.81 points to 466.07 and the Nasdaq Composite index rose 4.34 to 783.78.
Volume on the Big Board totaled 273,220,000 shares, down from 341,620,000 shares Thursday.
Advancing issues outnumbered decliners, 1,169 to 963.
For the week, the industrial average dropped 1.25%, the S&P 500 fell 0.3% and the Nasdaq Composite lost 0.6%.
Weakness in cyclical stocks, and in shares of oil producer Chevron, put a lid on further gains in the industrial average.
Chevron lost 1 1/2 to 85 3/4 while other major oil stocks were mixed amid a drop in oil prices.
Auto stocks led the retreat in economically sensitive issues.
General Motors dropped 3/4 to 58 1/4, Ford Motor lost 1 to 61 1/2 and Chrysler shed 3/8 to 56.
Michigan National surged 3 1/4 to 63 3/4 on Nasdaq.
Heine Securities, a Short Hills, N.J., investment adviser, said it will push the Farmington Hills, Mich., company to seek an acquirer.
Heine holds a 5.5% stake.
Computer Sciences rallied 2 5/8 to 39 7/8.
A Dean Witter Reynolds analyst upgraded a rating on the El Segundo, Calif., company's stock to "buy."
Dean Witter had rated shares of the computer and communications systems provider "neutral."
Informix climbed 2 3/4 to 23 3/8 on Nasdaq after Salomon Brothers upgraded the stock to "buy" from "hold."
Salomon raised its estimate of the Menlo Park, Calif., software company's 1994 earnings to $1.05 a share, up from a prior forecast of 98 cents a share.
In 1993, Informix had a profit of 83 cents a share.
Raytheon jumped 1 3/8 to 62, while Loral lost 5/8 to 38 3/8.
A Defense Department board responsible for awarding contracts, has postponed a meeting at which it was expected to give a missile interceptor pact to Loral, according to people familiar with the situation.
Raytheon is making a competing system.
Wrigley Jr. rallied 3 1/2 to 48.
USA Today reported speculation that investor Warren Buffett could be interested in building a stake in the Chicago chewing gum company.
CNA Financial continued to slide, losing 3 1/4 to 69, after losing 5 3/4 Thursday.
The Chicago company's stock is to be removed from the S&P 500 index.
Shares of KeyCorp, based in Albany, N.Y., will replace CNA.
That stock was up 1 1/2 to 37 1/2.
Investment managers whose portfolios are designed to match the S&P 500 often buy and sell stocks as they are added and removed from that index.
Dave Pettit contributed to this article.
