The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether a federal law barring fraud in initial public sales of stock also applies to resales of the shares.
The justices will use a dispute between a New York investment banking firm, Allen & Co., and an Australian holding company, Pacific Dunlop Ltd., to decide the issue.
Asked by the high court for its views, the Clinton administration has already filed a brief urging the justices to interpret the antifraud law broadly.
If justices follow this advice, it would give plaintiffs an advantage in lawsuits alleging dishonesty in securities deals.
Section 12 (2) of the Securities Act of 1933 bars false statements or the omission of "material facts" in securities sales involving "a prospectus or oral communication."
The law is a potent weapon because -- unlike another major antifraud provision, Section 10 (b) of the 1934 Securities Exchange Act -- it doesn't require investors to prove that they actually relied on fraudulent statements or omissions in deciding whether to buy stock.
Section 12 (2) also allows for bigger damage awards.
Lower-court rulings have led to confusion over whether Section 12 (2) applies to securities transactions other than initial public offerings.
The justices presumably intend to clarify the ambiguity; a decision is expected by early summer.
In the case the high court will hear, Allen & Co. is appealing a ruling by the federal appeals court in Chicago, which said Section 12 (2) isn't restricted to initial offerings.
Allen was sued under Section 12 (2) in 1990 by a unit of Pacific Dunlop.
The unit alleged that the investment banking firm sold it stock in a battery-manufacturing company without disclosing that the company faced extensive environmental-liability claims.
A federal trial judge in Chicago dismissed the suit, but the appeals court reversed that ruling.
Allen then appealed to the Supreme Court.
(Allen & Co. vs. Pacific Dunlop Holdings Inc.)
Separately, the high court said it would consider how far courts or local governments may go in curbing protests outside abortion clinics.
The justices will examine a Florida state court's order that protesters had to stay out of a 36-foot-wide buffer zone around a Melbourne, Fla., clinic.
The case could have national implications because abortion-rights advocates have sought similar protection against protests and blockades in many states.
Antiabortion activists claim that the Florida court order violates their First Amendment right to speak freely.
Defenders of the Melbourne clinic, and other abortion providers in the state, counter that the protesters harassed patients and employees.
The trial judge in the case found that members of Operation Rescue, a militant antiabortion group, had obstructed the clinic's entrance, followed patients and clinic staff members "in a stalking manner," and on some occasions threatened violence against patients and employees.
Florida's Supreme Court upheld the judge's order.
But antiabortion activists appealing this decision pointed out that in a separate case involving the same order, the federal appeals court in Atlanta said that the order was unconstitutional because it restricted the protesters' expression based on their point of view.
(Madsen vs. Women's Health Center)
-- Agreed to decide whether union members may use a federal civil-rights statute to sue state officials for failing to enforce state labor laws.
The Clinton administration, which filed a brief at the justices' request, said that employees whose collective bargaining agreements are governed by federal law shouldn't be denied additional protections provided by a state labor law.
(Livadas vs. Aubry)
-- Consented to hear a separate labor-law case in which the question is whether airline and railroad workers may sue their employers in state courts for allegedly retaliatory firings.
The justices will consider an appeal by HAL Inc.'s Hawaiian Airlines of a lower-court ruling that said such suits may be filed under state laws.
Hawaiian Airlines argued that a federal labor-relations statute governing the railroad and airline industries supersedes state laws and requires workers to resolve their grievances in out-of-court arbitration proceedings.
(Hawaiian Airlines Inc. vs. Norris)
