Tokyo stocks snapped a four-session winning streak, skidding 2.3% Wednesday because of a crumbling Japanese bond market and weakness throughout world stock markets, which were still being whipped by bond markets' reaction to fears of rising inflation and interest rates.
These prospects seemed even more likely when a German money-supply report astonished European bourses.
London shares ended lower after recovering most of the day's deep losses when Wall Street opened stronger.
Frankfurt prices lost 2.3%, also rebounding from plunges but still setting a new closing low for this year.
Paris equities slid 1.8%, after climbing up from a 4.8% intraday hole.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.20, down 1.05.
Oilfield equipment stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 100.96, up 0.93, or 0.9%, with Dresser Industries of the U.S. posting a 2.2% gain in its local currency.
Entertainment stocks trailed at 145.19, down 18.23, or 11%, with Paramount Communications of the U.S. sliding 37% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which jumped 219.42 points Tuesday, plummeted 471.85 to 19744.77, near the session's low of 19724.27.
In trading Thursday, the Nikkei fell 64.70 points to close the morning session at 19680.07.
Wednesday's first-section volume was estimated at 400 million shares, down from 518.4 million shares a day earlier.
Losers clobbered gainers, 823-234.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which climbed 13.77 points Tuesday, lost 29.54, or 1.8%, to 1615.94.
The Nikkei's retreat, following gains from positive Japanese economic data earlier this week, came as corporate investors unloaded equities to lock in profits ahead of March 31 end of the fiscal year.
Investors got nervous as Japanese bond prices slumped Wednesday morning, but late in the day, bond yields, which move opposite prices, came off their highs, attributed to a growing belief that the Japanese economy has bottomed.
The Nikkei's afternoon plunge was attributed to index-linked arbitrage selling of equities as futures prices fell following news reports of U.S. action to allow quick imposition of trade sanctions on Japan if needed in the two countries' trade dispute.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index dropped 22.5 points to 3248.1.
The FT 30-stock index slipped 4.2 points to 2531.8.
Volume was 763.3 million shares, compared with 709.2 million shares a day earlier.
The market remained in negative territory all day, and the 100-stock index at its worst had lost 74.9 points, or 2.3%.
Prices fell in response to weakness in the gilt, or government bond, and futures markets; bonds and stock-index futures were pushed lower by U.S. economic data Tuesday, which fueled fears of higher U.S. interest rates, and the news from Germany yesterday.
The German Bundesbank said its M3 money-supply measure grew an astounding 20.6% in January on an annualized basis, dealing yet another blow to investors who had bet on falling interest rates to push stock prices up.
But a pickup on Wall Street after steep drops at the opening was interpreted in London as a positive signal, allowing stocks to claw back most of their losses; several brokerage houses said they bought bargains.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index plunged 46.72 points to 2020.33, after bouncing back from about 20 points lower.
Shares plunged early when the Bundesbank announced the money-supply data, citing continuing special factors and other distortions, but the growth far exceeded expectations.
This added to the market's jitters from a series of ill tidings, including weak U.S. Treasurys and German futures.
Though all 30 DAX stocks dropped, the German cabinet's decision to spend $5.21 billion to build a magnetic-train system between Hamburg and Berlin cushioned the blow for some shares that could benefit from the project.
In Paris, stocks partly recovered from a heavy thrashing that was sparked by the alarming German money-supply data, but still ended sharply lower in extremely nervous and volatile trading.
The market opened lower, depressed by a tiny German rate cut the previous day and by mounting anxiety about higher U.S. lending rates, then panic selling erupted following the Bundesbank report.
But Paris investors calmed along with others in Europe by late afternoon, helped by the stabilizing of losses on Wall Street.
In Amsterdam, share prices slumped to end near the day's lows, dragged down by sagging bond prices.
In Milan, the market including electronic trades sank 1.6%, also hurt by interest-rate blues sparked by the German report, damping hopes for Italian rate cuts.
In Madrid, stocks lost 2.3% after climbing up from lows along with a bond market recovery.
In Stockholm, the bourse dived 2%, as turmoil in bond markets depressed equity prices.
In Zurich, prices slid 2.8%, in line with the European trend on the German money-supply news.
In Brussels, stocks plummeted 2.4% on sightings of rising long-term interest rates.
In Sydney, despite good corporate profit reports, shares tumbled 1.3%, following the world trend of stock markets weakening as bond prices drop because of concern about a possible resurgence in inflation.
In Hong Kong, the market skidded 2.7%, spurred by continued selling of banking issues, and the financial sector dived 5%.
The persistent bearishness was linked to overseas selling of blue chips in the wake of global markets' declines prompted by rate worries.
In Singapore, stocks retreated 1.2% in thin volume, as caution in weak bourses abroad led institutional investors to lock in profits.
In Kuala Lumpur, prices were drubbed down 2.4%, with losses across the board, reflecting drops in regional markets; retail investors rushed to lock in gains, and each time that prices struggled up in sporadic bargain hunting, they were hammered back by heavy profit-taking.
In Manila, shares ended 2% lower, hurt by the declines in the telephone sector.
In Taipei, shares fell on discouraging economic news in Taiwan; construction shares slumped 1.4%.
In Seoul, stocks dropped 1.3% in heavy selling by individual investors; bank issues, which recently had gained on expectations for increasing capital, turned weak.
In Bangkok, shares plunged 2.7% in light trading amid continued poor market sentiment; foreign investors sold some blue-chip banking stocks.
But in Mexico City, stocks rallied 1.9% on news that rebels and the Mexican government tentatively agreed on ending the peasants' two-month-old rebellion in Chiapas, and by a rise in the U.S. dollar against the Mexican peso, which attracted foreign bargain hunters.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
