Harry and Louise may have the shrillest voices in the health insurance industry.
But they don't speak for everyone.
The Health Insurance Association of America's $10 million ad campaign, featuring the fictitious couple sitting around their kitchen table bashing the White House health-care proposal, has captured the spotlight.
Meanwhile, though, the nation's Big Five health insurers -- Aetna Life & Casualty Co., Cigna Corp., Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., Prudential Insurance Co. of America and Travelers Inc. -- have been quietly pursuing an agenda that in many ways is sharply at odds with the association's.
The two groups offer a case study in contrasting strategies for how best to influence the health debate.
The association has chosen a high-visibility public campaign, figuring that the louder it makes its case, the less it can be ignored.
By contrast, the Big Five, operating through their Alliance for Managed Competition, have gone out of their way to be more reserved.
Prudential, the last of the Big Five to leave the association, refused to help pay for the Harry and Louise spots.
Once, after Hillary Rodham Clinton blasted the ads, a spokesman for the Big Five group called reporters to point out that the alliance had nothing to do with them.
"If you want to be constructively engaged, why give the White House an excuse to throw stones?" asks Art Lifson, vice president for federal affairs at Cigna.
Last month, on a trip to Connecticut, President Clinton praised Aetna, Travelers and Cigna for not being involved with the ads.
In recent days, the association has begun beating a retreat from its hard-line stance.
Its president, Bill Gradison, last week wrote to Mr. Clinton suggesting that his group and the White House co-sponsor TV ads stressing "our willingness to work together" to achieve common goals.
And on Sunday, the association ran a full-page ad in the Washington Post emphasizing its agreement with the president's primary goal, coverage for every American.
Mr. Gradison says the Post ad, "a restatement of the positive side of our message," was a direct response to an ad campaign attacking the insurance industry by the Health Care Reform Project, a broad-based coalition supportive of the Clinton proposal.
He says the association "wouldn't change a thing we've done so far."
And he suggests that Harry and Louise, who were last seen on television at the end of February, could make a return if the White House doesn't tone down its own rhetoric.
The differences between the association's approach and that of the Big Five alliance can best be explained by where they came from.
The alliance companies were early supporters of the managed-competition concept that grew out of the Jackson Hole Group, an assortment of industry experts and academics who meet periodically in Wyoming.
The Jackson Hole philosophy would organize employers into insurance-buying pools, where the Big Five feel they could use their marketing clout to outmuscle their smaller rivals.
Although the association has some major companies in its ranks, including Principal Financial Group, New York Life Insurance Co. and Humana Inc., many of its 270 members are concerned that they would get shut out in such a system.
"The small and medium-sized companies fear there will be a competitive landscape rigged to favor the big guys," explains Robert Laszewski, a health-care consultant and former executive vice president of Liberty Mutual Insurance Group.
The Big Five alliance isn't the only group that has been irked by the association's hardball tactics.
"It hurts our credibility and reputation and it's troublesome," says Bernard Tresnowski, president of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, which represents 69 companies.
(The Big Five, association members and Blue Cross-Blue Shield plans each cover 60 million to 70 million people.)
The Blues even question whether the association is serious about reforming the health insurance market and eliminating the practice of "cherry picking," in which only the best risks are taken on.
"We meet them in the marketplace all the time, and that's their competitive niche: Give me your healthy and your young," Mr. Tresnowski asserts.
Like the AMC, the Blues have done a minimal amount of advertising, which has emphasized the need to move forward with the reform process, and underscored areas of agreement with the White House.
The Big Five's low-visibility efforts don't mean they aren't still big players in Washington.
They all boast active in-house lobbying operations here, are generous campaign contributors, and have signed up some of the most well-connected lobbyists in town.
Among them are Bill Oldaker, once the attorney for former House Speaker Jim Wright; Tom Ryan, a former top staff member for House Energy and Commerce Chairman John Dingell; and former Rep. Vin Weber, a Minnesota Republican.
The Big Five also recently hired Bonner & Associates to build support among thousands of community leaders across the country.
Among the pleas coming from the Bonner phone banks: Rally behind the bill sponsored by Tennessee Democratic Rep. Jim Cooper.
On some issues, the Big Five alliance and the association see eye to eye.
In one sense, both camps are already winners in the health debate, because there is virtually no chance that it will end in the kind of Canadian-style system that would wipe out the private insurance industry.
And now they are both vigorously fighting the caps on health insurance premiums that the Clinton proposal would impose.
But they differ sharply over such key proposals as the provision that would require all employers to help pay for their worker's health insurance.
Despite its war of words with the White House, the association backs the proposal, a key to guaranteeing universal coverage.
The alliance, however, is opposed to the employer mandate, worried that it would make it more difficult to battle price controls.
The powerful small-business lobby has made clear that if it is forced to swallow a mandate, it will try to hold down prices by advocating strict controls.
The Big Five alliance and the association are also split over the giant regional insurance-purchasing pools the Clinton proposal would establish.
With many association members afraid that they'll be frozen out, the group staunchly opposes requiring anybody to buy insurance through the pools.
The alliance rejects the Clinton approach as too regulatory and out of step with Jackson Hole, but it still calls for making enrollment in the pools mandatory for businesses with fewer than 100 workers.
However, Cigna's Mr. Lifson explains that the mandatory pools proposal isn't a "fall-on-the-sword issue for us."
In fact, the alliance isn't even of one mind on it.
Travelers does lots of business at the small end of the market, and is a leading member of another coalition lobbying against mandatory alliances.
For all of their differences, some believe the alliance and the association may have no choice but to fight together eventually.
Late last week, the association's Mr. Gradison and representatives of the Big Five met to exchange information and discuss areas of common ground.
Mr. Gradison has also chatted with the chairman of Prudential, Robert Winters.
After Sen. Jay Rockefeller (D., W.Va.), a Clinton ally, declared that there is a "special place in hell" for Mr. Winters for helping lead a Business Roundtable vote last month in favor of the Cooper proposal, Mr. Gradison called to tell him: "I'm glad to see I'm in such good company."
*Figures do not reflect contributions made by individual association members' own PACs.
