The Clinton administration released 51 reports showing how each of the states and the District of Columbia would fare under the president's health-care bill.
The unsurprising conclusion: All 51 would save money.
The stack of reports, about two-feet high, contains mounds of numbers.
But they are as much political documents as economic figures.
The administration plans to send them to every member of Congress as part of an effort to win over lawmakers with promises of savings for their states.
By the administration's analysis, states would save a total of $39.5 billion between 1996 and 2000, compared with what they would spend if the Clinton bill weren't enacted.
Much of the savings would come in state contributions to Medicaid, the federal-state health-care program for low-income people.
In addition, states would reap savings from a proposed federal long-term care program for the elderly, chronically ill and disabled.
"States are clearly among the winners under the Health Security Act," declared Kenneth Thorpe, the Health and Human Services Department's deputy assistant secretary for health policy.
The Clinton plan aims to guarantee a comprehensive package of health benefits to all Americans, while at the same time controlling medical costs.
All employers would be required to pay part of their workers' health premiums, and employers and individuals would be grouped into large buying pools to increase their bargaining clout with insurers and other health plans.
In addition, the plan would limit the annual increase in private health insurance premiums, as well as spending on Medicaid and Medicare, the federal health program for elderly and disabled people.
It is difficult to assess the accuracy of the administration's figures.
Lewin-VHI, a prominent health-care consulting firm that has done a previous analysis of the Clinton health plan, declined to comment on the reports, saying it hadn't had a chance to study them yet.
One big question is how politically realistic are Mr. Clinton's proposals to set stringent caps on premiums and public-health programs.
Another unknown is how much it will cost states to set up and administer the regional-buying pools that the White House is proposing.
Not surprisingly, the administration's figures show that the biggest savings would go to the biggest states.
They show that California, for example, would save $5.8 billion in Medicaid spending and long-term care programs.
The state would save an additional $707 million on state-employee health benefits in 2000, the administration says.
By 2000, the administration's analysis shows, California employers who currently offer insurance would save, on average, $1,082 a worker if the Clinton plan is enacted.
New York, where Democratic Gov. Mario Cuomo has expressed worry that the state would fare poorly under the Clinton plan, would actually do the best of all, by the administration's analysis.
It would save at least $8.6 billion in Medicaid and community-based long-term care expenditures between 1996 and 2000, according to the report.
New York state officials were dubious.
A state task force recently concluded the state would save only about $1 billion in Medicaid spending in the first four years, and actually would lose $300 million in the first year.
It expects not to save any money on long-term care.
"We stand by our earlier numbers," said Rick Cook, deputy secretary to the governor for health.
Meanwhile, Senate Republicans planned a party meeting Thursday and Friday on the health-care issue.
Few expect a single unified position to emerge from the session, but as the Clinton plan has faltered in Congress, conservatives are pressing party moderates to move back to the right so the GOP can maximize its leverage in the debate ahead.
Much of this pressure is directed at Rhode Island Sen. John Chafee, the lead sponsor of a GOP alternative that seeks to achieve universal health-insurance coverage by a combination of subsidies and mandates requiring all individuals to buy health insurance.
As chairman of the party's health-care task force, Mr. Chafee will host the retreat this week in Maryland.
And at the weekly caucus luncheon yesterday, conservatives pressed for a more open agenda to give senators more time to confront their differences.
"There is no question the Republicans are split on the question of mandates," said Oregon Sen. Robert Packwood in an interview televised by the Republican caucus this week.
"If you don't accept the concept of mandates, you don't get universal coverage.
That's where the split is," he said.
