Creators of the movie "The Flintstones" are already cashing in along Madstone, er, Madison Avenue.
Giant marketers, including McDonald's, Mattel, Lee Apparel, Topps and Thermos, are preparing to bombard consumers with everything from talking dolls to boxer shorts and suspenders to gummy bear candy, all featuring the Flintstones.
The tie-ins could be the most aggressive and numerous involving a movie ever, even outdistancing last year's juggernaut, "Jurassic Park."
Movie merchandising is exploding as companies try to repeat the success of "Batman," when $500 million of the caped crusader's paraphernalia was snatched up in a single season.
But tying in to "The Flintstones" is risky.
For one thing, the movie uses actors, including John Goodman from "Roseanne" as Fred Flintstone.
Baby boomers who grew up on the television series, which aired in prime time from 1960 to 1966 on ABC, are used to seeing the Flintstones and their neighbors the Rubbles as cartoon characters.
It isn't clear that "The Flintstones," the movie, will lure them into theaters when it opens nationwide on May 27, the kickoff of the summer movie season.
Even today's generation of children has had the animated characters reinforced through the popular Flintstone vitamins from Miles and Kraft General Foods' Fruity Pebbles and Cocoa Pebbles cereals.
And just because characters are popular on television doesn't mean they will work on the big screen.
"The Jetsons," a futuristic series from the creators of "The Flintstones," bombed as an animated film in 1990.
"The Coneheads," based on characters from the NBC show "Saturday Night Live," died a quick death at the box office last year.
The sequel to the "Addams Family" movie also didn't perform up to expectations in 1993.
And "Car 54, Where Are You?" is a question that could be asked about that movie, which disappeared shortly after its release this year.
But the real precedent for "The Flintstones" may be "Popeye."
The spinach-gulping, mumbling sailor is phenomenally popular as a cartoon.
But when Robin Williams played Popeye as a live person in a 1980 movie directed by Robert Altman, the film failed miserably.
The "Popeye" fiasco predated major tie-ins with fast food chains and other products.
But marketers recall hundreds of T-shirts, among other items, with the "Popeye" movie logo that probably ended up in the trash heap.
Mr. Williams was spared any marketing humiliation because he didn't license his likeness.
There's no such issue with Mr. Goodman or other members of the cast, which includes Rick Moranis, Rosie O'Donnell and Elizabeth Perkins.
Their likenesses will adorn everything from cereal boxes to toys.
And therein lies another problem.
"If the movie doesn't connect with audiences, the merchandise won't sell through at retail because the characters don't bear the images of the classic Fred and Wilma," says Seth Siegel, co-chairman of the Beanstalk Group, a New York licensing and merchandising agency.
Truth to tell, not only do some of the products, such as the toy figures from Mattel, not look like Fred Flintstone; they don't look much like John Goodman either.
Stare for more than a moment and the figure bears an uncanny resemblance to Lou Costello, half of the comedy team of Abbott and Costello.
Some of these items could suffer the fate of other giant merchandising efforts tied to the Steven Spielberg film "Hook," starring Dustin Hoffman, "The Jetsons" and "The Last Action Hero."
Remember $400 Jetsons jackets or the more affordable Jetsons toothbrushes?
Nonetheless, marketers are betting millions that "The Flintstones," from Hanna-Barbera/Amblin Entertainment Production, released by Universal Pictures, will be the megahit of the summer.
For instance, McDonald's is expected to spend more than the $25 million to $30 million it lavished on its 1992 "Batman Returns" marketing campaign.
The fast-food chain drew criticism back then because its promotion was aimed at kids even though many parents felt the Batman movie was too dark for children.
"Companies have to be very careful who they align themselves with," cautions John Lister, chief executive officer of Lister Butler, a New York consulting firm specializing in corporate brands.
"It sounds as if a lot of these companies just want increased instant exposure and aren't doing much to protect the long-term image of their brands."
Marketing experts note that two products with long-term ties to the cartoon Flintstones could end up confusing their customers by placing Mr. Goodman on packages instead of the animated Fred.
Miles, for instance, which introduced Flintstones children's vitamins in 1969, is producing special packages with Mr. Goodman instead of a drawing of Mr. Flintstone.
Mr. Goodman is also being used in life-size stand-up posters advertising Flintstones vitamins in drugstores, and Miles is offering customers a "YabbaDabba-Doo" kit featuring game books and movie stickers.
Post is also bumping the cartoon figures on its cereal boxes in favor of the actors.
Post, which introduced Pebbles cereals in March 1982, didn't return calls seeking comment.
The companies selling the movie to advertisers play down the risk of overexposure.
Lois Sloane, executive vice president of world-wide licensing and merchandising for Turner Home Entertainment, contends there isn't a "danger of glutting the market with Flintstones property.
We think it is exciting to introduce something new and exciting to a 34-year-old property."
(Turner Broadcasting System owns Hanna-Barbera Productions, and Turner Home Entertainment is the distribution arm of Turner Broadcasting.)
Linda Berkeley, senior vice president and head of MCA/Universal Merchandising, believes McDonald's alone will give the movie a huge boost.
"McDonald's is putting together its first ever global promotion in support of this movie," she says, "so we're on track to make this a success."
A spokeswoman for McDonald's declines comment on the specifics of the promotion, which is expected to be a variation of its Happy Meal package.
Meanwhile, Fred, Wilma, Barney and Betty will have to face some competition of their own for the family audience this summer.
Walt Disney will release a new animated movie, "The Lion King," with original music from Elton John.
And Disney has already signed Burger King, Nestle and Eastman Kodak, among others, as promotional partners.
In short, here comes summer and, as Mr. Siegel puts it, "another licensing free-for-all."
Saatchi & Saatchi Co. contradicted reports that Robert Kennedy, who left his post as North American chairman and chief executive of Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising last month, received $6 million as part of a package to sever a multi-year contract.
"The charge to our profit and loss account will be lower than the figure quoted" in published reports in Europe, a spokesman for the British holding company said, declining to be more specific.
The company is expected to report its year-end financial results next month.
When Mr. Kennedy left Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising in January, the company had originally said he retired.
Mr. Kennedy, a longtime Saatchi veteran, was removed from his North American post last month after just a year at it.
Published reports said he had earned $800,000 a year in that job under a multi-year contract.
The Saatchi spokesman declined to discuss details of Mr. Kennedy's contract but added, "A similar contract wouldn't now be put in place."
Saatchi chief executive Charles Scott must approve contracts of more than a year, he said.
"No contract over three years would be put in place at all."
CME KHBB, which Saatchi & Saatchi launched as its third global agency network with an eminently obscure name, has reverted back to a better-known, easier to pronounce name, Campbell Mithun Esty, in North America.
In September 1992, Saatchi merged two of its units, the staid Midwestern agency Campbell Mithun Esty and the London shop KHBB.
The name of the resulting agency, CME KHBB, raised eyebrows on Madison Avenue.
Now, CME KHBB is dropping its artless moniker in the U.S. and Canada, reverting to the names of three of its founders.
In Europe, where the KHBB name is more recognized, the CME KHBB name will remain in use.
But as the agency expands into new markets, the Campbell Mithun name will be on the door.
Campbell Mithun's president, Howard Liszt, said, "We needed a name that was simpler and better clarified our brand image.
The initials were counterproductive, and we're already known as Campbell Mithun anyway."
