Russian President Boris Yeltsin told President Clinton that he intends to continue his march toward a market economy despite expected roadblocks from a new, more conservative parliament.
"President Yeltsin emphasized there is no turning back from fighting inflation and continuing to privatize," Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said after a two-hour meeting between the two chiefs of state and their economic teams.
In fact, the Yeltsin government wants to accelerate some of its reforms, Mr. Bentsen said.
To drive home the point, Mr. Yeltsin had told Mr. Clinton in an earlier, private meeting that Anatoly Chubais, the architect of Russia's privatization program, will remain in his cabinet as deputy prime minister.
There had been speculation that Mr. Chubais wouldn't be reappointed.
Mr. Yeltsin is expected to name a new cabinet Monday, and U.S. officials are hoping that he'll stick with his reform team, including Finance Minister Boris Fyodorov.
Mr. Yeltsin gave no hints about the fate of other officials, but one U.S. participant in the meetings said Mr. Fyodorov "projected a sense of continuity."
But Mr. Clinton also got a firsthand taste of some of the difficulties Mr. Yeltsin and his reform team may encounter from parliament.
At a reception for prominent Russians at Spasso House, the U.S. ambassador's residence, Sergei Baburin, a parliamentarian from the anti-Yeltsin ultranationalist party that scored strongly in the Dec. 12 elections, loudly warned Mr. Clinton not to forget the role of parliament in making policy.
One of the administration's fears is that parliament will oppose Yeltsin anti-inflation policies.
In remarks at the reception, Mr. Clinton noted that U.S. support shapes events in Russia, but stated that "in the end you will have to decide your future."
Although the meetings yesterday morning dealt mainly with the pace and importance of Russia's economic changes, U.S. officials said that Presidents Clinton and Yeltsin agreed in their private meeting that the two former adversaries will stop aiming their nuclear weapons at each other.
Instead, the missiles will be retargeted toward the oceans.
The change is mostly symbolic, because the missiles can be redirected very quickly, but it does reduce the chance of a nuclear accident.
This change will be announced today, when the leaders sign a disarmament agreement under which the U.S. will pay Russia and three other former Soviet republics for dismantling nuclear weapons.
U.S. officials were clearly upbeat after the meetings.
They said there was a strong sense of rapport.
"We've been reassured about the Russians' commitment to reform, and I think that Russians have been reassured about our commitment to reform," said one participant in the meetings.
"There was a sense of shared strategy."
Secretary Bentsen said the presidents agreed that more "attention has to be paid to easing the hardships" of reform, such as unemployment, inflation and uncertainty.
Mr. Clinton outlined several steps to speed aid to Moscow as reform continues.
He said the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the Group of Seven major industrial nations are prepared to carry through on earlier promises of aid as quickly as the reforms permit.
Mr. Clinton gave some details of previously announced plans to support equity investments in newly privatized Russian businesses.
Since the elections, both Washington and Moscow have begun to pay more attention to bolstering social-support programs, particularly unemployment and retraining benefits for workers in inefficient industries that must be closed.
Mr. Clinton said the discussions focused on "the specific things we can do to keep the economic reform going in Russia and to help the Russian people to realize the benefits of the courageous changes that have been going on."
The U.S. embrace of Boris Yeltsin and his policies is based on the calculation that he has the best chance of leading Russia toward free markets and, ultimately, strong democratic institutions.
That's one of the reasons U.S. officials were so pleased by the reappointment of Mr. Chubais as privatization chief.
Under his leadership, about 70% of the nation's shops, hotels and other small enterprises have been taken over by private owners.
About 40% of the workers in heavier industries also work for private companies now.
U.S. officials believe these changes are irreversible.
Both U.S. and Russian officials hope that the policies will attract more foreign investment to the former Soviet Union.
Yesterday, Mr. Bentsen and Secretary of State Warren Christopher attended the first meeting of the newly formed American Chamber of Commerce in Moscow.
Several of the bankers, oil executives and others who spoke at the meeting stressed how hard it was to do business in Russia.
Laws change, bureaucrats are rigid, and uncertainty reigns, they said.
The U.S. pastor who said grace even hit the theme.
"Do not let us lose hope," he prayed.
