It's been a bad week for the tobacco industry: First, the Surgeon General attacked Joe Camel cigarette advertising; then the Food and Drug Administration raised the possibility of regulating cigarettes.
Now, a more immediate threat to tobacco companies looms in Baltimore.
The Baltimore City Council voted Monday to restrict much of the cigarette advertising in the city, forbidding outdoor ads on billboards, on the sides of buildings and on freestanding signboards.
The move follows by less than three months a similar measure governing advertising for alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, in Baltimore.
The Baltimore ordinances are the latest and, in some ways, the most far-reaching of local efforts to restrict tobacco and alcohol advertising in public places.
Cities such as Boston, San Francisco and Denver have voted to keep tobacco ads off public transportation and other city-owned property.
But the Baltimore ordinance goes further, restricting ads on privately owned space.
"It's going after billboards on private property," says David Versfelt, who is counsel to the American Association of Advertising Agencies.
"This isn't regulating them.
This is banning them."
The cigarette measure is almost certain to face legal challenges from the tobacco industry.
The alcohol measure is being contested in U.S. District Court in Baltimore by Anheuser-Busch and Penn Advertising, which owns 1,000 of the 1,100 billboards in Baltimore.
"We think this just comes down to a basic first-amendment right to advertise," says Fred Lauer, Penn's director of governmental affairs.
He says about 43% of the company's $10 million in revenue comes from affected tobacco and alcohol billboards.
Exempted from the Baltimore bans are billboards on public transportation, along interstate highways, in sports stadiums and on taxicabs.
But even those exemptions may not last long.
Already, Maryland Governor Donald Schaefer has signed an executive order banning tobacco and alcohol ads from city buses.
The Baltimore measures are the result of campaigns by several local activist groups, including the City Wide Liquor Coalition, which contend that alcohol and tobacco companies target minors with ads in lower-income neighborhoods.
Bev Thomas, chairwoman of the group, says she and like-minded citizens grew disgusted by pictures of glamorous people smoking and drinking at every turn in these neighborhoods.
"A young person would see that as the way to be successful -- to have either a drink or a cigarette in their hands," Ms. Thomas says.
She observes that such brands as Newport cigarettes and Hennessey cognac were most prevalent in predominantly black, low-income neighborhoods.
In low-income white communities, ads for Camel and Marlboro cigarettes and Jack Daniels liquor dominated, she says.
"We don't see a Nike, not a Coca-Cola or a Campbell Soup."
The alcohol industry argues that unless it can be shown that its ads increase consumption, there is no reason to ban them.
In a prepared statement, Anheuser-Busch said it believes, "Baltimore won't be able to prove, as it must, that there is a causal relationship between exposure to beer advertising and consumption in general, and under-age consumption in particular."
The Tobacco Institute says it hasn't yet decided whether to file a formal legal challenge.
But it is already at work debunking the notion that a ban would affect the rate of smoking.
Walker Merryman, vice president at the Insitute, asserts that studies show tobacco ad restrictions in Scandinavian countries had no effect on smoking.
"The world isn't a sandbox," he says.
"You can't limit the adult population or any city to seeing advertising that is only fit for children."
Drafters of the Baltimore measures disagree, citing a ban on outdoor tobacco advertising in Utah that has been in place for more than six decades.
Viewers' exposure to outdoor advertising is almost completely involuntary, they say, compared with ads in magazines, newspapers and television, which can be shut out by turning a page or changing a channel.
The Surgeon General's report, which links teen smoking to tobacco advertising, offers more ammunition for the bills' proponents.
However, scientific proof is beside the point in these cases, says Chris Fritz, a lawyer who works with the Coalition.
"Courts are realizing some cases aren't susceptible to scientific proof," he says.
"In this instance, there isn't any control group.
There is no part of society that hasn't been permeated by cigarette and alcohol advertising."
Philips Consumer Electronics, a unit of Philips Electronics NV, tapped D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles, New York, for its estimated $30 million account, ending a review that had attracted some of the biggest names on Madison Avenue.
Last fall, Philips abruptly dismissed Saatchi & Saatchi Co.'s Backer Spielvogel Bates and put the account into review.
The agency change was a surprise and something of a mystery: Backer's "Smart.
Very Smart" commercials for Philips's Magnavox consumer electronics brand, starring the comedian John Cleese, were considered among the best work it did.
By one estimate, a dozen agencies clamored to get into the pitch.
The search had been narrowed recently to DMB&B and two other shops, Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis, and Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass.
Philips said a new Magnavox campaign is due this fall.
Separately, another Philips agency search is continuing, for CD-i, Philips's interactive compact-disk home-entertainment system.
Finalists in the pitch for the estimated $10 million account are the Los Angeles office of DMB&B; Los Angeles agency Cohen/Johnson; and San Francisco shop Woolward & Partners.
Foote Cone & Belding Communications, Chicago, ousted Eric Weber from his position as executive creative director of its flagship office, industry executives said, naming Geoff Thompson, a top creative manager in its San Francisco office, as Mr. Weber's successor.
Mr. Weber, 51 years old, said the decision to leave his high-profile job was his own.
"I haven't wanted to be an executive creative director for six months now," he said.
"I wanted to go back to New York and concentrate on my own campaigns."
Mr. Weber left a top creative job at Young & Rubicam, New York, in 1991 for the post at FCB.
He said he intends to finish work on a new campaign for Diners Club and then find a new position at FCB's New York or Philadelphia operations.
Foote Cone announced the appointment of Mr. Thompson to the post of executive vice president and executive creative director, overseeing creative output of its Chicago office.
Mr. Thompson, 51, was previously senior vice president and group creative director at FCB San Francisco, working on accounts including Coors Brewing's Zima Clearmalt and Levi's jeans for women.
Executives said top management at Foote Cone was unhappy that its flagship office wasn't keeping pace creatively with its San Francisco and New York operations.
Mr. Weber disagreed, citing recent new business wins for Chicago including Alka Seltzer Plus, Cadbury Schweppes and Louis Rich meats.
"I'd hold our work up against anyone's," he said.
The new appointment is effective April 1.
Ad Notes. . . .
TERMINATION: Nikon Inc., a unit of Nikon Corp. of Japan, fired Ammirati & Puris and said it would start a search for a new shop.
In a statement, Nikon complained of "frequent changes" in creative and account services personnel.
Martin Puris, the agency chief executive, countered that the account was impossible to staff the way Nikon wanted because it didn't approach the $15 million billings promised in the pitch three years ago.
WHO'S NEWS: Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago, named Mary Ann Quick executive vice president and chief creative officer, ending a year-long search for a creative successor to former partner Tony Vanderwarker, who left the agency in 1992.
Ms. Quick, 45 years old, was an executive vice president and group creative director at Leo Burnett Co., working on accounts including United Airlines, McDonald's, Kellogg's, and Procter & Gamble.
TV ADVERTISING: Revenue from advertising at television stations rose 4% in 1993, to $23.7 billion, according to the Television Bureau of Advertising.
For the full year, advertising by local companies was up 6% to $5.57 billion; "spot," or local advertising by national advertisers, was up 3% to $5.62 billion.
Quarterly results were more dramatic: total ad revenue rose 11% in the fourth quarter of 1993, compared with the year-earlier period.
ACCOUNT: Ally & Gargano, New York, said it won an estimated $3 million account from the Krugerrand Organization, the international chamber of mines that mints the gold bullion coins.
