There may have been as many as 10,000 livestock carcasses on one branch of the Overland Trail.
Mexican bandits, Indian raiders and plain old highwaymen abounded.
On the ground there was heat and snow -- and winds so strong they could topple a Conestoga.
On ships there were crowded conditions and scurvy.
One group of travelers got so hungry they ate their own dog -- and then when one of the party died of exhaustion, they ate him too.
Fools and dreamers chased after gold from 1848 to 1900, seeking it in California, of course, but also in Alaska, Colorado, Montana and Idaho.
The gold rushes were gales of change that blew across the continent, opening the prairies and mountains to white settlement, changing the land and shaping the culture of the West.
Boom towns sprung up, only to disappear into dust.
A few fortunes were made, and many small caches of savings were depleted for vain hopes.
It all began in 1848 at Sutter's Mill, when a New Jersey carpenter found a particle of gold "about half the size and shape of a pea."
Within a year, 90,000 people, mostly the young and the desperate, were on their way to pick up what God and geology placed in California.
They were the '49ers, the pioneers in a movement that, by the time it was over, would send a million souls west, to starve, get hurt, go nuts and, in many cases, die.
For years the best book about this mad scramble wasn't even written by an American.
It was Pierre Berton's "Klondike," the 1972 volume that completed his history of the opening of the Canadian Northwest between Confederation and World War I. But now comes Paula Mitchell Marks's "Precious Dust: The American Gold Rush Era, 1848-1900" (William Morrow, 448 pages, $25), a comprehensive, lively look at the entire era, written with the proper skepticism.
Many of these searchers after gold were rogues, criminals, fools and misfits, with lots of childish dreamers sprinkled among them.
"They lived in brush arbors, tents, and rude cabins, furnishing those abodes with found items and ingenuity, as a purposeful child would a playhouse.
In an odd echo of childhood pastimes, they spent their days on treasure hunts and planning other improbable schemes for wealth," writes Ms. Marks.
We have come to think of the search for gold -- "a mad rush," in the words of one Alaska stampeder, "to a land nobody knows anything about" -- as a truly American phenomenon.
The gold rushes are also a marker in our history; Ms. Marks argues that they represent the end of the idea that frugality and hard work are what it takes to make it in America (and to heaven).
The stampedes lasted for a half-century, expiring when the new finds dried up and when it became clear that almost nobody got rich chasing after gold.
By the time the whole thing was over, the country had been transformed, its center of gravity shifted, its culture jolted, its image of itself adjusted.
No longer was the West an untamed, unsettled "land of extremes," empty and foreboding.
No longer did the mercantile life of the U.S. end at St. Louis.
Even when the silver and copper bonanzas are added in, the mining West added little to the wealth of the country.
And the men who depleted their savings and borrowed from their relatives to go west spent far more money outfitting and transporting themselves than they found in their pitiful little metal pans.
The gold-rush communities were, as one observer put it, "like the cities of the magic lantern, which a motion of the hand can build or annihilate."
In one year the settlement of Nome grew from three tents and a log cabin to a city of 20,000 people.
In these communities, the science of urban planning was unknown, but laws of supply and demand were well-respected.
Thus Dawson had 30 saloons and only two barbershops.
It also had, according to one account, "an uncounted number of lawyers" and 235 gamblers.
Not all the players in this national melodrama were men.
Among the women, some were gold diggers, some dug gold.
Nearly everywhere they went they caused a sensation, women being, as one Klondike stampeder said, "scarcer than gold."
In Georgia Gulch, Colo., a horde of men turned up to gawk at the new waitress.
Because there were so few women, Western governments, looking for inducements, were willing to give them greater legal freedoms than available elsewhere.
In many communities women had the vote, a right not extended to all American women for another half-century.
And of course this crazy spectacle brought out some unruly, stupid behavior.
People paid $8 a dozen for eggs.
They pushed themselves beyond the limits of endurance.
They prodded their animals unmercifully.
One sadist, exasperated that his weary oxen would not move, built a fire under them.
He roasted them alive.
Mr. Shribman is Washington bureau chief of the Boston Globe.
