Three weeks ago, the House voted 238 to 181 to continue exempting Members of Congress from the independent counsel law that covers other government officials.
The House's leaders solemnly declared that Congress must take the lead in policing the behavior of its own.
Fat chance.
This week, when Rep. Ernest Istook wanted the Ethics Committee to finally probe the two-year-old embezzlement scandal at the House Post Office, more than 95% of the Members who voted against independent counsels for Congress also voted against Mr. Istook.
He lost 238 to 186.
The excuse given was that a Congressional probe would interfere with a simultaneous effort by federal prosecutors.
But there's little risk of that if the Ethics Committee doesn't grant immunity to witnesses.
GOP Rep. Porter Goss, an Ethics Committee member, says by comparison that no major corporation would delay an internal review of its operations just because a criminal inquiry was under way.
"If we can't enforce the rules of this body every time someone is being investigated, then the Ethics Committee is completely gutted," he told us.
The Senate Ethics Committee has had no qualms about looking into allegations against Senator Bob Packwood while he's being investigated by the Justice Department.
So we have a majority of House Members who are now on record against subjecting themselves to scrutiny by outside prosecutors (their names were listed in these columns on Tuesday), while virtually the same Members have voted to put off an internal review of the biggest House criminal scandal of recent years until probably after the next election.
Clip and save this for November.
The following Members voted against an immediate investigation of the House Post Office scandal: Dellums, Lantos, Stark, Eshoo, Mineta, Edwards, Farr, Condit, Lehman, Dooley, Beilenson, Berman, Waxman, Becerra, Martinez, Dixon, Roybal-Allard, Torres, Waters, Harman, Tucker, Brown, Schenk, Filner Conyers, Collins, Dingell Maloney, Rangel, Serrano, Engel, Lowey, McNulty, Hinchey, Slaughter, LaFalce Clayton, Neal Traficant, Applegate, Fingerhut Kanjorski, Murtha, Coyne, McHale, Frost, Ortiz, Tejeda, Green, Johnson, E.B., Wilson, Pickle, Geren, Laughlin, Coleman Kreidler
