Norway agreed to join the European Union, following a compromise with Spain on fishing rights.
Austria, Finland and Sweden reached EU membership agreements two weeks ago.
The 12-nation trade bloc hopes to induct the four countries Jan. 1, pending national approvals.
Under the deal with Norway, Spain and Portugal were granted extra fishing quotas in Norwegian waters and the EU promised to try to purchase quotas elsewhere in the world, including Russia and Canada.
The EU also agreed that restrictions on Spanish and Portuguese vessels fishing in EU waters would be lifted in 1996, seven years ahead of schedule.
But EU ministers were unable to resolve a dispute about votes needed to block legislation in the enlarged union.
Britain and Spain, which fear an erosion of their ability to defend national interests, want to maintain a veto by two large countries and one small one.
But the other 10 member states want this changed to reflect votes granted to the four applicants.
Foreign managers in South Korea said government red tape is the greatest barrier to doing business in the country.
Of 349 executives surveyed by the Chosun Ilbo newspaper, 47% said regulations posed the most harm to foreign investment.
Prejudice against foreigners ranked second at 20%.
Other respondents cited market inaccessibility and labor disputes.
Foreign investment fell from its height of $1.28 billion in 1988 to $1.04 billion last year.
The Czech government will distribute up to $33.7 million to about 20,000 citizens who were incarcerated in Nazi jails and concentration camps during World War II.
The money will come from either the state's small privatization program or the sale of property owned by the now-defunct Czechoslovak Communist Party.
The Nazis occupied Bohemia and Moravia from March 1939 until May 1945, when Czechoslovakia was liberated by Allied forces.
The Czech and Slovak republics split apart in January 1993.
Rich countries and developing nations broke a deadlock on a voting formula for a new body to protect the world environment.
The agreement in Geneva by delegates from 87 countries clears the way for more than $2 billion in pledges to set up a global fund.
The U.S. is expected to be the largest donor and thus have the most clout, followed by Japan.
The accord organizing the Global Environment Facility would help finance projects suggested at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro.
Mauritius is setting itself up as an investment hub and tax haven in the Indian Ocean region.
The island nation increasingly is attracting funds that invest in India.
Mauritius seeks to become a financial center similar to Dublin, which last year had the greatest growth in offshore mutual-fund listings.
The 15 offshore funds now based in Mauritius invest in India and are mostly European.
The country expects to register U.S. funds investing in India, and later to attract funds investing in Pakistan, Sri Lanka, South Africa and other African nations.
China plans to open by year end three banks to fund national development projects, a crucial part of Vice Premier Zhu Rongji's financial reforms.
The Import-Export Bank of China, which will help finance major trade deals, is expected to open first, followed by the National Development Bank, and a new wing of the Agricultural Development Bank of China.
The banks will receive funds from the central government and issue long-term bonds.
The specialized banks may become commercial banks or shareholding companies in three to five years.
A simplified law aimed at streamlining and accelerating the privatization of Latvian industrial enterprises took effect.
The measure, which replaces a 1992 law, establishes a nonprofit Privatization Agency to centralize and oversee the restructuring and sale of state-owned enterprises.
Under the old privatization program, sales were handled by 170 part-time commissions, and the process could take longer than a year.
In 1993, only 42 industrial enterprises, or less than 10% of the target, were sold.
The government had hoped to sell off more than 400 companies a year under the old system.
The goal under the new program is about 200 companies a year.
The Privatization Agency, which is to start operating next month, will employ about 100 people and operate under the Economics Ministry.
Latvia still has about 1,500 state-owned enterprises.
Meanwhile, about 60% of city-owned storefront businesses and services, which aren't part of the privatization program, have already been sold off.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Transport workers in Poland staged warning strikes in the southern cities of Katowice and Sosnowiec in the latest protests by the Solidarity trade union against government economic policy. . . .
A strike by journalists in Italy, protesting the slow pace of their pension program's privatization, shut down all major Italian daily newspapers, which are to resume publication tomorrow.
