Coca-Cola Co. said it is "confident" it will reach 8% volume growth in its international business this year.
Separately, the soft-drink company outlined plans for a $350 million promotional campaign for the summer, the biggest in Coke's history.
The volume projection -- made by John Hunter, president of Coke's international business sector, in an address to industry analysts here -- appeared to be a bid to bolster investor confidence in the company.
In recent years, Coke has predicted that volume in overseas markets, which account for about 80% of the company's earnings, would grow at a rate of about 8% to 10%.
But final figures have sometimes fallen short of that goal.
Last year, international volume grew 6%.
But Mr. Hunter said Coke is optimistic that 8% growth is achievable this year because economies in key countries, such as Germany, are expected to rebound later this year.
Moreover, Coke sees strong sales in emerging markets such as China and Eastern Europe, as well as sales gains in the Latin America and Pacific markets.
Mr. Hunter also said the company is "cautiously" looking at acquiring other brands in other markets, after the success of Coke's purchase of Parle Exports Ltd. in India last year.
Parle brands control 60% of the India market.
Meanwhile, Coke's summer marketing campaign, called "Red Hot Summer," will run for 11 weeks beginning in mid-May.
The package will be tied into programming on the Fox television network in an effort to attract young consumers.
Prizes will be featured on multipacks and bottles of Coke's core brands and in selected fountain outlets.
About $30 million in TV and radio advertising will be spent to support the campaign.
Tom Pirko, a beverage industry consultant, said the moves are in keeping with Coke's plan to respond faster to changing consumer tastes.
"They're trying to shake off about 10 years of very conservative domestic behavior," Mr. Pirko said.
Since the youth market has been Pepsi's franchise for several years, Mr. Pirko said, it will be interesting to see how that company responds to Coke's summer marketing juggernaut.
In Purchase, N.Y., a spokeswoman for PepsiCo Inc., declined to give any details about the company's summer plans -- but said the company perceives Coke's moves as the highest form of flattery.
"It's a compliment to be considered the benchmark for successful advertising and marketing," she said.
