Insiders at Fieldcrest Cannon Inc., the household-textile manufacturer, have been snapping up shares in the company as the stock continues to hit new highs.
Six directors and senior officers at the Eden, N.C., maker of towels, blankets and linens purchased a combined 22,000 shares between mid-December and late-February, raising their respective stakes in the company by an average 33%, recent filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission show.
The shares were purchased at an average $26 a share, with prices ranging from $25.375 to $28.75 a share.
Yesterday, Fieldcrest's thinly traded stock hit a 52-week high on the New York Stock Exchange, closing at $31, a gain of $1, or 3.3%.
Despite the stock's strong run-up since the beginning of the year, it is still trading at a relatively low multiple of around 14 times the trailing four quarters' earnings.
"It's rare to see insiders buying at the top like this," said Bob Gabele, president of CDA/Investnet, a Fort Lauderdale, Fla., firm that tracks insider activity.
What's more typical, he says, is for insiders to buy aggressively after their company's shares have been beaten down.
Fieldcrest's chairman and chief executive officer, James Fitzgibbons, was the most aggressive purchaser of the group, buying 9,000 shares at $26.50 a piece on Feb. 8, SEC data indicate.
Mr. Fitzgibbons currently holds around 30,000 shares in the company.
He was traveling yesterday and was unavailable for comment.
Thomas Staab, the company's chief financial officer, who bought 1,200 shares on Feb. 8 at $26.13 a share, said he purchased the shares as "a sound long-term investment."
He wouldn't elaborate.
Analysts say the company seems poised to record significant earnings growth this year, following cost-cutting and debt-reduction moves.
Indeed, Fieldcrest's stock got a boost last month when the company beat analysts' expectations for the fourth quarter.
On Feb. 2, the company reported per-share net income of 77 cents for the quarter ended Dec. 31, well up on the 66-cents-a-share mean estimate provided by the Institutional Brokers Estimate System, and on the 58-cents-a-share operating profit posted a year earlier.
Pamela Singleton, an analyst with Merrill Lynch in New York, thinks the company will report a solid increase in revenue and an even bigger jump in net for the first quarter.
"We could see net, after the payout of preferred dividends and on fewer shares outstanding, of 45 cents a share vs. 22 cents" a year earlier, Ms. Singleton says.
Two factors seem to be helping the stock, she says.
Demand for household and home-improvement products has been on the rise, one of the few retail sectors to show persistent strength.
What's more, there is growing anticipation that Fieldcrest, a major buyer of cotton, will seek to pass on the rising cost of the commodity to consumers through one or more price increases later this year.
The company has said it plans to put through a 5% price increase as of July 1.
One potential negative facing Fieldcrest is the citation of the company last week by the National Labor Relations Board for 150 violations of labor law.
Fieldcrest was ordered by two NLRB judges to give back pay to some 4,000 employees and 14 dismissed workers, pay that may total more than $3 million.
The company has said it will appeal at least a portion of the rulings, which pertain chiefly to the firing of 13 workers during a 1991 union-organizing campaign and to the case of a worker who was laid off last year.
Mr. Staab, the company's chief financial officer, said Fieldcrest already has agreed to pay out $1.5 million to the affected parties and that the remainder will be appealed.
Kay Norwood, an analyst with brokers Interstate/Johnson Lane in Charlotte, N.C., says any remaining fallout from the labor-law ruling probably won't have much of an impact on the company's bottom line this year.
She sees Fieldcrest posting earnings of $2.75 a share this year, compared with $1.88 a share from continuing operations in 1993.
On the basis of her 1994 earnings estimate, the company's stock is currently trading at around 11 times forward earnings forecasts.
"That multiple is definitely at the low end of the range for the group of 15 textile companies I cover," she says, noting that the group's average forward price-earnings ratio is about 12 times.
Because of the sharp appreciation of the stock, Ms. Norwood currently rates Fieldcrest a "hold."
She remains generally bullish, however.
Even if the anticipated price increase doesn't hold in the second half, the company has insulated itself from further cost pressures from raw materials this year, she says.
"Fieldcrest has already purchased all the cotton they need for the whole year -- the bigger question is whether the price increase can hold," she says.
