CBS Inc. reported a 39% rise in fourth-quarter earnings on the strength of its television network, which posted its first fourth-quarter profit since 1985.
CBS said net income for the quarter rose to $46.4 million, or $2.77 a share, from $33.3 million, or $2.14 a share, a year ago.
Sales in the quarter rose 7.7%, to $1.04 billion from $968.3 million.
Revenue growth at the television network was aided by higher pricing of commercials during the prime evening hours and by new revenues from Late Show with David Letterman, which made its debut last August, the company said.
CBS said that at its Television Stations division, the sales increase for the quarter was the best quarterly increase for 1993, helped mainly by double-digit gains at stations in New York, Chicago, Philadelphia and Miami.
CBS Radio's sales rose slightly, led by gains at the division's radio networks.
The company's shares were off slightly, falling $2.25 to close at $311 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
John G. Nelson, an analyst at Brown Brothers Harriman, said earnings for the quarter were probably below the more than $3 a share consensus he estimated was held by analysts.
Although reported earnings were lower than expectations, "taking into account a couple of one-time factors, underlying profits were as good as expected," he said.
For the year, CBS reported net more than quadrupled, to $326.2 million, or $20.39 a share, from $81 million, or $5.23 a share.
The results benefited from a number of special, nonrecurring items that totaled $3.80 a share, or about $59.1 million.
CBS also recorded a gain of $1.53 a share, or $39.6 million before taxes, on the sale of marketable securities.
Revenue for the year totaled $3.51 billion, about flat with the $3.50 billion of the previous year.
Laurence A. Tisch, CBS chairman and chief executive officer, said the company continues to capitalize on a number of positive trends, including good audience ratings, improving advertiser demand and cost control.
"Excluding the effect of 1993's special items and capital gains, we are confident that the company's existing businesses will produce growing profits and will generate substantial amounts of free cash flow," Mr. Tisch said.
