A half dozen of the nation's largest banks reported sharply higher fourth-quarter earnings, aided by continued wide margins between lending rates and the banks' own cost of funds, strong trading results and reductions in loan-loss provisions.
Three other banks' profits rose modestly.
Citicorp reported earnings more than doubled, while Wells Fargo & Co. profit more than tripled.
Net income at Chemical Banking Corp. rose 14%, NationsBank 59%, Chase Manhattan Corp. 85%, First Interstate Bancorp 78%, Banc One Corp. 39%, Comerica Inc. 2.7%, and Continental Bank Corp. 11%.
Despite the good news, prices of many bank stocks fell or were essentially flat, continuing a trend in which investors react to higher earnings with profit-taking.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Citicorp stock edged up 12.5 cents, or 0.3%, to close at $41.25; Chemical fell $1, or 2.4%, to close at $40.50; NationsBank fell 50 cents, or 1%, to close at $49.25; Chase Manhattan rose 25 cents, or 0.7%, to close at $35.75; Banc One fell 87.5 cents, or 2.3%, to close $36.875.
Also, Wells Fargo stock fell $2.50 a share, or 1.8%, to close at $133.625, while First Interstate's shares fell sharply to $65.75, down $3 or 4.4%.
Comerica stock fell 12.5 cents, or 0.5%, to close at $27.125; and Continental common stock rose 12.5 cents, or 0.5%, to close at $26.75.
"People have made a lot of money on bank stocks," James Rosenberg, a bank analyst at Lehman Brothers.
"They are looking for excuses to sell them."
For the money-center banks, securities and currency-trading profits continued to be strong.
Although trading revenue typically declines in the fourth quarter, it remained virtually constant last year.
"Trading was surprisingly strong," said Judah Kraushaar, a banking analyst with Merrill Lynch & Co., who also offered a potential explanation for the gains: "Some of the banks changed their compensation schemes, so that their traders were more aggressive in December."
Credit quality continued to improve during the quarter, allowing several banks to reduce their loss provisions.
New York-based Citibank's provision for the quarter fell to $414 million, down slightly from $419 million in the third quarter and $548 million in the year-earlier period.
The loss provision at New York-based Chemical dropped to $286 million in the quarter, compared with $298 million in the third quarter and $315 million in the fourth quarter of last year.
Provisions at San Francisco-based Wells Fargo dropped to levels before the crash in real-estate values, according to Robert Albertson, a bank analyst with Goldman, Sachs & Co.
"Most people thought it would take years for Wells to get back to that level," Mr. Albertson said.
"But there has been an almost nose-diving of provisions across the industry."
While loan growth is less important to the money-center banks, because of increasing emphasis on nonlending activities, regional banks benefited from an apparent steady increase in lending, particularly to consumers.
At Banc One, reporting net income of more than $1 billion for the first time, consumer loans at the Columbus, Ohio, concern climbed to an average $15.5 billion, up 22% from a year earlier.
Credit-card loans rose 19% to an average $5.5 billion.
But for many banks, net interest margins, which peaked in the first quarter last year, continued to slip slightly in the most recent period.
Margins were affected by lower yields from both loans and securities, as well as a decline in short-term, low-yield deposits.
However, the trading results, lower loan-loss provisions and increased loans more than compensated for the tighter margins.
Chase managed to buck the trend of lower margins altogether, in part because of extraordinary items but also because of an increase in loan fees and a rise in mortgage loans.
Several banks, including Citicorp, Chemical and Chase, benefited during the quarter from Argentina's payment of $1.2 billion to settle overdue borrowings, mainly in the form of floating-rate bonds.
Chase also earned a special gain from its sale of real-estate assets.
Chemical's gain was partially offset by a $53 million special charge resulting from the launch of its new "co-branded" Shell Oil MasterCard.
Along with the improved earnings, many banks announced dramatic improvements in overall asset quality.
Chase decreased its disposition portfolio by $500 million during the quarter, reducing the balance to $222 million at year end.
Chemical's nonperforming assets fell by $607 million during the quarter, down to $3.5 billion at year end.
In response to Citicorp's improving balance sheet, Moody's Investors Service Inc. said it is considering a possible upgrade for Citicorp senior debt, now rated Baa1; a change would affect about $34 billion in debt.
Continental Bank is based in Chicago, First Interstate in Los Angeles, NationsBank in Charlotte, N.C., Comerica in Detroit and Chase Manhattan in New York.
