For years it has been fashionable to deride American competitiveness.
American businesses have been ridiculed for inventing such products as the VCR but failing to capitalize on them.
Japanese companies, on the other hand, have been endlessly praised for dominating markets once ruled by American companies.
Some say this success derives from the "Japanese model" of management, which emphasized market share at the expense of profits.
European companies, meanwhile, are praised for their support of expensive government social welfare programs even as their competitive position has deteriorated, despite government subsidies.
By contrast, American firms are alleged to lose market share because they lack long-term vision.
Critics charge that they conduct massive layoffs -- such as AT&T's 15,000-person reduction earlier this month -- in the name of short-term profitability.
Management fashions come and go, but ultimately business results are measured in terms of sales and profits over the long term.
The table nearby presents the scorecards of American, Japanese and European businesses over the past six years in globally competitive industries.
The data include global sales, including those of foreign subsidiaries.
The results clearly demonstrate that American owners, managers and workers have competed and won, taking home 37% of sales and 48% of profits in global markets.
In this sense the U.S. has produced something close to the trade version of Olympic basketball's "dream team."
American industry is the leader, or is highly competitive, in virtually every major global industry.
This success results from well-planned and well-executed capital investments, research and development, advertising, marketing, production, design and personnel development over several decades.
And all of this has come about without government planning.
It is the triumph of the free market.
It is curious that while it became conventional wisdom that U.S. businesses were falling behind competitively, U.S. entrepreneurs were developing the world's leading companies in many technologically intensive industries.
U.S. companies are the leaders in data processing, including computers and software; electronic equipment; electrical components; and health and personal care, including pharmaceuticals.
In technology today the two most powerful global companies are Intel and Microsoft, both American.
America has Boeing and McDonnell Douglas, who together would have a virtual monopoly of the commercial aircraft market if not for Airbus's European Union subsidies.
The pharmaceutical industry is an especially interesting case, given the Clinton administration's hostility toward it.
This industry alone accounted for more than 10% of the profits earned by all American companies over the past six years.
Yet this is an industry that necessarily must take a very long-term view, since it often takes a decade and hundreds of millions of dollars to develop a single new drug.
Clearly, American businessmen are not the myopic short-termers they are often accused of being.
Of course, the U.S. does not lead in every category.
In steel production, for example, U.S. companies earned a minuscule 2.3% of total profits while Japanese companies claimed more than 50%.
U.S. companies, on the other hand, are far ahead in the businesses of tomorrow: aerospace, electronic equipment, data processing (which includes software sales) and health care.
What U.S. companies in fact have done is leapfrog their rivals, giving up market share in low-profit industries while moving ahead in high-profit areas.
And high-profit industries are not necessarily only in the technology area.
Food, beverages, tobacco and personal-care products have been among the most profitable businesses in recent years.
These are areas where Japanese companies are particularly weak and the Europeans have been losing ground.
Note also that the mass-market European products of Volkswagen, Peugeot and Fiat are virtually nonexistent in the U.S. market, with a combined 1% market share.
In contrast GM and Ford are strong competitors in Europe, with a combined 24% market share there.
Many of those who favor the Japanese or European models are really less concerned with finding better and more efficient methods of management than with looking for a way to rationalize their basic hostility to capitalism.
They implicitly believe that profits are bad or at least undeserved, and that they somehow come at the expense of workers and consumers.
They also view the need for profits to be an insurmountable barrier to the transformation of corporations into instruments of social welfare that would subordinate profits to "higher" goals such as high wages and benefits for workers in the European style.
However, the most disturbing problem with those who favor another "model" is that they do not understand that profit is the principal source of capital to finance economic growth and job creation.
In the past 10 years, the U.S. has created over 18 million net new jobs and Japan has created eight million, while Europe has created just 6.9 million, despite having a population larger than that of the U.S. and more than twice that of Japan.
The collapse of Japan's stock market and the slowing of its economy are already slowing job creation there, while Europe actually is expected to have a net decline in total jobs over the next two years, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Meanwhile, the U.S. job machine has created more than one million new jobs in just the past year.
What the results tell us is that American managers are in fact the best in the world.
They have invested their capital and expanded production not only in the areas that have provided the best rates of return, but also in precisely those businesses that are best able to satisfy the changing needs of the consumer.
In the process, they have left most of their competitors behind.
True, American companies continue to restructure, and many large companies are still shedding jobs.
But others are creating jobs by developing new products, methods and marketing techniques.
It is all part of Schumpeter's process of "creative destruction," as companies in mature industries with declining profits downsize and dynamic new companies with high profit potential grow to replace them.
In the end, it is profitability that fuels this process.
Mr. Strickberger is a partner with an investment management firm in New York.
He is also an adjunct fellow with the Alexis de Tocqueville Institution in Arlington, Va.
*Europe's businesses in this sector had a net loss.
