Thomson Advisory Group L.P. agreed in principle to merge with the much-larger Pacific Investment Management Co., creating one of the largest publicly traded money-management firms in the U.S.
The accord sent Thomson stock surging $3.50 to $38.25 a share in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
The merger can't be easily valued because the combined concern will have two new separate classes of units.
But if both classes traded at the same level -- Thomson's closing price on the Big Board yesterday -- the merged entity would be valued at more than $1.3 billion.
The merger will propel Pimco, one of the top bond managers in the country and a subsidiary of Pacific Mutual Life Insurance Co., into the stock-management arena currently inhabited by Thomson, based in Stamford, Conn.
The merged firm, to be called Pimco Advisors L.P., will manage about $70 billion, including more than $15 billion in mutual-fund money.
The merger is notable in part because Pimco has the famous bond manager William Gross.
In size, the firm will leap past such publicly traded firms as T. Rowe Price Associates Inc., with $54 billion in assets, although it will be smaller than such firms as Franklin Resources, with $114 billion.
The combined firm will continue to operate as a master limited partnership, the structure Thomson has used.
Partnership investors gain tax benefits because the earnings aren't taxed at the partnership level, thus escaping double taxation.
The merger will allow brokers to sell bond mutual funds managed by Newport Beach, Calif.-based Pimco through distribution networks already established by Thomson.
Pimco's mutual funds are geared toward large, institutional investors, but small investors can buy some of them in smaller chunks through certain discount brokers.
Thomson used to be the money-management arm of the former Thomson McKinnon Securities, whose brokerage offices were sold off.
Pimco and the other Pacific Mutual managers oversee about $59 billion in assets.
Thomson manages $11.6 billion.
The rise in Thomson's price in trading yesterday reflects the agreement's plan to pay a higher distribution to existing unit holders.
The tentative agreement will reclassify the 4.3 million Thomson units held by the public into Class A units, entitled to a "priority annual distribution" of $3.75 a unit through 1997, as compared with the $2.60 for the four quarters of 1993, Thomson said.
Pacific Mutual and managers of its investment management businesses will acquire 12.35 million Class A units and 12.35 million Class B units.
On Dec. 31, 1997, the units will become a single class.
Thomson Advisory said it won't lose its master limited partnership status for federal income-tax purposes.
Pacific Mutual Life Insurance, the parent of Pimco and several other businesses to be merged with Thomson, will become a big owner of the enlarged firm.
Pacific Mutual and managers of its investment subsidiaries will own 29 million out of 35 million partnership units outstanding of Pimco Advisors L.P. Included in the 29 million units are about four million that are being bought, for $140 million, from two private investors in Thomson: TA Associates and Greylock Management Corp.
This isn't the first time that a mutual-insurance company has brought its investment management subsidiary public by merging the operation with a smaller, publicly traded money-management firm.
Last year New England Mutual Life Insurance Co. merged its investment division with publicly traded Reich & Tang L.P.
Such a move can boost a mutual insurance company's credit ratings, and sometimes its capital, because the public market for investment company stocks is higher than the value on the insurer's books.
William Gross, managing director of Pimco and a highly regarded bond manager, said in an interview that Pimco would run most of the bond funds at Thomson.
Both Pimco and Thomson said that it hasn't been decided yet whether the Thomson funds will take on the Pimco name.
The companies said William D. Cvengros, vice chairman of Pacific Mutual, will leave that post to become chief executive of Pimco Advisors L.P.
They said supervision of operations would be the function of a special operating board composed primarily of current Pimco management as well as representatives from the other investment operations.
One of the Thomson funds, Thomson Opportunity, has been a top performer.
The fund's B shares had a total return, including dividends and price gains, of nearly 34% in the 12 months through March 4, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc.
It gained about 28% a year in the five years through March 4, compared with just over 15% for other similar stock funds.
Pimco Total Return, a fund managed by Mr. Gross, had a total return of 8.3% in the 12 months through Feb. 28, compared with 4.98% on average for similar bond funds.
In the five years, the annual return of more than 12% beat the average of about 10% on comparable funds.
