The Clinton administration wants employers to pay their workers to take the bus, but the plan isn't likely to change commuting habits much, tax-law experts say.
The administration wants companies that pay their employees' parking bills to offer those workers the cash equivalent as an alternative.
Many of the employees would pocket the cash and take mass transit instead, the theory goes, easing air pollution and crowded highways.
The proposal is part of the "Climate Change Action Plan" that President Clinton introduced last fall, and will be included in the federal budget when it is unveiled next month.
The plan says that if companies want to preserve their tax breaks for giving their workers free parking, it must offer them the cash equivalent of the parking fees as well.
"This could help states meet their obligations under the Clean Air Act," an administration official said.
"It's better than a mandate."
Only commuters who park in separate parking lots, not owned by their employers, would be affected.
No one is certain how many commuters that amounts to.
But the officials contend that enough commuters would opt for the cash to make it a net government moneymaker, because the cash given in lieu of parking would be taxable income.
Moreover, companies that quit paying for parking would lose a tax deduction.
Officials estimate that the plan would muster several hundred million additional tax dollars, or perhaps as much as $1 billion.
With Congress scrounging for ways to meet its budget ceilings, any proposal that claims it can raise cash for other programs is likely to sail through.
But outside the government, reaction has been more akin to someone who just discovered a flat tire.
"I think it's a dumb idea," says Mary Hevener, a fringe-benefits expert at the law firm of McDermott, Will & Emery in Washington.
"I see this as being a huge revenue loser, and it astounds me that it has gotten to this point in the budget."
Ms. Hevener believes workers who are covered by the proposal will simply ask for a salary reduction equivalent to the value of their parking.
Many companies, for example, already allow employees to reduce their gross salaries in exchange for tax-free income dedicated to child care or health care.
"That will happen," the administration official concedes.
"But so many people park and get parking paid for, that you only need a sliver to opt for the cash on top of their salaries to raise real money."
Gerald Uslander, a principal at the Washington Resource Group, an employee-benefits consulting firm, is also skeptical.
He notes that a separate law will go into effect fully this year that requires employees to pay tax on the value of their free parking above $155 a month.
"That's going to be a big administrative burden for employers as it is, and this will just add to it," he says.
He also says that most of the employees who receive paid parking benefits are higher-paid executives anyway, to whom the convenience of driving exceeds the importance of a little extra cash.
"I don't see this changing behavior much," he says.
