They're from the government, and they're here to help you.
They're the people at the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp., the federal agency that protects 41 million U.S. workers from losing their pensions when companies go belly up.
In recent years, the PBGC also has assumed the role of gumshoe, tracking down the rightful owners of pensions that go unclaimed.
Aiming to expand its initiative, the agency is asking Congress to name it the official detective agency for missing pensioners of all discontinued "defined benefit" plans, the old-fashioned type of pension plans in which the employer manages the money.
Such a mandate would include not only the pension plans of bankrupt companies, but also those terminated by healthy companies -- for instance, by companies switching to 401 (k) s or other "defined-contribution" plans.
These are employer-sponsored retirement-savings plans that shift investment risk to employees.
"We want to be a kind of clearinghouse for locating lost participants," says William Posner, the PBGC's deputy executive director.
"For us, this is our bottom line, our mission: We want to get people their pensions."
When the trail is warm, tracking vanished pensioners is just a matter of looking up their records.
But accidents happen.
When Pan Am Corp. was failing two years ago, the records of its 37,000 pension beneficiaries unwittingly were hauled to a bankruptcy auction with the several dozen metal filing cabinets that contained them.
Fortunately, the PBGC heard about the liquidation sale in time.
On a Saturday at dawn, PBGC supervisor Tina Dressner rushed to the airplane hangar at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York where Pan Am's effects were about to go on the block.
By scouring through heaps of used office furniture, she intercepted the trove of documents before they were lost for good.
Without records, the PBGC's job can require some real sleuthing skills, and no small dose of luck.
Take the recent case of the illiterate truck driver.
He was one of a few dozen individuals owed retirement benefits by Palace Furniture, a Clarksburg, W.Va., retailer that closed down in 1981.
Unaware that his pension was insured by the PBGC and still would be paid, the man faded away without a trace.
Rescued From the Garbage That might have been the end of the story, but for one clue: On a rainy afternoon just after the business folded, DeWitt Shingleton, Palace's bookkeeper, had spotted the company's personnel records lying in a trash container.
Being a conscientious person, he fished them out, took them home and spread them out on the carpet to dry.
Then, not knowing what else to do with them, he stored them in a closet.
Years passed.
By chance, an ex-colleague of Mr. Shingleton's learned about the PBGC's existence from an out-of-town business guest.
Remembering the tale of the salvaged records, she called Mr. Shingleton to inform him of her discovery.
He, in turn, called the PBGC.
Working on the tip, PBGC case officer Rachelle Weiser placed an ad in the Clarksburg Exponent, a local newspaper, to call former Palace employees to a meeting at the county courthouse.
Over two days, almost all of Palace's exemployees showed up to claim their pensions.
But the illiterate truck driver wasn't among them.
Palace's former employees pointed Ms. Weiser in the direction of a local McDonald's, known to be one of the man's favorite haunts.
At last, on a Monday morning stakeout, she caught up with him.
"That's one of the perks of the job," Ms. Weiser says.
"I've had other jobs where it's hard to see the end results.
Here you can see the look on someone's face."
The tally of missing pensioners the PBGC expects to track at a given time is small -- numbering fewer than 1,000 a year.
Some are widows and widowers who don't know they're entitled to a deceased spouse's pension and never applied for it.
Others know they're owed retirement benefits, but because their employers have gone belly-up, they assume those pension promises are a thing of the past.
The PBGC frets that current trends in the work force could swell the number of misplaced pensions over time.
As recession and corporate restructurings send more workers bouncing from job to job, fewer workers will end up collecting just one pension when they retire.
Such mobility means that many small pensions accumulated here and there could fall between the cracks, pension pros warn.
"All companies have problems finding missing plan participants, particularly those with high turnover.
It's just a great, big, giant pain," says Lynn Dudley, director of retirement policy at the Association of Private Pension and Welfare Plans, in Washington, D.C.
The PBGC's sleuthing doesn't cover 401 (k) s and other defined-contribution plans.
While most workers keep their addresses current with their old employers or the investment firms handling their accounts, some people, especially young job-hoppers, aren't so diligent.
"You do have situations where you just can't find people," says Douglas Kant, senior legal counsel, Fidelity Investments, which handles 401 (k) accounts.
Employers can trace many missing participants through the Internal Revenue Service or the Social Security Administration, "but they're not foolproof," he adds.
-- Keep employment records such as W-2s, other earnings statements and pension documents, such as summary annual reports or annual benefits statements, as proof of promised retirement benefits.
-- Individuals in defined-benefit plans can turn to the PBGC for help if a former employer can't be found and the pension plan apparently has been terminated.
The address: PBGC Administrative Review and Technical Assistance Division, 1200 K St. NW, Washington, D.C. 20005.
-- Information about lost benefits might turn up when you file for Social Security.
At that point, the Social Security Administration is supposed to notify you automatically about PBGC-guaranteed corporate pensions to which you're entitled.
However, the agency isn't set up to handle outside requests.
A Social Security press officer warns, don't call it, it'll call you.
