Wu Guoxing understands the subtleties of business.
"Make a fortune in mainland China," he proposes in a flier.
"Investment US$800, annual profit US$1,000,000."
Who could resist such generous terms?
Not Gamvu Ventures Ltd. of Nigeria.
"Thank you for your `invitation' to expand our business relationship with China," the company writes, asking for details.
Mr. Wu happily obliges, dispatching the newest version of his ever-expanding list of projects seeking foreign investment.
On the list: factories making "donkey-wide gelatin products," "once-used cup" and "music candle."
One capital-hungry project turns out "beast medicine"; another produces "shampoo and hairflaps."
Of course you would expect a firm as comprehensively named as Mr. Wu's Asia Enterprise United Investments Development Co. to cover the gamut.
What you might not expect is its success.
The Taiwan-born entrepreneur says he is prospering as a facilitator of China's exploding trade economy.
He claims to have signed 1,800 deals since setting up shop five years ago in a shoe-box-size office.
He won't say how much profit he makes, but his staff now fills four busy offices in a building it shares with the promisingly named Everrich Trading Co. and several other firms.
"China is the land of opportunity for investors," he confides.
People like Mr. Wu are popping up all over this huge country; in the northern city of Harbin, 1,500 miles north and 90 degrees Fahrenheit cooler in March than Guangzhou, young men in glistening bearskin hats accost foreigners with offers of taxis and a query: "You here on business?
Want to meet businessmen?"
But the road to real riches, Mr. Wu thinks, is littered with handbills and faxes.
Every day, thousands of visitors rolling into this southern Chinese city's breezy railroad station are greeted by teenagers -- and sometimes uniformed customs officials who earn pocket money for their efforts -- handing out copies of Mr. Wu's expansive promises: "Welcome to join in and be our stockholder in China," "Small investment makes a great profit!"
"They gave me one of these things, and I'm like, you can't be handing this out if you're serious," says Daniel Krause, a 30-year-old from Los Angeles, who received a brochure in Guangzhou.
Mr. Wu doesn't know how the Nigerian company found out about his company, but his energetic translator, a 24-year-old woman named Jennings Zhang, is sure: "We are famous.
We advertise."
A dozen young women sit in one of Mr. Wu's cluttered offices stuffing brochures into air-mail envelopes they post, virtually at random, to any company address they can find in a newspaper or on a chamber-of-commerce mailing list.
Self-promotion is Wu Guoxing's strength and enthusiasm his procedure.
Though he's trim and at first serious-looking in a navy-blue suit, Mr. Wu can scarcely contain his ebullience.
Too impatient for his translator, he blurts out in English, "Open Door!
He can't get through a 45-minute interview without extending his hand three times offering to shake on a deal, any deal.
He proposes an information exchange with The Wall Street Journal -- a joint venture, the nature of which is unclear but seems to revolve around a capital contribution from the paper.
He suggests a reporter take commissions for marketing Chinese products overseas.
Like hairflaps (perhaps better known as toupees)?
"Anything, anything," Mr. Wu says.
"Everybody wants to buy from China."
Among Mr. Wu's many claims, that one rings true.
One wall of Mr. Wu's office is plastered with faxes from around the world, awaiting either translation or matchmaking with Chinese firms.
An Iranian company wants to buy cheap polyester; a Guatemalan company is looking for chemicals; and a Finnish company is interested in trading reindeer hides.
Mr. Wu says he takes commissions on trade deals he brokers.
Two centuries ago, China's Qianlong Emperor sent a British diplomatic and trade mission packing after informing the barbarians that China had all things in abundance.
Today, many purveyors of that abundance wind up on the rosters of matchmakers like Mr. Wu.
One recent afternoon, two businessmen in purple silk shirts and matching brown leather vests are hunkered down in negotiations at Mr. Wu's office with Liang Lu, a 28-year-old former schoolteacher in a fuzzy peach sweater.
She is jotting down their need: 60 million yuan (about $6.8 million) to build a hotel in Harbin.
They will have to get in line.
Across the room, a delegation led by a man in an electric-blue silk suit, red sweater vest, brown fedora and tinted glasses with a label stuck on the lens, is trying to barter steel products for 200 million yuan to build a hotel in Sichuan Province.
Both delegations represent state-backed companies.
Indeed, though Mr. Wu says it's a secret, it seems that many of the Chinese businesses looking to him for capital are so-called township enterprises -- companies set up by the state in rural areas to give people there an economic reason to remain and not migrate to China's overcrowded cities.
The problem, as Yang Zhengqian, the 50-year-old delegation leader from Sichuan, explains, is a money shortage, caused by credit clampdowns intended to keep China's racing economy from overheating.
"If we go to the bank, there is not enough capital," Mr. Yang says.
So they come to Mr. Wu, whose company finds Chinese partners the same way it finds foreigners: handing out fliers in other provinces of China.
Ms. Zhang, Mr. Wu's translator, says the company's hiring policy -- its 100 or so employees came to Guangzhou from all over the country -- also helps spread the word.
The employees are nearly all women in their 20s.
"Chinese women have a good eye for business," Mr. Wu says.
Besides, Ms. Zhang says, "Our company is an international investment group, so I'm afraid we need females to deal with international affairs."
Strictly business affairs, she says.
Not that it takes much inducement to get business going in today's thriving China, Mr. Wu explains.
As proof, he claims he won't take a cut of any deal he brokers until it is successful.
"This is good business," he says.
But has anybody actually made $1 million by investing only $800?
Of course, Ms. Zhang replies.
"If you join our projects, you will believe it."
