Federal Express Corp. said fiscal third-quarter earnings more than tripled from a year earlier, boosted by improved performance overseas, lower costs and the sale of aircraft.
Net income for the quarter ended Feb. 28 was $31.2 million, or 55 cents a share, up from $8.5 million, or 15 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue rose 7.3% to $2.07 billion from $1.93 billion.
During the quarter, the express-delivery company sold several 727-100 aircraft, resulting in a pretax gain of $10.9 million, or 10 cents a share.
Without the sale, Federal Express's third-quarter profit would have been in line with analysts' expectations of about 46 cents a share.
Narrower losses overseas drove most of the quarterly gain.
Earnings from domestic operations in the latest quarter sagged to $103.6 million from $119.6 million in the year-earlier period, pulled down by winter storms and fierce price competition.
"Considering that we had a terrible time with the weather and earthquake (in Los Angeles), I think we had very good performance for the overall quarter," said Alan Graf, chief financial officer.
Heavy financial losses overseas, especially in Europe, have hurt the company's earnings in recent years.
Now, however, those deficits appear close to evaporating.
Indeed, in its fiscal second quarter, Federal Express reported its first-ever international profit.
In the fiscal third quarter, the company again had a loss overseas -- but one that narrowed to $18.3 million from $61.3 million.
Foreign revenue rose 5% to $539.3 million from $513.7 million.
Mr. Graf said international operations benefited from cost-cutting and improved yields.
He added that Federal Express, as previously reported, is still aiming to report a profit overseas for all of fiscal 1995.
Here in the U.S., the company has a tougher fight.
With competitors holding prices down, and lower-priced afternoon and two-day deliveries becoming more popular, yields fell an average 3.7%.
Federal Express reported earnings after markets closed Friday.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, the company's stock closed at $67.625, down 62.5 cents.
During the past month, Federal Express's share price has drifted down more than 10% after a runup that started in the fall.
