A SHAKY TRUCE HELD in Sarajevo and the U.N. took control of some weapons.
Although Bosnian Serbs officially have rejected a NATO ultimatum to withdraw their heavy weapons by next Sunday or face air strikes, they had turned over 26 heavy guns to U.N. forces by yesterday, and government troops surrendered 10 weapons.
In addition, most Serb guns have remained silent since last Thursday.
One artillery round was fired yesterday in the Bosnian capital, with no injuries reported.
Dependents of U.S. diplomats were pulled out of Belgrade as a precaution against possible Serb reprisals in the event of Western air strikes.
The White House is considering cutting $2 billion in benefits for elderly immigrants to help pay for welfare reform, officials said.
While cutting off supplemental-security-income benefits to the parents of legal aliens is high on the administration's list, cuts also could come in emergency-housing assistance.
Pentagon officials are weighing a plan to sell a large part of the U.S. military's Cold War inventory of high-performance weapons to other countries.
Under the plan, the Pentagon would sell certain jets, ships and armored vehicles, and use the proceeds to purchase newer versions of the same weapons.
Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison was acquitted on state ethics charges just after her trial began Friday.
A judge in Fort Worth ordered the Texas Republican acquitted when prosecutors refused to present their case without an advance ruling on whether they could use evidence that was seized during a raid.
Somali gunmen ambushed a U.N. convoy in Mogadishu and killed an Egyptian soldier, while two Italian aid workers were kidnapped in central Somalia and were held for ransom.
Meanwhile, weekend battles between clans in southern Somalia killed 60 people and forced more than 5,000 to flee the port of Kismayu, a clan spokesman said.
Zulu leader Buthelezi told his supporters to prepare themselves for "casualties and even death" following a decision by his Inkatha Freedom Party to boycott South Africa's first all-race elections in April.
Buthelezi accused the rival African National Congress of starting a campaign of "ethnic cleansing" against his people.
Thieves in Oslo escaped with one of the world's most famous paintings, "The Scream" by Edvard Munch, after using a ladder to climb through a window of the National Art Museum.
Two men, filmed by surveillance cameras, entered the museum early Saturday and grabbed the 1893 painting.
The theft took less than a minute.
Skater Tonya Harding will be allowed to compete in the Olympics under an accord reached Saturday.
The U.S. Olympic Committee has canceled a hearing to consider whether to let Harding skate, and her suit against the panel has been dismissed.
Harding faces allegations that she was involved in an attack on rival Nancy Kerrigan.
A contraband fuel shipment exploded in Port-au-Prince, destroying the Haitian capital's main center for illegally imported gasoline.
The fire demolished up to a dozen homes and businesses, but no casualties were reported.
Diplomats said there has been a recent increase in fuel smuggling from the Dominican Republic.
Palestinian assailants fired at a car carrying Israeli security agents in the occupied West Bank, killing one person and injuring two, authorities said.
Israeli army officials immediately clamped a curfew on the villages of Beituniya and Ramallah, and cut off electrical power in a nearby refugee camp, El Amari.
Mexican peasant negotiators have begun leaving their remote jungle hide-outs to attend peace talks aimed at ending a 44-day-old uprising in the southern state of Chiapas, a government peace envoy said.
The talks, which originally were to have started a week ago, have been delayed by logistical problems and security concerns.
Thousands of Liberians have fled from their villages and converged on a seaport, Buchanan, in an attempt to escape killings and looting by rival insurgent groups in the West African country.
Clashes have intensified over the past few weeks between Charles Taylor's guerrilla movement and a rebel splinter group.
