Sequent Computer Systems Inc., which uses Intel Corp. chips in its minicomputers, is open to the idea of basing future products on the new PowerPC chip made by Intel rivals, said its chairman and chief executive officer, Casey Powell.
"We're always open to that.
We're not locked into Intel," said Mr. Powell, a former Intel executive who left the company a decade ago, taking 16 colleagues with him to start Sequent.
Sequent strings Intel chips together to build multiprocessing computers that rival mainframes in power, but cost much less, at $50,000 to $2 million each.
"PowerPC has a potential to be an alternative to Intel.
I think it's going to be a two-horse race," Mr. Powell said in an interview.
But he said he's not working on switching to PowerPC, and he's not in talks with Apple Computer Inc., Motorola Inc. and International Business Machines Co., the alliance making PowerPC.
Mr. Powell said Sequent has increased market share for systems that cost over $700,000, to 38% in 1993 from 20.3% in 1992.
But gross margins, which were 48% in the fourth quarter ended Dec. 31, will likely slip in the single digits this year, he said.
"I just don't know how many digits," he said.
He wouldn't comment on analysts' expectations that Sequent will have flat to slightly increased first-quarter earnings of 12 to 15 cents a share.
In the year-earlier quarter ended April 3, Sequent earned $3.4 million, or 12 cents a share, on revenue of $77.6 million.
For the most recent quarter ended Jan. 1, Sequent posted a net loss of $15.1 million, or 50 cents a share, after a $22.3 million restructuring charge.
During the restructuring, Sequent laid off 85 workers and formed two business units: one to sell hardware, and a business-solutions division called Enterprise, which designs and installs new computer architectures that use Sequent hardware and systems.
SEQUENT COMPUTER SYSTEMS Inc. expects that gross profit margins, which were 48% in the fourth quarter, will slip by single digits this year.
An article Friday said the margins would slip "in" single digits.
(WSJ Feb. 14, 1994)
