Unocal Corp. said it will take a $25 million after-tax charge against first-quarter earnings related to millions of gallons of spilled petroleum product at a California oil field.
Unocal's announcement late yesterday came hours after the state of California sued the Los Angeles-based oil company in state court for unspecified damages in a civil case that government officials said they believed is the largest toxic spill in California history -- allegedly involving more than eight million gallons leaking from a production-enhancement system between 1954 and 1990.
Unocal said its prospective first-quarter charge reflects the expected costs of write-down of facilities, immediate remediation costs and expenses of abandonment at the affected Guadelupe oil field, near the central California coast town of San Luis Obispo.
The company said recently it hopes to close the oil field but may not be able to do so for six months or more.
The state's civil suit was expected after Unocal agreed a week ago to pay about $1.5 million to settle criminal charges related to the spills.
Under the plea bargain earlier this month, Unocal pleaded guilty to three criminal misdemeanor charges, and 33 other misdemeanor counts were dropped.
Under California law, Unocal could be penalized up to $20 for every gallon spilled or $250,000 for each of 23 alleged violations, indicating civil penalties between $5.8 million and $160 million.
Unocal said, however, that it believed its liability, if any, to be far smaller and not to have a material affect on its financial condition.
"At some point, we expect to pay civil penalities that will amount to only a small fraction of the total penalties sought by the state attorney general," said John F. Imle Jr., Unocal executive vice president.
In the year-earlier first quarter, Unocal had net income of $11 million, or one cent a share after one-time gains of $47 million and one-time accounting adjustments totaling $130 million.
Revenue for the period totaled $2.32 billion.
