Federal and state regulators are examining Merrill Lynch & Co.'s sales practices involving limited partnerships in the 1980s, people familiar with the matter say.
The inquiries -- by the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the states of Florida, Virginia and New Mexico -- are in the very preliminary stages, the people said.
Regulators have begun to gather Merrill documents, including sales materials and scripts, used by brokers to sell the partnerships, the people said.
The concern is that the high-risk partnerships may have been sold as "sure thing" investments to clients seeking safety and retirement income.
Nobody is suggesting that there was the kind of widespread fraud at Merrill -- or any other big brokerage firm -- that has dogged Prudential Securities Inc., a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
"This is very preliminary," said a person familiar with one of the investigations.
"We don't know if this will amount to a big thing or not."
In a statement, Merrill said: "We have received absolutely no communication from the SEC as to any inquiry, let alone any investigation that would involve Merrill Lynch as the focus of any limited-partnership sales practices."
These latest examinations come as the SEC has launched a broad survey of major brokerage firms to gauge their partnership sales and investor complaint levels, Wall Street executives said.
"Not unexpectedly, the SEC has initiated a Streetwide survey related to the sales of limited partnerships in the 1980s," Merrill said in a statement.
"No single firm is the focus of this survey.
It is our understanding that all of the firms are responding to the SEC requests for information."
Part of the Merrill inquiry relates to the broader survey, and part also relates to specific complaints made about Merrill to a branch office of the SEC, the people said.
The increased regulatory scrutiny comes in the wake of the highly publicized partnership woes at Prudential.
The big brokerage firm recently settled allegations brought by the SEC and 50 states of widespread fraud in selling the partnerships; as part of the settlement, the firm has set up a reparations fund of at least $330 million for investors.
Other major Wall Street brokerage firms could ultimately face fallout from partnership scrutiny, some analysts say.
"The potential liability from these partnerships, at the very minimum, could put downward pressure on brokerage company earnings, and could possibly have a much greater impact on their bottom lines," Nancy Zambell, an analyst at JW Charles Securities Inc. in Boca Raton, Fla., said in a recent research report.
Though most Wall Street firms have stopped peddling partnerships, partnership headaches are "still out there," says Ms. Zambell.
The nation's brokerage firms have sold a total of $90 billion of public partnerships since 1980, says Keith Allaire, a managing director at the Stanger Report, a Shrewsbury, N.J., newsletter.
Many partnerships, which were hurt by tax-law changes and the real-estate slump, have triggered lawsuits by investors.
Merrill, the nation's largest brokerage firm, was among the major sellers of partnerships.
At the pinnacle of the partnership frenzy in 1988, for instance, Merrill had $1.75 billion of public partnership assets under management, plus partnership deals it marketed for other sponsors, according to Stanger.
Merrill says it stopped marketing leveraged partnership deals as early as 1983, and doesn't have significant partnership liability.
The SEC, as is its practice, declined to comment.
The office of Florida Comptroller Gerald Lewis "has received certain information regarding some of the partnership programs at Merrill and we have the matter under review," said Donald Saxon, director of the Florida division of securities.
Nancy Smith, New Mexico's securities director, and Lewis Brothers, Virginia securities director, said they couldn't confirm or deny whether an investigation was under way.
In a statement, Merrill said: "We routinely receive inquiries from states regarding customer complaints.
We routinely respond to them.
Nothing is going on at the state regulatory front that is any way out of the ordinary."
But regulators are said to be examining Merrill sales scripts for several partnerships.
For instance, internal Merrill sales sheets for the JMB/Hawaii partnership urge brokers to emphasize the beauty of Hawaii.
"Ask the client if they have ever visited Hawaii," the sales script says.
Another sales sheet, for the Registry Hotel at Pelican Bay -- a partnership that Merrill underwrote that has soured -- said: "This is not a high risk investment, although it has high returns."
Merrill declined to comment on the scripts.
But the firm says it won a classaction suit in August 1992 that had been filed in a Michigan federal court over sales of the Registry Hotel partnership.
That case is now being appealed, Merrill says.
Meanwhile, regulators also are examining whether Merrill and other brokerage firms presented investors with full and proper disclosure before selling them the partnerships, as stipulated by Appendix F of the National Association of Securities Dealers rules of fair practice.
Brokers often used sales scripts in selling partnerships, and mailed prospectuses to investors with their sales confirmation statements.
Many Wall Street firms, when selling partnerships, "flat out didn't follow the rules," says Thomas R. Grady, a Naples, Fla., lawyer representing clients with cases against Merrill and other brokers.
For their part, regulators say the Prudential partnership problems have triggered a heightened scrutiny of Wall Street.
"We're all well aware that limited partnerships were a big selling item in the '80s, and certainly are concerned about whether or not some of the sales-practice abuses occurred at some other firms" besides Prudential, says Ms. Smith, New Mexico's securities director.
