JAPAN'S RULING COALITION FACED an uncertain future after losing a key vote.
Hosokawa's government was thrown into turmoil after Parliament's rejection of legislation to reform the nation's political system.
The political uncertainty sparked by Friday's vote could hamper economic policies.
Visiting Treasury Secretary Bentsen said that the prime minister, due to meet Clinton next month to sign a trade agreement, "obviously has his work cut out for him."
Hosokawa this week will attempt to push through some kind of reform package.
Japan reported that its merchandise trade surplus increased 16% in December and grew to a record $120.40 billion for all of 1993.
Embattled federal officials insisted they were doing all they could to cope with the devastation from last week's earthquake in Los Angeles, as the death toll rose to 56 and damage estimates climbed.
Two strong aftershocks, one measuring 4.0 on the Richter scale, jolted the city.
Deputy defense chief Perry has become the front-runner to succeed Defense Secretary Aspin, White House officials said.
Perry, a military technologist and defense intellectual, is favored by many members of the Senate and House armed services panels.
However, Perry may be reluctant to take the job.
The Defense Department has canceled plans to conduct a controversial AIDS vaccine trial.
After months of wrangling among federal agencies opposed to the trial of a vaccine made by MicroGeneSys, the Pentagon said it will spend the $20 million earmarked for the trial on vaccine therapies and research.
National Medical Care agreed to correct manufacturing problems at its five U.S. production facilities.
The W.R. Grace unit, which is the nation's biggest provider of dialysis services and products, agreed to the step after sharp prodding from the FDA, which cited safety and quality problems that necessitated recalls.
An asthma medication has been linked to health problems, according to lawsuits that have been filed and complaints made to the FDA.
Copley Pharmaceutical recalled the drug, Albuterol, this month after discovering samples contaminated with bacteria.
Six children were killed by mortar fire Saturday while they were sledding in a Sarajevo suburb.
Three other children, wounded in the attack, awaited possible evacuation today for treatment.
Bosnia's prime minister urged the U.N. and the U.S. to demand air strikes against Serb artillery positions surrounding the capital.
China agreed to grant expanded operating rights to foreign banks, and the U.S. said it will help China improve the tools for managing its economy.
Treasury Secretary Bentsen and China's finance minister said that the accords reflect a commitment to improve the nations' trade and investment ties.
Attorney General Reno vowed she would do all that she could to ensure the independence of her special counsel's probe into Clinton's Arkansas financial dealings.
Reno said she had tried to make sure that Fiske has all the time and money that he needs to complete an independent report.
Israel said it was very close to breaking a peace deadlock with the PLO after a meeting in Oslo Saturday between Foreign Minister Peres and PLO leader Arafat.
Meanwhile, Prime Minister Rabin said he was ready for direct talks anywhere with Syria's Assad.
Two Western economists quit as advisers to reformers in the Russian government, saying the new government's policies are "strongly contrary" to their views.
Anders Aslund of the Stockholm School of Economics and Jeffrey Sachs of Harvard University submitted their resignations to President Yeltsin on Friday.
Hooded gunmen burst into a street party organized by a left-wing group in Colombia, killing at least 33 people and wounding eight, the army said.
The gunmen were believed to be members of a rival leftist faction.
Rival army factions clashed in Lesotho, leaving at least two soldiers dead and four civilians wounded.
Artillery and mortar fire was traded across Maseru, the capital of the southern African nation.
