USING SYMBOLS OF African-American popular culture in marketing campaigns has proven to be problematic for one white-owned hair-care firm.
Last year, Shark Products, which makes the popular African Pride hair-care line, sued to prevent a black-owned firm from marketing similar products named African Natural.
Shark's move to protect its Afrocentric trademarks incensed some black community activists.
Shark withdrew its suit last fall, but last month, Rev. Jesse Jackson's Rainbow Coalition persuaded Big B Drugs of Birmingham, Ala., to pull African Pride from its 350 Southeastern stores.
"People who come into our community using our symbols, then try to restrain us from using them should not be allowed to sell in our community," says New York's Rev. Al Sharpton, who plans to press national chains to drop African Pride.
Meanwhile, the trade group for black-owned hair-care firms says that while 79% of black consumers want to patronize black-owned firms, nine of 10 can't tell the owners' race because all firms' product names tend to be black-oriented.
The trade group is running full-page ads in black-oriented magazines listing hair products by the manufacturer's race.
In special ads, Shark, based in Brooklyn, N.Y., said it "made a mistake" in filing the trademark infringement suit, and stressed that 76% of its employees are black.
BY USING CENSUS data, a new software package aims to help small companies understand the ethnic makeup of their sales territories.
Using Pro/Filer, a CD-ROM and software disk packaged by Wessex, Winnetka, Ill., any small company can create demographically detailed maps for local marketing plans.
While voluminous government data on race, income and education levels has been publicly available, only big firms could afford to tailor it to their needs.
That data, supplied by firms that repackage and resell raw Census information, can cost $50,000.
The Pro/Filer data, along with simple software, sell for $1,500 or less.
Competitors note the Wessex data are inexpensive because the company doesn't use updated Census information and other refinements.
But independent consultants say it gives sophisticated ethnic data to less sophisticated firms at affordable prices.
George Ator of Group One Research, Pittsburgh, used Pro/Filer to help a regional furniture chain fine tune its direct mail by using information about customers' race and income.
For a few hundred dollars, Mr. Ator can advise a small-business client what to serve in a new restaurant, using a precise demographic map.
"This serves the smaller business person who can't afford to spend a lot on this kind of data," Mr. Ator says.
The Pro/Filer also can help smaller banks comply with recently tightened federal regulations on the race and income distribution of consumer loans, says David McCulloch of Triac, a Pasadena, Calif., consulting firm.
"The problem has been that the information was so expensive as to how many whites, Hispanics or blacks lived on a Census tract; now we can refine it to the block."
Under the new banking regulations, "our clients will need to know their penetration into minority areas before the regulators come in and tell them how terrible they are," he adds.
MINORITIES POSTED a small gain in public Fortune 1,000 company board seats last year after a stagnant decade, according to Directorship, a newsletter for corporate directors.
With more Hispanic and Asian-American directors, minorities occupied 404 seats, or about 4%, up from 3%.
African-Americans still hold the bulk of seats (266); Asian-Americans improved to 37 directorships at the end of the proxy season in June, from under 10 seats.
Hispanic-held seats increased to 101, from 61.
Richard J. Bela, executive director of a Hispanic business group, says the debate over the North American Free Trade Agreement has raised awareness of the Hispanic market, increasing demand for Hispanic directors.
"They are realizing they have to pay attention to who their consumers are and the need for representation," he says.
"When we're asked to do studies for clients seeking directors, we're getting more requests for minorities and women than in the past," says Directorship Publisher Peter Garrett.
On the other hand, 518 of the 819 public Fortune 1,000 firms had no minority board members.
Mr. Garrett also noted that black academics are in high demand as board members, making up 28% of black directors holding four or more seats.
"African-Americans have achieved much more prominence in academia than we have in business," says Earl Washington, president of the Executive Leadership Council, an organization of top-ranked blacks in U.S. corporations.
GIANT DIRECT-MAIL firm Advo rolled out Nuestra Gente (Our People) magazine to 1.5 million Hispanic homes last year, but the name already belonged to a profitable, small-circulation magazine in Miami.
Its owner, not named Chutzpah Publishing for nothing, convinced Advo to buy the right to the name for a "very high five-figure" payment, according to a Chutzpah official.
Chutzpah's magazine, renamed Entre Nosotros (Among Us), is a lifestyle magazine for Hispanic Jews in Florida and Latin America. . . .
Bookstore windows often feature serious tomes with African-American themes during February, which is Black History Month.
But William Morrow released "Snaps," a compendium of put-downs in the black street tradition known as "the dozens."
It's being touted as a more fun Black History Month offering that flouts political correctness.
A tamer sample goes: "Your shoes are so old, when you step on gum, you know the flavor."
