3DO Co., a multimedia startup whose stock gyrations have generated anxiety on Wall Street, is turning heads again, this time for its plan to give away stock for the sale of its pricey video-game players.
The Redwood City, Calif., company plans to offer through Sept. 30 two shares of its stock to manufacturers for each Interactive Multiplayer machine they sell at or below a new suggested price of $499.95, a 29% reduction from its previous price of about $700.
By giving up its stock, which closed yesterday at $25.75 a share, 3DO in effect is offering manufacturers rebates of about $50 on each sale.
The company said the stock giveaway would be accounted for as an expense, but analysts said it is a shrewd move because 3DO doesn't have to come up with any cash and an anticipated upsurge in sales should entice more software developers to write games for the machine.
Analysts said the giveways wouldn't greatly dilute the stock.
While the CD-ROM (compact disk, read-only-memory) player is far more powerful than many competitors' offerings, sales have been hampered by the player's high price and its dearth of games.
While the company wouldn't disclose figures, analysts estimate between 15,000 and 25,000 of the players have been sold in stores since shipments began late last year -- less than half what they had predicted.
3DO officials say the sales are on track with their own projections.
The sales are also a drop in the bucket when compared with the millions of game players, priced at less than $200, sold by heavyweight competitors like Nintendo of America Inc., a unit of Japan's Nintendo Co., and Sega of America Inc., a unit of Japan's Sega Enterprises Ltd.
In a statement, Trip Hawkins, 3DO's president and chief executive officer, said the company had expected to drop the player prices below $500 this fall but moved up the date to head off expected competition from powerful new players due out in the U.S. next year from Nintendo and Sega, among others.
3DO said its only current manufacturer, Japan's Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., tentatively has agreed to participate in the incentive plan.
It said the plan would be offered to other manufacturers, including American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and Sanyo Electric Co., which have announced they would be introducing 3DO products this year.
Although Matsushita already has compelling motivation to see 3DO succeed -- it owns a 15% stake in the startup -- analysts say the stock giveaway provides a greater push.
They said the key is in whether Matsushita, which markets the Interactive Multiplayer under its Panasonic brand name, can follow through with its own incentives for retailers to carry the machines.
Lee Isgur, analyst with Volpe, Welty & Co. in San Francisco, said the period through September is usually the slowest of the year for retailers.
Mr. Isgur said Matsushita might have to provide an incentive such as deferring retailers' payment on shipped goods to get them to stock shelves.
Normally, retailers are billed by manufacturers monthly.
Matsushita officials weren't immediately available for comment.
Because 3DO will depend on royalties from games and other programs it licenses for almost all of its revenue, drawing more developers is crucial.
3DO has about 20 software titles on the market and about 200 in development or completed.
With analysts like Steve Eskenazi of Alex. Brown & Sons in San Francisco forecasting that sales could rise to 500,000 over the next year, game developers say they might indeed start focusing their attention on 3DO.
However, they will be looking for solid growth in month-over-month sales.
"Our position is wait and see," said Gregory Fischbach, co-chairman and chief executive officer of Acclaim Entertainment Inc., a big game publisher in Oyster Bay, N.Y.
Added Henry A. Kaplan, chief executive of Hi Tech Expressions Inc., a New York game maker, "For us, it's not a question of if, but a question of when" to make games for 3DO.
And Robert A. Kotick, chairman and chief executive of Los Angeles-based Activision Inc., said his company would likely start writing games for 3DO once it has sold more than 250,000 players.
