PaineWebber Group Inc. is expected to announce today a top-level reorganization designed to position the retail brokerage company for a big push for new business.
The management shake-up follows a 3-for-2 stock split declared yesterday.
The firm also boosted its quarterly dividend to 12 cents a share; previously, it had paid a quarterly of 15 cents, which is equal to 10 cents a share on a postsplit basis.
PaineWebber shares slid despite news of the split and the dividend boost, easing to $27.875, down 62.5 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
The shake-up, announced in an internal company memo, streamlines the company into four regional divisions.
It elevates Joseph Grano, PaineWebber's 45-year-old president of retail sales and marketing, and Lee Fensterstock, 45, director of capital markets, to top management.
They will join the firm's chairman, Donald Marron, and its president, Paul Guenther, on a four-person executive committee.
The firm also announced a series of promotions, most of which went to executives on its sales side or who had been involved in the design and implementation of a new computer system designed to boost broker productivity.
The goal of the management changes, PaineWebber officials said, is to strengthen links between the product side of the business and the retail side and boost sales.
Robert Silver, who headed the retail branch network, becomes chief of marketing and Frank Minard, chairman of the Mitchell Hutchins Asset Management division that oversees PaineWebber's mutual funds, will now report to the head of retail sales, Mr. Grano.
The reorganization comes as the firm rolls out at its branch offices a $100 million computer database and broker oversight system.
The system, called "Window of Opportunity," flags a broker when a particular stock has dropped, lists any available PaineWebber research reports on the stock, displays the names and phone numbers of any branch clients who own the stock and displays suggested alternative investments.
Robert Benmosche, designer of the computer system and the firm's head of systems and operations, has been promoted to Southern Division manager.
Marten Hoekstra, manager of the Chicago office, will run the Northeast Division.
Mike Davis, formerly head of Southern Pacific business, becomes Western Division manager.
Clarence Catallo remains North Central division manager.
The firm also created an 18-member board of directors for the brokerage unit, and named Regina Dolan, its principal financial officer, to the additional position of chief financial officer of the parent.
The stock split is payable March 10 to shares of record Feb. 17.
The cash dividend is payable April 18 to shares of record March 28.
