The Supreme Court made it harder for mining companies to exclude union representatives from safety inspections at nonunion mines.
The unanimous decision was a procedural victory for the United Mine Workers and the Clinton administration, which supported the union position before the Supreme Court.
The case arose when a Wyoming mining company, whose 500 employees weren't union members, objected to the participation in 1990 of two UMW representatives in federally mandated safety inspections.
The federal mine-safety law allows workers to be represented during government inspections, and the employees in this instance proposed the UMW officials.
The firm, Thunder Basin Coal Co., countered that it had a right under U.S. labor law to exclude union organizers from its property.
Giving the union officials access to workers and records would provide the UMW with an unfair advantage in future organizing efforts, the company complained.
Thunder Basin, a unit of Atlantic Richfield Co., said that federal regulators who backed the workers tried to deny the company its legal rights by threatening to impose fines.
The company filed a lawsuit in federal court and persuaded a judge to block the union involvement.
But the federal appeals court in Denver reversed that ruling, saying the mine-safety act precluded Thunder Basin from going to court at such an early stage in the dispute.
The Supreme Court affirmed that decision.
Thunder Basin should have first filed a protest with an administrative body, the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission, the high court said.
If Thunder Basin lost before the commission, it could then take the case directly to a federal appeals court.
Amendments enacted in 1977 to the mine-safety statute were intended to streamline enforcement and prevent companies from using litigation to delay needed improvements, the high court determined.
Justice Harry Blackmun wrote the main opinion.
Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas agreed with the result but not all of the main opinion's reasoning.
(Thunder Basin Coal Co. vs. Reich)
The high court upheld the congressionally established method for selecting military judges, which two convicted Marines had challenged as unconstitutional.
The justices unanimously concluded that existing selection practices comply with constitutional requirements for federal appointments and don't violate the "due-process" rights of service members.
Among the contentions the Supreme Court rejected was the claim that because military judges aren't appointed for life or for fixed terms, they lack the independence needed to ensure impartiality.
The court stressed that temporary appointments are "part of the military justice tradition," a fact that in itself "suggests the absence of a fundamental fairness problem."
In any case, Chief Justice William Rehnquist wrote on behalf of the court, the judiciary generally shouldn't second-guess congressional decisions on how to organize the military.
One of the more striking aspects of the decision was a brief concurring opinion in which Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg said that "the care the court has taken to analyze the two Marines' claims demonstrates once again that men and women in the Armed Forces do not leave constitutional safeguards and judicial protection behind when they enter military service."
Seemingly at odds with the thrust of the Rehnquist opinion, Justice Ginsburg's comment appeared to encourage challenges to other allegedly unconstitutional conditions of military life, such as the ban on gays that is currently in litigation in the lower federal courts.
(Weiss vs. U.S.)
