Japan's economy is in the midst of a long winter, and spring isn't yet in sight.
In the past two years, Japan has experienced the shocks of a stock market collapse, export contraction, plummeting corporate profits, credit crunch, and toppling of a political order.
Regardless, worse is yet to come as Japan flounders halfway between a managed or market economy, between a rigged or open political system.
There's no going back to the pretenses and protectionism of the past, yet there is great pain -- low growth and high unemployment -- in moving toward a more open economic and political system.
To make matters worse, the Clinton administration has chosen this of all moments to launch a frontal assault on Japan's trade practices.
More important than the poor timing is the fact that the get-tough policy is short-sighted for America.
Hopes for sustained global growth, and thus expanding U.S. exports, are dependent on hitching Japan's economic engine to our own.
The most effective spur to nascent U.S. recovery would be growth in Japan.
Yet most predictions put annual growth in gross domestic product this year at well under 1%, compared with 3% for the U.S.
At the core of Japan's economic problem lie national and corporate noncompetitiveness.
The combination of an unrealistically strong yen, a padded work force and years of export-at-all-cost corporate strategies has left Japanese companies with big losses and their bankers holding big debts.
For the first time, Japanese companies can't export their way out of these difficulties because the high yen makes their products uncompetitive overseas.
Japanese banks, with their own assets severely reduced by the 1992 market collapse, lack the ability or inclination to bail out Japanese companies.
Japanese consumers, meanwhile, can't be counted on to rescue corporate Japan by buying overpriced Japanese goods.
Despite these realities, Japan has yet to taste the bitter medicine America has taken since the end of the '80s -- corporate downsizing and restructuring, layoffs and rising unemployment, economic pain at home for economic competitiveness abroad.
A few Japanese realize this lies ahead; most, however, remain oblivious.
"People still believe exports will return and save us," says Akio Mikuni, president of his own bond-rating firm.
"But they won't.
We have to fill the gap ourselves through more consumer spending."
Japan's economy, he says, will begin growing again this year, led by a pent-up construction boom delayed by investigations into political bribes.
This boomlet will fuel wishful thinking that the worst is over.
But this fragile growth, he and other realists warn, will soon be choked off by the tightening noose of a high yen.
Indeed, a return to sustained economic growth requires genuine political and economic reform, something that remains elusive.
While Japanese voters have elected a so-called reform government led by Morihiro Hosokawa, there's little sign that they are willing to make fundamental reforms.
These include the sort that dismantle a regulatory structure that intrudes into every aspect of economic life, a distribution system that inflates the cost of every product, lifetime employment practices that subsidize the society at economic cost, ownerships among companies and banks that inhibit any from floating on their own bottoms.
They also avoid changes in their political system to rid it of the kind of "rotten boroughs" that most Western democracies put behind them generations ago.
A recent study by Barclays de Zoete Wedd Research (Japan) Ltd. says that merely by eliminating the 10,000 regulations that constrain 50% of the economy, Japan could boost its gross national product 10%.
Fundamental reforms run against the Japanese grain as a nation and as a people.
A nation that has prided itself on export prowess must now learn to develop its domestic market.
People who have prided themselves on sublimating individual interests to the good of the group, and who have measured economic well-being in terms of domestic savings, not consumption, must now learn to spend to enhance their personal living standards.
More basic yet, the Japanese are going to have to learn to compete among themselves, not just against foreigners, and to accept that any competitive society includes both winners and losers.
Shifting Japan's focus from international to domestic markets, from savings to spending, from consensus to internal competition, will take at least a decade, say realists.
And along the way, there will be pain as well as gain.
A likely scenario has a number of Japanese companies and banks going bankrupt in the coming years.
Japanese unemployment is likely to rise from the official 2% to something close to 6%.
Growth will barely rise this year and likely won't rise above 3% for the rest of the decade.
Japan's share of global GNP, which rose steadily for several decades, is likely to fall by the end of the decade, particularly galling as China and other Asian neighbors grow.
While all of this will shock many Japanese, it should not surprise Americans -- except to the degree that Americans in the late 1980s built up the Japanese as economic terminators.
After a decade of exporting at all costs to gain a global market share they cannot profitably sustain, corporations are now losing both market share and money.
The almighty yen, so long a symbol of Japanese economic prowess, has become just another albatross that inhibits competitiveness.
Japan's exports to the U.S. are purchased with dollars, which cash-starved Japanese companies must repatriate quickly to meet expenses.
But using these export-earned dollars to buy yen drives the yen higher and makes Japanese exports that much less competitive.
Into this Japanese infirmary struts the Clinton administration, which has vacillated on virtually every other foreign policy issue over the past year but now chooses to get tough with Tokyo.
The patient is ill and can't get well without swallowing bitter medicine.
But what the patient doesn't need right now is for a healthier friend to come along and kick it in the stomach.
The kick won't kill it, but it surely won't do either the patient -- or the friend -- any good.
Ms. House is vice president, international, of Dow Jones.
