Call it "Mr. Muscle Meets Church Lady."
Allegations that a small New England fish processor thinks people in their mid-40s are too old to work efficiently has created an unlikely alliance between the Teamsters union and Church Women United, an ecumenical group of Christian women active in social issues.
Last week, the two groups organized protests outside various Long John Silver's restaurants nationwide.
They charge that Frionor USA Inc., a New Bedford, Mass., fish processor and Long John Silver's supplier, wants to replace "older" workers, mainly women, with younger ones.
According to the Teamsters and Church Women, the vulnerable workers could be as young as their mid-40s.
The groups say the average age of Frionor's female workers, who make up about 75% of the company's 110 production workers, is about 45 years old.
"These really aren't older women," says Ron Carver, strategic campaign director for the Washington, D.C., based Teamsters.
"But they're clearly being discriminated against based on the costliness that is associated with their experience."
Frionor, a subsidiary of Frionor AS, a small Norwegian company that packages fish products, disputes the charges.
"These are usual Teamster tactics," says Charles Dillon, Frionor's president.
"There is nothing in our contract talks that even tries to negotiate discriminatory practices toward older workers."
But the Teamsters and Church Women say two main changes that Frionor is seeking in its current labor contract with the Teamsters are aimed at squeezing older, better paid workers off the production line.
The first would require workers to undergo strength and agility tests that would give the company the right to forbid some workers from performing certain tasks along the production line.
Work there includes such jobs as cutting, partially frying, packaging, and boxing frozen fish.
The second change would allow the company to decide which production-line task each worker carries out.
In the past, employees have chosen their jobs at the beginning of each workday based on their own preferences and abilities.
Mr. Dillon says that Frionor is willing to drop the company's requests for agility testing if the workers are willing to concede on other points, such as accepting lower wages.
And he says that Frionor needs to assign production-line tasks because workers have usually chosen their assignments based on a desire to chat with co-workers rather than to work hard.
Mr. Dillon adds that Frionor is trying to win the right to pay new workers $7.50 an hour, $1.50 less an hour than the company's current workers earn.
He says the two-tiered wage scale is designed to reduce labor costs in anticipation of automating the production line.
It is this prospect of reduced labor costs, say Frionor's critics, that gives the company the incentive to get rid of older workers, who also have long vacations and might raise health-care costs.
"I firmly believe that they think they can get younger people in there who can do a better job for less money," says Margaret Lynch, a 49-year-old janitor who joined Frionor 22 years ago.
"I helped them build up to where they are today.
They can't just throw me out."
The fate of workers such as Ms. Lynch drove the Teamsters to approach Church Women last year and suggest an alliance.
Church Women agreed, and its director, Pat Rumer, decided to write Frionor's customers to alert them to problems that she believed the processing plant had.
Last November, Ms. Rumer wrote Long John Silver's Inc., a Lexington, Ky., company that is an international operator and franchiser of seafood restaurants.
It is also Frionor's biggest customer.
Her letter alleged that Frionor was trying to "lay off senior workers and fire workers who are sick or injured."
She also mentioned that Church Women was "very concerned about the current trend of employers to `dump' older workers so that younger, lower-paid workers may be hired."
Although Long John Silver's never replied to the letter, Frionor did.
In January, it filed a $4 million libel suit against Church Women in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York.
The lawsuit alleges that Church Women defamed Frionor by criticizing its "standing, business methods and integrity" and unfairly charging the company with "exploitative or immoral conduct in the treatment of its workers."
The lawsuit stunned Ms. Rumer.
"It seemed, frankly, like an act of intimidation," she says.
"We ask people all the time about their business practices and it's unusual for us to get this hostile a response."
Nonetheless, the lawsuit prompted members of Church Women and the Teamsters to protest outside several Long John Silver's restaurants nationwide Thursday.
They handed out pamphlets to workers and customers informing them of the lawsuit and conditions at the Frionor plant.
Although Long John Silver's says it is not taking any action, Frionor is.
On Friday, it issued a news release saying it was withdrawing its suit against Church Women.
"I regret Church Women United was drawn into what became a public dispute," Mr. Dillon says in the release.
"Frionor remains committed to the belief that, through collective bargaining, we will resolve our differences with our union workers."
