Vanguard Group is shuffling managers at some of its stock funds to try to improve the funds' returns.
Vanguard, a Valley Forge, Pa., mutual-fund company with more than $130 billion in assets, said it's cutting back the role of Wellington Management Co. as co-manager of Vanguard Explorer and Vanguard/Morgan Growth stock funds.
The move reflected "dissatisfaction . . . in Wellington's performance in both funds," John C. Bogle, Vanguard's chairman, said in an interview.
Boston-based Wellington, which manages a number of Vanguard funds under contract, decided to replace Frank V. Wisneski at both Explorer and Morgan Growth.
By March 31, Kenneth L. Abrams, 33 years old, will succeed Mr. Wisneski at the $902 million Explorer fund, and Robert D. Rands, 51, will succeed Mr. Wisneski at the $1.1 billion Morgan Growth fund.
Mr. Wisneski, 47, will continue to manage money at Wellington.
Wellington changed managers at the funds because it "got a message from us . . . that they should make some changes," Mr. Bogle said.
Vanguard decided to reduce Wellington's oversight of Morgan Growth's portfolio to 40% of the fund's assets from 51%.
Three other money-management firms run the remainder of Morgan Growth's assets.
And at Explorer, Wellington will run 47% of the portfolio, down from 54% currently.
Granahan Investment Management will run 47% of the fund, up from 40%.
The remaining 6% of the assets are in cash.
Earlier this month, Vanguard moved to close two of its industry-sector funds that had failed to attract much money because of mediocre performance.
More often than most mutual-fund groups, Vanguard contracts out the management of its funds to unaffiliated money managers such as Wellington.
Vanguard says this allows it to replace managers, or even whole management firms, more easily than if it employed these fund managers directly.
It also allows Vanguard to negotiate less-expensive contracts with managers.
Vanguard is a "manager of managers," says John Rekenthaler, editor of Morningstar Mutual Funds, a Chicago newsletter.
But many of Vanguard's stock funds have lagged behind competitors' funds in performance over the past three years.
"Vanguard is definitely feeling competitive pressures on the equity side," Mr. Rekenthaler says.
Mr. Bogle, while calling the performance of Vanguard's stock funds "satisfactory," acknowledges: "Last year was certainly not one of our best."
Vanguard has been tinkering with the management of Morgan Growth since 1989, when it gave half the fund's portfolio to another Wellington employee.
Mr. Wisneski had managed the entire fund since 1979.
In 1990 and 1993, Vanguard made other management shifts at the fund as well, giving a portion of the portfolio to firms besides Wellington.
The tinkering doesn't yet seem to have fixed the fund's performance disparity.
"As they've added more managers, the performance gap between this fund and the average growth fund has widened," says Daniel Wiener, editor of Independent Adviser for Vanguard Investors, a Watertown, Mass., newsletter.
"That tells me something is wrong."
Vanguard was formed by Mr. Bogle in 1974, shortly after he was fired by Wellington, to administer the mutual funds that Wellington managed.
Separately, three Vanguard bond funds will soon have new managers following the retirement of Paul Sullivan, 51, another Wellington money manager.
Paul D. Kaplan, 47, will succeed Mr. Sullivan as manager of Vanguard's Ginnie Mae fund, and the bond portion of Wellesley Income Fund, which invests in stocks and bonds.
Earl E. McEvoy, 45, will be the new manager of Vanguard's long-term corporate bond fund.
The new managers, who also work for Wellington, will take charge by March 31.
