Apple Computer Inc. disclosed details of its strategy for marketing its new line of Macintosh PowerPC computers, listing prices that are several hundred dollars below other companies' lines and promising a multimillion-dollar advertising assault on its rivals.
At a press briefing Friday, preparatory to the official unveiling of the Power Macintoshes today, Brodie Keast, vice president of Apple's personal-computer division, predicted the PowerPC line would nearly double the company's world market share to 20% in two years.
Apple is trying to grab a piece of the 85% share of the market controlled by computer makers who use Intel Corp.'s microprocessors and Microsoft Corp.'s operating system.
Its main weapon will be price cutting.
The lowest-end, bare-bones Power Macintosh, for instance, is priced at $1,819 with a microprocessor speed of 60 megahertz and is aimed at small- and medium-sized businesses.
Stripped-down versions of the midrange Power Macintosh 7100, targeted for large corporations, are priced at $2,899 with a 66 megahertz chip.
And the highest-end Power Macintosh 8100, intended for technical and publishing firms, is priced at $4,249 with an 80 megahertz microprocessor.
"We expect this pricing to be competitive for some time," said James S. Gable, Apple's product manager for the Mac PowerPC.
The Apple prices are somewhat misleading, because the entry models don't include features contained in many computer systems running on Intel's top Pentium microprocessor, such as bigger diskdrive storage and keyboard.
The low-end Power Macintosh 6100, for instance, comes with 160 megabytes of hard drive, which computer experts say is too small for "power uses."
Adding another 400 megabytes of hard drive, and including monitor, keyboard, modem and some other extras, that computer's price comes to almost $3,000.
Nonetheless, this configuration is still about $400 cheaper than a comparable Dell Computer Corp. machine based on a 60-megahertz Pentium.
Mr. Gable said Apple is determined to maintain this kind of price spread, even if that requires further cuts.
Despite the low prices, most analysts say Apple at best might defend its own share and gain up to five percentage points in five years.
They say Apple faces long odds in wresting share from Intel because 90% of all PC-software programs are written to run on Intel-based machines.
Apple will also encounter stiff resistance from Santa Clara, Calif.-based Intel, which has pre-emptively unleashed new versions of its Pentium chip that analysts say slightly outperform the first iteration of PowerPC running on Macintoshes, although they are more expensive.
Makers of Intel-Microsoft PCs have also slashed their prices.
To keep their own customers, Apple officials say they have included an enhanced version of the Macintosh's System 7 operating system that runs all the old Macintosh programs at the speed of the previous fastest Macs.
There will be an initial dearth of programs written specifically for PowerPC, which runs software as much as four times faster than the previous Macintoshes.
But more than 150 software developers are announcing today they are lining up behind PowerPC, with 50 programs ready to ship within a month by such companies as Microsoft Corp., Adobe Systems Inc. and Aldus Corp.
Apple officials said there should be hundreds more by the end of the year.
Apple officials said they intend to go after what they termed "fence sitters;" users of PCs powered by rival Intel microprocessors who are not considered loyalists of that PC and its Microsoft Windows' operating system.
These include corporations that have Intel-powered PCs, as well as some Macintoshes, and need more speed and power to perform tasks such as publishing, graphics and scientific research.
Today, Apple is launching a multimillion-dollar advertising campaign world-wide to try and lure those customers from the Intel-Microsoft camp.
"Obviously, we know we are not going to overnight convert the world to Macintosh, but this is the first salvo we are firing," said Michael Markman, director of Apple's world-wide advertising.
