When John Carson arrived here in May to take the reins at Royal Crown Cola Co., he discovered he had an inexperienced marketing staff, no one who could understand a sales report and virtually no money for advertising.
What he had were two 500-pound gorillas to battle: Coke and Pepsi.
This week, Royal Crown plans to unveil a marketing campaign Mr. Carson hopes will bring the soft-drink company back from the near-dead.
There is $68 million for advertising, promotions and capital improvements in 1994; agreements with Harley-Davidson and Wal-Mart Stores Inc. to give Royal Crown badly needed visibility; and, perhaps most important, a strategy the company believes will allow it to compete with Coca-Cola Co. and PepsiCo Inc.
Rather than meet its rivals head-on, "we have to walk beneath the legs of the giants," says Roy Spence, president of the beverage maker's new ad agency, GSD&M, the Austin, Texas, unit of Gold Greenlees Trott of London.
Once an innovator in the soft-drink business -- it introduced the first diet cola -- Royal Crown fell on hard times in the 1980s.
Under the control of Miami financier Victor Posner, it was drained of dollars and talent.
(Mr. Posner declines to answer questions about the company.)
In 1984, according to Beverage Digest, an industry newsletter, Royal Crown's ad budget was almost $10 million.
By 1992, it fell to just $3.1 million.
While during its best years Royal Crown had 5% of the soft-drink market, its share has dropped to just over 2%.
Coke has a 41% market share; Pepsi's is about 31%.
In April, Mr. Posner sold out to investors Nelson Peltz and Peter May, who hired Mr. Carson away from his post as president of rival Cadbury Schweppes PLC's North American operations.
The new president and chief executive officer, in turn, has persuaded about 20 people with backgrounds at Coke and Pepsi to join Royal Crown.
Among the most significant: Don Lenehan, a former group brand director at Coke and a former senior vice president for the diet Coke account at the Lintas ad agency.
Both Mr. Lenehan, now senior vice president for marketing, and Mr. Spence say they knew a frontal assault on Coke and Pepsi would fail, so they tried to identify their rivals' weaknesses.
Mr. Lenehan believed the sheer size of Coke and Pepsi meant the two overlooked certain audiences.
"Coke wants to be all things to all people," he says.
And "Pepsi, as much as it tries to act hip and cool, can't afford to be too targeted."
Interviews with 150 consumers told Mr. Spence that people had no significant complaints about Royal Crown's taste; rather, they said, they simply didn't see it on store shelves.
Moreover, they appeared to like the idea of a "comeback."
A strategy evolved to target the "forgotten generation," those aged 18 to 29.
Members of this group, in Royal Crown's thinking, are more willing to experiment, aren't particularly brand loyal and love to root for the underdog.
Developing a campaign, however, proved troublesome.
One of the first slogans developed at GSD&M was "RC: It's easy to spell."
Test groups thought it was funny.
Not so Mr. Lenehan.
"It was . . . not as aggressive as we needed to be," he says simply.
Another slogan that fell flat was, "RC: You can't find it."
Fred Adamany, president of Royal Crown's bottler in Chicago, one of the beverage's few strongholds, helped kill that idea, saying he wasn't about to tell customers they couldn't find his product.
What was needed, says Mr. Lenehan, was a "rallying cry for the entire company . . . something that would say to the customer, `Don't just keep doing the same old thing.'"
Just a month before a major meeting with bottlers, Mr. Spence and several associates met for a brain-storming session.
Nothing clicked, until a creative director mentioned the winner, almost in passing: "Shake things up."
Mr. Spence liked it immediately.
To get the message across, Royal Crown starting seeking promotions and sponsorships.
RC executives approached Harley-Davidson, which had staged its own comeback.
But Harley-Davidson wanted to know why it "should tie in with a company that has been so invisible," Mr. Lenehan recalls.
Royal Crown pointed out that Harley-Davidson appealed to an unorthodox market that wasn't beholden to the status quo -- an image RC had embraced.
And Royal Crown presented itself as a new marketing outlet for the motorcycle manufacturer.
Harley-Davidson signed on.
Among their joint promotional campaigns will be a sweepstakes whose top prize is a customized Harley bike.
Another potential weakness at Coke and Pepsi that Royal Crown believes it can exploit is diet colas, a category whose popularity has been sagging.
Royal Crown's Diet Rite cola is the only national brand with no calories, no caffeine, no sugar and no sodium.
Mr. Spence and crew came up with the slogan: "We got Diet Rite."
For the next 12 to 18 months, Royal Crown will concentrate on developing new accounts in convenience stores and small food stores -- areas where Mr. Lenehan believes Coke and Pepsi may be vulnerable because of their focus on big grocery chains -- as well as improving relations with supermarkets.
It will roll out 10,000 vending machines this year and also develop a strategy to work with mass merchandisers.
Wal-Mart has agreed to run limited tests of Royal Crown products in a few stores.
Royal Crown's marketers are realistic about how much they can accomplish in the next few months.
"We're not going to bring anybody to their knees," says Mr. Spence.
"We're just going to get up off of ours."
