Standard & Poor's Corp. downgraded this food concern's senior debt to triple-B from triple-B-plus to reflect the company's "weak operating performance and related financial deterioration."
About $2.2 billion of total debt is outstanding.
Borden's commercial-paper rating was affirmed.
The company had no comment.
S&P said, "Borden is in a transition period, and ratings are dependent upon the credibility of the new management team in achieving its stated 1994 goals."
It added: "The negative ratings outlook reflects the potential that Borden may not reach its desired results given the very competitive industry conditions."
S&P did note Borden's latest restructuring program, announced earlier this month, which "is expected to improve overall performance."
FIRST BANK SYSTEM (Minneapolis) -- Moody's Investors Service Inc. said it upgraded the long-term debt of this banking company and raised subordinated-debt ratings on of one of its subsidiaries.
The actions, which Moody's attributed to "sustained improvement in asset quality, earnings and capital," affected about $1.4 billion in securities, Moody's said.
The rating company raised First Bank System's senior debt to single-A-2 from single-A-3; its subordinated debt to single-A-3 from Baa-1, and its preferred stock to single-A-3 from Baa-1.
It also upgraded the subordinated debt of First Bank National Association to single-A-2 from single-A-3.
FIRST FIDELITY BANCORP. -- Standard & Poor's Corp. raised its ratings on about $600 million of long-term debt of this holding company and its First Fidelity Banks Inc. unit, including upgrades of subordinate debt to triple-B-plus from triple-B.
It also raised the rating on the holding company's preferred stock to triple-B from triple-B-minus.
S&P said the upgrades reflect the bank's "solid financial condition and favorable operating trends."
SHERRITT Inc. (Ford Saskatchewan, Alberta) -- Standard & Poor's Corp. put the senior unsecured debt on this fertilizer, energy and metals concern on CreditWatch with negative implications because of Sherritt's negotiations to buy the fertilizer business of Imperial Oil Ltd.
The move affects about $200 million (U.S.) of debt currently rated double-B-minus.
The rating agency said that, depending on the purchase price and method of financing, the acquisition could result in greater financial risk for Sherritt.
