Bobby Inman withdrew his nomination to be defense secretary, attributing the surprise move to his dismay at Washington's adversarial ways, specifically a "new McCarthyism" that he claimed was aimed at him by New York Times columnist William Safire.
The extraordinary withdrawal by the retired admiral and intelligence chief -- just one week before he was expected to be confirmed and take office -- is an embarrassing setback to the Clinton administration.
In the wake of Mr. Inman's unusual performance at a news conference announcing his withdrawal, some White House officials expressed relief that he was pulling out.
But senior administration officials last night said that while President Clinton was "disappointed," he believed Mr. Inman deserved "respect" for his 30 years of service.
The president specifically told his staff not to take shots at Mr. Inman.
While many observers were stunned by Mr. Inman's charges at the news conference, the White House wasn't.
Over the last 12 days, he had told the White House of those charges as well as details about a rumor campaign against him, including attacks on his personal life.
Dealing with the accusations, aides said, took a heavy toll on Mr. Inman's family and was a major factor in his withdrawal.
In a telephone interview last night, Mr. Inman said he doesn't have any skeletons in his closet, and expressed frustration that reporters asked about such matters, rather than focus on the message he gave at his news conference about the corrosive effects of the adversarial media.
A new pick could emerge soon because the White House has had almost two weeks to reopen its search for a successor to Mr. Aspin.
Mr. Inman had been chosen from a list of about 12 candidates, and Clinton aides are going over that list, according to a senior administration official.
The White House, he said, expects to move in an "orderly and timely manner."
It was equally possible, said a second official, that Mr. Clinton would look beyond the original list.
The White House has asked Defense Secretary Les Aspin, who had planned to step down within a few days, to stay on until a new nominee is found, Pentagon aides said.
And the possibility was raised last night that he could even be asked to keep his job.
Mr. Inman said in an interview yesterday that he had told a White House aide on Jan. 6, less than a month after he was nominated, that he intended to withdraw from consideration.
But he delayed delivering a formal letter of withdrawal, he said, because President Clinton first had to deal with the funeral of his mother and then a trip to Europe.
The people mentioned most frequently yesterday as potential nominees are Deputy Defense Secretary William Perry and former New Hampshire Sen. Warren Rudman.
James Woolsey, the director of central intelligence, also has been mentioned.
Mr. Perry is a military technologist and mathematician who has won respect for his management of the Pentagon over the past year, but whom some describe as too low-key to lead the defense establishment.
He couldn't be reached to comment yesterday.
Mr. Rudman is a Korean War veteran who served on the Senate defense appropriations subcommittee.
He currently is co-chairman of the Concord Coalition, an antideficit group that espouses much that President Clinton opposes, such as cutting federal benefits for the middle class.
Mr. Rudman, a Republican, himself didn't disclaim an interest in the Pentagon job.
He said the president hasn't contacted him, but also said, "I'm not going to advertise in the pages of The Wall Street Journal."
But senior administration officials said Messrs. Rudman and Woolsey weren't likely to be chosen.
According to one aide, the president is seeking "a star" for the post.
Many people at the Pentagon and on Capitol Hill were too struck by Mr. Inman's unusual, hour-long news conference in Austin, Texas, to focus on who might be picked as the next Pentagon chief.
While Mr. Inman observed that he has received generally favorable news coverage, he dwelled at length on criticisms of him that have appeared in the media, some of them seemingly minor.
Sen. Trent Lott (R., Miss.) called Mr. Inman's news conference "wild" and "bizarre."
Mr. Inman said he decided to withdraw early this month after being told that Mr. Safire, the New York Times columnist, was conspiring against him with Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole of Kansas.
"There were reports, which both will probably deny, that there was a trade between Mr. Safire and Sen. Dole, that if Sen. Dole would turn up the heat on my nomination then Safire would turn up the heat on Whitewater Development," Mr. Inman alleged, referring to the Arkansas land transaction that lately has proved nettlesome to the Clinton White House.
When asked about Mr. Inman's charges, Mr. Safire, reached at his suburban Washington home last night, said: "Read my column" on Thursday.
"I'm not going to scoop myself."
He repeatedly declined to elaborate.
Mr. Safire, a veteran of the Nixon administration, is a generally conservative columnist for the New York Times's generally liberal op-ed page.
The Times released a statement from its publisher, Arthur Sulzberger Jr., that didn't directly address Mr. Inman's charge, but defended Mr. Safire as "a man of great decency, honor and integrity."
The statement also quoted a Times spokeswoman, Nancy Nielsen, as saying that Mr. Safire's opinions are his own, but that "as an employee of the Times, he is expected to work within the standards of the Times and we are confident he has done so."
An angry Sen. Dole was less restrained, saying of Mr. Inman that "he's probably not qualified to be secretary of defense if he has fantasies like that."
The bad blood between Mr. Inman and Mr. Safire dates back at least to 1981, when Mr. Inman was deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Mr. Safire was close to William Casey, the CIA director, and managed Mr. Casey's unsuccessful campaign for Congress in 1966.
Mr. Inman, in his news conference yesterday, related the story of how, after the Israelis bombed a nearly operational nuclear reactor in Iraq, he curtailed Israeli access to photographs taken by U.S. reconnaisance satellites.
The decision outraged the Israelis.
"Casey had been on a trip down to Australia and New Zealand," Mr. Inman said yesterday.
"When he came back, his favorite journalist and former campaign manager, Mr. Safire, complained to him about the decision."
Mr. Inman was particularly pained by a column by Mr. Safire last Dec. 23 that labeled Mr. Inman "Clinton's worst Cabinet nomination" and accused the nominee of being "manipulative and deceptive."
Mr. Safire also wrote that while at the CIA, Mr. Inman "became convinced that Bill Casey and I were conspiring to block his advancement."
In that column, Mr. Safire also criticized Mr. Inman's failure to pay taxes for employing a part-time housekeeper, calling him a "cheat."
Mr. Inman said on Dec. 20 that he had sent a $6,000 check to the Internal Revenue Service to cover the back taxes.
"I was frankly very surprised at the depth of animosity in that initial column," Mr. Inman said in a telephone interview yesterday.
Displaying some animus of his own, he repeated an accusation he made at the news conference that Mr. Safire is "a man who has hidden his own plagiarism by an out-of-court settlement with sealed documents."
Mr. Inman didn't elaborate on his accusation, and the New York Times statement didn't address the issue.
Washington was inundated with rumors yesterday that Mr. Inman was withdrawing out of fear that old enemies, perhaps covert operators at the CIA, would attack him with derogatory information, perhaps funneling it to Mr. Safire.
But Mr. Inman dismissed that thought, saying, "I don't know that anybody there at the agency still has it in for me."
Mr. Inman also rejected suggestions that old adversaries in Israel had undermined him.
Noting that he had long shared intelligence data with the Israeli government, he said, "I have always had excellent relationships with the Labor side of Israel," which is currently in power.
Rather, he said, he thought Mr. Safire was operating on his own.
Asked why he would let a sole newspaper columnist knock him out of the box, Mr. Inman said, "If I'd wanted to stay in the box, I would have stayed.
"In the current climate, you've got to want one of those jobs awfully badly," he said in the interview.
He said that he didn't.
"I looked at this prospect as being one where it was constantly negative every day, and decided that's not how I want to spend the next years of my life," he said at his news conference.
In addition, Mr. Inman may have learned from his preconfirmation briefings that one of the biggest problems he would have faced as defense secretary would be wrestling with a defense establishment that isn't shrinking as fast as the defense budget.
He began his news conference by denying that he had any differences with President Clinton on defense policy.
But he concluded the session by tossing something of a farewell hand grenade to Mr. Clinton, saying that "Two years from now, the president's going to find himself in a terrible crunch of either finding more money or reducing force levels."
That is exactly the criticism that many of the administration's critics have leveled at the planned defense budgets and at Mr. Aspin's "bottom-up review" of the U.S. defense force structure.
"I've read large volumes now of issue papers on national security," he said.
"I've not whipped up a great appetite for those issues."
John Harwood contributed to this article.
