What's an ex-communist to do?
Some days get so bad they make a fellow long for the old Cold War.
Thursday seemed like one of those days for Eduard Shevardnadze.
The Georgian head of state had come to the U.S. earlier in the week for help in ending his homeland's fratricide; now all he could take home were promises of humanitarian aid and some work to organize peacekeepers at the United Nations.
He had had a shot at an old-fashioned superpower-style press conference with Bill Clinton; then reporters obsessed with Whitewater hogged the limelight.
Now he and his entourage hoped to depart the New York Helmsley Hotel -- but reports were coming in that the crew seemed to have misplaced the plane.
Mr. Shevardnadze, former foreign minister of the formerly existent Soviet Union, is the man who penned hundreds of communiques and redrew the map of Central Europe.
That's not helping him though to calm bloody Abkhazia, a Georgian region with a population one-sixth that of urban Berlin.
Asked to compare Georgia's challenges with those of unifying Germany, the erstwhile diplomat talks around the question.
Then he says: "It is more difficult."
To see how much more difficult, it helps to spend a morning in the Helmsley's halls with Mr. Shevardnadze and the hopeful, worried Georgians in his company.
The white-haired diplomat takes a seat at a table in his suite and draws invisible circles in the air while describing his transformation from statesman to warrior.
Georgia, he says, is like "boiling pitch."
When he returned to Tbilisi from diplomatic Moscow, "I dived into it."
He isn't exaggerating.
In communist days, rocky Georgia was Moscow's Mexico; a sunny vacationland whose tomato shipments were often the only thing that stood between Muscovites and scurvy.
Post-Soviet Moscow continued to meddle in Georgia, by all accounts contributing to the conversion of what used to be a country into three or more dusty war zones.
The Abkhaz conflict alone has killed 3,000 and created 300,000 refugees.
To save Georgia, Mr. Shevardnadze has alternately defied and caved to Moscow.
He has faced down gunfire and led besieged towns -- a long and brave step from the corridors of diplomacy.
He has even allied himself with a warlord, Jaba Ioseliani.
Faced with a rolling TV camera, the Georgian leader makes the best pitch he can to American business.
"If you come to Georgia, you will see how beautiful and how promising it is in terms of investment."
And: "The people are prepared to do hard work."
And: Business has "already started.
Coca-Cola is there."
And: "I will bet the Coca-Cola is even tastier in Georgia than elsewhere."
All of it.
But so is a laconic description of pre-conditions for investment offered by one of the smoking Georgian aides lining the Helmsley's 40th floor: "Absence of gunfire."
Just two days earlier, President Clinton promised he'd try to round up U.N. Security Council members to help organize a peacekeeping force in Georgia.
Mr. Clinton is also working on getting $70 million to feed hungry Georgians.
He hasn't, however, promised Georgians what some report they hoped for: that 25% of the peacekeepers would be Americans.
Before the camera, Mr. Shevardnadze declares himself contented with his American trip.
"I am fully aware . . . of what the U.S. can do and what it cannot do."
He argues that it doesn't matter which nationality makes up the peacekeeping force: "A contingent is a contingent."
On this trip, he has even allowed that Russians could take part in some kind of peacekeeping effort.
The Georgian leader's strength is that he is supposed to have good contacts in Moscow -- after all, he used to work there.
This very morning at the Helmsley, he keeps a group of reporters waiting while he closets himself with Yuli Vorontsov, his former subordinate and the current Russian ambassador here.
(Trapped in an elevator by a reporter, the ambassador drops a soundbite that "Russia and Georgia have been helping each other for centuries.")
Asked whether Russia appears to be returning to some form of the Brezhnev Doctrine, Mr. Shevardnadze bristles: "I want to assuage {fears} -- this is impossible."
Yet Russians were all over the Abkhazian conflict.
"Where do you think the Abkhazians got planes?" asks a cynical member of the entourage.
Like Leonid Kravchuk, the Ukrainian leader who preceded him this winter on a U.S. trip, Mr. Shevardnadze is faced with a Russia that is moving toward claiming control of what Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev has called the "near abroad."
Dangerous," mutters a Georgian reporter and disconsolately kicks a Gap bag, the booty of a quick shopping trip.
For now, Abkhazian separatists, and perhaps some Russian friends, still control their territory, including the city of Sukhumi.
("The Abkhazian separatists started this war," the U.N.'s Georgian ambassador says later over the phone, "and they don't want to end it.")
And Georgians can't expect much more from the preoccupied Clinton administration.
On this morning, Mr. Shevardnadze and the Georgians are preoccupied with more immediate problems: Their crew is reconnecting with their plane, and they are happy they have received a cash promise to stave off famine.
Yet before he departs, Mr. Shevardnadze warns of Russian tyranny's danger.
"For this not to happen the West must concentrate on the democratic belt {of countries such as his surrounding Russia}."
Here at the Helmsley, there were few signs of such concentration.
Miss Shlaes is editorial features editor of The Wall Street Journal.
