America's "jobless recovery" is finally starting to look a little different -- like a recovery that is creating jobs, and probably faster than many think.
Many economists and companies say the job market turned a corner in recent months.
Outplacement firms say out-of-work middle managers are getting new jobs faster.
Help-wanted advertising is growing.
Small companies that have long put off hiring are finally adding staff.
Some big companies are turning from cutting back to rehiring -- and even beginning to resume hiring before finishing the cutbacks.
And headhunters say demand for executives is strong.
"The job picture has definitely picked up," says Gail Fosler, chief economist at the Conference Board.
Employment has been growing at varying rates for about a year and a half.
But in the past six months, the pace has been steadier, and that consistency counts.
Except for January, when severe weather and the Los Angeles earthquake disrupted the economy, the government's payroll employment figures show that businesses have created more than 150,000 jobs a month, net of jobs lost.
As a result, unemployment has dropped faster since December.
Now, the hiring momentum is expected to roll along in the days ahead.
Lynn McIntyre had been looking for a job in Washington, D.C., since last August.
This month, she finally landed one, as an account manager at The MediaCenter , a firm that sells a database to television-advertising sales forces.
In fact, five of the seven members of the informal support group of unemployed people that Ms. McIntyre joined have landed jobs in the past six weeks.
The job market "seemed to suddenly perk up," she says.
"We are looking for a real strong year," adds Jo Bredwell, senior vice president at Bernard Hodes Advertising, a large recruitment advertising agency.
"The worst is behind us."
When the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports March employment figures tomorrow , the numbers are expected to show a continued brisk climb in jobs -- though one month's statistics might easily turn out to be a fluke, as January showed.
Nonetheless, no one is calling this job market robust.
Many companies are still cutting payrolls; when hiring, they do so sparingly.
Some industries, such as defense, and some sectors of society, such as the military, are still downsizing -- and pumping thousands of job seekers into the market.
Some regions, such as California and the Northeast, are recovering more slowly than the rest of the nation.
Job counselors also see a hard core of workers -- under- or over-qualified -- who are still difficult to re-employ.
Competition for jobs remains fierce, and many people are having to take jobs that are less attractive, and paying less, than they want.
What's more, the job cuts of the past few years were so wide and so deep that many people, even among the employed, still feel vulnerable.
"Nobody feels totally safe," says Michael Brenner, a partner in Lamalie Amrop International , an executive-search firm.
"The minimum level of anxiety over employment has gone up permanently."
That said, business confidence is clearly improving.
For the first time in about a decade, nearly an equal number of chief executive officers surveyed by the Conference Board say they expect employment to rise as expect it to fall.
Last year, only 20% expected employment to increase, while 30% were expecting a decrease.
The National Federation of Independent Business, a small-business trade group, reported that in February 18% of small companies said they were finding it hard to fill jobs.
That was more than in any other February in five years.
A year earlier, the percentage was 13%.
Gordon Richards, chief economist for the National Association of Manufacturers, sees the so-called jobs gap closing fast.
In 1992, he calculates, the economy created 1.5 million fewer jobs than would have been expected at that stage of the recovery.
Last year, the disparity shrank to about 670,000.
By year end, he predicts, the gap will vanish.
In fact, some economists are already starting to fret that unemployment may be "too low."
When unemployment drops below what economists call its "natural" rate, the scarcity of workers fuels inflation by increasing wage demands.
Few people think that point has been reached -- but quite a few think they spy it right around the corner.
David Wyss, head of research at DRI/McGraw-Hill, says he expects 1994 to end with an unemployment rate below 6.0%, a level at which many believe labor shortages begin to develop.
Unemployment stood at 6.5% of the work force in February.
"We are getting within touching distance of full employment," he says.
It's been a long time coming.
Even though the country's economic recovery began back in March 1991, the pace of job creation was tepid.
For example, New Jersey, which was hit harder than most states, has so far regained only about a third of the 262,000 jobs it lost during the recession.
In typical recoveries, says Samuel Ehrenhalt, mid-Atlantic commissioner for the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the state had regained all its job losses by this point in the recovery.
Clearly, sentiment is improving.
David Littmann, senior economist at Comerica Inc. in Detroit, sees the change in confidence in his monthly regional survey for the National Association of Purchasing Management.
The purchasing managers' hiring index, which reflects recent hiring, has been strengthening since the middle of last year.
In October, the index jumped to 59 from below 50 at the beginning of 1993.
However, the managers' comments in the survey were still downbeat.
"Do more work.
Don't hire more people," one respondent penned onto the survey.
This month, though, the index jumped again, to over 64, and respondents' comments in an informal telephone poll were far more positive.
"Hiring to pick up on the need for expanded capacity, a direct result of increased demand," one said.
Another commented, "Employment increasing because of new programs and sales."
Some companies are simply expanding.
"We are about to hire a new associate," says Beatrice Mitchell, an owner of Sperry, Mitchell & Co., which sells privately held companies.
"It kills me to do it, but I have to.
We are all working until 11 p.m."
She says business at the five-person New York firm is booming.
"We need to make hay while the sun shines."
Similarly, Cap Gemini America, a U.S. consulting unit of Cap Gemini Sogeti S.A. of France, has hired about 50 people in the past five weeks; in the year-earlier period, it hired only 15.
The company plans to hire 200 college graduates this year, double the number last year.
Other companies are compensating for their deep cuts during the recession.
Kimmins Environmental Services Inc. nearly halved its staff, to about 80 people.
"We have reversed that trend in the last 90 days," says Francis Williams, chairman of the Tampa, Fla., company.
He plans to hire 50 to 75 people this year.
The reason: The company now finds itself understaffed, just as demand for its waste-management and contracting services is growing.
"Our margins have improved and our sales are climbing," he says.
"Some things you did better with those extra people."
Even companies still cutting workers -- and there are plenty of them -- are finding that new business opportunities require selective hiring.
Digital Equipment Corp., which has been in the throes of big cutbacks, began advertising last fall for specialists to work in its growing personal-computer and data-storage businesses.
The number hired won't approach the number cut, says Russ Johnson, Digital's manager of world-wide staffing and planning.
But it's still a lot more hiring than in the recent past.
"A year ago," he says, "we were consolidating units and trying to understand how to downsize.
This year, we are really looking at how we grow certain parts of our business."
For much longer than usual in this recovery, worried companies opted for overtime and temporary and contract workers, rather than hire permanent employees.
Now, even some of these concerns are making new commitments.
Earlier this month , General Motors Corp. held a one-day job fair, seeking to hire about 2,000 engineers.
Some will work on new projects, but others will replace some GM contract employees.
"We don't view these people coming on as temporary," a GM spokesman says.
"We see this as long term."
At Manpower Inc., Chairman Mitchell Fromstein noticed last year that companies were increasingly turning temporary workers hired early in the recovery into permanent employees.
This year, he expects as many as a third of his firm's temporary workers to be hired permanently, the same percentage as last year and up from 20% in 1992.
For job hunters, all this translates into more opportunity.
After his marketing job was eliminated at a small company in November 1991, Clinso Copeland Jr., of Silver Spring, Md., tried unsuccessfully to go into business for himself.
The new venture didn't pan out.
So, in March 1993, he began spending most of his time looking for work.
It took him a year, but last week he finally found it, as a manager with a trade group in Washington.
"I've been there for just two days, but it seems like I've been there forever," a delighted Mr. Copeland says.
David Opton, executive director of Exec-U-Net, a Norwalk, Conn., networking group, says he still sees many executives laid off in corporate restructurings.
But now, he adds, there also are more new positions available for job seekers.
Last week, the regular job list his group publishes was the longest it has ever been.
It had 240 postings, up from 191 a week earlier and about 150 six months ago.
Help-wanted advertising is surging at many newspapers.
The Conference Board's help-wanted advertising index, which tracks 51 newspapers, has been climbing for several months and is expected to continue to do so.
It dipped in January, but that was due to the weather.
In Atlanta, outplacement firm Drake Beam Morin held eight champagne parties in February and four in March to celebrate the success of unemployed clients in finding jobs.
During the darkest days of 1991 and 1992, "we were lucky to have one a month," says Linda Kammire-Tiffan, managing director of the office.
Overall, Drake Beam says, the time it takes an out-of-work manager to find a new job dropped to 3.8 months last year from six months the year before.
That's "the biggest turnaround in our history," Chairman William Morin says.
At another Drake Beam office, David Eckel landed a new job earlier this month as vice president of operations for America's Cash Express, an Irving, Texas, check-cashing firm.
His search took only about four months, less than he expected.
"When I started working with Drake Beam, they kind of braced me for a six-, seven- or even eight-month job search."
However, employers and job seekers alike report brutal competition for the jobs that are offered.
"We see 40- and 50-year-old people for jobs that we used to staff with 25- and 30-year-old people," Kimmins Environmental's Mr. Williams says.
"I have never experienced this.
I have never before had the pleasure of interviewing five qualified people for a spot."
Digital's Mr. Johnson says an advertisement seeking to fill 12 to 15 positions draws as many as 2,000 resumes.
As a result, many job seekers are having to settle for salaries, benefits and responsibilities that are a cut below the jobs they left.
For example, Ms. McIntyre is pleased to have just landed the MediaCenter job but says it pays 30% less than her old one did.
"You can't be hard-nosed on negotiations on money," she says.
"It's not unusual to find people taking up to 50% cuts.
There are so many candidates out there -- if you don't want it, there's someone else to take it."
Moreover, Mr. Richards, the economist at the National Association of Manufacturers, estimates that the 1.6 million jobs lost in manufacturing in the past four years are gone for good.
About 17.8 million manufacturing jobs are now left.
Nevertheless, Kenneth Goldstein, a Conference Board economist, says the improvement in the overall job market is starting to be felt by ordinary people, and that, in turn, is being reflected in rising consumer confidence.
Tuesday, the Conference Board said its consumer confidence index shot up to 86.7 from 79.9 in February -- the highest reading since July 1990.
With unemployed neighbors finally finding work, many Americans are growing more hopeful about the future.
