Behind the Clinton administration's hands-off policy on the yen, officials see the currency's rise as a way of intensifying pressure on Japan to import more from the U.S.
Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown said yesterday "there is no deliberate effort" by the U.S. to boost the yen.
But he hinted at the advantages of a policy of benign neglect that doesn't counteract the higher yen.
In an interview with Cable News Network, Mr. Brown said the U.S. is pressing Japan to stimulate its economy -- a move that would increase its demand for imports.
"Clearly, factors that have an influence on that are ones that we are going to watch closely," Mr. Brown said.
A stronger yen, which makes Japanese products more expensive in world markets and slows Japan's export-driven economy, will increase pressures on Tokyo to stimulate domestic demand with a combination of lower interest rates, tax cuts and more government spending.
The stronger yen increases pressure on Tokyo "to pump up their economy so that Japanese consumers and business people buy more goods," said Irwin Kellner, Chemical Bank's chief economist.
Following its surge Monday, the yen lost a little ground against the dollar yesterday amid sentiment that the U.S. currency had been oversold following the failure of U.S.-Japan trade talks.
In late New York trading, the Japanese currency was quoted at 103.70 yen to the dollar, in contrast to its level of 102.65 yen the day before.
Although the Treasury said late Monday that "we don't believe in artificially manipulating exchange rates," analysts speculated about whether the U.S. would intervene against the yen if a continued rise creates disorderly market conditions.
Twice last year, once in April and once in August, the U.S. joined the Bank of Japan in selling yen to halt a rise in the Japanese currency.
Yesterday, the Bank of Japan intervened against the yen without support from the U.S.
Despite the Treasury's past willingness to intervene to calm market disruption, the U.S. watched Monday as the yen soared.
Many analysts believe the Treasury will let the yen stay where it is or even rise further unless the administration and the Federal Reserve see signs of excessive volatility in the financial markets, particularly the bond markets.
Inflationary pressures or worries about financial instability in the U.S. or Japan also could trigger currency-market intervention.
"I think they will just sit back and let the markets push the yen up," predicted C. Fred Bergsten, director of the Institute for International Economics.
"The only question is whether they intervene to push the yen back below 100 like they did last August.
I don't think they will."
Mr. Bergsten is a vigorous advocate of a stronger yen to help narrow the $60 billion U.S. trade deficit with Japan.
Mr. Bergsten used to call for a yen in the 100-110-to-the-dollar range, but he recently suggested a stronger yen in the 90-to-100 range.
"With Japanese domestic demand so low, to get the same trade correction, you need a somewhat stronger yen" to help shrink Japan's trade surplus, he said.
Treasury officials have been careful to avoid any hint of what they'll do if the yen resumes its rise after what traders called profit-taking yesterday.
But there are two reasons why the U.S. may be slow to intervene if the yen continues to rise.
First, after the failure of trade talks last week, Washington wants to keep pressure on Tokyo to open its markets.
"I think the administration is going to use this as the first step in the process of getting Japan to rethink its position," Mr. Kellner said.
Second, since the U.S. intervened to halt a rising yen in August, the dollar has risen against all major currencies -- including the yen -- until the past few days.
The yen spurted to 101 briefly Monday from 108.75 in the middle of last week; it then hit an air pocket as traders recast their hedges and reassessed their positions.
"No one knows what's going to happen," one U.S. official said.
Lawrence Kudlow, the chief economist at Bear, Stearns & Co., frets about the psychological impact of a lower dollar.
"My market sense tells me that if the dollar makes a new low under 100, you're going to see a major break in the markets," he said.
"I think there will be a run out of the dollar" that could hurt the stock and bond markets.
However, U.S. officials believe that the general economic forces during the next few months will tend to force up the dollar against the yen because the U.S. economy is growing, while the Japanese economy is mired in recession.
Thus, the next moves in U.S. interest rates are likely to be up, while the next moves in Japanese interest rates are likely to be down.
