Whether one agrees with the underpinnings or scope of the health care reform proposals coming out of Washington, at least two facts remain to the dismay of managed care critics: First, managed care already has fueled the engine of reform in the marketplace and second, it has proved its ability to deliver quality health care while containing costs.
The greatest value of managed care, particularly HMOs, lies in its approach to organizing and coordinating care.
This approach -- so greatly misunderstood by the critics -- involves changing the economics and delivery of health care so it is possible to provide the right care at the right time and place.
In a group practice HMO, for example, the doctor can truly be a patient advocate because individual clinical decisions do not directly affect his or her income.
Knowing patients will not be financially burdened also frees the physician to base clinical decisions on what is medically appropriate, and to provide care in the setting that best meets the patient's needs.
An HMO's financial incentives and rational structure ensure quality and contain costs.
Critics of managed care raise the specter of medical decisions made by a bureaucracy concerned only with the health of its bottom line.
On the contrary, group practice HMOs -- closely knit groups of physician colleagues who practice together, coordinate care, and learn from one another -- have been working to reform health care for several decades by putting the patient at the center of all decisions, making health the bottom line.
How does the theory translate into practice?
Evidence indicates that organizing and coordinating care to keep people well improves quality and contains cost.
Here are a few examples from my own organization, Kaiser Permanente:
-- Physicians, health educators and nurses have joined together to create a support system that helps families understand, predict and control a child's asthma.
While the national average for repeat hospitalizations for children suffering from asthma is 20% to 30%, at several Kaiser Permanente facilities this figure is now down to just 5%.
Hospital days for asthma treatment are down by 70% over a two-year period.
-- The first step in reducing heart disease and stroke is identifying people at risk.
In the past five years, we screened 93.1% of our "at risk" Northern California members for hypertension.
The effectiveness of our treatment following screening is demonstrated by the low number of our patients who suffer strokes relative to statistics from other California hospitals -- 125.7 per 100,000 people compared with 164.1 statewide.
-- Our performance in Northern California in immunization against common childhood illnesses (measles, mumps, diphtheria) is well above the state average.
In the case of hemophilus influenza type B, which can cause bacterial meningitis, we immunize children at a rate more than twice the state average.
Statewide, about 70% of children under age 2 have been inoculated against measles, mumps, and rubella, compared with 93.8% of Kaiser Permanente members.
-- Our premature-birth prevention programs include frequent prenatal visits, nutrition counseling, and having a nurse telephone the mother frequently to assess warning signs of premature labor.
By putting the patient at the center of care, we have prevented one in four premature deliveries.
Neonatal intensive care days have been reduced 25% -- days that cost more than 10 times that of a full-term newborn nursery.
The savings in hospital costs alone translate into more than $1 million a year in our Washington, D.C., region.
These examples illustrate what HMO physicians can do for their patients.
But do they contribute to a more efficient marketplace?
-- A new KPMG Peat Marwick study found that HMO premiums increased 40% less from 1988 to 1993 than premiums for fee-for-service plans and 32% less than preferred-provider organizations.
Savings were achieved while providing more preventive services, lower out-of-pocket costs, and generally more comprehensive benefits.
-- According to the latest Foster Higgins survey of 1993 health benefit costs, traditional indemnity plans remained the most expensive plans, averaging $3,500 per employee nationally, while HMO plans averaged only $3,276.
In California, where HMO penetration is highest, indemnity plan costs increased 8.4% to $3,743 per employee and HMO costs increased only 4.9% to $2,926 per employee.
-- Growing numbers are choosing HMOs as an alternative to fee-for-service medicine -- 45 million Americans last year alone.
A new survey by KPMG Peat Marwick found that 74% of mid- and large-sized employers are offering HMOs.
-- Employees enrolled in HMOs offered by their employers are as satisfied with their plans as are members of traditional fee-for-service plans, according to polls by Gallup and National Research Corp.
Successful market-based reform should not be measured by cost savings and increased enrollment in managed-care organizations alone, however.
Legitimate reform must provide coverage and access for the uninsured or underinsured, guarantee the quality of medical care, provide a broader choice of health plans (including free-choice-of-physician plans) for individuals, and equitably spread the cost of financing America's health care bill.
Indeed, some of these reforms are already occurring at the state level and through voluntary actions by health plans.
More reform is needed, however.
If we do not improve the health status of all Americans, and if we do not correct the underlying structural flaws and skewed incentives of traditional insurance that prevent our health care system from serving everyone, reform ultimately will fail.
It is precisely these problems that organized, coordinated care approaches like Kaiser Permanente's have addressed.
Does our model represent a cure-all, a reform panacea?
We would never make such a claim.
We believe people should have choices.
More and more Americans are turning to HMOs because the status quo clearly is not working.
Health care largely remains a cottage industry made up of thousands of independent entities.
Many who have insurance coverage find it confusing and uncertain.
When future generations look at the accomplishments of health reform, I hope they do not see that we perpetuated a fragmented, inefficient, unfair system that leaves many without the health care they need.
Dr. Lawrence, a physician, is CEO of Kaiser Foundation Health Plan Inc. and Kaiser Foundation Hospitals.
