Washington, D.C.-based CD Radio Inc. filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to raise about $50 million in an initial public offering, based on its satellite radio signal concept.
The company is proposing to sell 4.5 million shares at an estimated $10 to $12 a share, which would give the company a market value of $120 million to $144 million, based on 12 million shares outstanding.
Seidler Cos. and First Marathon Securities Ltd. are underwriters.
The company envisions launching its CD Radio system by mid-1997.
The system includes a silver-dollar-sized antenna that will pick up 30 channels of digital compact disk-quality music -- from jazz to classical -- on a special "S-band" radio.
The commercial-free channels would run 24 hours a day nationwide, and CD Radio says it later would add as many as 20 channels of other formats, such as all news, sports or talk programs.
The prospectus says CD Radio plans to use proceeds from the offering for working capital and general corporate purposes including market research, as well as $1 million to develop the special integrated circuit needed to receive the digital radio satellite signals.
But considerable hurdles remain: The service requires Federal Communications Commission approval, and the filing says CD Radio would need to raise about $494 million to build and launch two necessary satellites and operate the system for the first year.
The filing cautions that a significant delay in developing, building, launching and beginning operation could have a material adverse effect on the company.
Moreover, it warns, "there can be no assurance" that the CD Radio system "will actually function as currently contemplated."
CD Radio has a contract for a Loral Corp. unit to build two satellites for the service, which would be available for about $10 a month; subscribers would have to purchase a so-called S-band radio.
CD Radio says the S-band radios would resemble today's AM/FM receivers and likely would include the AM/FM bands as well as a digital display showing the CD Radio channel number, song title, recording artist, album title and record label.
S-band radios are expected to be "somewhat more expensive" than traditional radios, the filing says.
No such devices have yet been built for commercial sale, the filing says.
CD Radio is seeking to claim a foothold in the proposed Digital Audio Radio Service that the FCC is considering.
The filing says the National Association of Broadcasters has opposed granting the FCC license.
CD Radio is one of four companies seeking an FCC license to operate satellite radio technology.
The filing says the FCC approval "is likely" before the satellites' expected launch between December 1996 and June 1997 -- the dates it has reserved with Arianespace, the European satellite-launching consortium.
Since its formation in 1990, CD Radio has spent about $10 million developing its proposal.
The company expects to report losses through at least the first full year of CD Radio broadcasts.
In 1993, the company had a net loss of $6.6 million.
Since 1990 it has accumulated a $9.5 million deficit.
Last April, CD Radio purchased Sky Highway Radio Corp., a competing applicant, for $2 million, taking a $2 million charge against its 1993 results.
