MCI Communications Corp.'s new push into the wireless market will prod a slew of rivals to quickly decide which technological approach to take in the coming free-for-all for wireless customers.
And while industry insiders may debate the arcane comparisons of the rival wireless approaches that are emerging, in the end sheer marketing muscle may determine the winner.
That notion appeared to be part of the motivation behind yesterday's announcement that MCI will spend $1.3 billion for a 17% stake in wireless upstart Nextel Communications Inc.
MCI's move and the effort by American Telephone & Telegraph Co. to push through its $17.6 billion acquisition of cellular powerhouse McCaw Cellular Communications Corp. will force other rivals to respond quickly.
The seven Baby Bells, GTE Corp., Sprint Corp. and others must develop wireless strategies, pick which technology to adopt, and set their marketing ploys to try to avoid becoming easy targets for new predators like MCI.
"They just can't sit still waiting for more and more companies coming into their markets," says Kenneth Leon, a telecommunications analyst with Lehman Brothers Inc.
"There's pressure to become a lot more pro-active."
Toward that end, Mr. Leon says all industry players are going to have to become more aggressive in offering wireless services in their local markets.
"There was never any incentive" before MCI's announcement, he adds.
"Now the pressure's on."
Right now, each cellular market has just two providers.
But the number of competitors in each market could more than triple next year, after the Federal Communications Commission begins auctioning licenses, seven for each market, for "personal communications services," a cellular cousin that offers seamless wireless communications.
With the MCI-Nextel tie unveiled yesterday, the wireless business now promises yet another potent rival.
Three technologies are at war in this effort: regular cellular phone service, the new personal communications approach, and Nextel's specialized mobile radio service, a venerable method used for years for taxi dispatch and other two-way communications.
Personal communications is the newest and perhaps the most unproven approach.
Unlike traditional cellular service, which won't work inside office buildings and often ends car-phone conversations in tunnels, personal communications phones use different radio frequencies and more transmitters to beam calls over shorter distances from virtually anywhere.
Technically speaking, cellular, personal communications and mobile radio operate on different portions of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Current cellular calls ride along at frequencies of 800 to 900 megahertz (or as many as 900 million cycles a second), and mobile radio transmits in the same range.
The government had split up the frequency so that one portion was reserved for cellular calling and a second was set aside for private networks such as taxi dispatch.
Personal communications will run at 1.8 gigahertz, or 1.8 billion cycles, a higher frequency that requires smaller "cell sites" and a higher number of cellular towers for beaming calls.
Cell sites for traditional cellular are good for five to 10 miles, depending on the market (shorter distances in New York with its spectrum-blocking skyscrapers; longer spans for the wide-open plains of Iowa).
But personal communications cell sites are good for only 100 meters or so.
Such differences may be all but invisible, however, to consumers.
They just want to make a call.
Increasingly, it also appears that ever more consumers like the idea of placing that call from a Star Trek-like communicator they can tuck into a coat pocket or into a small purse.
Girding for the coming onslaught of competitors, most companies are beefing up their marketing efforts, courting customers and looking for any technological wrinkle to exploit.
Chicago-based Ameritech Corp. spent $500 million over the past 18 months and plans to spend even more over the next year.
Betting firmly on current cellular technology, it is introducing a raft of new services such as one-person, one-number calling and promoting the Ameritech brand name at every turn.
Ameritech's cellular unit has begun a marketing push in 400 local high schools, where driver's education classes include lessons on how to use a wireless phone.
Ameritech provides free phones and air time.
The Baby Bell is doing a similar campaign with police departments across its Midwest service territory.
Because of its cellular business, Ameritech won't be allowed to compete in the major part of the personal communications battle and will be relegated to a lesser part of the spectrum.
But it nonetheless recently began offering a wireless telephone service for business customers that allows workers to use their cellular phones inside office buildings, as part of its eventual personal communications push.
"There's not enough wireless business here in Chicago for seven players.
What it will get down to is two or three survivors," predicts John E. Rooney, president of Ameritech's cellular unit, suggesting Ameritech plans to be among the latter.
Some industry observers say MCI's endorsement of the mobile radio technology, and the coming invasion of personal communications competitors, won't necessarily force existing cellular players to choose among competing technologies.
To be sure, some players will wind up specializing in one technology or another.
But many may simply use a mix of technologies to make sure customers get what they want.
"This isn't a technology game.
It's a marketing game," says Jack Grubman of PaineWebber Inc.
And marketing is going to get tough, given the entry of such recognized names as AT&T, regarded as one of the world's most recognized brand names, and now MCI.
MCI's initial investment in Nextel probably won't be its last run at the wireless market.
Indeed, many wireless watchers expect MCI to continue building its wireless empire after personal communications gets closer to reality.
While AT&T and MCI gear up, the rest of the industry's players are taking stock of their options.
Under FCC rules, wireless companies won't be able to go after the choicer personal communications licenses in markets where they already have a major presence.
That limits the Baby Bells, which are major players in all their respective markets.
The restrictions in part prompted Pacific Telesis Group, based in San Francisco, to spin off its cellular arm into an independent entity, rechristening it AirTouch Communications.
That allows the telephone company to go after the best personal communications licenses, which probably will mean that it will have to go head-to-head with its former sibling at some point.
