To watch a lot of Super Bowl games is to become a connoisseur of routs.
The one Sunday night by the Dallas Cowboys over the Buffalo Bills was unusual in that the losers led at halftime and were in a tie until almost midway through the third quarter.
But once the tide had turned the game had the feeling of inevitability, even to the participants.
"Our idea is to pound on the other team 'til they can't take it anymore," said one of the chief pounders, the Cowboys' 325-pound offensive guard, Nate Newton.
"Football's a 60-minute game, and even when we were behind we didn't think anybody could stay with us that long."
The final score in the spiffy Georgia Dome was 30-13, but it could have been worse from Buffalo's standpoint.
Dallas outscored its mistake-prone foe 24-0 in the second half, and the count would have been 28-0 if a late-fourth-quarter drive that brought the winners to a first-down-and-goal from the Buffalo one-yard line hadn't been stalled by a penalty and ended with a field goal.
No matter, though.
"Turnovers usually determine a game's outcome, and we handed them several, but, really, they're an awfully good team," said a weary Marv Levy, the coach of a team that has now lost four of these professional football championship games in succession.
"They have great run-pass balance on offense, and a very good defense.
To beat them, you have to have done more than we did."
The outcome had been widely anticipated -- the Cowboys were a hefty 10 1/2 point favorite going in -- and while the 'Boys' skills were the immediate cause, history also seemed to be on their side.
This was edition XXVIII of a game so self-important that it employs the numbers of the Caesars, and XV of them have been decided by XIV points or more, the common definition of I-sidedness.
Throw in the additional IV games in which the margin has been X to XIII points, and you have a precedent that's weighty indeed.
Given the Cowboys' 52-17 (in earthbound Arabic numerals) victory in last year's big game over much the same Buffalo team, and the Washington Redskins' 37-24 conquest of the Bills in the 1992 contest, quite a bit of the pregame discussion dwelt on why the Super Bowl is so often uncompetitive.
Most of the answers had to do with such notions as momentum swings and the risk-taking associated with the game's all-or-nothing nature.
Closer to the truth, though, is the fact that one team in these things has been a heckuva lot better than the other.
For all its asserted subtleties, football is a game in which appearances rarely deceive, and one gang can be just plain bigger, tougher and quicker than its foe.
The Cowboys qualified on all counts Sunday.
Their sheer physical dominance came through best in the third-quarter drive that put them ahead to stay.
It involved eight plays that covered 64 yards, seven of which, worth 61 yards, were runs by stumpy Emmitt Smith, the brilliant running back who was named the game's most valuable player.
Five of the runs went to the right, behind the blocks of Kevin Gogan, the 6-foot-7, 328-pound right guard; Erik Williams, the 6-foot-6, 324pound right tackle; and the abovementioned Newton, who swung his 6-foot-3 frame over from his left-guard station.
"Put me, Erik and Nate in front of Emmitt, and the defense has trouble seeing him," Gogan giggled later.
"We could have told 'em we were coming and it wouldn't have mattered much," said Newton.
Dallas's next touchdown, on a 34-yard drive set up by a James Washington interception of a Jim Kelly pass, was much the same, with Smith running on six of its nine plays.
It gave the 'Boys a 27-13 lead that wasn't about to be surmounted.
Safety Washington was the winners' main defensive hero.
Besides his interception, he caused a first-quarter fumble by the Bills' Thurman Thomas that set up a Dallas field goal, and picked up another bobble by poor Thomas on the third play of the second half and zigzagged 46 yards with it for the touchdown that tied the score at 13.
The glib Los Angeles native is making a habit of such heroics; an interception of his also figured prominently in last year's Super Bowl.
Again, though, it was Dallas's overall defense that shone.
Earlier in the week, Kelly had said his team couldn't win by completing a lot of short passes, but that was exactly what Dallas forced upon him (31 completions for 260 yards), and the effort demanded a perfection he couldn't sustain.
"We knew mistakes were inevitable, and we just wanted to be there when they happened," Washington noted.
In winning a second straight National Football League title, the Cowboys joined elite company; only Green Bay, Miami, Pittsburgh and San Francisco have done that during the Super Bowl era.
They are a young team in key positions -- Smith is 24 years old, monster blocker Williams is 25, and quarterback Troy Aikman and middle linebacker Ken Norton are 27 -- and despite the vagaries of player free agency and league salary caps, they will be favored to do this again next year.
One possible fly in their ointment is injuries.
Aikman suffered shoulder woes during the season, plus a concussion that blanked out most of the previous week's playoff win against the San Francisco 49ers.
Smith also had shoulder injuries that bode less well for a runner than a passer.
Another is the relationship between Cowboy coach Jimmy Johnson and owner Jerry Jones, whose egos may need more room than Texas can offer.
Johnson's Hype Week pronouncements shifted between expressing love for the Cowboys to hinting that he'd relish the challenge of building an NFL expansion team.
It was hard to know which stance to take seriously, for a reason Johnson himself provided.
Relating how, as coach at Oklahoma State University, he'd told bluechip recruit Thurman Thomas he'd stay for four years only to leave for the University of Miami before the ink was dry on Thomas's commitment, he gave this explanation: "I didn't exactly promise him I'd stay.
It was more like it was my opinion at the time."
Can't exactly take that to the bank, can you?
