GFC Financial Corp. signed a definitive agreement to purchase a financing unit of Bell Atlantic Corp. of Philadelphia for a price that people close to the transaction said was as much as $350 million.
GFC is a commercial lending and mortgage insurance company in Phoenix that was once part of Dial Corp.
Samuel L. Eichenfield, GFC's chairman and chief executive, wouldn't confirm or deny the transaction price, which was said to be around $24 to $26 for each of 13.5 million shares of the Bell Atlantic unit, TriCon Capital Corp. of Paramus, N.J. Tricon provides commercial finance and equipment-leasing services.
Mr. Eichenfield said the transaction "brings us into leadership positions in a variety of new businesses."
Among the fields he listed was TriCon's medical-financing and medical-equipment leasing business.
The Bell Atlantic unit had 1992 revenue of $242 million.
Mr. Eichenfield said GFC would finance the acquisition initially through debt, and that the company also intends to "visit the equity markets" in the next 30 to 60 days.
The transaction isn't subject to a shareholder vote and is expected to close April 1, pending regulatory approvals.
The TriCon agreement marks GFC's second significant acquisition in recent months.
Last month, GFC bought Fleet Financial Group Inc.'s factoring and assetbased lending subsidiary for $257 million.
Including TriCon assets, GFC said it will have total assets of about $5 billion, and would have reported net income of about $72 million in 1993 if the purchases had been retroactive to the beginning of last year.
GFC shares closed at $32, up $2.625 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading Friday.
Bell Atlantic had announced its decision to exit the financial-services business Oct. 13, the day it also agreed to acquire cable operator Tele-Communications Inc.
A spokeswoman for the Baby Bell said the decision to quit the financial-services business wasn't related to the proposed acquisition of TCI, a deal that has since fallen through.
"We want to focus on our core communications business," she said.
As a result of the pact with GFC, Bell Atlantic has withdrawn a planned spinoff of TriCon in an initial public offering valued at as much as $351 million.
The spokeswoman said the spinoff, which was announced late last year, was one of several options for exiting the financialservices business that the regional phone company had been considering.
Bell Atlantic said it still owns some real estate operations that it has no immediate plans to sell, and is involved in a joint-venture computer leasing business from which it will eventually "bow out."
The sale of TriCon is not expected to have a material impact on Bell Atlantic, the company said.
