MCI Communications Inc.'s $1.3 billion gamble on Nextel Communications Inc. has sparked renewed investor interest in the higher-profile wireless stocks, but some of the smaller players may be left in the dust.
Over the past two years, a host of small telecommunications companies have cast their lot with the wireless boom.
That boom has been fueled by investments from a roster of powerful telecomm players and from alliances among some of them -- the seven Baby Bells, GTE Corp., a proposed AT&T-McCaw Cellular combination, and now MCI-Nextel.
Although niche markets exist, smaller companies are going to have to struggle even more to deliver the promised wireless services.
They lack capital, recognizable brand names and geographic reach -- all of which the beefed-up Nextel now commands, analysts say.
And profits remain a pipe dream among most of them.
"There's no way all these small companies can have a winning technology," contends Herschel Shosteck, a wireless communications analyst based in Silver Spring, Md.
Noting that a telecommunications "feeding frenzy" is likely to continue, nonetheless, he adds: "We can't see where there is enough business to support everybody."
Will Lyons, Atlanta-based editor of the "Short On Value" newsletter, which makes 30 short-sell recommendations each month, is certainly skeptical about prospects for the smaller independent wireless companies.
"Some of the wireless stocks, like Geotek, CenCall and Dial Page, did go up in sympathy with the MCI-Nextel announcement, but not by very much," he says.
Of the three, Dial Page Inc. has had the biggest move, up some 20% since the MCI-Nextel announcement Feb. 28.
"In general, we think the wireless stocks, especially the paging-company stocks, are valued at prices that are unsustainable," he says.
Competition in the highly fragmented wireless-paging business can only intensify, particularly as Nextel and several large cellular operators are gearing up to include paging services on wireless pocket phones.
More broadly, he says, wireless technology is going to advance so rapidly that the smaller wireless companies "will have to make substantial, ongoing investments -- that has to be paid for by debt, which could hurt earnings, or by further equity offerings, which would dilute any future earnings they might come up with."
Topping his list of short-sell recommendations among wireless companies this month are: Cellular Communications Inc., Centennial Cellular Corp., Metricom Inc., Mobile Telecommunications Technologies Corp., Paging Network Inc. and Dial Page.
"Paging Network had a big operating loss for 1993, and its balance sheet is loaded with debt," he notes.
Nextel had been on Mr. Lyons's list of bearish bets before the MCI move.
"We backed off shorting Nextel after the MCI investment was announced," he says, noting that with major players such as Comcast Corp., Motorola Inc. and now MCI heavily invested in the company, "it would be hard to see Wall Street's enthusiasm for the stock fading anytime soon."
One of the first casualties from the MCI-Nextel link-up could be rural cellular companies, which have come to depend heavily on high "roaming" fees they collect from phone users traveling outside their own area.
Because of its size and geographic reach, the new Nextel-MCI combination could lure away those customers by offering competitive service and dropping the roaming charge.
"Rural cellular operators could see their business undermined by Nextel's entrance," says Charles Pluckhahn, a portfolio manager of State Street Research's Small Cap Growth fund in Boston.
Two companies that could be hurt are Cellular Inc. and U.S. Cellular Corp.
To be sure, MCI's decision to invest in Nextel represents a shift in the long-distance carrier's wireless strategy that doesn't bode well for another group of smaller wireless players, the so-called PCS providers.
MCI had originally championed "personal communications systems," or PCS, a futuristic technology that would enable users to transmit voice and data on inexpensive pocket phones.
But by linking up with Nextel, MCI has indicated that PCS isn't worth waiting for, analysts and money managers say.
"The picture for PCS service doesn't look all that bright," notes State Street's Mr. Pluckhahn.
He says that entrepreneurs who expected to launch initial public offerings based on receiving PCS licenses may now decide not take their companies public, following the MCI move.
Additional problems stand in the way of PCS, others say.
Not only has the government delayed its plan to auction such licenses, but "there are no opportunities for small players in PCS unless you are a rural based PCS company," argues Jerry Lucas, president of TeleStrategies, a McLean, Va., telecommunications consultant.
Those PCS licenses that eventually will be auctioned off will only be affordable in the less-competitive rural markets for smaller companies, he explains.
Overall, the fortunes of many smaller wireless companies hinge narrowly on the potential success -- or failure -- of untested technologies.
Geotek Industries Inc., for example, aims to sell wireless services based on Israeli defense systems, but some analysts say the technology has a 50-50 chance of flying.
Qualcomm Inc., whose stock is particularly skittish, has suffered several delays in bringing its digital cellular technology to market.
On Feb. 17, Qualcomm partly attributed a 7% drop in its stock price to news that Pacific Telesis Group might consider a rival digital technology for its foray into PCS.
Wireless stocks "aren't for the faint-hearted," Alex Cenna, analyst at Lehman Brothers says.
"Investors need to be careful," warns Jeffrey Hines, an analyst at PaineWebber Inc.
"Nothing is a slam dunk when it comes to developing technology."
He particularly cites Qualcomm, whose shares have dropped from highs of over $43 in mid-October to about $25 today.
Mr. Hines remains a big fan, however, of Nextel and CenCall Communications Inc. (Nextel has an agreement to buy a large minority stake in CenCall.)
To be sure, some brokers and money-managers think now might be the time to pick up more stock in the likes of Geotek.
Louis Cohen, a broker with Lew Lieberbaum & Co. in New York, thinks Geotek has been under pressure because of a planned debt offering.
Longer term, he says, the stock should perform strongly.
Smaller stock prices edged higher, egged on by a recovery in the bond market after Thursday's plunge.
The Russell 2000 Index, which tracks the performance of small-capitalization stocks, edged up 0.07, or 0.03%, to 265.49.
The Nasdaq Composite Index gained 0.11, or 0.01%, to 789.20.
Advancing Nasdaq issues ran past decliners, 1,562 to 1,422, on Nasdaq National Market volume of 238,380,000 shares and total volume of 279,253,000.
On Thursday, National Market volume was higher at 284,700,000, while overall turnover stood at 326,793,000.
For the week, the Russell 2000 gained 0.78, or 0.29%; the Nasdaq Composite fell 1.35, or 0.17%; and the Dow Jones Industrial Average jumped 30.40, or 0.79%.
Agouron Pharmaceuticals jumped 2 1/4 to 14 3/4.
The company said a team of its researchers solved the three-dimensional atomic structure of rhinovirus 3C protease, an enzyme that plays a vital role in the life cycle of the family of viruses most frequently responsible for the common cold.
A rating upgrade to "buy" from "hold" by Prudential Securities boosted Orbital Sciences 3 1/2 to 18 3/4.
The company makes space products.
Big Board-traded Tech-Sym Corp., Houston, rose 1 5/8 to 19 3/4 after Dan Dorfman reported on CNBC that an analyst told him someone might make an "unfriendly run" at the company.
Bentley Capital Management money manager Michael Lauer reportedly said the electronics company's price makes it an attractive takeover candidate.
Andrea Electronics gained 1 3/4 to 20 1/8 on the American Stock Exchange.
Although the company expects a first-quarter loss, it said it is negotiating a licensing agreement to provide noise-cancellation technology to BellSouth Corp., which rose 1/8 to 54 1/4 on the Big Board.
A BellSouth spokesman said the deal wasn't yet firm and that the situation hadn't changed materially since discussions began some months ago.
Goodmark Foods racked up 2 5/8 to 17 7/8.
The meat snack products concern said its fiscal third-quarter earnings rose to 32 cents a share from 25 cents on more shares a year earlier.
PAGING NETWORK Inc. posted an operating profit for 1993, but had a net loss due to interest expenses.
In yesterday's Small Stock Focus column, it was incorrectly stated that Paging Network had an operating loss in 1993.
