Big stocks may have lost their way, but small issues are shooting to new records, propelled by solid earnings and a flash of takeover fever.
The Russell 2000 Index, which tracks the performance of small-capitalization stocks on the major exchanges and the Nasdaq Stock Market, climbed to consecutive new highs Wednesday, Thursday and Friday.
Year-to-date, the index is up 4.8% to 271.08, compared with a 3.8% gain for the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
The Dow is off 2.1%, however, from its Jan. 31 peak, while the Russell is up 1.3% from its Feb. 2 earlier high of 267.62.
The Nasdaq Composite Index, which compromises mostly small stocks, also finished the week at a record.
How long can this last?
The most bullish analysts argue that small stocks can scale new heights as long as earnings continue to meet, or exceed, expectations.
And the likelihood of that happening is high, barring any aggressive efforts by the Federal Reserve Board to slow the economy.
Analysts and traders said they will be watching for a possible boost in short-term interest rates following the meeting of the Fed's policy-making arm that begins tomorrow.
"Small stocks have escaped much of the damage that rising interest rates inflicted" on the broader market following the Fed's Feb. 4 boost in short-term interest rates, says Paul Greenwood, senior research analyst at Frank Russell Co. in Tacoma, Wash.
The company compiles the Russell 2000 and other indexes.
According to Zacks Investment Research, 56% of companies with a market capitalization of $650 million or less met or beat expectations for their last reported fiscal quarters ending in December, January or February.
While the figure is a few percentage points below the trend seen in recent quarters, it still shows that "earnings are on track," says Benjamin Zacks, executive vice president at Zacks in Chicago.
Those companies beating estimates (some 45% of all small-cap companies surveyed) did so by an average 17.53% in their last reported quarter, Mr. Zacks says.
And he thinks they can keep up the pace for the most part.
Certainly they have fooled a lot of analysts who, for the past four quarters, have lowered expectations only to be surprised by the strong overall earnings gains that small stocks have posted.
On the basis of earnings performance, Mr. Zacks thinks small stocks will continue to outperform in what has become a solidly earnings-driven market.
He notes, for example, that analysts now project 1994 earnings for small-cap companies to grow 19% year-over-year (albeit down from projections of 22% three months ago).
That compares with growth estimates of 16.5% for the Standard & Poor's 500 Stock Index, a much broader gauge of stock performance.
Mr. Zacks sees other factors bolstering small-company shares this year.
"They're benefiting from corporate restructuring and the pickup in the overall economy.
More specifically, they're not as exposed to foreign operations as large-cap companies, which have been hurt by a stronger dollar and by slack demand in Europe."
Other analysts have suggested that funds previously earmarked for investment in hot new emerging markets abroad may find a home in small-cap domestic equities, now that those overseas markets are floundering.
Finally, there has been a flurry of merger news in the communications and broader technology sectors, such as Tuesday's announcement that desk-top publisher Adobe Systems Inc. will buy competitor Aldus Corp. in a $515.8 million stock swap.
"The technology sector has definitely been leading the way, with the group approaching double-digit gains for the year to date," says Mr. Greenwood, the Russell analyst.
Among the top performers within the Russell 2000, where the average market cap stands around $420 million, are Breed Technologies Inc., a maker of auto airbag crash sensors; Western Digital Corp., a computer-component manufacturer; and Centex Telemanagement Inc., a provider of telecommunications management services.
All three issues are up more than 100% this year.
As for top-performing sectors, semiconductor stocks are the standouts, buoyed by strong order flows.
Mr. Greenwood points out that the stronger relative performance of small caps may reflect, in part, the substantial underweighting of utilities in the Russell 2000 index.
Utilities tend to be among the most interest-rate-sensitive sectors, largely because of their substantial financial leverage.
"In the S&P 500, utilities have 2.6 times the weighting they do in the Russell 2000," Mr. Greenwood explains.
Veteran small-stock investors say they like what they've been seeing over the past few weeks -- small stocks retaining their leadership role.
But, they caution, it's still wise to lighten up on some of the hot issues.
"I'm taking profits and trying to buy stocks with lower P/E's," says Gil Knight, managing director of ASB Capital Management Inc. in Washington D.C.
Before Mr. Knight begins chasing high-P/E "growth" stocks, he's going to wait for a shakeout in the market for initial public offerings.
The pipeline of low-quality IPOs coming to market is absorbing large amounts of the fresh money being put into equities, he says.
Fresh money is what's needed to power the market higher.
"I want to see some of these IPOs pulled," before getting strongly bullish about the small-cap market, he says.
Year to date, only a few issues have been pulled, most of them proposed financial offerings or those of real estate investment trusts (REITs), according to Securities Data Co.
Among the REITs that were postponed, several have since refiled and been sold.
The Russell 2000 was up 1.29, or 0.48%, to 271.08 for a third consecutive record close.
The Nasdaq Composite index rose 0.08 to 803.93 from Thursday's record.
Equally impressive was the Nasdaq's late-day rebound from its session low of 799.14.
Immunomedics, which makes diagnostic medical products, was up 1/4, or 5%, at 5 1/4 after the company said a recent study showed one of its products could accurately disclose the presence or absence of tumors in 93% of test subjects.
The company said the results of the study were reported in this month's issue of the Journal of Clinical Oncology.
Monk-Austin, a tobacco company, rose 2 5/8, or 17%, to 18 1/2 after it said it agreed in principle to buy R.J. Reynolds Tobacco's "U.S. tobacco needs" from the auction market beginning in 1994.
The arrangement provides that New York Stock Exchange-traded Monk-Austin will purchase the U.S. tobacco at auction and then sell it to R.J. Reynolds, a unit of RJR Nabisco.
Monk-Austin said it believes the agreement will add $200 million to $300 million annually to its net revenue beginning in the fiscal year ending June 30, 1995.
Chico's FAS, a chain of retail clothing stores, surged 1 1/2, or 15%, to 11 3/4 after the company said its first-quarter net income will meet or exceed its year-ago pro-forma earnings of 14 cents a share.
Advanced Magnetics, a biopharmaceuticals company, rose 7/8, or 6.1%, to 15 1/4 following a positive write-up in the current issue of Business Week.
In the article, a money manager said the American Stock Exchange-traded issue is worth a price of 25, while analysts said they see sharp revenue increases over the next few years, with earnings growth beginning in 1996.
By 1997, the company is seen earning $2 a share on sales of $40 million.
Raytech was up 7/8, or 28%, to 4 after the engineering company that is traded on the Big Board reported fourth-quarter earnings of 57 cents a share, compared with seven cents a year earlier.
Gottschalks, a department store chain, rose 5/8, or 5.8%, to 11 3/8 after the Big Board-traded company reported fourth-quarter earnings of 49 cents a share, compared with a year-earlier loss of 14 cents.
Bally Gaming International posted a gain of 5/8, or 4.6%, to 14 1/8 after the Las Vegas gambling machine company signed a contract with Harrah's riverboat casino in Shreveport, La., to supply a computerized data system that supplies player tracking, cash monitoring, hardware and software support, accounting and security functions.
New Image Industries fell 3/4, or 6.3%, to 11 1/4 after it said bad weather and the California earthquake would have a negative impact on third-quarter sales and that third-quarter earnings will fall significantly below expectations.
The video and computer imaging company expects fourth-quarter sales and earnings to be on target.
Momentum Corp. was down 3 3/4, or 29%, at 9 1/4 on news the company signed an agreement to merge with Phillips & Jacobs in a stock swap that will create a new company.
Both Momentum and Phillips & Jacobs will operate as subsidiaries or divisions of the merged company, which will have revenue of more than $350 million in 1994, according to Momentum.
Compania de Telefonos de Chile ADRs dropped 12 5/8, or 12%, to 93 as the company remains deadlocked with regulators on several rate case issues.
In a conference call with analysts last week, Claudio Garcia, chief financial officer, said that because a decree drafted by government regulators covering rates the telecommunications utility will charge from 1994 to 1998 isn't a public document, the company hasn't issued any details to investors.
