The swirling Whitewater scandal is beginning to hurt the Clinton administration on many fronts.
The first major victim could be White House Counsel Bernard Nussbaum.
Many in the White House believe he has mishandled a series of Whitewater-related matters and will have to go.
In addition, the partisan waters of Congress have gotten so roiled that an important nomination and the president's legislative agenda appear to be under threat.
Even the president's allies are beginning to separate themselves from the White House.
In particular, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen asked the Office of Government Ethics to review three meetings between top Treasury officials and White House aides regarding possible Resolution Trust Corp. lawsuits in a case involving a failed Arkansas thrift.
Mr. Nussbaum was present at all three meetings.
Deputy Secretary Roger Altman, who is also interim RTC chief, and General Counsel Jean Hanson are among the officials subject to the review.
In a more partisan action, Senate Republicans vowed to block confirmation of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. chairman until Democrats agree to hold hearings on the circumstances that led to the failure of Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan, which has been linked to Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton's political and business dealings in Arkansas.
Top administration officials said they couldn't see how Mr. Nussbaum will be able to remain in the wake of disclosures about the questionable meetings with regulators who are probing the Clintons' Whitewater real-estate investment.
Even Mr. Clinton criticized the meetings when asked about them.
While saying, "nearly as I can determine, nobody has done anything wrong or attempted to improperly influence any government action," the president added, "I think it would be better if the meetings and conversations hadn't occurred."
Last night, the White House publicly defended Mr. Nussbaum.
"The president has confidence in Mr. Nussbaum; he's done good things," said Mark Gearan, the White House communications director.
Mr. Nussbaum couldn't be reached for comment.
Mr. Nussbaum has had a notably calamitous tour of duty.
Although he helped choose two often-praised Clinton appointees -- Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsberg and FBI Director Louis Freeh -- he also has weathered heavy criticism for his role in the aftermath of the firing of the White House travel office, the failed Zoe Baird nomination for attorney general, the abortive nomination of Lani Guinier to be the Justice Department's civil-rights chief, and, more prominently, his removal of Whitewater files from the office of his deputy Vincent Foster after his suicide last summer.
White House insiders said that, although he hasn't been accused of doing anything illegal, his actions have left the impression that the White House was stalling and even stonewalling in matters related to Whitewater and Mr. Foster's death.
The appearance problem was ironic, given Mr. Nussbaum's stint in Washington as a senior staffer on the Watergate cover-up investigation in the House.
The ethics inquiry initiated by Secretary Bentsen adds a new element to the Madison case.
It's the first administration acknowledgement that department officials may have breached Treasury rules designed to protect the independence of financial agencies.
The RTC sells off the assets of failed thrifts and often sues lawyers, accountants and thrift officers who may have contributed to the thrift's failure.
White House and Treasury officials confirmed a Washington Post report that Treasury officials had discussed the RTC's investigation of Madison twice last fall with White House officials.
The White House said that at a Sept. 29 meeting, Ms. Hanson told Mr. Nussbaum that criminal referrals against Madison had been prepared by the RTC for consideration by the Justice Department.
On Oct. 14, Ms. Hanson and Mr. Nussbaum met with other White House and Treasury officials.
Although Mr. and Mrs. Clinton were mentioned in the RTC's criminal referral, they're not targets of the inquiry, according to the Post.
Mr. Clinton has denied any wrongdoing.
A special counsel is investigating the failure of Madison and its connection, if any, to Whitewater Development Co., a north Arkansas land venture owned by the Clintons and the former owner of Madison and his wife.
The disclosure of last fall's meetings follow testimony by Mr. Altman, who told the Senate Banking Committee last week that he had recently discussed with Mr. Nussbaum the statute of limitations on RTC civil actions involving Madison.
Mr. Altman has recused himself from further consideration of Madison.
Yesterday, he said he discussed only public information and that the Treasury's ethics officer had cleared the meeting.
The GOP's decision to block a vote on the nomination of Ricki Tigert to head the FDIC shows that the partisan bickering could slow presidential appointments and, more important, stop legislation.
Ms. Tigert was particularly vulnerable to being taken as a political hostage because she is an acquaintance of Mrs. Clinton's and in line to head a bank-supervisory agency.
Republicans charge that the White House is trying to exert political control over bank regulators to choke off investigations into the circumstances surrounding the 1989 failure of Madison.
"In this climate of concern about the integrity of our financial system, it is absolutely essential that the public have complete confidence in our independent bank regulatory system," said Sen. Alfonse D'Amato (R., N.Y.).
At a Banking Committee hearing on an administration plan to consolidate bank regulatory agencies, Mr. D'Amato announced that 43 Republican senators have signed a letter pledging to block consideration of the Tigert nomination until the committee "has an opportunity to thoroughly examine" the RTC's handling of a civil investigation into Madison.
Banking Committee Chairman Donald Riegle (D., Mich.) has refused to hold extensive hearings, citing the special counsel's investigation.
The White House reacted angrily to the holdup of the Tigert nomination, which was cleared by the Senate Banking Committee 16-1.
"It's unfortunate that the Senate is going to play politics with this," said spokeswoman Dee Dee Myers.
"We'll cooperate with the special counsel and the ethics office.
In the meantime, the Senate ought to get on with the business of debating these appointments and debating issues that matter to the future of this country."
Mr. D'Amato suggested that GOP opposition won't stop with the Tigert confirmation.
"We're not going to let this matter rest," he said at news conference.
The administration has been stung.
Mr. Bentsen instructed Treasury officials "to have no contact with the White House about this case."
He noted pointedly that "I did not attend any of these meetings, nor was I informed of many of these meetings."
White House Chief of Staff Thomas McLarty issued a two-paragraph memo outlining the rules about contacts with outside agencies regarding Whitewater.
"No contact by the White House with executive branch or independent agencies regarding these matters should be made without prior authorization from the deputy counsel," the memo stated.
Mr. Clinton said, "We will bend over backward to avoid not only the fact but any appearance of impropriety."
Separately, the full Federal Bureau of Investigation background report on Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell was sent to the Senate Judiciary Committee following a request by Republican Sens. Strom Thurmond of South Carolina and Charles Grassley of Iowa.
At the time of Mr. Hubbell's confirmation hearing last year, only a summary of the report, as is the general practice, was available to the committee.
A Justice Department spokesman said there is nothing in the document about a reported investigation into Mr. Hubbell's billing practices when he was with the Rose Law Firm, because, the spokesman said, there was no investigation.
