Kemper Corp., battling an unfriendly $2.2 billion takeover offer from GE Capital Corp., has set up a lucrative compensation plan for its top 13 executives if they leave as a result of a change of control, according to Kemper's proxy statement.
A spokeswoman for Kemper, based in Long Grove, Ill., denied that the compensation plan, which doesn't require approval by Kemper shareholders, resulted from GE Capital's bid.
Still, people close to the General Electric Co. unit, which announced its bid earlier this month, said that rather than hinder the acquisition, Kemper's move could make its management more willing to sell the company.
Under the compensation plan, the top five executives could receive at least an estimated $19.4 million if the company is sold.
"It looks like what someone would do if they thought there was going to be a sale," one person said.
A spokesman for GE, based in Fairfield, Conn., declined to comment.
The Kemper package isn't unusual in that many large public companies have "golden parachutes" for management in the event the company is acquired.
Kemper says its "termination-protection agreements" will encourage executives to remain with the company "during periods of uncertainty" about the company's ownership.
"Philosophically, the idea is if there were to be a change of control, we want our executives to be focused on business during such a period," the spokeswoman said.
The Kemper spokeswoman said the compensation plan stemmed from a decision last year by Kemper to sell two businesses to its former parent, Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co., in exchange for Kemper stock.
The transaction slashed Lumbermens stake in Kemper to 4% from 38%, which analysts said made the money-management, brokerage and insurance company more vulnerable to a takeover bid.
Kemper's management owns relatively little of the company's stock and so wouldn't benefit much from the increased value of Kemper shares if GE succeeds in its $55-a-share bid.
But the new termination packages mean the Kemper executives would be richly compensated if they resign, are fired or demoted, or forced to move more than 20 miles as a result of a takeover.
The compensation includes three years of salary and estimated bonuses; triple the usual profit-sharing payments; payment of any accrued but unpaid bonuses; three years of retirement benefits, and any deferred compensation.
In addition, the company would give executives a lump-sum cash payment for taxes paid to the extent that the severance packages become subject to an excise tax.
Although the compensation isn't expected to hinder any acquisition, some Kemper shareholders criticized the move.
"It's repugnant, if not immoral," said Martin Sass, president of M.D. Sass Investors Services, a big shareholder of Kemper.
"Where's the interest of shareholders being fulfilled?
It's unconscionable, but not uncommon, unfortunately."
The proxy material for 1993 disclosed that David Mathis, Kemper's chairman and chief executive officer, earned $2.4 million in cash and restricted stock, more than double 1992's amount.
In addition, he received stock options to buy 45,000 Kemper shares at an exercise price of $38.375.
Yesterday, Kemper's stock closed at $61, down 37.5 cents, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, giving the options an estimated current value of more than $1 million.
Only 25% of the options can be exercised this year, but if the company changes control, all the options can be exercised immediately.
Mr. Mathis's total compensation from the golden parachute is estimated at more than $6 million.
The proxy statement, as expected, renominated four directors whose terms are expiring, and reiterated that to remain independent "would be a superior alternative," Mr. Mathis wrote to shareholders.
"We cannot permit ourselves to be strongarmed by any potential acquirer, large or small, who seeks Kemper's valuable franchise at a bargain-basement price."
Last week, GE Capital intensified the battle by filing an alternative proxy statement that nominated a slate of four directors to succeed the four Kemper directors whose terms expire.
GE Capital is unlikely to take any further steps immediately.
Shareholders are to vote on the rival nominations at Kemper's annual meeting scheduled for May 11 in Chicago.
The company disclosed that its financial adviser, Goldman, Sachs & Co., also found the GE unit's offer inadequate.
Analyses by outside advisers are often used to buttress a company's defense, and the company had yet to cite Goldman's opinion.
But the proxy material didn't disclose Goldman's analyses of how the company is going to enhance shareholder value without selling the company.
The proxy material shows that Kemper's stock has underperformed the broader stock market as well as indexes of stocks of similar companies.
