Banks in South Dakota and Mississippi have agreed to settle federal charges that they discriminated against minorities when making housing loans.
First National Bank of Vicksburg, Miss., has agreed to an $800,000 settlement of charges it discriminated against black borrowers by overcharging them on interests rates, federal officials said.
Of that amount, $750,000 goes toward compensating about 170 African Americans who allegedly were charged higher rates than whites for unsecured loans.
A $50,000 fine will be paid to the government.
The comptroller of the currency, Eugene Ludwig, said that in 1992 First National charged 97% of 61 black borrowers interest rates that were five percentage points, on average, higher than whites.
"From a statistical perspective," he added, "it is one chance in a million, literally one chance in a million, that these statistics can be explained other than differentiation by race."
Blackpipe State Bank in Martin, S.D., will set aside $125,000 to compensate victims of alleged unfair lending practices, Justice Department and bank officials said.
Some Native Americans will have their interest rates lowered.
If the compensation doesn't require the full $125,000, then as much as $50,000 will be paid to the government as a fine, according to Paul Hancock, chief of the housing section in the Justice Department's civil-rights division.
In November, the Justice Department filed suit, alleging that Blackpipe refused to make loans on Native American reservations and set credit requirements that didn't apply to whites.
No bank officers are named in the suits.
Mr. Hancock said the settlements require the banks to provide mortgage loans without discrimination and call on them to train employees not to discriminate.
The banks admitted no wrongdoing and had no comment on the charges.
Mr. Ludwig and Attorney General Janet Reno planned to announce the settlements today.
When Ms. Reno announced the suit against Blackpipe in November, she said: "In many cases discrimination has become so institutionalized and subtle that many victims don't know how to attack it or that it's even happening to them . . . although discrimination may be accepted as commonplace by some, it is illegal by all."
