SKIRMISHES IN VIRGINIA between Civil War battlefield preservationists and two developers -- Walt Disney and the builder of a racetrack -- could mark the beginning of a wave of battles.
After a recessionary lull, development is spreading outside Washington, D.C., Atlanta and other Southern cities where fighting was heavy.
"The developers have the same ideas as the generals had.
They're marching out the natural transportation routes from the cities," explains Grea Baxter, president of the nonprofit Civil War Trust, which raises private funds for preservation.
A commission created by Congress has identified 384 significant Civil War battlefields in 26 states.
A third have been lost to private development, and another third could be within 10 to 15 years, the group said.
The development of an auto racetrack was recently approved for the Brandy Station, Va., battlefield, and Disney hopes to put up a historic theme park near the Haymarket, Va., battlefield.
"There isn't enough money in the federal Treasury to buy back all the land at full development value," says Randall Arendt, vice president of Natural Lands Trust in Media, Pa., a nonprofit land conservation group retained by National Park Service to devise ways to preserve battlefields.
"We have to use our heads, not our wallets."
One idea championed by Mr. Arendt and others is for developers to build around old trench lines, cannon batteries and other battlefield landmarks, much as communities are developed around golf courses.
"It doesn't penalize the developer," says Mr. Arendt.
"He gets the same number of houses and a marketing advantage.
Open space sells."
When Harold Isbell of Corinth, Miss., stumbled upon a cannon battery and trench line on several hundred acres he had planned for housing, he rerouted a planned road, set aside several acres to preserve the historic features and even bought a cannon replica to adorn it.
"I think it's an asset to the development," he said.
Preservationists convinced NTS of Louisville, Ky., to hold off developing 400 acres of a 3,000-acre luxury community adjacent to the Wilderness Battlefield national park near Fredericksburg, Va.
NTS scaled down its plans, but wants some compensation from the government or preservationists for giving up 250 lots.
"If we can preserve it and we can come out whole, we're very happy to cooperate," said NTS President Richard Good.
"But if there's no economic solution, we may have to select some areas of it to develop."
THE MARKET FOR apartment buildings has become so heated in some cities that some firms have decided it makes more sense to build new ones.
Vacancy rates are falling and rental rates are rising in such economically vibrant cities as Denver, Phoenix, Austin, San Antonio and Atlanta.
Investment capital has begun pouring in from real estate investment trusts, pension funds and entrepreneurs, sending building prices soaring.
"There have been some good rental increases, but building prices have gone up two or three times what the rental increases have, which indicates perhaps those prices have been going up too fast," says Michael Evans, director of real estate at Ernst & Young.
"The REITs have a lot of capital and are under pressure to buy properties," says Jonathan Kempner, president of the National Multi Housing Council, a trade group for apartment-building owners.
He says there is concern in some markets that prices have risen higher than are justified by rental rates.
"Once prices get to 85% of replacement cost, then you have to ask yourself the question, `Why do you want to own a five- to 10-year-old property when you can get a new one?'" says Ric Campo, chairman of Camden Property Trust, a Houstonbased apartment owner.
"There are a number of properties under contract at higher prices than I would ever want to pay."
Camden is putting up buildings in Denver, Austin, Houston and Corpus Christi.
El Paso-based Property Trust of America has also "passed on a number of transactions," says its chairman, Ron Blankenship, and is building in six Southwestern cities.
RENTS FOR high-end retail space appear to have bottomed out, but they aren't expected to rise any time soon.
Of the 150 tony retail streets surveyed world-wide by London-based real estate consultant Healey & Baker, only 29 recorded an increase in rents in 1993.
Because of the ailing Japanese economy, Tokyo's Ginza, traditionally the world's costliest retail location, saw rents plunge 43%.
At $498 a square foot, space on the Ginza is cheaper than on Pedder Street in Hong Kong, where rents rose 21% to $647 a square foot, and Manhattan's Fifth Avenue, where they rose 11% to just over $500.
The most expensive addresses behind the Ginza are Munich's Kaufinger StraBe, at $254 a square foot, and Budapest's Vaci Utca, at $190.
Due to a sluggish economic recovery, U.S. retail rents didn't rise as expected last year, says Healey & Baker consultant Michael Creamer.
"Although you'll see retailers do well this year, I don't think you'll see increases in rents," he predicted.
"It takes a while to filter down."
The growth of discount retailing, says Mr. Creamer, isn't likely to hurt high-end stores.
"There are still people who want to spend $125 on a tie," he says.
AT MID-1993, Americans had nearly $4 trillion in equity in their homes, according to SMR Research of Budd Lake, N.J. . . .
Fifty-eight percent of the chief executives of real-estate companies surveyed by Ferguson Partners said they planned to hire experienced executives in the first half of 1994, up from 45% a year ago.
