In the heyday of the Texas oil boom in the late '70s, a brunette known as "The Western Company Girl" appeared on television spots and captured the mood of the industry with this snappy one-liner: "If you don't have an oil well, get one."
A bankruptcy-law filing and several debt restructurings later, Western Co. of North America now eschews such flashy promotion, sticking to more economical advertising in trade journals.
The company, founded by entrepreneur Eddie Chiles, now embodies a new oil-industry ethic of a lean, nimble company prepared to adapt quickly to dips in energy prices -- an important skill now that crude-oil prices are hitting five-year lows.
Many energy-related companies have slashed debt and streamlined operations, but Western is one of the industry's biggest turnaround stories.
In a process that began seven years ago and is continuing, Western cut costs, pared debt and sold off drilling rigs to concentrate on its more profitable oil-well services business.
Amid a generally gloomy outlook for energy companies, Western is now a bright spot.
"Compared to its peers, Western has gone from being one of the most leveraged to one of the least leveraged in a period of about a year," says James Carroll, an oil-service analyst at PaineWebber Inc.
"Considering that some investors were concerned about the company's survivability in mid-1992, Western made a pretty significant swing."
Western's stock more than doubled during 1993, starting the year at $5.75 a share and ending it at $12.875.
According to Wilshire Associates Inc., a Santa Monica, Calif., financial-consulting firm, Western was the year's third-biggest gainer among Texas energy stocks, after Energy Service Co. of Dallas and Tejas Gas Corp. of Houston.
In fact, the turnaround has come so far that Western's new management claims to be unfazed by the recent drop in oil prices.
Sheldon Erikson, hired in 1987 as chief executive officer to reverse the company's fortunes, has five profitable quarters under his belt.
He vows the company will be in the black for 1994.
Western has the advantage of being tied closely to natural-gas prices -- about 67% of its oil-well-services business is on natural-gas wells, and natural-gas prices have remained healthy so far.
But if gas prices follow oil prices on their downward curve, as some industry observers believe they will, Mr. Erikson says, "We'll just adjust our organization down. . . .
We have learned to always be prepared to adjust to changes in the market."
If Mr. Erikson scales back operations, it won't be the first time.
After taking over as chief executive in 1987 after Mr. Chiles stepped down from that position (he remained chairman), Mr. Erikson cut operations, laid off employees and filed for bankruptcy protection.
Mr. Chiles's corporate jet was one of the first things to go; Western's comfortable offices in west Fort Worth were sold, and the company's elaborate corporate museum was given away.
Many executives were fired, and Mr. Chiles wasn't replaced after he retired as chairman in 1988.
(He died last year at the age of 83.)
Now there are few layers of management.
Mr. Erikson himself holds multiple titles: He's chief executive, chairman and president at Western, and has also been president of Western Petroleum Services Group since the previous head of the subsidiary was dismissed in 1988.
Moreover, half of Western's 2,000 employees have their salaries tied to the company's profitability, with incentives accounting for 10% to 40% of their compensation, says Mr. Erikson.
That means the salary budget automatically drops whenever profits do.
Other companies have incentive plans, but Western's is unusually comprehensive.
"Western has got places where field workers are on incentive plans.
That's unusual," says James Wicklund, an analyst at Rauscher Pierce Refnes Inc.
Western has added to its cushion by virtually getting rid of its offshore drilling contracting business -- in October it sold nine of its 11 offshore rigs for $150 million -- and focusing on its oil-service business.
Of the two sectors, Mr. Erikson was less comfortable with contracting, because it fluctuates more rapidly with the price of gas and oil than oil service, which is done on both new and existing wells.
Now the company is free to concentrate on its biggest strength: well stimulation, which involves pressure-pumping enormous amounts of sands or liquids into the ground to create cracks in the earth that oil can flow through.
That business is less competitive than contracting, and plays to the company's strong relationships with domestic independent producers.
Western is also on the way toward cleaning up a capital structure that, two years ago, seemed about to send the company on a second trip through bankruptcy court.
The problems arose when gas prices plunged in early 1992.
Western's stock fell to about $3 a share, as investors worried the company wouldn't be able to meet payments on $160 million in debt.
But Western rescheduled some payments, and later paid off bank loans by issuing $95 million in high-interest bonds.
Last month, Western announced a plan to pay off those bonds at $1.19 on the dollar by using some of the proceeds from the sale of the drilling rigs.
Even if bondholders accept the offer in a vote scheduled to begin this week and be completed in about a month, Western will have some $50 million in cash to help weather hard times -- or even to take advantage of bargain-basement prices to snap up other oil-field service concerns.
