President Clinton has chosen wisely in nominating Deval Patrick to the nation's top civil-rights position.
It will be hard for the opponents of effective civil-rights enforcement to defeat Mr. Patrick, but it is clear they are going to try, once again using inflammatory and misleading rhetoric.
Clint Bolick, in his Feb. 2 editorial-page article "Civil-Rights Nominee, Quota Clone," used the phrase "Quota Queen" to describe the previous nominee, Prof. Lani Guinier, and enough people were prepared to believe -- mistakenly, in my view -- that she favored quotas as a remedy for past racial discrimination so that the label stuck and the misleading message it carried brought Ms. Guinier down.
Mr. Bolick and his allies are at it again, taking shots at Mr. Patrick.
He has already accused Mr. Patrick of sharing the same "radical views" as Prof. Guinier and dubbed Mr. Patrick a "stealth Guinier," clearly implying that he favors quotas, without offering a shred of evidence in support.
There is no such evidence because Mr. Patrick does not believe in quotas and has never said he does.
As one who has known Mr. Patrick for 20 years, I find the suggestion that he is a radical to be ludicrous.
He grew up in poverty, in a segregated neighborhood of Chicago.
He was fortunate to have a wise and loving mother and grandparents.
His seventh-grade teacher recognized the special qualities now apparent to all who know him and recommended him to a program for minority students at staid Milton Academy, a prep school near Boston.
From there he proceeded to Harvard College, a Rockefeller Fellowship, Harvard Law School, and a clerkship with a Federal Court of Appeals judge.
After three years with the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, he wound up as a partner in a leading corporate law firm in Boston.
Mr. Patrick's opponents apparently regard his work for the Legal Defense Fund as evidence of his assumed radical views.
But as a long-time member of the LDF board, I can reassure him that the organization does not favor a quota system.
Its board includes Wall Street lawyers, business executives and bar-association officials -- hardly radicals.
Mr. Patrick has the will and the ability to enforce the civil-rights legislation enacted by Congress and to carry out the policies of the president and attorney general.
He will be a strong and compassionate advocate for fairness, justice and opportunity.
Cambridge, Mass.
