Japan's economy contracted at a 2.2% annual pace in the latest quarter, a better-than-expected performance that economists say may prompt them to moderate their bearish forecasts for this year.
But political instability, business retrenchment and consumer pessimism pose formidable obstacles to a full recovery, analysts add.
"The worst is over," said Jesper Koll, economist at S.G. Warburg Securities (Japan) Inc.
Still, he warned, Japan is headed for a "joyless recovery.
Nobody -- neither consumers nor corporations -- is going to feel good about it."
Many analysts had expected a sharper drop in the gross domestic product in the October-December period.
A rise in consumer spending partially offset steep declines in corporate capital spending and in exports, said a spokesman for Japan's Economic Planning Agency.
Thus, output surpassed consensus forecasts, one of which had called for a decline of 4.2%.
For the full year, the economy grew just 0.1%, the worst showing since a 0.6% contraction during the oil shock of 1974.
Some analysts said the latest data will lead them to boost their projections for growth.
S.G. Warburg's Mr. Koll said the quarter's strong 11% rise in housing starts from year-ago levels bodes well for sales of consumer durable goods in coming months.
He said he'll raise his GDP growth forecast for calendar 1994 -- but only to about 1%, from 0.6%.
While most economists expect the economy to improve in the current quarter, they've been projecting growth of less than 1% for this year.
Some companies expect the uptick in consumer spending to continue.
Toyota Motor Corp. will raise its daily auto-output target in Japan by about 1,000 vehicles, to some 15,000, in the March to May period.
Toyota expects a coming reduction in the auto-sales tax to boost sales, but it isn't calling for an end to Japan's auto slump.
"There are reports consumers are coming back to dealers, but of course it doesn't show in the figures yet," said a Toyota spokesman.
"We're not very optimistic yet."
Hurdles to genuine recovery remain considerable.
A strong yen is expected to continue crimping Japanese exports, a linchpin of the economy.
Private forecasters expect corporate capital spending, which accounts for about 15% of the nation's economy, to shrink some 6% in the year that starts April 1.
And corporations are likely to suppress hiring and wage increases this year as they continue to restructure.
That could reverse the fourth quarter's surprising 3% annualized spurt in consumer spending.
Businesses are skeptical of an early upturn.
According to a survey of 144 major firms conducted earlier this month by Keidanren, a big-business lobby, 76% of companies expect their earnings to stay flat, or fall, in the year that begins April 1.
Consumers are cautious, too: A government survey published this week shows that a record 45% of Japanese say they're uneasy about the future.
Economists say the positive fourth-quarter data, combined with widespread expectations that the economy will grow in the current quarter, gives the Bank of Japan further justification for refraining from cutting its official discount rate, now at a record low of 1.75%.
"It makes the likelihood of a discount rate cut smaller," said Salomon Brothers Inc. economist Robert Feldman.
Many businessmen sought lower rates as a way of bringing down their debt-payment burdens and making credit more affordable for businesses wanting to expand.
Political uncertainty is another factor threatening Japan's economic woes.
"My biggest worry about the economy is political instability," said Hajime Funada, former chief economic planner and a legislator in Japan's ruling coalition, in an interview.
The latest problem is a dispute over whether Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa acted improperly in accepting a loan of 100 million yen ($942,000) more than 10 years ago from Sagawa Kyubin, a scandal-tainted trucking company.
The opposition Liberal Democratic Party is using the matter to delay deliberations on next fiscal year's budget.
Yesterday the LDP agreed to pass a key income-tax cut by the end of this month so that consumers can get the money in their June paychecks, as promised.
But the party is expected to hold the full-year budget hostage in hopes of damaging Mr. Hosokawa.
Once the budget passes, Japan faces another battle over a plan to raise consumption taxes as a way of financing a permanent income-tax cut.
An identical controversy nearly split the ruling coalition in February.
Political battles of the last several months have chipped away at Mr. Hosokawa's popularity, the main force bolstering his government.
In a poll published last week by the TBS television network, support for Mr. Hosokawa's cabinet fell to 45% from 70% in September.
Smelling blood, the opposition Liberal Democrats have begun openly calling for his resignation.
Mr. Hosokawa's political problems also raise doubts about Japan's ability to present the U.S. with promised market-opening measures by the end of this month.
Failure to deliver could trigger a familiar chain reaction: The U.S. ratchets up its trade rhetoric against Japan, the yen's value rises against the dollar on market expectations that the U.S. will seek a stronger yen to cut Japan's trade surplus, and Japanese exporters suffer another hit to their sagging profits.
To be sure, Mr. Hosokawa may sail through these brewing storms.
His popularity ratings are still far higher than those of his predecessors.
Moreover, Japan appears to be making progress on at least some of its market-opening measures.
This week, the auto industry will present a plan that will probably include steps to widen dealership networks to U.S. car imports, said Hiroyuki Nakamura, manager of the international department of the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association.
He also suggested that some auto makers may soon bend to a key U.S. demand that they publish numerical goals for buying U.S.-made auto parts.
