Tokyo -- It's just before the big New Year's holiday, and at five-year-old "Crayon" Shinchan's nursery school, everybody gets to help make "mochi," a sticky-rice treat that can be shaped like clay.
His classmates make cute mochi giraffes and trains.
Shinchan, meanwhile, produces a pile of quite realistic phalluses, drawing sighs from his friends and a familiar scolding from his teachers.
Shinchan is the only child of the fictional Nohara family, and the protagonist of six volumes (and 20 million copies) of "Crayon" comic books, a weekly television cartoon and, most recently, a movie.
A full-blown merchandising campaign has put the irreverent, cynical child on fully 500 different products, from packaged food to computer software.
He's become the subject of living-room and media debates throughout the country.
This is what's most galling about Shinchan: He comes right out and says what he's thinking, regularly abandoning "tatemae" (appearance) for "honne" (true feelings).
Adult Japanese raised on programs such as the long-running "Sazae-san," which chronicles an idealized family's trials and tribulations, are often reluctant to consider such an outspoken, and increasingly lecherous, television alternative to their lifestyles and interactions.
More shocking to Japanese, though, is the possibility that there may be a new kind of individual emerging in their society.
Twenty-three-year-old Atsuko Niwa of Shinei TV Asahi, the cartoon's producer, insists: "The media often says Shinchan's an aberration, but he's not."
Japan's largest newspaper, the Asahi Shimbun, reported last year that "Speaking in Shinchanisms is a nationwide trend among kids from five on up," and that such behavior was addressed at a conference titled "The Information Age and Child Rearing."
The paper quoted a Japanese psychologist remarks: "It's important that adults don't slip into the same speaking habits, and that they teach kids how it feels to be talked to the way Shinchan does."
Shinchan is watched by 68% of four- to 12-year-olds, the newspaper reported.
Inevitably, the Shinchan boom is starting to affect the younger generation.
Kids are copying his impudent slur.
One Japanese mother I know frets that her child is practically transformed into Shinchan after he watches the show.
His straightforward, truly childlike honesty may seem refreshing.
Yet all the fuss about Shinchan's behavior, which mostly amounts to bad manners, is revealing.
As Shinchan has evolved from adult-comic-book hero to prime-time cartoon character, another aspect of his personality has emerged -- one much more dangerous than his precociousness.
Shinchan is, as 19-year-old Maiko Iga asserts, "offensive."
Lewd is a better way to put it.
And this raises the question of whom Shinchan's creators are trying to please.
The weekly cartoon, which has aired at 7 p.m. since April 1992, is seen by 25% of Japanese households.
The show started out with story lines featuring Shinchan's harmless pranks and misunderstandings, and was often set at his nursery school.
It has come to include more and more perversity.
This includes the traditional Japanese male's derogatory view of women, which is perhaps not a surprise.
"The prime target is four- to 12-year-olds," says Ms. Niwa.
"But we eventually wanted to reach young working women and men my father's age, too.
We never thought it would happen so quickly."
Shinchan's opening song, changed last year in an apparent attempt to appeal to the older set, reflects a familiar chauvinist attitude.
It's racier than the original, which began: "From a distance he's fun, but up close, that willfulness, that cheek, it'll drive you crazy . . ."
Now it's laden with pickup lines such as "Come on baby, come on baby . . . if you look at me that way, I'll blush . . .", as well as part of Shinchan's bawdy version of a traditional nursery rhyme about an elephant's trunk.
In one episode, Shinchan peeks under his mom's skirt as she prepares to go out, then declares, "You're not wearing your see-through panties!"
In another, adapting his grandfather's song about his favorite foods, the five-year-old sings, "Bring me T-back panties, high-leg panties!"
Ms. Niwa admits that the station received complaints from "conservative" people.
But she, like many fans, is willing to forgive him because he's a preschooler.
Viewers like Ms. Iga, on the other hand, counter: "Just because he's a little boy doesn't make it O.K. Sexual harassment is now recognized as a serious problem in adult society; why is it accepted in a children's cartoon?
Lots of kids may be taking these {sexist remarks} seriously."
Scott Brause, a Tokyo writer, translator and father of two preschoolers, agrees: "Shinchan's always got his hands in some chick's pants; if it's not his mother, it's his teacher."
Maybe the risque themes are included to keep adults from changing channels.
But more difficult to fathom is why the Shinchan movie, a product of Toho Studios and targeted at four- to six-year-olds, features a bad guy who -- by black magic -- puts many of the characters, including the male principal of Shinchan's nursery school, into "high-leg" bathing suits.
A fiftysomething woman who took her three-year-old granddaughter to see it said afterward: "It didn't conform to my values, but I wouldn't call it dirty, exactly.
It was just odd, so all the kids were laughing."
Toho Studios is laughing too, all the way to the bank.
More than two million Japanese have seen the film since its July release.
Ms. Saiki is a free-lance writer in Kyoto.
