Based on the stock market's recent behavior, maybe Wall Street traders shouldn't even bother showing up for work until 3:50 p.m.
More than ever, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has carved out a pattern of registering its gains in the final minutes of each trading day.
Late-afternoon institutional buy orders, descending on the market in waves, have made it routine for the Dow Jones average to spurt just before the 4 p.m. close.
By one calculation, since last May, an average 47% of the Dow's daily movement -- mostly upward movement of late -- has occurred in the last 10 minutes.
"It's like clockwork," says Robert Exler, equity trader at Clover Capital Management in Pittsford, N.Y.
"I don't know who it is or what it is, but there's definitely a pattern to it."
He says it reminds him of the typical NBA pro-basketball game, "where the last two minutes is all that matters; that's when the game is decided."
Intrigued by the Dow's late-day movements, Mr. Exler started keeping a computer record last May 24 that tracked what the Dow did from 3:50 p.m. on.
Among the eye-opening findings: The last 10 minutes of trading accounted for 89% of the Dow's overall gains.
In other words, from May 24 to year-end, 261 points were gained on the Dow, and a net 233 of them (counting both gains and losses) were reaped in the 10 minutes before the closing bell.
In mid-December, there were seven days in a row in which the Dow spurted upward just before the close.
"The statistical probability of that happening is pretty slim," says Prof. Robert Wood of Memphis State University, who has studied how stocks behave in the last minutes of a trading day.
Studies have shown that the final trades of a day typically occur on an "uptick," adds Prof. Wood, but not necessarily to the extent it has been happening in recent months.
A New York Stock Exchange spokesman says: "We always monitor for unusual trading activity, but we can't comment on specific situations."
"I think something very strange is going on here," moans one bearish Wall Street trader.
He claims that mutual funds and other institutional traders are "waving the market" through waves of last-minute stock buying.
He and other bears claim it's another reason the market isn't really as strong as it seems.
After all, the number of declining Big Board issues often outnumbers advancers, even when the Dow closes higher.
Why is the Dow able to jump so much late in the day?
A combination of reasons including program trading (which has returned to record levels) and the power of mutual funds, say traders.
Some of the buying, observes one Big Board broker, is from "institutions throwing in the towel to own economy-sensitive cyclicals and Dow stocks" such as General Motors and Caterpillar.
When computer-assisted, multistock program trades hit the market late in the day and the Dow ticks upward, the institutional orders begin being filled, and the rise snowballs.
"There's just so many professionals in the market right now.
They're able to move the market a lot more than in the past," the broker says.
Dudley Eppel, head of stock trading at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, says, "The tendency is for the market to thin out near the close," allowing program trades to "muscle" prices.
This doesn't mean that program trading has been nothing but a late-in-the-day savior for stock prices.
On the contrary, program trading depresses stock prices during other parts of the day.
According to Birinyi Associates, a Greenwich, Conn., stock-market research firm, program trading accounted for 5.1% of the Dow's gains for all of 1993, or just 23 points of the 452.98 total.
That means there are many days in which program trading tugs the market up and down, before giving the Dow a final, modest yank upward in the closing minutes.
The lesson for investors?
Clover Capital's Mr. Exler says: "If you're out there selling" in the afternoon, "you're much better off waiting for the last 10 minutes," or even the next morning.
"You'll probably get a higher price."
Giant stubs toe.
Fidelity Magellan Fund, by far the nation's largest mutual fund, dipped 0.3% in the fourth quarter.
It was the first quarterly decline under Jeff Vinik, who took over the fund in mid-1992.
"I had three great quarters and one terrible quarter," says Mr. Vinik, adding that one year is the shortest period over which it's fair to judge a fund.
For the year, Magellan rose 24.7% -- more than double the gain in the S&P 500.
Mr. Vinik has boldly loaded the $31 billion fund with energy (particularly natural gas) stocks and semiconductor stocks, and stripped away almost all food, beverage, tobacco and drug stocks.
The strategy worked great for the first nine months and in December, but it backfired in October and November.
Mr. Vinik says he plans to stick to the same strategy in 1994.
"They did badly in the quarter for the same reason they had a great year -- because Jeff Vinik has the courage to be different from the market," says Don Phillips, publisher of Morningstar Mutual Funds in Chicago.
John R. Dorfman contributed to this article.
