Investing today feels a lot like ice skating in the spring.
You know the ice will give way at some point.
You just don't know when.
Rising interest rates have investors looking for serious cracks in both the stock and bond markets.
But jittery or not, they need to put their money someplace.
And with the after-tax return on money-market funds now less than the rate of inflation, there is no place that feels really solid.
"When interest rates were high 10 years ago, it was easy to go to money-market funds," says Warner Arms Henderson, a Boston investment adviser.
"Now there is no simple solution.
There is nowhere you can turn that is void of risk."
Indeed, even moving to the sidelines won't prevent a loss.
Once taxes and inflation take their bite out of a 2.3% money-market return, investors are already underwater.
Moreover, if the bull stock market keeps roaring for another year or two, all the money pulled out of the stock market will be left behind.
"This isn't the time when you want to make any big bets," either by pulling your money out of the market or putting it all into, say, biotech stocks, comments Richard T. Whitney, president of T. Rowe Price Balanced Fund.
"You don't want to put all of your eggs in one basket."
While many worry that stocks are overdue for a big slide, trying to time the market is risky business, notes Michael Stolper, a San Diego consultant who helps wealthy clients pick money managers.
That's because nobody really has any idea when the market finally will turn.
Investors who are really worried may want to take 10% or 20% of their money out of the stock market, Mr. Stolper says.
But unless the money is needed in the next five years, he adds, investors would do better keeping their long-term money in the market and simply riding out any down cycle.
"Often the best thing you can do for your clients is to keep them from stepping away from the game," he says.
But others say it's time to move at least some money to the sidelines, particularly if you have nice profits in growth stocks and cyclicals.
One approach is to spend time researching stocks you would like to buy if the market tanks.
"If you have a broadly diversified wish list and are patient, chances are over the next year you'll get a chance to buy some bargains," says Hugh Lamle, executive vice president with M.D. Sass Investors Services in New York.
Whatever money you leave in the market should be well diversified.
In addition, "investors should be looking for investments that have relatively low correlation with the stock and bond markets," says Lewis J. Altfest, a New York investment adviser.
Since these investments don't move with the markets, a big market drop wouldn't necessarily affect them.
Gold is the classic example, but Mr. Altfest says there are also some mutual funds that "march to their own tune" when markets move.
The Mutual Series funds managed by Michael Price are among them, he says, putting money in "opportunistic," sometimes "off the beaten track" investments that have included bankruptcy plays and small, little-known banks.
(Mutual Beacon is the only one of the four Mutual Series funds currently open to new investors.)
International investing is another way investors can diversify.
Yet some markets here are overheated, pumped up with money from U.S. investors.
"We have caused these markets to skyrocket," says Mr. Altfest.
"So we could cause them to go down."
His favorite foreign play right now: Japan.
Here at home, small-capitalization stocks look good to T. Rowe Price's Mr. Whitney.
"We are still sort of right in the middle of the small-cap cycle," he says.
Some market watchers like energy and natural-resources stocks as a defensive play in an uncertain market; others say real estate is ripe for a rebound.
Investors who prefer to let mutual funds do their stock picking may want to look for funds that have performed well in down markets.
Some names on the list include Lindner Fund, Neuberger & Berman Partners and Phoenix Growth, says A. Michael Lipper, president of Lipper Analytical Services Inc.
The downside here: These funds probably won't perform as well as others if the market keeps going up, he says.
Some advisers say value funds -- which look for stocks at bargain prices -- are a good pick today.
But don't rely on the name or category of a fund to tell you its investment philosophy.
Many so-called growth funds can embrace a value style of investing, just as balanced funds can have significant foreign investments.
"You can't go by the label," says Mr. Henderson, the Boston investment adviser.
"You need to look at the actual holdings of the fund."
Balanced funds and equity-income funds are often billed as less risky in a down market, but they may not offer as much protection as investors think.
While stock-market risk may be less, the fixed-income part of these funds could take a pounding from rising interest rates.
The fixed-income portion of your portfolio should be the security blanket of your portfolio.
But rising interest rates, which cause bond prices to drop, can seriously erode this protection, locking investors into below-market interest rates or creating actual losses for investors who sell their bonds or own bond funds.
"We think there is greater risk on the fixed-income side than on the equity" side, says Mr. Lipper, noting that people expect dips in their stock portfolio but aren't prepared for losses in the fixed-income arena.
The traditional defense: Reduce interest-rate volatility by shortening maturities and moving to higher quality.
The best place to be on the yield curve right now?
Five-year securities, says Theresa A. Havell, director of fixed income for Neuberger & Berman, New York, noting they capture 87% of the yield of a 30-year bond but with only 50% the volatility.
Still Ms. Havell thinks investors need to add a third dimension to the traditional defense: international bonds.
"I have been thinking about this for months.
We are seeing a complete globalization of the marketplace," she says, noting that in many countries not only are interest rates higher but the economic recoveries are far behind the U.S.
"So spread your risk horizontally, not vertically."
Most investors aren't equipped to navigate foreign financial waters themselves.
That means looking to a mutual fund.
But here it is critical that investors find a fund that matches their risk tolerance.
"Just because it says global, it doesn't have to be high risk," Ms. Havell says.
The risk of a fund varies depending on the credit quality and the amount of derivative securities as well as maturity and currency risk, she adds.
Assuming equal quality and maturity, is it a better defense today to buy individual bonds or a bond fund?
It doesn't really matter, says Mr. Lamle of M.D. Sass, as long as the fund isn't leveraged.
That, he says, magnifies losses caused by interest-rate increases.
A good manager, however, may be able to navigate the interest-rate waters better than an individual investor.
For that service, an investor pays a fee.
To make sure your manager is earning that fee, Mr. Lamle suggests checking fund performance against a relative index.
The Salomon Broad Index, for example, tracks intermediate taxable bonds.
"Has the manager added 50 to 100 basis points?" he asks.
(A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.)
Another clue to good management is turnover.
"If the turnover is under 50%, the fund is not really being managed," he says.
Finally, remember that investing defensively means paying attention to the details.
The management fee, for example, can have a big impact as you move to shorter maturities.
"It could be up to 20% of your total return," says Mr. Henderson, noting fees can range from 0.25% to more than 1% of assets.
"It's something to pay attention to."
