When the Catholic Foundation set up the Aquinas family of mutual funds, the goal was to be fruitful and multiply.
The funds, with $102 million under management, are some of the newest entrants into the world of public mutual funds -- they've been around for just three months.
But the Catholic Foundation is hardly new to Wall Street.
It has been running these same funds -- primarily for religious and charitable institutions -- for about a decade, under the name Catholic Common Fund.
And the returns?
You might call them, well, almost heavenly.
For the past three years, the Aquinas Equity Income Fund returned 19.42% annually, while its benchmark, the Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index, managed 15.62%.
The Aquinas Equity Growth Fund recorded a 22.35% annual showing over five years, more than seven percentage points better than the Russell 3000 Index.
And for 1993, the Aquinas Fixed Income Fund bested by more than 11% the Salomon Broad Index, which tracks intermediate taxable bonds.
(These calculations consider the funds when they were part of the Catholic Common Fund.)
While it is Aquinas money managers who do the stock picking, foundation officials joke that the funds may be receiving some extra help.
With all the priests and nuns who have trusted their money to the Aquinas funds, "we have a lot of praying going on to push our stocks up," says Bernard DiFiore, the foundation's executive director.
The Aquinas funds -- named for Thomas Aquinas, the 13th century theologian and philosopher -- are the latest example of mutual funds tied to religious organizations.
In addition to the Catholics, the Mennonites, Lutherans and Muslims have their own mutual funds.
And like their peers, the Aquinas funds support "socially conscious investing."
But for the Catholic Foundation, that doesn't mean an avoidance of so-called sin stocks associated with tobacco, gambling and liquor.
Indeed, the Aquinas Equity Growth Fund owns shares of tobacco giants Philip Morris and UST.
Instead, Aquinas leans toward shareholder and community activism.
Rather than routinely divesting itself of the stocks of companies with questionable practices, the Catholic Foundation is more likely to try to change disquieting corporate behavior through letter-writing campaigns and proxy votes.
To that end, the foundation is part of the New York-based Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility, a watchdog group representing 250 religious institutions holding $35 billion in assets that seeks to influence companies through corporate governance resolutions.
"The issues we are concerned with are tiny problems for a company," Mr. DiFiore says.
"So, you can make more of a change by dealing with a company and getting them to address your problem than you can by simply dumping the stock and moving on."
Additionally, the funds reach out to the community.
The Aquinas funds are no-load funds, meaning they have no upfront charges; however, the funds do charge annual operating expenses of 1% to 1.5% of assets.
Any profits from the management fees are donated to the Catholic Foundation, to be distributed in the form of grants, scholarships and endowments for educational, religious and charitable activities.
The foundation was begun in the mid-1950s to build an endowment program and to offer financial guidance to Catholic organizations.
Because of its successes increasing the net worth of churches and schools with the Catholic Common Fund, the foundation in the 1980s began fielding requests from individuals who wanted it to manage part of their portfolios.
The foundation wasn't equipped to handle the relatively small accounts of individual investors.
But demand dictated that the foundation do something to address investor interest.
So on Jan. 1, the foundation board of trustees split the Catholic Common Fund into three distinct parts and created the Aquinas funds.
Since then, assets under management have increased less than 10%, and the clients are still primarily institutions.
"We haven't started getting a lot of $1,000 deposits yet," Mr. DiFiore notes.
But the foundation is just now getting around to advertising the funds' existence, taking out full-page ads in small Catholic newspapers in the five states in which the funds are registered for sale -- Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas, New York and California.
Other states will be added as investor interest materializes.
The Aquinas funds require a minimum $1,000 initial investment.
The foundation employs three core canons in managing the Aquinas funds: allocate assets for balance, invest for the long-term and continually diversify to reduce risk.
To encourage diversity, the foundation uses five different fund managers spread across the country.
"We get great diversity that way because all managers have a local flavor" that comes from investing in stocks in their region that they are more familiar with, says Mr. DiFiore.
Here in Dallas, the foundation enlisted John McStay Investment Counsel to manage part of the Equity Growth Fund.
The holdings include high-profile Texas stocks such as Dallas's Southwest Airlines, funeral-home giant Service Corp.
International in Houston, and Brinker International, the Dallas restaurant chain.
(The growth fund's co-manager is Sirach Capital Management, Seattle, while the Equity Income Fund is managed out of San Francisco.
The Fixed Income Fund is split between Boston and Stamford, Conn.)
Foundation of Dallas for the following periods ended Dec. 31, 1993: Common Fund.
In announcing last week that it failed to win a toll-collection system contract for an interagency group made up of toll authorities in New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania, Dallas's Amtech noted the loss will have "minimal" impact on 1994 results.
But it seems investors don't see it that way.
Amtech's stock lost more than 38% of its value on the news, closing the week at $20, down $12.50.
Adding salt to the wound, Alex. Brown & Sons downgraded Amtech's stock to "neutral" from "buy" immediately after the company announced it had failed to secure the contract.
Lomas Financial stock soared early in the week, only to crash days later.
The Dallas residential mortgage company announced last Tuesday that it was considering merging with or being acquired by another company to help "maximize shareholder value."
Investors bid the stock up 23% to $9.25 in one day.
Then late in the week, CNBC commentator Dan Dorfman quoted Oppenheimer analyst Steve Eisman as saying, "Anyone who pays more than $4 a share for Lomas is out of his mind."
That sent the stock tumbling to $8, up 50 cents for the week.
Mr. Eisman says Lomas has a "lousy bottom line" and has "grossly overstated" its book value at $11.24 a share; Mr. Eisman says book value is closer to $3 a share.
The company, of course, disagrees.
Moorco International, Houston, dropped nearly 12% to $15.875 after third-quarter earnings failed to meet the expectations of analysts.
For the quarter ended Feb. 28, the maker of fluid-control products for the drilling industry reported net income of $2.9 million, or 25 cents a share.
Analysts had expected earnings of 28 cents a share.
For the year-earlier quarter, Moorco earned $2.4 million, or 20 cents a share.
