To Carol Womack, the only thing worse than the dangerous chemicals oozing underground down the street from her former home is how her neighbors reacted.
One family sued the developer of the subdivision, arguing they should have been warned about the chemicals -- but still bought another nearby house, which they later moved into, and sued again.
Another couple said their house was unsafe, moved out, then rented it to another family.
Still a third used settlement money to build a rambling addition.
"There've been so many lawsuits and so much craziness," says Mrs. Womack, a 39-year-old fourth-grade teacher who abandoned her home last July.
"I don't think anyone has really focused on what it will take to clean it up."
Known as Brio, the dusty 58-acre patch adjacent to Mrs. Womack's old neighborhood doesn't look menacing.
But the treeless expanse, ringed by a chain-link fence dotted with Day-Glo orange "Keep Out" signs, was once a fuel refinery and conceals 22 unlined, underground chemical pits.
In 1984, the Environmental Protection Agency added it to its Superfund list.
Buried here is a brew of volatile compounds, including benzene and vinyl chloride -- both known human carcinogens.
Getting listed under the 1980 Superfund law was supposed to indicate a cleanup was on its way.
But what came soon after the EPA were hordes of lawyers.
Thousands of residents have sued the developers and builders of the subdivision, known as Southbend and situated about 20 miles south of downtown Houston.
They also have sued the chemical companies, especially Monsanto Co. of St. Louis, being held responsible for the waste site.
Teachers and pupils at a local school sued, residents of a neighborhood half a mile away sued, even Little Leaguers who played nearby sued; most of these suits, filed in state district court in Harris County, are still pending.
The companies and their insurers have paid out hundreds of millions of dollars in settlements -- but the cleanup has yet to begin.
With Superfund up for renewal in Washington, cases such as Brio help explain why the program is lambasted by both business and environmentalists.
"Just about everything that can go wrong at a Superfund site went wrong at Brio," says Linda Greer, a senior scientist at the Natural Resources Defense Council.
The Clinton administration last week proposed sweeping changes to the Superfund law that EPA Administrator Carol Browner said would make cleanups "faster, fairer and more efficient."
A major complaint about the law is its failure to address quickly many toxic dumps; over the past 14 years only about 200 have been cleaned up, while the list has swollen to more than 1,250.
Some estimate that these cleanups could take 50 years.
The Clinton proposals include loosening standards for some cleanups, especially on land never again to be used for housing; incentives to reduce costly legal tussles among companies responsible for waste sites; and more community involvement in decision-making.
But streamlining Superfund won't do much to avoid situations such as Brio -- where many of the things that misfired have nothing to do with the law itself.
The revisions, for example, won't stop litigious residents from seeking damages for possible health problems or stem the fears and uncertainties that arise when land next to one's home is tagged a toxic dump.
Similarly, businesses responsible for the cleanups may be discouraged from getting into legal wrangles between themselves, but they can't be forbidden to.
In the case of Brio, local residents have also raised a storm about the cleanup itself.
They contend that the agency has overlooked evidence of a wider range of contaminants at the site than it has acknowledged exists there.
Residents want a much more complete cleanup than currently envisioned.
"All the lawsuits around Brio are not the fault of Superfund," says the Natural Resources Defense Council's Ms. Greer, "and they won't be eliminated under the new law."
Not that it was clear at first that Brio would become such a legal swamp.
Back in 1984, most residents blandly accepted the EPA's assurances that living in Southbend wasn't dangerous and that a cleanup would soon be under way.
Families continued moving in throughout the decade, while others built pools or put up siding.
"We had no reason to doubt the EPA -- after all, they were the ones coming to fix the problem," says Nancy Webber, a 38-year-old housewife who moved into Southbend in 1981.
But then she started noticing health problems in her children.
Her son had 18 upper-respiratory infections before he turned two and developed a speech impediment.
Her daughter kept having massive nosebleeds.
By 1989, worried residents had conducted a door-to-door survey and said they found frightening numbers of birth defects, leukemia and other health problems.
The EPA's position was that if there was such a pattern, Brio wasn't at fault.
The agency says it has yet to find a "pathway" showing how chemicals got into the subdivision.
Other efforts to confirm a pattern of health problems have been dismissed by the EPA and the chemical companies as inconclusive.
To resolve the question, the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, a division of the U.S. Public Health Service, is conducting a health survey on every woman who ever gave birth there.
Mrs. Webber doesn't need any more proof.
She eventually had her children tested and found abnormal levels of some chemicals in their blood.
No one has ever explained how the chemicals might have come from Brio; its border was three blocks from where they lived.
But the Webbers decided to flee their house to a community 50 miles to the north, and Mrs. Webber says her children's problems have subsided.
The family sued, "but we got very little money," Mrs. Webber says, "because when you look at my kids, you don't see the problems."
As part of the out-of-court settlement, the Webbers had to agree not to disclose terms.
By the time the Webbers left in 1990, not only the residents were worried.
Their mortgage company ignored them when they stopped sending payments on their abandoned home, and they soon learned the reason: The company had torn up the note.
"They said, `You own it; you don't need to call us anymore,' " Mrs. Webber recalls.
Worried about possible liability, mortgage holders simply gave some people their houses.
Similarly, the Resolution Trust Corp., which ended up with some Southbend properties when it took over failed thrift institutions, rushed to unload them -- auctioning off one house for just $39.
In another move that startled residents, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development stopped putting "For Sale" signs on houses it owned, fearing that such advertising might be viewed as endorsing the neighborhood.
As some residents were fleeing, other people moved into Southbend and became eligible to sue.
One family that arrived in 1990 got $50,000 for each of two children to cover the possibility they might develop health problems in the future.
With the EPA contending it was safe to live there, latecomers could say they moved in without realizing the danger, even though sellers had begun requiring buyers to sign disclosure forms stating they knew that the house was near a Superfund site.
Some families ended up in a series of lawsuits.
Maria Molina says she and her husband, Noe, sued the developer over deceptive trade after discovering that the house they bought in 1983, a year before the announcement about Brio, was within view of the Superfund site.
They got an out-of-court settlement.
But they bought a second house in the neighborhood -- in 1987 according to real estate records.
Mrs. Molina says they wanted to help bolster the area and have an investment to help pay for their three sons' educations.
"We'd heard all about the scare," she says, "but the EPA was telling us it was OK, and we loved the neighborhood, especially the school."
The Molinas moved into the second house -- and now are suing again, this time on behalf of the boys, while waiting for the developer to buy the house back.
The children are fine, she says, "so far."
Another litigant is Lee Anne Herbert, a Southbend resident from 1982 to 1990, who says she had four extremely difficult pregnancies and her first child was stillborn.
She blames the waste site, which was two doors away.
The Herberts have already sued on behalf of themselves and their children and now are considering suing over the child that didn't survive.
They already have collected money in several settlements.
"At times it seems like I'm getting greedy," Ms. Herbert says, "but I don't care.
After what we've suffered through, we deserve something."
While residents sued, the builder of the subdivision and the companies responsible for the waste site got into a legal snarl of their own.
That happened even though the businesses responsible for the site agreed early on about how to pay the cleanup bill, which is expected to run between $60 million and $80 million.
In many Superfund cleanups, it is precisely this question that sparks the legal wrestling.
The fight at Brio, however, erupted over who should pay the settlements to the nearby residents.
In the first wave of lawsuits in the mid-1980s, residents mainly contended that they were victims of deceptive trade because nobody had warned them about the waste site.
These people got relatively small payouts.
But when homeowners started claiming health problems -- and the prospect of huge jury awards loomed -- the developer, Farm & Home Savings Association of Nevada, Mo., began looking around for someone to bear the cost.
In 1989, a group of residents were suing Farm & Home and Monsanto, contending that they were getting sick from living in the neighborhood.
After steadfastly denying there was any problem in that case, the developer and its insurer -- Crum & Forster Inc., a Basking Ridge, N.J., subsidiary of Xerox Corp. -- decided to settle with the residents and team up with them to sue Monsanto in the state district court.
Under this arrangement, known as a Mary Carter agreement in Texas, the insurer and developer were eligible to pocket half of whatever the residents won from Monsanto.
But the jury found for Monsanto.
And in a bitter twist, later suits relied on the record of this case, in which the developer and insurer appeared to acknowledge problems in Southbend.
"We took the position in this case that right next door to a hazardous-waste site is probably not the best place to build a subdivision," says Thomas Bistline, a Monsanto attorney.
"But there was no proof anyone was injured."
The dispute is far from over.
Monsanto won a $71 million verdict in state court in Harrison County in 1992 against Crum & Forster, which also is one of the chemical company's own insurers.
Monsanto claimed Crum & Forster acted in bad faith in going together with residents to try to collect money under a Mary Carter agreement.
The case is on appeal.
Monsanto is also wrangling with Crum & Forster over who should pay its share of other settlements with the residents.
Meanwhile, Southbend has become almost a suburban ghost town.
All but about 100 of the 667 homes are boarded up, the community pool is filled with dirt, and the elementary school is closed.
To stop the hailstorm of litigation, Southbend's developer and Crum & Forster are buying back the houses -- but the two sides are fighting over who should pay for that as well.
The entire area probably will be bulldozed.
Driving along a rutted path inside the fence separating the waste site from Southbend, John Meyer, the EPA project manager, gazes at the bleak, empty houses and shakes his head.
"We still don't believe there's any immediate health risk over there," he says, explaining that his agency's soil and water tests never found any contamination that would explain health problems.
He concedes that Superfund seems to have failed at Brio "if its purpose is to clean up sites quickly."
But, he adds, "nothing would have happened here if it weren't for the law."
Pulling over near the bank of a muddy creek, he shows one of the things EPA is already doing to contain the damage from decades of careless handling of chemicals.
A white plastic pipe sticks out of the ground, linked to a pump and a nearby filtering machine, part of a network of pumps and filters that probably will be needed for the indefinite future to stop chemicals from leaching into the water from the ground below the waste pits.
"People don't realize that we're going to have to be here forever," he says.
The EPA has built an incinerator at Brio to burn what it can dig out of the ground.
But as often happens at Superfund sites, locals are opposing that, too.
Many fear the incinerator will spew into the air dangerous chemicals that could drift into more distant neighborhoods.
The only other option would be to dig up the chemical pits and haul the soil away, but that would risk spreading the contamination and creating another hazardous-waste site somewhere else.
This is one reason EPA favors dealing with heavily contaminated soil with on-site incineration.
With the agency's credibility here weakened by the Southbend debacle, it faces a tough task convincing residents the incinerator is safe.
One skeptic is Marie Flickinger, editor of the local newspaper.
Hunched over boxes of documents and aerial maps in her cluttered office just up the road from the Brio site, she has made stopping the incinerator a top priority.
Officials who once might have dismissed Mrs. Flickinger take her very seriously.
Her crusade has helped draw attention to Brio from Texas Gov. Ann Richards, who has enlisted help from EPA Administrator Browner in re-examining the cleanup.
"I guess you could say Brio is my obsession," says Mrs. Flickinger, exploding in a cackle of laughter.
If Mrs. Flickinger has a nemesis, it's Norma Goldman.
As spokeswoman for the Brio Site Task Force, Ms. Goldman represents the chemical companies that drafted the Brio cleanup plan under EPA oversight.
Ms. Goldman notes that Mrs. Flickinger has a financial interest in Southbend: She owns a house there in which her son once lived.
Mrs. Flickinger admits owning the house, and she is seeking a nominal settlement on it -- but denies this has colored her opinion.
Of course, many of the problems at Brio might have been avoided if, as Ms. Goldman once contended, there was a 250-foot impermeable clay layer under the site.
In the late 1980s, she used to tell community groups about the mass of clay -- which, in theory, would hold in chemicals and shield the groundwater below.
"I wish I'd never used the term," she says, explaining that what she actually meant was that there is a "pretty good" layer of clay down below -- which actually is permeable.
One of the complaints about many Superfund cleanups, including Brio, is that the EPA lets companies responsible for the dumped chemicals have a lot of say in how they are cleaned up.
The Clinton proposals wouldn't change that, however, because the cost and time involved in having EPA do all the work would make it impossible to do more than a few at a time.
The idea of easing the standards, depending on how the land will be used in the future, is also controversial at Brio.
Local residents have long struggled with the notion of what it means to "clean" the site.
Many initially thought that the EPA was going to cleanse the place completely.
But no technology exists to do that.
Under the EPA plan, Brio would remain practically a no man's land forever.
"It will be a wildlife sanctuary with a fence around it," says Mr. Meyer, adding that the EPA has selected special grasses to plant there after the incineration is finished and the land smoothed over.
