It was an idyllic moment for Geoffrey Goodfellow: He was sitting on the beach in Hawaii, reading and answering electronic mail stored in California.
It was also an epiphany.
The year was 1975.
And Mr. Goodfellow, then a 19-year-old hacker and high-school dropout, had gotten his first glimpse of the wireless future.
He has since worked his way into the middle of that world.
Today, as the chairman and founder of RadioMail Corp., Mr. Goodfellow is shaping the technology's evolution, providing a universal link through which people on almost any combination of wireless -- and wired -- networks can communicate.
"We've been concentrating on the plumbing of cyberspace," Mr. Goodfellow says.
"So far no one really knows how to do that as well as we do."
Mr. Goodfellow, who got his first computing jobs from systems managers impressed by his unauthorized intrusions into their machines, is a slender 37-year-old with shaggy blond hair and a penchant for surfer-style clothes.
He still likes to run lighting effects at San Francisco dance clubs.
Yet his company, with just 30 employees, fewer than 2,000 customers and less than $2 million in revenue last year, provides one of the most advanced services in the emerging market for portable data transmission.
RadioMail, based in San Mateo, Calif., is a sort of high-tech answering service that takes electronic-mail messages for its customers and makes sure they get them.
It doesn't have a wireless transmission system of its own; rather, it packages the hardware and software needed to send and receive wireless messages on portable computers.
And its own computers route customers' messages to and from any combination of wireless carriers, corporate networks, on-line services and the Internet, which offers links between just about every public and private network.
RadioMail was the pioneer in forging these kinds of connections, but it's no longer alone.
Last September, American Telephone & Telegraph Co. began offering wireless messaging through a service called EasyLink, which offers the same breadth of connections to computer networks.
As the market grows, other companies are sure to jump in.
In fact, the company last month shuffled top managers and is modifying its marketing message to counter increased competition.
Mr. Goodfellow -- who says RadioMail is "losing money right on schedule" and won't be profitable until late this year at the earliest -- argues that RadioMail will retain important advantages.
Among them: He is counting on being quickest to tie in to every promising wireless communications technology that pops up, including coming digital-cellular and satellite-transmission systems.
"What Geoff has set up is the Switzerland of wireless communications," says Paul Saffo, an analyst with the Institute for the Future, a think tank in Menlo Park, Calif.
"It's a tiny country that is neutral ground."
RadioMail now routes messages through data-only radio networks operated by RAM Mobile Data, owned by BellSouth Corp. of Atlanta and RAM Broadcasting Corp. of Woodbridge, N.J.; and Ardis, a joint venture of Motorola Inc. and International Business Machines Corp.
Users pay RadioMail $89 a month for unlimited messages, a one-time $99 setup fee and $49 for software.
They also must buy a radio modem; current models cost about $775 and are about the size of a pocket cellular phone, though much smaller models are due out this year.
RadioMail's service works with modems made by Motorola and Ericsson GE Mobile Communications Inc., a venture of General Electric Co. and Telefon AB LM Ericsson of Sweden.
To send a message to, say, Mr. Goodfellow from your wireless device, you would tap in his address, Geoff@radiomail.net, and hit the send button.
The message would move over radio waves into the Ardis or RAM networks, which have transmission towers in most U.S. cities.
Next, phone links would carry it to RadioMail's switching center, a room at headquarters packed with wires and workstations.
From there, the process would be reversed; the message would be routed out first over phone lines and then over RAM or Ardis to Mr. Goodfellow's palmtop computer.
RadioMail has spawned a community of users who zap messages back and forth.
To speed decision making, Network Computing magazine last March set up accounts for nine editors who have offices around the country, says Gary Bolles, its editor in chief.
Alan Reiter, editor of Mobile Data Report, a newsletter in Alexandria, Va., says, "I rarely have to worry about dealing with a cantankerous hotel phone system.
Sending a story is basically as easy as pushing the send button."
Perhaps the heaviest user is James Opfer, a wireless communications consultant who uses RadioMail to escape the office altogether.
A former U.S. Air Force colonel who worked on electronic communications in the Reagan White House, Mr. Opfer receives 3,500 messages a month and sends about that many.
By using the service to pick the brains of his informal network of experts, he says, he can get clients fast answers from virtually anywhere.
"People pay me for being there in `near real time,'" Mr. Opfer writes in a RadioMail note.
"This is the ultimate in what I call the evolution to `people-centric' computing," because the power to send and receive data follows users rather than being tied to a phone line somewhere.
The service has limits.
RadioMail messages can't be longer than eight pages; customers typically use it for short notes.
Ardis and RAM don't reach many rural areas and are relatively slow.
RAM, for example, has a theoretical capacity of 8,000 bits of data a second, equal to about 200 words, but it says most messages move at about one-third that rate, at the speed of older telephone modems.
Ed Forman, RadioMail's vice president of marketing, nevertheless says it usually delivers any message within 28 seconds.
Most high-tech executives began thinking about such services in the 1980s.
Mr. Goodfellow's visions of communicating without wires started much earlier, when he read a Popular Science article on cellular phones that appeared in 1972 -- a decade before that technology began to spread.
At about the same time, his mother and stepfather bought him a Teletype terminal to encourage his nascent interest in computers.
They also helped him get a computer account for nights and weekends at a Silicon Valley data-services company.
After a manager noticed his wanderings through its systems, the company hired him for a summer job in 1973.
While he was there, a co-worker gave him a dial-up number for Arpanet, the Internet's predecessor, set up by the Pentagon's Advanced Research Projects Agency, or ARPA.
He connected to it from his home terminal.
Mr. Goodfellow also tapped into SRI International, a research and consulting firm originally spun off from Stanford University to pursue defense research.
In those days, an outsider logging on probably was just interested in computers; hackers weren't yet villains.
"He seemed like a goodhearted, bright soul," says Dan Lynch, who was managing SRI's machines then.
He gave Mr. Goodfellow a part-time job "because he was breaking into my computers."
Mr. Goodfellow started at SRI as what he calls an "assistant systems janitor," responsible for "burping and diapering" its mainframe computers.
He also accelerated his self-education process on networks, tapping into scores of computers around the country and learning their workings -- knowledge he would use to make RadioMail work.
He eventually obtained accounts on about 80% of the computers on Arpanet; one friend joked that his electronic address should be "Geoff@everywhere."
"No one knew Geoff Goodfellow was a kid," says Mr. Lynch, now chairman of Interop Co., a Mountain View, Calif., company that organizes computer-networking conferences.
"He just trolled the net.
He never slept.
When he found something that was goofy, he would fix it or find someone who could fix it.
I called him the ultimate debugger."
Mr. Goodfellow's computing habit didn't help his schooling.
In 1975, he dropped out of high school and took a full-time job at SRI.
He also learned of an ARPA-funded project at the University of Hawaii that set up one of the first civilian radio networks for transmitting data.
The concept so intrigued Mr. Goodfellow that he took a vacation in Hawaii, lugging along a suitcase-sized communications terminal that SRI helped to assemble.
"That was my first wireless experience," Mr. Goodfellow says.
Despite his lack of diplomas, Mr. Goodfellow worked his way up into computer-research jobs at SRI and received security clearances for government contracts.
And, with his network knowledge and hacker contacts, it was natural for Mr. Goodfellow to move into computer security.
"We used him quite a bit to find where these hackers were breaking into our system," says Stevan Milunovic, SRI's director of information systems.
After 12 years, he left SRI for the entrepreneurial world.
A cellular-phone start-up failed, but in 1988 he borrowed $50,000 from his parents to form what would become RadioMail.
The company started in one room of his Menlo Park house and gradually packed the dwelling with 25 computers, 50 phone lines and related paraphernalia.
RadioMail finally moved to an office park last year, but has tried to keep a homey atmosphere; lunches are made in a company kitchen by Priscilla Baird, who holds the title of concierge and tries to make sure employees don't neglect nutrition.
To expand the company, Mr. Goodfellow began seeking outside funding in 1992.
Though he eventually raised $3 million, the search was frustrating.
Venture capitalists, his first targets, "are really not risk-takers," Mr. Goodfellow says.
"They are more conservative than bankers."
After some early rejections, Mr. Goodfellow beefed up RadioMail's management: He fired himself as CEO in late 1992 and brought in William Hipp, who had managed advanced-technology projects for the Air Force and been president of Dowty Network Systems Inc., a now-defunct maker of local-area networks.
Venture capitalists still didn't bite.
Things also didn't gel with AT&T, which at one point looked like a potential partner before going on to start EasyLink.
Venture capitalists say the likelihood of such competition was a key reason they were leery of RadioMail -- along with a suspicion that a big market was a few years away.
"Geoff's a great guy, and what he's got is pretty intriguing," says Michael Moritz, a partner at Sequoia Capital in Menlo Park, Calif., which was approached by RadioMail.
"But rightly or wrongly, we thought five years from now he would be thought of as a very imaginative footnote to the wireless business."
Despite the naysayers, Mr. Goodfellow last April attracted $2 million from Motorola and $1 million from 2M Invest, a Danish investment firm.
Motorola said it considered the company 12 to 18 months ahead of the rest of the industry.
But further changes were needed at RadioMail.
Mr. Hipp says he spent most of his time negotiating important partnerships, while internal operations suffered.
One problem was delays in introducing new messaging software, including a version that works with Microsoft Corp.'s popular Windows operating system.
In January, Mr. Hipp relinquished the president and chief executive positions, opting to start a spinoff company to explore foreign sales of the company's service.
While RadioMail searches for a new CEO, two vice presidents, Olivia Dillan and Alan Beringsmith, are running day-to-day operations.
Mr. Goodfellow remains chairman and chief technical officer.
RadioMail also changed its marketing strategy.
The company had billed itself as selling wireless electronic mail.
In doing so, Mr. Goodfellow says, it has found that users expect to be able to do everything they can with a modem and a laptop computer, including attaching spreadsheets and other files to messages.
Many customers aren't particularly interested in immediacy; they simply want a wireless system that allows them to get their messages whenever they log on, which might be hours after a message is sent.
So, RadioMail now plans to compare its service to electronic Post-it notes, Mr. Goodfellow says, to appeal to people who want to get short messages instantly.
A subscriber's messages appear on a portable device as soon as it is switched on, without the need to log on to a remote system.
Another RadioMail selling point is that its pricing doesn't vary with the number of messages or the distance they travel.
For frequent users, this is cheaper than paying EasyLink's per-message charges.
"I don't have to worry about long-distance charges at all," says Mr. Bolles of Network Computing.
RadioMail also has a slightly broader geographical reach because it uses both the Ardis and RAM radio networks, while EasyLink uses only RAM.
And Mr. Goodfellow's determination to use any and all wireless carriers may both extend RadioMail's reach and save users money.
Metricom Inc., based in Los Gatos, Calif., is setting up a wireless network expected to offer unlimited messaging for as low as $2.95 a month; RadioMail plans to use it and pass the savings along.
Mr. Reiter of Mobile Data Report sees one gap in RadioMail's service.
As messages proliferate, some customers will want software that knows to send an urgent message from the president of the company but to hold for later retrieval things like the cafeteria lunch menu.
RadioMail expects to offer such filtering software, but Mr. Reiter says some competitors have a head start on the technology.
"RadioMail has been the leader in messaging and has dramatically helped to publicize this industry," Mr. Reiter says.
"They are a small company that has made a major impact.
But their lead is decreasing."
Mr. Clark is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau.
