Tucson, Ariz. -- Don Baylor put in 22 years as a Major League baseball player and coach, but he got an inkling that managing the fledgling Colorado Rockies would be a quite different experience well before that team first took the field last season.
"It was December 1992, and I'd just been hired.
I was in Salt Lake City on a promotional tour, and went to a Utah Jazz basketball game one evening," he recalls.
"As I'm leaving the arena a guy nudges his wife and says to her, `There's the manager of our baseball team.'
"Now, Salt Lake City is 500 miles from Denver, and I'd never been there before in my life, yet this guy recognizes me as the manager of his team.
I thought to myself, `This is gonna be something else.'"
The premonition proved correct: The Rockies' inaugural campaign was something new under the baseball sun.
The team drew 4,485,350 fans at home, far and away a record.
Baseballs zinged like rifle bullets through the rare air of Denver's Mile High Stadium, creating carousels of base runners for all concerned.
The Rockies lost 13 games in a row in one July-August stretch, then immediately bounced back with six straight victories.
They won 31 of their last 52 outings, and by season's end had won 67 times.
That was the most for any first-year National League expansion club, and more than three established teams in the circuit.
Season II now approaches, and Baylor, a managerial rookie no more, is downright anxious for the for-real games to begin.
"I think we all learned a lot over the past year, and that can only help us this time," says he.
What the Rockies learned last season and afterward was that, in their aerie, they would live and die by the bat, at least for the near term.
The 1993 Rockies hit .273 as a team and scored 758 runs, both third-highest in their league.
Trouble was, the opposition whacked their pitchers to the tune of .294 and scored 967 times, totals that were throwbacks to the hit-happy 1930s.
In 41 of their 162 games, one team or the other scored 10 runs or more.
One would think that better pitching would have been Colorado's primary objective in the recent off-season.
One would have been correct.
Predictably, however, hitters relished the prospect of making the climb to Denver far more than prospective pitchers did.
So the Rockies wound up investing much of their '93 box-office bonanza in Ellis Burks and Howard Johnson, a couple of veteran free-agent outfielders, and Walt Weiss, a seasoned shortstop.
If all three of those recruits stay healthy -- a big "if" given their injury-marred pasts -- it should make a beefy batting order beefier.
They'll be joining Denver's reigning Mr. Beef, Andres Galarraga.
The 250-pound refugee from the St. Louis Cardinals and Montreal Expos had been more sluggish than slugger in seven previous big-league seasons, sporting but a .267 lifetime batting average, before accomplishing a baseball miracle by tacking 103 points to that mark last season and leading the majors.
Baylor, an accomplished batsman himself in his not-so-distant heyday, got some credit for that by persuading Galarraga to open his right-handed stance, the better to see the ball.
Also returning from career-best years will be Charley Hayes, the cheerful third baseman who hit .305 with 25 home runs and 98 runs batted in, and outfielder Dante Bichette (.310, 21 and 89).
Joe Girardi is a decent hitter (.290 last season) and pretty good defensive catcher.
Rookie Roberto Mejia, at age 21 the sort of youngster one expects to see on an expansion team, should start the season at second base.
"Every day Roberto does something better," his manager says.
And the pitching?
Sure, nobody but the Atlanta Braves has enough, but that doesn't make the Rockies' any better.
The team did lure two free-agent hurlers in the off-season -- tall (6-foot-5) Mike Harkey from the Chicago Cubs and taller (6-7) Marvin Freeman from Atlanta -- but their primary asset seems to be bravery.
Both come from launching-pad-type ballparks and, thus, won't be surprised to see their deliveries leaving Mile High.
The primary mound incumbents are starter Armando Reynoso, who has a nice array of pitches and won a staff-high 12 games last year, and relievers Darren Holmes (25 saves) and Bruce Ruffin.
The latter, a six-year Major League vet, was having a typical mediocre season until he suffered a broken toe from being hit by a line drive on Aug. 18.
He was all but unhittable thereafter, posting a 1.25 earned run average and striking out 43 in his last 36 innings.
Baylor has no plans to re-break Ruffin's toe, but says that other lessons from the season past might help improve all his pitchers.
One was his discovery, near midseason, that bunching his outfielders toward center field took away some of the power-alley doubles and triples opposing batters were piling up.
Another was the advent of his dictum that "thigh-high is too high in Mile High."
He explains: "Good sinker-slider pitchers like Bill Swift {of the San Francisco Giants} and Terry Mulholland {Philadelphia Phillies} came in here and did just fine.
There's no reason our guys can't do as well by keeping the ball down."
And the 44-year-old skipper says he'll continue to confound the experts with his practice of moving in his infielders in early inning run-scoring situations at home on the chance that'd choke off runs that could tell later.
Such moves, of course, carry the risk of making bad innings worse.
"Last year I'd pull in the infield with runners on third in the second or third innings of games, and the writers later'd be asking `why?'" he says.
"The answer was that I wanted to give our pitchers the idea that we weren't going to concede a thing.
If we saved a run early, and it helped keep us close, I figured we could get it back later.
In our park, the fans never leave until the game is over.
And we always bat last."
