Some big companies are trying to break their glass ceilings.
They are putting out the word that only women need apply for some of their top jobs.
That's a turnabout from the recent past, when women were considered last -- if at all -- for senior posts, executive recruiters say.
The new practice, arising from a desire to diversify upper management, is controversial -- and potentially illegal.
When businesses exclude men from consideration for lucrative managerial posts, they risk reverse sex-bias suits and a disruptive loss of morale among male employees, authorities say.
"This may be a ticking time bomb waiting to go off," warns Gloria Allred, a Los Angeles lawyer who specializes in women's rights cases.
Some corporations try to sidestep the issue by telling recruiters merely that they would "prefer" to hire a woman if qualified candidates exist.
Such targeted searches are multiplying, dozens of executive women and headhunters say.
"The trend has dramatically increased over the past year or so," says Yvonne Jackson, senior vice president of human resources at Burger King Corp., a unit of Grand Metropolitan PLC.
Recruiters seeking women for managerial spots call her once a week.
Two years ago, she says, she got such calls once every three months.
Indeed, Burger King's search for a woman landed Ms. Jackson her six-figure job in December.
The company looked outside after inside contenders for the job -- all male -- failed to qualify.
The fastfood chain says it interviewed only women because its chief executive officer, James Adamson, insisted that senior management better reflect Burger King customers, nearly half of whom are female.
The selection of Ms. Jackson, a former Avon Products Inc. executive, added a second woman to Burger King's 10-member executive committee.
Korn/Ferry International, the nation's biggest search firm, says it was asked to find a woman in 4.1% of its executive assignments during fiscal 1993.
Five years ago, says Madeleine Condit, head of the firm's U.S. diversity practice, that proportion "would have been nil."
During the past year, five companies asked Corporate Directions, a career-counseling and search firm in Torrance, Calif., to fill middle-management and senior-level jobs with women, says George Schmutz, president.
Four said, "We will interview men, but we are only going to hire women," he recollects.
"One company said, `Don't waste my time sending me men.'
So, I only sent women."
A.T. Kearney Executive Search is getting twice or three times as many requests for female-targeted searches as it had 18 months ago, says Charles W. Sweet, president of the A.T. Kearney Inc. division.
Last June, for example, Kearney helped the Chicago Sun-Times recruit Bernadette Soens as controller.
The 44-year-old Ms. Soens, previously chief financial officer of a small manufacturer in Niles, Ill., is the only woman among the newspaper's eight vice presidents.
Sun-Times officials say they interviewed only female outsiders for the controller's job because the internal candidates -- all men -- lacked sufficient experience and because Ms. Soens's predecessor was a woman.
Joseph P. Gaynor, an executive vice president of the parent Chicago Sun-Times Co., says the company figured that a good way to find another senior woman was to look in areas like finance, where there would be larger pools of qualified women candidates.
Other employers aggressively seeking female managers also pinpoint specialties in which experienced contenders are more likely to be found, including human resources, public relations, legal affairs and other staff functions.
But some female managers fear the tactic will perpetuate "pink" ghettos.
"If we are really going to diversify our workplaces, it can't just be in finance or in human resources," argues Beverly Pierce, communications director of AlliedSignal Inc.'s braking-systems unit in South Bend, Ind.
Ms. Pierce became the first woman on her unit's 12-member management team when AlliedSignal hired her to direct the unit's public relations in September 1992 following an outside hunt for a woman.
The team gained a second woman last August.
Yet Ms. Pierce, 39 years old, still faces constant reminders of her gender's scarcity in upper management.
She works in the unit's executive suite.
But "there is only one bathroom on that floor," she notes.
"It says: `Men.'"
Virginia Lundquist, an AlliedSignal public-affairs vice president, helped to choose Ms. Pierce from a list of five women.
"I was quite happy with the fact we could put in a female," says Ms. Lundquist, the only senior woman executive in AlliedSignal's automotive sector, which employs 35,000.
But even though Ms. Pierce has worked out well, Ms. Lundquist says, "we aren't going to direct all searches to be gender-specific."
Her attitude isn't surprising.
When companies limit executive recruiting to women, they expose themselves to attacks from overlooked men.
So far, few men have challenged gender-specific searches.
But a qualified male aspirant excluded because of his sex may feel "he has gotten the short end of the stick," says Joseph D. Luksch, a partner with Epstein Becker & Green, a management law firm in New York.
A hard-goods manufacturer with $150 million in annual sales recently lowered the experience requirement for the head of its retail division rather than consider men, recalls Susan Landon, a principal at recruiters Lamalie Amrop International in New York.
"They didn't want to hear about male candidates," she says.
"They were more willing to change the specifications."
(As it turned out, the woman who was hired met the original requirement.)
Whether a business considers both sexes or just women, though, a female-targeted search doesn't always succeed.
Three years ago, Xerox Corp.'s chairman, Paul Allaire, sought a woman to be the company's human-resources vice president, an informed individual recalls.
But the company rejected three external female candidates because they lacked experience in handling large-scale organizational change.
William F. Buehler, an American Telephone & Telegraph Co. executive, was hired instead.
Finally, in 1992, Mr. Allaire promoted Mr. Buehler and replaced him with Anne Mulcahey, previously director of human resources.
Some big businesses simply refuse to give up in their quests for outside female executives.
Burger King went 18 months without a human-resources chief because its search for a woman with global experience took longer than expected.
"We all grumbled a lot" about the pinch hitting required, remembers Cori Zywotow, Burger King's vice president of communications.
"But we wanted it to be right, not fast."
