There's more evidence that Mother Nature's cold shoulder wreaked havoc on the nation's economy in January.
New-home sales tumbled 20.1% from December, the Commerce Department said, to an annual rate of 695,000.
The decline followed a 13% rise in December.
"The drop was weather-related," said David Berson, chief economist for the Federal National Mortgage Association.
But he added that the rate of increase in December was too brisk to be sustained month after month.
The decline in new-home sales follows a report earlier this week that existing-home sales rose 12.3% in January.
But that report, by the National Association of Realtors, reflects sales that on average take 30 to 90 days to close and thus were largely unaffected by the winter storms.
According to the Commerce Department report, the Midwest region was hardest hit in January, although analysts said the California earthquake also hurt home sales during the month.
The earthquake also hurt disposable personal income in January, the department said.
After adjustments for inflation, disposable income slipped 0.4% following a rise of 0.6% in December.
"Income was destroyed by the Los Angeles earthquake.
But if you take that out, and other special factors, the January rate is a very normal, comfortable rate," said Robert Dederick, chief economist at Northern Trust Co. in Chicago.
The weather didn't crimp spending in January, though.
It rose 0.5%, the same as in December, with most of the purchases in the durable-goods sector.
"In January, people continued to go about their business, and their business is to spend," Mr. Dederick said.
As a result, the savings rate of Americans slipped in January to 3.3% of income from 4.2% in December.
Yesterday's storm on the East Coast suggests weather may keep hurting economic performance.
"Looking out my window, the weather is going to continue to play a negative factor," said Sandra Shaber, retailing analyst for the WEFA Group in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.
"I expect another round of `bad' numbers in February."
The figures have been adjusted for price changes and normal seasonal factors.
Here is the Commerce Department's latest report on personal income.
The figures are at seasonally adjusted annual rates in trillions of dollars.
