Prudential Insurance Co. of America is likely to be slapped with a significant fine for selling unlicensed group annuity policies in New York state.
New York regulators have been investigating Prudential's sales of pension contracts for several months, and the probe is now concluding, said people close to the investigation.
Prudential has acknowledged selling products that were either rejected by state officials or never taken to them for approval.
"We made a mistake," said a Prudential spokesman.
The state's investigation has uncovered evidence that at least 900 employers in the state bought the unauthorized pension contracts, said Kevin Foley, deputy superintendent for the New York Insurance Department.
People familiar with the investigation say New York is likely to impose a $50,000 to $100,000 fine on the company, which, although small by Prudential's standards, is large by the standards of insurance departments.
State regulators believe that fines are less important as a deterrent than for the embarrassment of public disclosure.
The case is noteworthy because it comes at a time when Prudential is settling legal claims brought by investors who purchased limited partnerships from its Prudential Securities brokerage unit.
And the case shows how insurance companies sometimes ignore state regulation when they find it inconvenient.
Because each of the 50 states has different insurance laws, insurance companies often complain about the burden of complying with a variety of regulations.
New York, whose rules are among the toughest, goes further than most states to ensure that insurance policies are fair to consumers.
The approval process is important in protecting consumers from being "ripped off," Mr. Foley said.
"This is the method we use to guard against problems."
One of the products under scrutiny is a group annuity policy called Medley.
The product, marketed to nonprofit organizations, allows an employer's workers to invest in a variety of investment options for their 401K or other defined-contribution retirement programs.
Despite never having sought regulatory approval, Prudential sold the policy to 500 employers in the state.
People familiar with New York insurance law say the state probably would have rejected the contract because it could have denied profits to investors.
That's because, under certain circumstances, investors could be denied profits from their investments.
Investors who sought to get their money back immediately upon cashing out of the policy -- rather than waiting five years -- would get either the amount they invested or the market value of the investment, whichever was lower.
That meant that if the market value of the investment rose during the period of the contract, Prudential, instead of the investor, would keep the profits.
Mr. Foley added that the insurance department found evidence that Prudential sold other unapproved products in addition to Medley.
"Our investigation goes further than that," he said.
Mr. Foley said the department has already found about 900 improperly sold pension contracts, 400 more than the Medley product that sparked the probe.
Some of the contracts Prudential sold were actually rejected by the state, he said.
