At 4:31 a.m. on Jan. 17, the fortunes of this already troubled city took a tumble.
Twenty-five miles away, the Los Angeles area earthquake collapsed a five-story high freeway intersection, severing Palmdale's main connection to the urban center where many of its now-rattled residents work.
Suddenly, hours have been added to the commuting times of thousands, a stroke of misfortune for a city where things are already so bad that calls for Christmas charity baskets quadrupled this year at a local municipal aid agency.
Though local economies are improving in much of the nation, the forces of Southern California's entrenched recession and damage from its earthquake are writ large here, with troubling financial and social repercussions.
On the once-booming suburban fringe of Los Angeles, recovery is nowhere in sight.
Advertisements for local supermarkets note that food stamps are welcome.
Foreclosures on homes are climbing.
And city officials are worried about meeting payments on municipal development bonds.
Palmdale, which grew faster than all other California cities during the state's peak years in the 1980s, is today a study in suburban change, a desert site that has acquired the population -- and the problems -- of the urban life its residents came here to avoid.
"The city without limits," as Palmdale bills itself, has nearly 90,000 inhabitants, over seven times the 12,000 residents in 1980.
Some 20,000 people have arrived in the last three years alone.
Even in recession, growth is the main business in Palmdale, where flags and billboards advertise subdivisions and a sea of red-tiled roofs and white stucco houses stretches into the distance.
"To me, if a city isn't growing, it's dying," says James Ledford, Jr., Palmdale's part-time mayor, who is otherwise unemployed.
Cheap housing draws people to this site, 60 miles north of downtown Los Angeles.
For not much more than $100,000 -- inexpensive by California standards -- the American dream is within reach.
The downside for many in the work force has been a daily drive of as much as four hours to and from "down below," as locals refer to the sprawl of Los Angeles.
With the severed freeway, that trip has grown in some cases to as much as five or six hours.
While Palmdale's population swells, its commercial life blood has coagulated.
Housing construction has plunged.
From a peak of almost 7,000 homes valued at a total of $760 million in 1989, Palmdale's residential building permits have dwindled to 627 houses valued at just $65 million in the first ten months of last year.
Palmdale's newer residents are flocking to smaller, more densely packed apartments and houses.
The city's many marginal, first-time buyers have been especially vulnerable to declining economic fortunes.
Through October, mortgage lenders foreclosed on nearly 740 houses totaling $122 million in value, according to TRW-Redi Property Data.
At this rate, foreclosures are outpacing new construction in value.
Palmdale house prices have fallen moderately by California standards, off about 13%, to an average of $134,400 from a peak of $155,200 in 1990.
More telling is what has happened in the real-estate development market: prices for undeveloped land have plunged to less than half their 1989 peak.
Even as values dwindle, Palmdale's population keeps swelling.
In the surge, the image of benign suburbia, of lawns and barbecues and houses on quiet, curved streets is clashing increasingly with the realities of modern California.
From a population almost entirely white, mostly blue collar, and very middle class, Palmdale has diversified into a racial and socioeconomic mix closer to that of greater Los Angeles.
Less than two-thirds of Palmdale's population is white, non-Hispanic these days.
Roughly one quarter is Latino.
The remainder includes a growing black population as well as Asian Americans.
With these changes, problems have emerged.
Hate mail and calls poured in when a local English-language radio station dropped an English-language country and western format to become the first all-Spanish station in the area.
A skinhead was found with a pipebomb at the local high school not long ago.
And a California legislator, who is a former mayor of Palmdale, raised eyebrows when he distributed a racist poem that mocked Latino immigrants.
Yet Palmdale, in one major way, may represent a multiracial model for suburban America.
Amid rapid growth, communities sprang up without regard to skin color.
"We didn't worry who our neighbors were; we were looking for affordable housing," says Mayor Ledford.
However the middle-class comforts of home ownership are being undercut by Southern California's economic woes.
Commuter workers have been broadly affected by Los Angeles-area joblessness, which has lingered above 9% for several years now.
At a giant Air Force facility in the heart of Palmdale, where Lockheed Corp., Northrop Corp. and Rockwell International Corp. all operate aircraft assembly and maintenance facilities under contract, jobs are being consolidated from other Los Angeles-region facilities, boosting employment soon to about 11,000 people from about 8,500 currently.
But, many of those positions are filled by employees commuting from elsewhere and are slated to disappear in a few years, as production contracts for the B-2 Stealth bomber and other projects are completed.
The City of Palmdale itself is shedding workers.
And its own ambitious development plans have stumbled.
In a recent letter to holders of some of its local improvement bonds, the city explained that, though payments to bondholders have been up to date, local businesses have made less than two-thirds of required payments on time into the local improvement fund and that delinquencies were running into the millions of dollars.
But the city is under strain.
Public services are more in demand than ever from the growing and changing population.
The city's main charity agency, a provider of last resort for financially imperiled residents, ran out of money briefly this fall.
Crime, once relatively low, has soared of late.
Juvenile arrests for serious crimes jumped 26% in the first eight months of 1993.
Says Richard Loa, a local public defender and prominent member of the Latino community.
"People came here to escape, but everything that they ran from in Los Angeles is coming up here."
