REPUBLICAN National Chairman Haley Barbour likes to call California "America's wind tunnel," meaning it is usually testing out trends the rest of us will be picking up later.
So at the beginning of an election year in which a staggering $100 million is likely to be spent on campaigns in California, it's worth asking: What's the political Zeitgeist in the Golden State?
The answer is intriguing.
When a visitor to California can look past the earthquakes and mud slides, what he sees is a striking new kind of political pragmatism emerging.
Old ideologies and party labels are blurring, and a new balance between the roles of business and government is developing.
This just may be the precursor of a national trend.
When Republican researchers Christine Matthews and Bill McInturff recently tried to forecast public opinion trends for the rest of the 1990s, one of the central themes they predicted was "a rejection of partisan and ideological labeling."
In California, that's happening because everybody is having to rethink old verities on the fly, thanks to the state's remarkable run of tragedies: earthquakes, riots, recession, loss of 415,000 defense-related jobs.
Californians are cranky, and more than ready to take it out on their politicians.
And as Dr. Johnson noted, there's nothing like the prospect of a good hanging to focus the mind.
So politicians are on a sober search for non-ideological solutions.
That has prompted Democrats to move toward Republican thinking on crime, immigration and economics, while Republicans have moved toward Democratic thinking on government activism.
THIS PROCESS IS BEST personified by the state's Republican governor, Pete Wilson, and his most likely Democratic opponent this fall, state Treasurer Kathleen Brown.
Gov. Wilson is almost impossible to typecast.
Is he a conservative?
Well yes, but not nearly enough for his own party's right wing, which sneers at him for supporting abortion rights, opposing a state initiative on school choice and championing a $7 billion tax increase in his first year in office.
He talks of "preventive government," emphasizing such services as widespread prenatal care.
So is he a progressive?
Well yes, but not nearly enough for the state's Democrats, who fought him so bitterly over spending cuts that California virtually shut down for the summer of 1992 and paid its bills with IOUs during a bloody budget debate.
They say "preventive government" has washed up on the rocks of draconian budget cuts.
And Gov. Wilson hits all the conservative hot buttons on crime and immigration.
Yet in the last year, Gov. Wilson and the Democrats came together to pass a strikingly business-friendly economic package designed to breathe life back into the state's sagging business sector.
It includes an overhaul of the workers' compensation law, a sales tax credit for purchase of manufacturing equipment, a capital gains tax break for investments in small businesses and tax relief for start-up businesses.
More such ideas are in the Wilson hopper.
Now comes Ms. Brown, daughter and sister of California's last two Democratic governors, seeking to take Gov. Wilson's seat.
In doing so, she has moved well to the right of many Democrats on immigration and crime, Gov. Wilson's two hot-button issues.
She's in favor of mandatory sentences for first-time drug offenders, curfews for teens and life sentences for three-time felons.
She promises to carry out executions despite personal misgivings about the death penalty.
To curb illegal immigration, she wants to use the military to shore up the Border Patrol and to require all employees to carry a tamper-proof Social Security card to prove legal status.
MORE SIGNIFICANTLY, she has just laid out her economic philosophy in a speech that, as one Democrat grumbles, Gov. Wilson could have given.
It calls for a tax moratorium for new businesses, a tax credit for job creation, simplification of the regulatory structure and creation of a new business capital fund.
Intriguingly, Ms. Brown has echoed Gov. Wilson in opposing an instant tax increase to cover the cost of the Los Angeles earthquake.
This hardly means that Democrats and Republicans agree on everything.
Insurance Commissioner John Garamendi, the other Democratic gubernatorial candidate, has an eclectic, populist message all his own, and he does call for an earthquake tax boost.
And there's plenty on which Gov. Wilson and Ms. Brown disagree.
He hints at denying illegal immigrants medical and education services; she is passionately opposed.
She didn't back the North American Free Trade Agreement; he did.
But the point is that it's getting harder to predict where California's political leaders will come down on any particular issue.
The old stereotypes are dying in California -- and that's healthy for a troubled state, and the nation that may follow in its footsteps again.
