Hoping to head off Ukraine's economic implosion and keep a nuclear disarmament agreement on track, President Clinton has decided to double U.S. economic assistance to Ukraine and seek closer political and economic ties.
In an agreement with Russia and the U.S. earlier this month, Ukraine's president, Leonid Kravchuk, pledged to give up all his country's nuclear warheads in exchange for economic assistance and security assurances.
But with Ukraine's economy careening out of control, there have been strong doubts about whether Mr. Kravchuk could override the objections of nationalist legislators and live up to that commitment.
U.S. officials hope that by reaching out to Ukraine now, they can both encourage desperately needed economic reforms and strengthen Mr. Kravchuk politically.
Until now Ukraine has failed to make any economic reforms at all.
With monthly hyperinflation topping 90% in December and secessionist pressures building among ethnic Russians in Crimea, U.S. officials have warned in recent days that Ukraine could face economic collapse and political explosion.
U.S. officials say that for the sake of the treaty and of stability in Ukraine, it is time for the U.S. to seek closer ties.
A delegation of senior Ukrainian officials is in Washington this week to discuss how far those ties might go.
As a result of those talks, U.S. officials say that they expect to double the current U.S. commitment of $155 million in economic aid and "significantly increase" funds for dismantling Ukraine's nuclear warheads.
The U.S. also expects to initial a bilateral tax treaty this week, a prerequisite for any U.S. investment, and is also working toward a bilateral investment treaty.
U.S. officials say both agreements would be signed when President Kravchuk meets with President Clinton in Washington in March.
The U.S. is also hoping to smooth Ukraine's relations with the international lenders, by helping them craft "a workable economic reform program," according to a senior U.S. official.
In testimony before the Senate earlier this week, R. James Woolsey, director of the Central Intelligence Agency, described Ukraine as a crisis in the making.
He said that "reform has been nonexistent in Ukraine" and that "economic mismanagement and political drift" had led to profound disillusionment.
