IBM Chairman Louis V. Gerstner unveils his long-awaited turnaround strategy today, outlining a blueprint that would reduce IBM's dependence on the mainframe business that has been the company's lifeblood for nearly 40 years.
Mr. Gerstner, who makes his first major address to Wall Street analysts today, is expected to outline a broad framework that amounts to having International Business Machines Corp. reach outside, instead of inside, to solve its problems.
Among the targets: pushing "client-server" computing that relies on cheaper, smaller machines; increasing sales of IBM technology to industry rivals; and tailoring computer systems to specific industries, even when it means incorporating rival brands.
But Mr. Gerstner's message may be more noteworthy for what it leaves out.
It will be short on specifics, will contain few major new initiatives, and won't call for any new cost-cutting steps or provide much detail on IBM's finances, according to industry executives familiar with the talk.
An IBM spokesman had no comment.
The plan "isn't the end-all, it's the beginning," said one executive.
"What's important is that he shows he's focused on strategy."
The eagerly awaited talk is aimed at showing Wall Street -- and customers and employees -- that Mr. Gerstner has a distinct vision for IBM's future.
Last July, the former RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. chief executive was chided for saying that "the last thing IBM needs right now is a vision."
He later explained that the company, which was financially hemorrhaging, had to be stabilized before he could consider what its overarching strategy should be.
Mr. Gerstner may use two forums next month -- a session with industry consultants and IBM's annual meeting of shareholders -- to flesh out the plan.
Wall Street is waiting to hear what Mr. Gerstner has to say.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, IBM shares fell $1 to $57.25 in above-average volume.
Versions of his initiatives have been discussed by top IBM executives for months -- or, in some cases, even years.
But the emphasis by IBM's new CEO represents a new determination to shed the old-line, proprietary business of mainframes and embrace "open-systems" computers.
Customers increasingly demand these setups, which can be mixed and matched with other brands but are less profitable and face strong competition.
IBM is talking more about the open-systems approach, "but they haven't delivered yet," said Henry Holland, president of Dun & Bradstreet Corp.'s software subsidiary, which sells to a large IBM customer base.
"IBM has got to quit putting out so many different integrating visions and start putting out a strategy that speaks to customers."
Among the areas Mr. Gerstner will highlight:
-- Client-server: As part of the move from costly mainframes to more flexible PC networks, IBM is devising a plan called Open Blueprint.
It seeks to link Big Blue's myriad incompatible product lines, as well as rival computers and software, by following industry standards.
-- Sales and services: Mr. Gerstner may outline changes in IBM's sales force to have marketers act as technology consultants instead of salespeople pushing particular products.
They would help customers sort through the bewildering array of products and tailor systems to specific industries, such as banking.
-- Technology: IBM will increase efforts to sell its own computer chips, including the new PowerPC microprocessor, and other high-tech products to rivals.
It previously had hoarded what it claims is the world's best chip-making technology mostly for its own wares.
-- Network services: IBM hopes to better exploit what it believes to be an underutilized asset: a broad line of hardware and software that could help telephone and cable companies build "infohighway" systems.
One IBM plan, under development, would link traveling executives almost anywhere via hand-held devices and networking technology that works over wire or the airwaves.
