"I had become too isolated," says Mr. Klein, conceding that he lost touch with consumers by cloistering himself in his showroom here.
"When I'm out there in the stores, I learn."
Mr. Klein's self-examination comes after a series of business setbacks for Calvin Klein Inc. and a corporate rescue in May 1992, when Mr. Klein's longtime friend, entertainment mogul David Geffen, bought $62 million of Calvin Klein Inc.'s junk-bond debt -- in effect, lending the company the money.
Mr. Geffen threw himself into helping Mr. Klein rebuild his fashion house.
The result: After several years of sluggish sales and occasional losses, Calvin Klein Inc. is transforming itself into a design, marketing and licensing company.
Having finally conceded that outside manufacturers could make some of its lines more efficiently and profitably, the company found buyers for its jeans and underwear businesses, which will now be converted to licensees.
With the proceeds of those sales earmarked to retire its remaining debt -- a $58 million Citibank loan -- the closely held 25-year-old company is forecasting a profitable 1994.
In the future, Calvin Klein will derive virtually all its income from the royalties it collects from licensees.
In a sense, this is a return to the past; when the company introduced its jeans in the late 1970s, it used a licensee to make them.
Calvin Klein fragrances -- Obsession, Eternity and Escape -- have always been sold under license.
And now that the company has licensees for its underwear and, once again, its jeans, it is actively pursuing a licensing deal for its CK menswear and women's-wear divisions.
If and when buyers are found, only the women's couture collection will remain in-house, as the engine driving the label's image.
By licensing its brand name, Calvin Klein's revenues will fall -- but so will its costs, as its licensees assume much of the business's overhead.
Licensing also provides a cushion against risk: Royalties are based on sales -- not profits -- and as long as the businesses grow, so do the royalties.
The restructuring allows Mr. Klein, who is 51 years old, and his longtime business partner, Barry Schwartz, also 51, to focus on what they do best: designing and marketing the apparel that others will now produce.
A high priority: improving the CK lower-priced "bridge" women's-wear collection.
Last fall, Mr. Klein criticized it as "too young-looking" and lacking styles that women could wear to work.
"We've gone through a difficult period," concedes the designer, who has been dubbed "Calvin Clean" by the fashion press for his spare, minimalist fashions.
"We're not all the way there yet, but we've developed a real long-term strategy to grow our businesses."
Adds Mr. Schwartz: "Manufacturing wasn't our forte."
A few years ago, the company was coasting on the success of its fragrances, while other divisions showed hit-or-miss results -- and it was apparent on the bottom line.
In fiscal 1990, the last full year Calvin Klein released financial results, it had a net loss of $4.3 million on sales of $197 million.
For the first nine months of 1991, net income was $2.7 million on sales of $155.3 million.
(After Mr. Geffen bought its junk bonds, Calvin Klein was no longer required by the Securities and Exchange Commission to disclose its earnings.)
For 1994, Mr. Geffen forecasts profits before interest and taxes of around $40 million.
He doesn't estimate the company's net income, but it is clear that the profits of Calvin Klein Inc. this year will be substantial.
Retailers say Mr. Klein's personal attention -- including attending all-day retail meetings and visiting stores outside New York -- is paying off.
"Calvin Klein today is right up there on top," says Philip Miller, chairman of Saks Fifth Avenue.
"The big value that he is now bringing to the business is him."
But Mr. Klein also owes much to Mr. Geffen.
One of the wealthiest people in Hollywood, Mr. Geffen sold his Geffen Records company to MCA Inc. in 1990 for stock valued at $700 million when MCA was sold to Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. later that year.
After Mr. Geffen bailed out Calvin Klein, the company repaid him the following year with funds borrowed from Citibank, which will be retired this month.
At Calvin Klein, Mr. Geffen says he has become an unofficial "third board member."
Mr. Geffen adds: "I sat them down and helped them see their business more clearly.
They needed to run it more like a business."
Calvin Klein sold its corporate jet and strengthened its management team.
It hired a new chief financial officer, Richard Martin, who was most recently chairman of national apparel and retail industry services practices at Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm used by Mr. Geffen.
With his pop-music connections, Mr. Geffen helped the company sign Marky Mark, the muscular rap singer who became the poster boy for Calvin Klein underwear, spurring sales among teenagers.
Mr. Geffen negotiated the recent sale of Klein's underwear division to an apparel maker, Warnaco Inc., for $64 million.
Under the terms of the sale, Warnaco will produce the underwear, paying Calvin Klein a royalty of about 5% of annual revenues.
In 1993, the underwear business generated wholesale volume of about $60 million.
Warnaco plans to introduce the brand in more department stores in the U.S. and abroad, as well as expand the product line.
"Designer brands are stronger than ever, and we will hit a home run," says Warnaco's chairman and chief executive, Linda Wachner.
Calvin Klein initially gained fame with its designer jeans, which generated sales as high as $240 million in 1982, when the business was owned by Puritan Fashions Inc., the jeans manufacturer that was Calvin Klein's licensee.
But after Calvin Klein bought Puritan in 1983, the company neglected jeans -- which at one time accounted for 80% of its overall revenues -- and by last year jeans sales had shrunk to about $50 million.
Last month, New York-based Rio Sportswear Inc. bought the jeans division for $35 million and will pay a royalty ranging from 5% to 10% to Calvin Klein.
Arnold Simone, Rio's president, expects that sales of Calvin Klein jeans can be lifted quickly.
Rio, which already produces 1.5 million pairs of jeans a month under labels such as Bill Blass, says manufacturing efficiencies will enable it to lower prices from about $60 a pair to about $45 -- matching Gap and Levi's brands.
"The beautiful part of Klein is that the company is really the best marketer in the industry, with wonderful sexy and sophisticated ads," Mr. Simone says.
Rio will also launch a line of Calvin Klein children's jeans.
Calvin Klein Inc. is counting on generating much of its future growth from abroad.
In the past year, the company has opened licensed Calvin Klein boutiques in Barcelona, St. Moritz and Singapore.
And last week, Calvin Klein announced that it had formed a new partnership with four Japanese companies to intensify Klein presence in Japan by creating in-store shops, and produce more licensed apparel in Japan.
As for Calvin Klein himself, the designer is now preoccupied with what he calls a "breakthrough" concept: a unisex perfume.
