One of the longest and most heavily litigated dumping cases in U.S. legal history abruptly ended as the two rivals realized they could no longer gain from continuing the fight.
In a joint statement, Smith Corona Corp. and Brother Industries Ltd. of Japan said they agreed to terminate all trade litigation between them filed over the last 14 years.
"Both of our companies are better served by concentrating on the marketplace and serving our customers," the companies said.
The end of the litigation seemed inevitable.
In the 20 years the two companies have charged each other with "dumping" -- selling portable typewriters and word processors below cost in the U.S. -- they have gone through such drastic transformation that they sometimes found themselves in reversed roles.
Smith Corona, which is based in New Canaan, Conn., and has a 113-year history of manufacturing in the U.S., produces typewriters and word processors.
The company is in the process of shifting the last of its U.S. production in Cortland, N.Y., to Mexico.
After March, a spokeswoman said, Smith Corona's entire manufacturing base will be located outside the U.S.
This could take away the legal basis for seeking protection under U.S. antidumping laws.
Meanwhile, in 1986 Brother Industries, which also makes typewriters and word processors, moved production from its primary facility in Nagoya, Japan, to Bartlett, Tenn., qualifying it as a U.S. manufacturer.
In fact, in an ironic twist, Brother Industries in 1991 began claiming that it was the company that represented the U.S. domestic typewriter industry and not Smith Corona, which in 1989 became a public company, with 48% owned by Britain's Hanson PLC.
Moreover, Brother sued Smith Corona in 1991, alleging that it was "dumping" its Singapore-made typewriters in the U.S.
Indeed, in 1993 the U.S. Commerce Department appeared to agree with Brother.
In a preliminary determination, the department said Smith Corona was selling typewriters from its Singapore plant at less than fair value in the U.S.
And, in the same ruling, the Commerce Department found that Brother Industries represented the domestic typewriter industry, said Mark Thompson, general counsel of Brother Industries.
"Here were two companies claiming to be representing the domestic industry, and each had filed antidumping claims against the other," Mr. Thompson says, "It was crazy; we were chasing our tails."
"The two parties have been using litigation to compete in the marketplace," he said.
"At the end we decided to use the marketplace to compete."
The companies said that as part of the settlement they would ask the Commerce Department to suspend its antidumping investigation of portable typewriters from Singapore and to revoke antidumping duties on portable electric typewriters and personal word processors from Japan.
They said they will ask that related litigation in the U.S. Court of International Trade be dismissed as a result of the settlement agreement.
