A tiny Des Moines software company hopes to do for multimedia systems what Microsoft Corp. has done for PCs.
Microsoft came to dominate the personal-computer industry by designing the internal software, known as the operating system, that made millions of PCs run.
Now little-known Microware Systems Corp. is trying to get the same hold in interactive software by designing the operating system for the TV set-top boxes expected to be in millions of homes.
Little-known Microware has just landed a coveted piece of business.
Bell Atlantic Corp., the regional Bell company, expects to distribute an interactive service to 10 million households by the turn of the century.
It has placed orders for set-top boxes from three suppliers.
All the boxes, in turn, rely on Microware's OS/9 software.
The company's software is already used in hundreds of critical systems worldwide.
The California Department of Transportation has begun relying on OS/9 to run traffic lights, toll booths and even to help weigh trucks.
Chrysler Corp. uses OS/9 in the computer systems that design and build braking systems.
At the University of Cern in Switzerland, the particle accelerator couldn't smash atoms without thousands of Microware systems controlling its magnets.
The key feature at the heart of these myriad applications is OS/9's ability to handle multiple "real-time" tasks simultaneously, which can be traced to the software's robotic origins.
Such "multitasking" powers are seen as a critical feature for interactive networks, letting "interactivists" shop on a network or respond instantly to the button-pressing of fellow game-players.
"Their software has a lot of the functions that everybody believes will be necessary for the future interactive services," says Lucy Fjeldstadt, former vice president of multimedia at International Business Machines Corp., who now runs a consulting firm in New Canaan, Conn.
Microware would seem to be a surprise contender in the highly competitive multimedia sweepstakes, in which Microsoft has invested $100 million a year.
It was founded 17 years ago by Kenneth Kaplan, a computer buff at Drake University in Des Moines, and two friends.
They started out trying to build an educational robot for teaching handicapped children, a project that went nowhere.
Microware got its first big break in 1980, when Motorola Inc. approached Mr. Kaplan and his partners and asked them to design an operating system for a new microprocessor.
"Today about 80% of our business is Motorola-based," Mr. Kaplan says.
"We owe our existence to them."
By 1982, Tandy Corp. chose OS/9 for its TRS-80 color computer, an early entry in home computers.
Soon after, Fujitsu Ltd. in Japan fitted its machines with OS/9.
By 1986, when Philips and Sony Corp. began looking for a real-time operating system for their CD-Interactive player, they turned to Microware because OS/9 was proven in large commercial and scientific projects.
Microsoft last year allied with chip maker Intel Corp. and cable-box maker General Instrument Corp. in a bid to dominate the set-top market.
But the trio hasn't announced a final product and seems to be running behind schedule.
The effort also ran into resistance when cable companies balked at Microsoft's plan to charge a fee each time a consumer conducted a transaction using its set-top software.
Microware's founder, Mr. Kaplan, says Microsoft's efforts to control the market simply won't work this time.
"Anybody in computers always talks about how they support open standards," he says.
"But in the dark recesses of their greedy little hearts, they want things to be proprietary" and use that edge to their own advantage.
OS/9, by contrast, will work with myriad rival systems, Mr. Kaplan says, including gear from IBM, Philips N.V. and several other set-top vendors selected last week by Bell Atlantic.
Nor does Microware intend to impose additional per-transaction user fees beyond what it charges for licensing OS/9, the company says.
Microware's OS/9 went head-to-head with a prototype from Microsoft called Modular Windows in a test by Bell Atlantic, says Arthur Orduna, a Microware marketing manager.
He brags that OS/9 beat its rival.
A Microsoft spokeswoman doesn't dispute this account.
However, she said Microsoft is interested in not only supplying real-time software for set-top boxes, but also graphical software that presents a picture on the television screen that could entice consumers to use the service.
"{Chairman} Bill Gates has said that the early interactive services trials will be disappointing because we haven't made enough progress in user interfaces and the richness of services delivered."
She added that Microsoft may be behind schedule because it is trying to deliver software for several segments of the market, including cable head-end systems, set-top boxes and the programs delivered over the networks.
Mr. Kaplan says Microsoft in March 1986 tried to buy Microware.
Microsoft had begun trading publicly on the over-the-counter market.
According to Mr. Kaplan, Mr. Gates saw that Microware was chosen as the operating system for the Philips-Sony CD-i machine and "he wanted into that market badly."
Rather than design a new operating system, Mr. Gates figured it made more sense to buy Microware, Mr. Kaplan says.
"I refused and wanted a joint venture instead and the talks fell apart."
Mr. Gates, through a spokeswoman, confirmed the account.
Compared with Microsoft, Microware is truly micro.
The closely held company doesn't give out numbers.
Mr. Kaplan, its president, will say only that "we're one one-hundredth the size of Microsoft," which would indicate revenue of about $25 million or more.
Tonight, Bell Atlantic's key partner in multimedia software, Oracle Corp., is staging events in four cities to outline its interactive ambitions.
The Bell Atlantic effort is a much-watched affair because, while the phone company could change its suppliers, it intends to deliver new services to 250,000 homes by year's end, adding another million homes in 1995.
Bell Atlantic's plan to acquire cable giant Tele-Communications Inc. could give it access to more than 20 million homes.
Today half of Microware's sales are overseas, as are half of Microware's 200 employees.
"They have a nice, tight system that operates well," says Brian Smith, vice president of market development at Philips's Digital Video Communications Systems Division.
"It's powerful enough to do real-time video functions, and you can still load applications software on top."
