Stanley Jaffe was angry, again.
The president of Paramount Communications Inc., a man whose explosive temper had become legendary inside his company, had assembled a dozen or so division heads at the firm's Los Angeles movie studio, and he was berating them.
Furious, Mr. Jaffe rose from his seat, say two witnesses to the scene.
His voice grew louder, until he was yelling so hard that, though he wasn't aware of it at first, his nose began to bleed.
"He didn't realize that his nose was streaming blood," says one person who was there.
"No one wanted to say anything.
We just sat there in a mixed emotion of horror and joy."
Mr. Jaffe denies the tale.
But the volatile, 52-year-old executive admits to what he has called an "in-your-face" management style.
A onetime movie producer whose biggest hit was "Fatal Attraction," Mr. Jaffe has largely overseen Paramount's day-to-day operations since 1991, when he was brought in by Paramount's high-profile chairman, Martin S. Davis.
Although Mr. Jaffe has mostly stayed behind the scenes in the battle between Viacom Inc. and QVC Network Inc. to buy Paramount, he has been a swaggering and even frightening presence inside the company.
But by many measures, his three-year tenure has been a disappointment.
When he was hired, Paramount's big Hollywood studio, the company's largest unit, was mired in problems.
Its poor results had dragged down earnings for the whole company, which also owns publisher Simon & Schuster and the Knickerbockers basketball and Rangers hockey teams.
Yet Mr. Jaffe, who had little experience as a corporate executive, hasn't fixed many of the troubles, including too few movie releases and too many flops on the order of last year's "Coneheads."
Even as Paramount's share price rises in the overheated bidding war, its earnings are lackluster, throwing into question the value of the very assets Viacom and QVC are battling to seize.
Its crown jewel, the Paramount studio, is mired in a deep box-office slump that even two big hits, "The Firm" and "Indecent Proposal," haven't reversed.
Steady gains at Simon & Schuster haven't been enough to compensate for the studio's poor results.
Morale has plunged.
Now Mr. Davis is faulting his second-in-command's management for Paramount's looming loss of independence, according to insiders and directors.
The tension between the two men, once friends, is palpable.
The gruff, plain-spoken Mr. Davis has been bad-mouthing his hand-picked deputy to directors, associates and industry executives, they say.
"Jaffe blew my company," one senior insider quotes Mr. Davis as having said.
In an interview in his sprawling 42nd-floor office overlooking New York's snow-covered Central Park, Mr. Davis offers a tepid denial of such reports.
"He's done his job.
We are satisfied," he says.
Pale and battling his third cold since the four-and-a-half-month takeover struggle began, Mr. Davis, 66, declines to elaborate.
When asked whether Mr. Jaffe has retained the board's confidence, Mr. Davis says yes, but quickly adds that there are "varied views of directors" about his deputy.
Some Jaffe supporters charge that Mr. Davis and his board are casting the Paramount president as a scapegoat.
After all, Mr. Jaffe didn't start Paramount's troubles.
And his boss is the one who has shaped Paramount and determined its course.
"The Blame Game," some insiders are calling the finger-pointing.
Mr. Jaffe's supporters contend that he has gotten the studio back on track, with a strong slate of films scheduled for this year.
"Under Stanley's aegis, they have really revitalized the studio," says James Wiatt, president of International Creative Management, the big talent agency.
Still, many current and former Paramount executives say Mr. Jaffe's hour under the spotlight is long overdue.
Mr. Jaffe concedes that he is likely to be out of a job once Paramount is under a new owner, whether it is friendly suitor Viacom or uninvited bidder QVC.
And many Paramount insiders, along with Hollywood producers and others who have worked with the studio, couldn't be happier.
Stories abound of Mr. Jaffe's harsh treatment of subordinates, sometimes blistering even by the standards of Hollywood, where screaming is a common management tool.
During his tenure, Paramount has hired his relatives and friends for important jobs, even though the company frowns on nepotism.
He has spent lavishly from Paramount coffers, but put the rest of the company on a diet of austerity.
Rather than articulate a strategic vision for the company, he has micromanaged, focusing on the minutiae of casting or editing movies -- sometimes making end runs around other executives and alienating employees in the process.
And he has lavished what some insiders consider an inordinate amount of attention on the sports teams, which account for only about 1% of Paramount's $4.3 billion in revenue.
In a three-hour interview, an alternately charming and blunt Mr. Jaffe admits he doesn't "suffer fools well" and has an explosive temper.
"I can intimidate people," he says.
He calls the studio's bumpy financial performance and the low number of films it has released his "one disappointment."
But he says that he is "proud" of his accomplishments and that Paramount is poised to reap the financial rewards of his work in the next fiscal year.
Securities analysts, however, are trimming their 1995 earnings projections, some by as much as 20% from initial estimates, based on Paramount's continuing box-office malaise.
Analysts estimate earnings for fiscal 1994, ending April 30, will be roughly flat to down, before rebounding somewhat in fiscal 1995.
From the start, Mr. Jaffe was regarded as in some ways an odd choice for the corporate post at Paramount, although there was no question about his knowledge of movies.
The son of retired Columbia Pictures Chairman Leo Jaffe, Mr. Jaffe grew up in New Rochelle, N.Y., immersed in the details of movie-making.
At 28, he produced his first feature film, the hit "Goodbye, Columbus."
In the 1970s, he was a senior executive at both Columbia and Paramount.
But he soon left the management track, spending the 1980s producing movies for the Paramount studio with partner Sherry Lansing.
Their biggest hit, "Fatal Attraction," grossed about $345 million worldwide.
He had directed one movie, "Without a Trace," and was set to direct another, "School Ties," in 1991 when he began to discuss the problems at Paramount's studio with Mr. Davis, whom he had known for more than two decades.
At the time, the studio was hampered by bloated costs, too few movies and a series of box-office bombs such as "The Two Jakes" and "Days of Thunder."
Mr. Davis was under pressure from shareholders to improve the stock price and to line up a successor, since he had operated the parent company without a second-in-command for nearly six years.
Mr. Jaffe was determined to be that person.
Convinced he had found his successor, Mr. Davis named Mr. Jaffe to the new posts of president and chief operating officer.
But his deputy -- accustomed to movie-making, not managing -- wasted no time in alienating scores of employees.
Frank Mancuso, Paramount's studio chief and a 30-year company veteran, was so angered by the move that he refused to report to Mr. Jaffe, citing contract terms that said he would report only to Mr. Davis.
He filed suit; the approximately $25 million settlement that Paramount ended up paying him contributed to a $52 million charge at the company in the 1991 fiscal year, ended Oct. 31.
(The firm has since shifted to an April fiscal year.)
Rank-and-file employees weren't much happier.
One of Mr. Jaffe's first moves was to embark on a tour of operations, ordering dismissals along the way of about 400 staffers.
In its 1991 annual report, Paramount said it expected to realize more than $50 million in overhead reductions.
Yet as the ax was falling, Mr. Jaffe riled employees with displays of his own indulgence.
HG magazine ran a photo spread of his 32-acre estate in upstate New York, which he had just completely renovated with his second wife.
The article lavished attention on his priceless collection of English antiques and noted that he spared no expense; Mr. Jaffe was quoted as saying that he "could have bought a house for the price of the decorative trim."
Later, Paramount built a screening room for him there at a cost of $1.5 million.
(It belongs to Paramount, but, notes a proxy statement, Mr. Jaffe has an option to buy it at a discount should he "no longer be associated with the company.")
Mr. Jaffe also had Paramount buy a second corporate jet for $6 million or $7 million.
Insiders say he wanted it largely to ferry him between New York and the Hollywood studio, as well as to fly him to Knicks and Rangers games, since the other corporate jet was often used by executives and movie stars.
Mr. Jaffe replies that the jet wasn't for his exclusive use, and says he remembers using it only once to travel to a game.
The plane was a necessary, affordable "tool to run the company," he says.
The belt-tightening at the rest of the company didn't seem to dent the generous rewards Messrs. Jaffe and Davis reaped.
Since joining the company, Mr. Jaffe has collected a package of stock and stock options worth about $60 million -- before his costs -- under QVC's current offer.
(Mr. Davis's current stock position would be worth about $155 million.)
On top of that, Paramount has paid Mr. Jaffe at least $7 million in salary, bonuses and long-term cash compensation, as well $1 million under his old production deal with the company.
And his employment contract holds that, if a new owner boots him or if he quits for "good reason," he collects his annual salary of $760,000 through February 1997.
Despite the firings he ordered, Mr. Jaffe's relatives and acquaintances began appearing on the payroll.
In late 1991, his son, Robert, then 26, joined the studio as a $125,000-a-year vice president.
At Paramount's music publishing arm, Famous Music Publishing Cos., industry veteran Irwin Robinson, a long-time Jaffe acquaintance, was hired for the new post of chief executive.
Mr. Robinson then replaced Famous Music's president with Ira Jaffe, the Paramount president's brother, who had worked with Mr. Robinson in the past.
The hires, at combined annual salaries of $625,000, don't appear to have paid off.
Profits at Famous Music, which owns "Moon River," "Flashdance" and other tunes from Paramount movies, have plunged 50% to 75% from profit levels under previous management, say people familiar with the results.
Paramount concedes that profits are off, but says the drop is less than 50%.
Mr. Jaffe vigorously defends Paramount's hiring of Mr. Robinson, who once headed Thorn EMI PLC's music publishing company.
He says he had no role in his brother's hiring and adds that the two men have "transformed" Paramount's small music publishing operation, expanding it into contemporary music and lessening its dependence on soundtracks.
He also passionately defends hiring his son.
"I think he could produce movies tomorrow," Mr. Jaffe says, adding, "It's not my fault that I have a terrific son."
Mr. Jaffe's grating style and excesses might have been overlooked had he turned around Paramount's fortunes.
And during his first year, it looked as if he were on his way.
Propelled by the hits "Wayne's World" and "Addams Family" -- and by Jaffe-imposed cost cuts -- the entertainment group's operating profits soared to a near-record $279.6 million for fiscal 1992.
At Paramount's annual meeting in March 1992, Mr. Jaffe said Paramount's house had been put back in order for years to come.
"In all my years of being associated with studios," he told the assembled shareholders, "I've never seen one so rich in big commercial titles and commitments."
He added: "Paramount is finally positioned for the future."
His optimism, it turns out, was premature.
The success of "Wayne's World" and "Addams Family" -- both in the works before Mr. Jaffe arrived -- masked ongoing problems.
Hits continued to be far outnumbered by expensive flops, including the animated features "Cool World" and "Bebe's Kids" and the Christopher Columbus dud "1492: The Conquest of Paradise," for which Mr. Jaffe personally gave the go-ahead.
Mr. Jaffe pledged that the studio would release at least 25 pictures a year, but it hasn't yet come close.
This year, only 15 films are bound for the big screen, though he indicates another 14 will start production.
Big rivals release between 25 and 40 a year.
Hollywood executives largely fault Mr. Jaffe for the sluggishness.
Instead of focusing on larger issues such as the volume and mix of releases, say Paramount insiders, Mr. Jaffe has tended to take a hands-on role in specific projects, often getting bogged down in minutiae and contributing to delays.
He personally helped edit "Sliver," the steamy Sharon Stone movie that was a big disappointment in the U.S., although it did well overseas.
He also has been closely involved with "Beverly Hills Cop III," which was initially scheduled to come out last year but now won't appear until sometime this year.
His approach has made it difficult for him to hang on to talented managers in the entertainment division.
His most visible falling-out was with Brandon Tartikoff, the former NBC programming whiz whom he recruited himself in 1991 -- and who lasted just 15 months.
Mr. Tartikoff said he was leaving to help with the slow recovery of his young daughter, who had been hurt in a car accident.
But he also was fed up with Mr. Jaffe's meddling, people close to Mr. Tartikoff say.
They say Mr. Jaffe sometimes gave the go-ahead to projects without consulting Mr. Tartikoff.
He would take charge of casting decisions, nixing one actor chosen for a role in favor of someone he liked better.
Mr. Jaffe concedes he took a hands-on role and clashed with Mr. Tartikoff.
But he puts the blame for the low film output largely on Mr. Tartikoff, who he says didn't get enough film projects into the pipeline.
For his part, Mr. Tartikoff, now an independent producer, says the "development cupboard was bare" when he arrived.
He says he stocked it with projects that will carry the studio through the next several years.
"Getting blamed for unsuccessful films such as `1492' the flop Mr. Jaffe approved . . . and not getting credit for success such as `Indecent Proposal' and `The Firm,' which I did green-light, seems to be an unfortunate facet of being a motion-picture chairman emeritus," Mr. Tartikoff says.
Mr. Jaffe ultimately installed his long-time producing partner, Ms. Lansing, at the helm of the movie studio.
She and Mr. Jaffe have given the go-ahead to, among other projects, an already over-budget basketball flick called "Blue Chip."
They also chose its director: Ms. Lansing's husband, William Friedkin, who directed "The French Connection."
By early last year, at least one Paramount board member, James Pattison, a Canadian industrialist, had soured on Mr. Jaffe.
According to people close to the board, he felt that Mr. Jaffe wasn't up to the job, that he was stubborn and that he mistreated employees.
Reached at his Vancouver office, Mr. Pattison says he is too close to the matter and doesn't want to talk about it.
One person who has spoken out publicly is producer David Kirkpatrick.
He has sued Paramount in Los Angeles Superior Court, claiming the studio reneged on a production agreement because of a "pattern of revenge" on the part of Mr. Jaffe.
According to the suit, in 1990, Mr. Kirkpatrick, who was then head of production at Paramount, had been ordered by his bosses to slice the budget on Mr. Jaffe's and Ms. Lansing's "School Ties," a film about a Jewish student who confronts anti-Semitism at a New England prep school.
The cuts infuriated Mr. Jaffe, the suit alleges, and when he landed his current job, Mr. Kirkpatrick was fired.
Mr. Kirkpatrick was given a production agreement with Paramount, but in October, the suit says, Ms. Lansing tried to end it.
When he asked about a settlement, the suit alleges, the studio evicted him from his office on the lot and threw his furniture onto a lawn.
Paramount calls the suit "baseless" and without merit.
Although Mr. Jaffe has had a heavy hand at the studio, he has had far less to do with the Simon & Schuster publishing group.
However, author Christopher Byron says a book he wrote, in which Mr. Jaffe's wife was mentioned, was changed.
The 1992 book, "Skintight," chronicled the battle between bluejeans makers Guess? and Jordache.
Mr. Byron says Simon & Schuster asked him to excise material on one of the central characters, Melinda Marciano, the ex-wife of the Guess? founder -- and now the wife of Stanley Jaffe.
When he balked, Mr. Byron says, Simon & Schuster slashed the number of planned printings and canceled a promotional tour.
The book bombed.
A Simon & Schuster spokesman says that there was no interference by Paramount corporate headquarters and that editors asked for changes because they identified libel issues concerning Ms. Marciano.
He says the book received "the normal promotional and publicity efforts."
Mr. Jaffe says he didn't interfere with the book and hasn't read it.
More than almost anything else, Paramount insiders say, sports seem to dominate Mr. Jaffe's attention, especially Paramount's Madison Square Garden unit, which owns the Manhattan arena as well as the Knicks and the Rangers.
When working at the studio, Mr. Jaffe routinely has had his secretary interrupt meetings to hand him hockey scores scribbled on paper.
Executives recall Mr. Jaffe, a former high-school hockey player, gleefully describing how he borrowed the skates of Rangers star Mark Messier to take a turn on the ice.
Mr. Jaffe makes frequent use of the Garden's "Suite 200," a wood-paneled V.I.P. room decorated with Leroy Neiman paintings.
From a courtside seat alongside such pals as actor Michael Douglas, Mr. Jaffe often can be seen wildly cheering for the Knicks and trading high-fives with center Patrick Ewing, whom the team, with Mr. Jaffe's approval, re-signed with a $33 million contract.
"I go to games because I love it," Mr. Jaffe says.
"I have better seats today."
Mr. Jaffe doesn't limit his involvement to courtside, though.
In 1991, he muscled out the president of the Garden operations and quickly installed himself on the National Hockey League's board of governors as the Rangers' representative.
Once he flew to Montreal for a week to try (unsuccessfully) to woo star Eric Lindross to the Rangers.
One Garden executive says that Mr. Jaffe treated the sports operations more as a toy than as a business, and wanted a championship at any cost.
Mr. Jaffe says that he treats the unit as he treats any business, and doesn't spend an inordinate amount of time on sports.
He also notes that both the Knicks and the Rangers are championship-caliber teams.
Mr. Jaffe even has some hopes that the teams may be his salvation as the messy fight for Paramount nears its conclusion.
A few months ago, at a dinner with Mr. Davis and Viacom officials, he broached the idea of buying the teams if the Viacom-Paramount deal goes through.
Mr. Jaffe says he brought it up only because he had been approached about leading an investor group to do so.
Still, he admits, "I would want to see if it's possible."
He pauses for a moment, then adds: "Yes.
I would be interested in it as a business proposition."
