The Clinton budget, like all budgets, will contain funding for an array of entitlement programs.
Too bad Congress won't do anything beyond spinning the dials on the funding levels.
A real-world look would likely turn up a lot of perverse outcomes from these efforts at doing good.
Example No. 1: Last year, more than 250,000 people collected federal disability payments of $1.4 billion simply because they were addicted to drugs or alcohol.
But many of them weren't adequately checked to make sure they were in treatment or weren't buying booze and drugs with the tax dollars.
A just-published General Accounting Office study has found that 172,000 substance abusers on disability weren't subject to treatment or payment safeguards.
Recipients are supposed to get treatment and have their checks paid to a friend or relative to curb abuse.
But there doesn't seem to be much incentive to worry about that.
Federal guidelines say "a substance addiction in and of itself" can be grounds for granting disability checks that average $434 a month.
And a federal appeals court ruled just this month that a heroin addict who sold drugs to support his habit can't be denied disability benefits because of his drug dealing.
Bob Cote, director of a private Denver homeless shelter called Step 13, says Washington is "helping people commit suicide on the installment plan."
He showed us Skid Row billboards put up by lawyers that invite addicts and winos to apply for disability.
The lawyers collect their fee from the large back payments the government doles out after an application is finally approved.
Mr. Cote says he knows of dozens of alcoholics who have their checks sent to local liquor stores or bars, which run a tab for them.
Indeed, disability payments can give alcoholics a license to keep drinking.
"As long as you're an alcoholic you continue to receive the checks," says Dr. Ernie Proud, a California psychiatrist who treats alcohol abuse and estimates only 1% of the cases he sees need to be on disability.
It's clear that many well-intentioned entitlement programs not only don't work, our legal system ensures they can't work.
Mr. Cote, who accepts no government funding for his tough-love shelter, says private efforts that encourage those helped to take responsibility for their own lives are a partial answer.
"Show me a government handout, and I'll show you something that encourages irresponsibility," he says.
That's a hard knock on entitlements, but it deserves an answer.
