Reading Irving Kristol's unabashed brief on behalf of a renewed Russian empire ("Russia's Destiny," editorial page, Feb. 11), I was reminded of Mr. Kristol's appearance as a speaker at a memorable meeting of the Committee for the Free World in Washington, D.C., in April 1990.
To the dismay of most of the audience, Mr. Kristol argued against the West's support of Lithuania and the other republics in their struggle for democracy and independence.
Ironically, it was a Russian, former prisoner of conscience Vladimir Bukovsky, who led the charge against Mr. Kristol that day, arguing eloquently for Western support of the non-Russian independence movements.
The firestorm of objections to Mr. Kristol from the audience ended when Midge Decter brought the session to a close, remarking that "I think Irving has embarrassed himself enough today."
Although much in the world has changed, Mr. Kristol's position has not.
It can be reduced to the thesis that, while the new Russia may be nondemocratic, authoritarian and imperialist, it deserves support because it is Russian, and because Russians have a vision of themselves ruling the "near abroad."
Those former republics that were brought to near ruin in the last round of Russian imperialism will (in Mr. Kristol's words) "just have to live with it."
When will Russia's supporters, including Mr. Kristol, learn that perpetuating the notion of Russia's imperialist destiny harms Russia most of all?
As long as an empire serves as Russia's economic support system and pretext for authoritarian control, the issues of democracy and internal reform that cripple Russia will never be addressed.
Consistent with this position, Mr. Kristol disavows both aid to market-oriented economic reform in Russia and support for the fledgling democracies on Russia's periphery.
It would be difficult to conceive of a policy more injurious to the welfare of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union than that espoused by Mr. Kristol.
Patience T. Huntwork
The benign assessment by Mr. Kristol of Russia's strategic importance to global security is as startling and compelling a call for American isolationism and disengagement as we have seen since the days leading up to World War II.
Suggesting that Russian nationalism has a limited imperialist dimension is to belittle what has been the only consistent thread through successive czarist, Communist and post-Communist regimes, namely ethnic and geopolitical imperialism.
The process of containing Russian imperialism has been a major focus of Western diplomatic and strategic doctrine, since well before the first world war, through the Nazi-U.S.S.R. nonaggression pact, to Potsdam, the Berlin Airlift, NATO, the Cuban Missile Crisis and beyond.
The notion that Russian imperialism focuses exclusively on the "near abroad" would be a cruel irony to nations in the Baltic, Southeast Asia, the Mideast, Central Europe, Africa and the Americas that have either been directly subjugated by, or faced terrorism or threat from, Soviet client states, neighbors, proxies or funded insurgences.
The danger of this complacent view is that it not only feeds those who would destroy Western defense capacity in the U.S. and among her allies, (including liberals, socialists and neo-conservatives here in Canada), but it provides an intellectual underpinning for the kind of disengagement the historic NATO failure to extend full membership to Eastern European supplicants underlines.
As mother Russia stoutly indicates its determination to defend ethnic Russians in the C.I.S., as Russian units open fire on a Japanese fishing trawler in disputed Asian waters, as Russian scientists who believe Russia has not fully complied with gas warfare agreements are put on trial -- it is a signal of serious and dangerous weakness to have denied NATO membership to nations that have embraced democracy and freedom at serious economic cost to their people and short-term commercial prospects.
To deny them membership in an alliance that provided mutual protection from invasion is to admit that any fresh strain of Russian imperialism can take as a given the new democracies of Eastern Europe, their former client states, the Baltics and the old Soviet Union constituency.
The genius of the common stand taken by President Reagan, Prime Minister Thatcher, President Kohl and Prime Minister Mulroney -- along with other NATO leadership -- was that it erected clear hurdles, both strategic and economic to continued Soviet militarism.
An enlightened and often inspired Soviet leadership made the right choices.
The notion that removing all hurdles and diminishing Western preparedness would somehow inspire a Russian departure from all the forces of Russian history is not only counterintuitive, but well beyond the realm of any real world assessment of the forces now at play in Central Europe or Russian politics.
This is not about the Russian people, or any related demonology.
The people of Russia are as humane, decent and nonaggressive as any; it is about the dynamics of Russian politics, the early and fragile stage of their democratic development and the need to find external enemies when internal dissatisfaction continues to mount.
I am sending Mr. Kristol's article to my relatives and friends in Prague so that they may read about one viewpoint current in the U.S.
They will be interested to hear that, as Russia is revamping its economy, it "will move to confer something like `protectorate' status on those 14 other new nations. . . ."
The famous Lord Runciman went to Prague in the summer of 1938 to help determine British policy toward Czechoslovakia.
This culminated in the Munich agreement.
My relatives and friends in Prague will be exhilarated that they will be spared a visit by a latter-day Lord Runciman, as Mr. Kristol has already decided that a "protectorate" is again looming on the horizon.
R.AA Keisman, M.D.
It seems clear that most of the people in these 14 countries would much rather flounder with their own problems than have them resolved through dominating force from either East or West.
People such as those in the Baltic states and the Ukraine have brilliant historical pasts as independent entities when the Russians were living under the most primitive conditions.
The well-civilized Poles helped defeat the Turks in the second siege of Vienna in the 17th century, and thereby spared Western Europe from possible Turkish domination.
As for the Muslim lands, the brilliance of their civilization prior to and even after the devastation wrought by Genghis Khan are matters of historical record.
This is no time for our country to encourage the continuation of an enforced form of colonialism that has run its full historical course.
As for the Russians who have immigrated as masters in these occupied countries, they have long been worried about their minority status, made increasingly so by the high birth rates of the indigenous populations.
Their best role would seem to lie in becoming constructive citizens in their new homes in the American fashion.
