The European Union signed an accord for trade and political cooperation with Ukraine, the trade bloc's first such pact with a former Soviet republic.
Under the agreement, the 12-member EU will grant Ukraine favorable trade status and remove quotas on Ukrainian imports, and Ukraine will remove hurdles to EU imports and investment.
The pact also allows EU companies operating in Ukraine to use hard currency.
The accord is part of an EU drive to strengthen links with Eastern Europe, with some of the region's nations possibly joining the EU at the end of the decade.
While the agreement doesn't currently offer Ukraine the prospect of membership, it provides for an eventual free-trade zone with the EU.
Separately, the EU granted $1.43 million in aid for victims of the Chernobyl nuclear accident in Ukraine eight years ago.
The aid will help furnish hospitals in Ukraine and Belarus with thyroid-cancer detection equipment and medicine.
Russia will publish a new map of the country without the deliberate distortions Soviet authorities once used to mislead the West, the Segodnya newspaper reported.
The map, together with a new atlas, will reflect the political changes that have taken place since the 1991 Soviet breakup.
In the previous edition, issued in 1983, Soviet authorities required geographers to distort important roads and omit cities and towns built around strategic defense facilities.
The new map work is complicated because borders between former Soviet republics, which had only administrative significance in the past, now have to be clearly marked.
Indonesia started up two coal-fired power-generating plants with a total capacity of 800 megawatts.
The new facilities are expected to ease electricity shortages in Java and the tourist island of Bali, where some industrial projects have been delayed because of insufficient power supply.
The World Bank, which financed the plants, has agreed to a $4.1 billion loan for 21 electricity projects in Indonesia, which plans to double its electricity-generating capacity in five years.
Zambia received pledges of $1.14 billion in aid for 1994 from 11 countries and praise for its massive overhaul of a stagnant economy.
The 28-month-old government has slashed Zambia's annual inflation rate from 284% in early 1993 to 10% at year end and turned the economy from almost complete state control to a market-dominated system.
The pledges, coordinated through the World Bank, meet Zambia's full request for assistance for the first time.
The aid includes $285 million for development projects and food aid, $590 million for balance-of-payment supports and $260 million for debt relief.
Workers in major Brazilian cities demonstrated against salary losses under the government's anti-inflation plan.
More than 5,000 civil servants marched in Brasilia; in Sao Paulo, the country's economic center, a work stoppage by bus and subway conductors left thousands of commuters stranded during the morning rush hour.
Protesters oppose the government's economic stabilization plan, which calls for salaries to be tied to a new price index.
The plan, which has the support of leading business groups, aims to slow inflation, now running at more than 40% a month.
Czech Radio is issuing an 18-minute compact-disk recording of President Clinton playing the saxophone at Prague's Reduta Jazz Club in January.
The CD is titled "Two Presidents' Jam Session," as Czech President Vaclav Havel was in the audience.
The gig includes renditions of "My Funny Valentine" and "Summertime," which Mr. Clinton performed for Mr. Havel and 75 of his artistic friends.
They responded with a standing ovation.
Vietnam is combining thousands of small, ailing state-owned companies into larger industrial groups while shifting business planning to company managers from government ministries.
The resulting consolidations, privatizations and failures have slashed the number of state-owned enterprises to about 4,000 from 6,000 at the start of the year, and 15,000 several years ago.
The process is expected to continue for two years.
Equity shares in some of the combined companies already have been offered to Vietnamese investors.
The government, which hopes to start a stock market in 1997 or 1998, intends to expand share ownership by offering stock to workers within the companies, then to the general public and finally to foreigners.
The chief catalyst for the change is the passage of separate bankruptcy and commercial laws by the national assembly in December.
Foreign investors, especially banks, consider establishment of a bankruptcy law a prerequisite to lending.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Turkey ordered oil tankers longer than 200 yards to sail through the Bosporus only during daylight, and at reduced speeds.
The move follows a collision and fire last week that closed the strait, linking the Mediterranean and Black seas, for five days. . . .
The European Union's annual economic report for 1993 says interest rates are still too high in member states whose economies are in recession.
