WHEN A HEADHUNTER calls, watch out.
You can make some major blunders that might cost you an important career move.
Look at what happened to John Sculley, Apple Computer's former chairman.
Earlier this month he abruptly resigned as chairman of troubled Spectrum Information Technologies.
Mr. Sculley claimed he hadn't known about some accounting problems and a Securities and Exchange Commission investigation before he joined the tiny wireless-technology concern in October.
The lesson: Investigate a company very thoroughly before you accept a tempting job offer, career experts suggest.
"For Sculley not to have known some of those issues before going in with Spectrum is surprising," says Terry Ebert, managing director of Ayers Group, an executive recruiting and outplacement firm in New York.
Yet many executives conduct more research on stock picks for their personal portfolios than they do about a prospective employer, Mr. Ebert adds.
It can be tempting to take a new position without closely analyzing the company beforehand.
Managers keen to change jobs or fearful of a layoff often don't ask a lot of detailed questions because they really want to make the switch, notes Carl Menk, chairman of New York recruiters Canny, Bowen.
But in today's competitive job market, the thoroughness of your background checks may decide whether you win a senior-level post.
Anthony W.G. Lord, a managing director of A.T. Kearney Executive Search, a division of A.T. Kearney, says few things turn off a chief executive more "than when he asks a job candidate, `What do you think of the company's announcement last week?' and the candidate replies, `What announcement?'"
Mr. Ebert advises that you practice extensive "due diligence" before accepting a job offer.
Conduct a thorough check of articles, legal briefs and investment analysts' reports about the company.
CREDIT BUREAUS can be a good source of information about a private business.
Industry trade groups, the attorney general in the state where the company is based and government agencies may be able to tell you about pending regulatory or disciplinary actions.
If it's a public company, examine annual reports for the past five years to uncover other evidence of recurring financial, management or legal problems.
For example, Spectrum's general counsel Christopher Franco maintains that Mr. Sculley could have learned about the company's accounting problems by reading its quarterly SEC filings.
A spokesman for Mr. Sculley replies, "He did everything he thought was necessary at the time.
In retrospect, he might have done things differently."
Mr. Ebert suggests that you also meet with would-be peers during the interviewing process "to assess the company's management style, business ethics and morale."
The chief information officer at a major insurance company didn't do enough of this kind of homework before he took the No. 2 position at a smaller insurer undergoing a turnaround.
He and the chief executive officer soon clashed over their management styles.
Within 18 months, the newcomer was out of the job.
If the ousted executive "had simply done some background checks on the CEO, he would have unearthed the mismatch in management styles," Mr. Ebert notes.
Executives can blunder by assuming there won't be a careful check of them.
More companies are doing a fuller job of investigating job candidates' claims of prior compensation, primarily by asking for individuals' W-2 income statements.
Recruiters say executives often inflate their compensation by 10% to 20% -- or more.
Contenders sometimes explain they've simply figured in the value of their perks and business travel.
SUCH CREATIVE mathematics can alter a hiring decision.
"Some clients, depending on the situation, will say the person is terrific and decide, `Let's go ahead,'" says Kearney's Mr. Lord.
"Others will say there's absolutely no way they'll hire the person."
Many headhunters report they're also seeing more job seekers lying about their credentials.
Christopher Polson, a Minneapolis recruiter, recently verified the resumes of 11 semifinalists for a $200,000 top financial post at a major construction concern.
He found that two had misrepresented their college backgrounds.
One man claimed an M.B.A. degree when he only had a bachelor's.
The other candidate said he had an accounting degree when it was a business degree.
"What a stupid thing to do by people of accomplishment," he says.
Neither man got the job.
Some candidates also fudge by not coming clean about a prior dismissal.
And with laid-off executives often getting use of offices and secretaries through outplacement concerns, it isn't easy for headhunters to quickly determine whether an executive is actually unemployed.
Though risky, such concealment is understandable.
You enhance your chances of being hired -- especially for more money -- if you are working.
But savvy recruiters almost certainly will discover the truth.
One way is by asking: When was the last day you worked?
If you obfuscate, you will only raise doubts in a recruiter's mind.
"Don't play games.
Tell us about any warts you have," counsels E. Pendleton James, a New York headhunter.
After all, he adds, "what is a wart to you may not be to me."
