When China's leaders threw their public tantrum in front of Secretary of State Warren Christopher last week in Beijing, they allowed us a look at their real opinion of American motives and character.
The Chinese, it is clear, think that, despite our rhetoric about laws and rights, we will tolerate their behavior because we are so eager to reap the benefits of trade with them.
Yet that huge Chinese market beckoning on the horizon may be a mirage.
Every day, American producers of software, video games and other intellectual property see Chinese offenses that threaten one of the basic conditions on which world trade rests: the recognition that property cannot be stolen and promises must be kept.
In China, U.S. products are being counterfeited on a massive scale.
Worse, the pirating of video-game products is done not by outlaws but by the Chinese government itself.
Most sales at my firm, Nintendo of America, come from video games developed by independent American companies.
These games are marvels of imagination and ingenuity.
It takes an average of two years and a million-dollar investment to create just one of them.
Like other American software companies, Nintendo must continually fight foreign counterfeiting in courts around the world and through trade talks.
Taiwan has historically been a major source of counterfeit video game products, but Taiwanese companies are moving operations to the Chinese mainland.
There they operate more easily, and add to the problem in China.
In a 1992 Memorandum of Understanding with the U.S., China explicitly promised to provide effective deterrence against the infringement of intellectual property rights.
It has not done so.
We estimate that 20 million counterfeit Nintendo hardware units have been sold in China within the past few years.
Assuming -- conservatively -- that each hardware owner has also purchased just one three-game video cartridge for $20, Nintendo of America and its American affiliates have lost $1.2 billion (counting both hardware and video games) to Chinese counterfeiting.
More realistically, we are losing several times this figure to the video pirates.
The Tianjin New Star Electronic Co., based in the Beijing area, is one of the largest Chinese counterfeiters.
In the summer of 1993, New Star sold more than 300 video game titles.
All appear to be counterfeits, stolen from Nintendo and affiliated American companies.
A New York-based American arm of New Star's operation is actually seeking capital in U.S. markets to expand its counterfeiting in China and abroad.
New Star is unambiguously controlled by the Chinese government.
The company president is director of a department in the Ministry of Electronics and Machinery.
The staff is made up of ministry employees.
The ministry receives 20% of New Star's profits.
In light of the government's active role in the counterfeit video trade, it is inevitable that software makers fighting Chinese theft of their property get virtually no official help.
After the 1992 Memorandum of Understanding, China did enact a modern copyright law and subscribed to the Berne and Universal Copyright conventions.
But China has no border control system to protect intellectual property.
Its grandly named Administrative Authority for Software Copyright has been given no enforcement capability.
The country's new National Copyright Administration will not accept software infringement cases for enforcement action because the Chinese government is still deciding whether to give jurisdiction over these matters to the Ministry of Electronics -- the same unit that controls New Star.
Nintendo, along with many independent American developers of Nintendo games and owners of intellectual property used in the games, has recently asked the office of the U.S. Trade Representative to use its "Special 301" powers under the 1988 Trade Act to designate China a Priority Foreign Country, vulnerable to retaliatory trade sanctions if it does not stop the theft of intellectual property.
We do not take this step happily.
We want to enter the Chinese market via free competition, not official threats.
Our products thrive in climates where trade is most open and least constrained by government edicts, not in an atmosphere of retaliation and sanctions.
We want to participate in China's economy not just by selling our goods there but by investing and manufacturing there.
Yet we will never have a fair chance if the Chinese government refuses to recognize our ownership of these products and steadily acts to destroy their value.
This attitude of contempt is not only offensive, it makes China a dangerous place to do business as well.
Piracy has always been a threat to international trade, but it is especially so now.
Thanks to technology's miracles, the products of the postindustrial age -- like computer-driven games and information services -- are susceptible to piracy in ways that manufactured products never were.
What is more, a big part of their value rests in the "invisible" intellectual capital that was spent to create them.
But intellectual property is every bit as much in need of protection as property of other kinds.
The issue is one that our political leaders must not avoid addressing as they reach a verdict on whether the Chinese can be trusted to meet their obligations as partners in this trade.
Mr. Lincoln is chairman of Nintendo of America Inc.
