Sales of new cars and trucks in the U.S. surged 19.9% in February from a year earlier to the highest seasonally adjusted sales pace in more than two years.
Despite extended periods of miserable weather in many parts of the country -- something that worried some auto-industry officials -- Americans bought 1,150,648 cars and light trucks, both imported and North American-built, in February.
That was equivalent to a seasonally adjusted sales pace of 15.5 million vehicles a year, well above the industry's 14.8 million pace in the previous three months.
In February 1993, the sales rate was 12.9 million vehicles a year.
General Motors Corp. and Chrysler Corp., buoyed by strong gains in both cars and light trucks, each seized more market share, at the expense of Ford Motor Co. and the Japanese auto makers.
GM's market share jumped 1.8 percentage points in February to 34.5%, and Chrysler's share rose to 15.3% from 15%.
Ford's share skidded 1.6 points to 25.2%.
Even so, Ford's sales rose 13% to 289,794 units, and Ross Roberts, the general manager of the company's Ford marketing division, was crowing about record truck sales and strong car deliveries.
"We were shocked" at the market's strength, considering the weather, Mr. Roberts said.
"The buying attitude is awfully good right now . . . .
The truck industry is just absolutely on fire.
It's growing beyond our wildest expectations."
Sales of minivans, sport-utility vehicles and light trucks rose 23.8% in February from a year earlier, and sales of passenger cars edged up 4.1%.
The boom in truck sales has forced Detroit to add more production capacity for light trucks.
The Big Three are trying to keep up with growing truck demand, but want to do it without building new assembly plants.
"We have been playing catch-up with trucks for the last 12 months," said J. Michael Losh, GM's group vice president of sales and marketing.
"We've been adding truck production every month since then." for sale in the U.S. Totals include all vehicle sales reported in the period except tourist-delivery sales of imported models. year earlier.
Percentage differences based on daily sales rate rather than sales volume.
