HOW VULNERABLE is the IRS to being cheated by sophisticated crooks?
Members of a House Ways and Means subcommittee, chaired by Rep. Pickle (D., Texas), will raise this question with IRS officials at a public hearing tomorrow morning.
Concern has mounted since a report on growing taxpayer fraud was issued last year by the General Accounting Office, a congressional watchdog agency.
Some tax experts fear the IRS is especially vulnerable to fraud from taxpayers filing electronically.
The IRS hired an outsider to study the issue, but hasn't released the report yet.
The GAO report says the IRS found twice as many returns involving fraudulent refund claims last year as the prior year.
But it is unclear how much of that increase came from more fraud and how much from improved monitoring.
"What does seem clear is that the harder IRS looks, the more fraud it finds," the GAO says.
At tomorrow's hearing, two men convicted of filing fraudulent tax returns will give details of what they did.
TRUSTING THE POST OFFICE to deliver tax returns to the IRS may be risky.
What happens if Postal Service gremlins devour an important return or letter?
Don't expect much IRS sympathy if a dispute later arises and the taxpayer has no proof of having mailed a return or check on time, lawyers warn.
Thus, many people routinely get registered return receipts.
But IRS officials say that slows return processing and proves only that the taxpayer mailed an envelope, not whether anything was inside.
So, to be extra safe, Valerie Pearsall Roberts, a lawyer at Wood, Williams, Rafalsky & Harris in New York, advises enclosing an extra copy of the tax return or letter, along with a cover letter.
Ask the IRS to stamp the extra copy and return it in your stamped, self-addressed envelopes.
"I do it all the time, and I've never had any trouble," she says.
Robert L. Johnson, a New Hampshire accountant, suggests writing the return receipt number on the tax return or letter as it is being mailed.
Those forms generally are available at postal counters.
COMEDY CENTRAL: A federal appeals-court judge roasts the IRS for its bloopers.
"This case makes plain the proposition that Kellogg does not have a monopoly on flakes," writes Judge Irving L. Goldberg in U.S. vs. Walter Kellogg, trustee for West Texas Marketing Corp. in Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceedings.
"Indeed, it is Kellogg's opponent, the United States Government acting through the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS") which has committed two scoops of errors, allowing a case which should have been a snap to dissolve into a series of crackles and pops."
The judge continues: "In the serial antics of this case, the government has repeatedly failed to determine the actual tax refund owed to the debtor, West Texas Marketing Corporation, and has sugar frosted the refund, overpaying by a considerable amount."
But even though the government made "many mistakes," the judge said civil procedure rules allow correction of clerical errors without time limit.
Thus, the court vacated a lower-court ruling and ordered the case to be reviewed again.
TALKING TURKEY: A Treasury official will ask Turkey about a Ralston Purina executive's beef.
The company complained that a "substantial portion" of the animal-feed industry in Turkey isn't paying a value-added tax on ingredients and finished products.
THE IRS SEEKS FEES for taxpayer services.
Its fiscal 1995 budget request calls for an $18 to $20 charge for paying taxes in installments, and an $8 charge for a direct-deposit refund confirmation.
Fees for copies of old returns: $12, up from $4.25.
BUDGETARY RESTRAINT?
Congress's Joint Tax Committee needs a 7.4% increase in its fiscal 1995 budget to more than $6.1 million, says House Ways and Means Chairman Rostenkowski (D., Ill.).
That includes pay raises for about 75 staffers, as well as equipment and supplies.
COMPANIES STRUGGLE to figure out how to react to a startling IRS defeat.
A recent federal appeals-court decision raises tricky questions for many companies.
Albertson's, a company based in Boise, Idaho, agreed to defer pay to several executives and a director.
It said part of that pay represented interest and deducted it each year, even though it won't pay it for many years.
The appeals court, rebuffing the IRS, sided with the company.
Some companies with similar plans now plan to file for refunds, but others fear that would only be asking for big trouble from the IRS.
"Everyone I've talked to thinks the Albertson's decision is wrong," says Peter L. Faber of the law firm of Kaye Scholer.
"It's bad law."
The IRS probably will ask for a rehearing.
If the answer is no, the IRS may challenge other companies in other regions, hoping eventually to take the issue to the Supreme Court.
Or the IRS might tax executives currently on their deferred interest.
Or Congress might change the law.
Lawyers urge most clients to take no action until the IRS makes its next move.
BRIEFS: Thanks for reminding us: The Tax Foundation says all the money the average U.S. taxpayer makes for two hours and 41 minutes of each workday goes to pay federal, state and local taxes. . . .
Nora Daly, a payroll-tax analyst at Pacific Bell, is the new "chair" of the IRS Commissioner's Advisory Group, an influential group of non-IRS tax experts who make policy recommendations to the IRS.
