In a policy change that will broaden the flow of space-launch technology into the U.S., the Clinton administration has decided to allow imports of equipment from Israel derived from Israel's ballistic-missile program.
According to a State Department official, the earlier prohibition against the Israeli technology was dropped because the administration concluded that such imports involve "no proliferation risks."
U.S. companies now may import Israel's space-launch vehicle, called the Shavit, which is capable of placing small satellites into orbit, the official said.
Some proliferation experts criticize the change because the Shavit is the civilian version of the Jericho II missile, which was developed secretly in the 1970s to carry nuclear warheads.
Improved versions have a range of 3,000 miles.
The missile is thought to have been developed, in part, from U.S. and French technology.
"If they the Israelis can commercialize the missile, it cuts down their per-unit costs.
What we're the U.S. doing is putting dollars into a proliferant country's missile program for the first time," said Gary Milhollin, director of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control.
The deal that provoked the policy shift involves Atlantic Research Corp., a unit of Sequa Corp. of New York.
According to Israeli diplomats, who asked not to be identified, Atlantic Research is importing a so-called apogee kick motor from Rafael Armament Development Authority, which is part of Israel's Defense Ministry.
The motor, part of the Shavit equipment, is considered sensitive technology because it gives a satellite or other rocket payload, such as a warhead, the final, precise boost on its journey.
According to the Israelis, Atlantic Research is buying the rights to manufacture the motor in the U.S. under Israeli license.
A spokeswoman for Atlantic Research said the U.S. policy shift will give U.S. companies access to Israeli technology that is "well-suited to a new class of small, commercial satellite launch vehicles."
She said the company has working agreements with two Israeli companies that manufacture the equipment, Rafael and TAAS Israel Industries.
The change in U.S. import policy was conveyed to Israel's prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin, in a letter from President Clinton on Jan. 16.
The State Department official said the shift might permit imports of space technology from other countries.
Currently, the U.S. imports very little space technology.
However, it is planning to import rocket motors and other items from Russia as part of a collaboration on the space station project.
The Shavit deal, according to an Israeli diplomat, will eventually allow Israel to compete in the lucrative U.S. space-launch market.
Henry Sokolski, who worked on missile proliferation problems for the Bush administration, said Israel's campaign to sell its space-launch technology in the U.S. began at least three years ago and has provoked much internal opposition in the state and defense departments.
"This has a policy profile that I don't think will be welcome to diplomats who are trying to prevent the proliferation of missile technology in the Middle East," asserted Mr. Sokolski, who says the new policy runs against the spirit of the Missile Technology Control Regime, under which the U.S. and several industrial nations are attempting to contain the spread of missile-related items.
By subsidizing the missile program of Israel, which isn't a member of the group, the U.S. appears to be "undermining the policy," he said.
