Los Angeles -- "Picasso and the Weeping Women: The Years of Marie-Therese Walter & Dora Maar" might sound like the name of a new soap opera.
And in fact it is: a veritable melodrama played out in the galleries of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
The show puts a Hollywood spin on Picasso, focusing on the short but schmaltzy interlude when nothing seemed to interest him more than depicting his lovers' tear-streaked faces.
In this city of extravaganzas, how fitting that Picasso's oil-on-canvas mourners have arrived as if on cue along with the earthquake and mudslides.
You may think of Picasso as art's colossal cubist, the man who smashed the history of art into a thousand tilting shards.
But forget what you learned at college.
Today's culture is demanding that we see him as someone new: art's leading male louse.
"Picasso and the Weeping Women" wraps feminist ideology in L.A. tinsel to give us an art show that seems closer to a precis off the desk of Mike Ovitz.
In the course of his long, prodigious career, Picasso never lost his talent for reducing women to tears.
But he painted them crying for only a limited period.
In 1937, the year of his gray-hued epic, "Guernica," he produced 60-odd works in various media depicting his mistresses in unmistakable distress, tears gushing forth, lips aquiver, handkerchiefs clutched against properly fragmented cubist faces.
This one brief lachrymal moment is the theme of the L.A. show (which was organized by the art historian Judi Freeman and stays up until May 1, before traveling to the Metropolitan Museum in New York and the Art Institute of Chicago).
Why did Picasso feel compelled to paint women crying?
The motif was many things to him, including a convenient symbol for the suffering unleashed by the Spanish Civil War.
Several of his studies for "Guernica" depict sobbing peasant women, their heads as round and stocky as potatoes, tears flowing down along their cheeks in a rich black river of pencil.
Interestingly, however, Picasso eventually decided to delete his weeping women from the finished "Guernica," as if the image was too achingly intimate -- too much like his everyday life -- to fit into his exalted political scheme.
Instead, he saved the image for a series of more personal paintings begun immediately after finishing "Guernica."
Among the best is the smallish, jewel-like "Weeping Woman," now owned by the Tate Gallery in London.
The painting shows a dark-haired woman having a good cry, her face as jagged and richly colored as broken glass.
There can be no pretending that she belongs to the cast of aggrieved peasants created for "Guernica."
Rather she's a suave Parisian, complete with a fashionable red hat.
A woman wearing such a hat can be crying over one thing only: the disappointments of romantic love.
From one work to the next, we see the two women who then figured prominently in Picasso's erotic life: Dora Maar, an accomplished and articulate photographer, and Marie-Therese Walter, the blond, rounded, sleepy-eyed mistress who preceded Maar by a decade.
Sometimes Picasso combined their features into a single hybrid figure, as in the "Weeping Woman" etching shown here, in which one hand is perfectly manicured down to its razor-sharp nails and the other hand, curiously, has bitten-off nails and a softer presence.
The weeping head cries into a handkerchief, a robust, billowing form that seems to almost blossom, while the woman holding it looks crumpled.
Picasso was hardly the first artist to feel inspired by the sight of a crying woman.
Many of his Spanish predecessors explored the theme; the mater dolorosa (sorrowful mother of Christ) was a popular subject in 16th- and 17th-century Spanish painting.
But Picasso's doleful women, of course, aren't mourning Jesus.
They're mourning Pablo, in his mind another savior.
Coincidentally, a second exhibition currently in Los Angeles -- the retrospective of Roy Lichtenstein's work at the Museum of Contemporary Art -- also abounds with pictures of crying women.
Many of Mr. Lichtenstein's classic pop paintings from the early 1960s show comic-book blondes weeping their eyes out.
Though the pictures come layered with the artist's trademark irony, they underscore a fundamental truth: Most men's idea of a romantic heroine is a woman who's not just charming and fun, but -- more importantly -- willing to die of grief.
How else to explain Anna Karenina ending up under the wheels of a train?
At any rate, the installation of "Picasso and the Weeping Women" is meant to accentuate the human drama implicit in the paintings.
The walls have been painted a dusky purple, and the lights are turned down so low you keep thinking you forgot to remove your sunglasses at the door.
The whole thing looks like a bordello.
The benches are curvy and so are the walls; the paintings are hung on long, gently arching partitions presumably meant to echo the sinuous forms of Picasso's art (and of his mistresses as well).
In truth, these curves have nothing to do with Picasso, who in his work always set his curves off against straight lines and angles.
But then the question of artistic achievement does not weigh heavily in this show.
The Weeping Women are not the Demoiselles d'Avignon.
They don't represent a radical breakthrough, but rather a minor and maudlin footnote to Picasso's work of the '30s, when his color ripened and his forms became pleasantly stylized.
Presumably, the show was organized less to showcase great pictures than the legendary ladies who appear in them; it goes against traditional scholarship on Picasso by giving a starring role to his muses.
Still, judged on its own feminist terms, the show is a flop.
By isolating paintings of helpless women weeping into hankies, it defines womanhood as victimhood, and falls prey to sexism's oldest cliche.
And, as if construing Picasso's famous sadism as an act of heartwarming romance, the show opened on Valentine's Day.
Still, one doesn't want to sound overly dismissive.
Just think how great Lena Olin would be as Dora Maar.
