The word about some recent mergers seems to be getting around awfully fast.
Target companies in four major deals in the past month have seen their stock prices climb sharply before any merger announcements were made, suggesting that material inside information is being abused by people in the know.
Martin Marietta Corp.'s announcment yesterday that it is launching a $55-a-share tender offer to acquire fellow defense contractor Grumman Corp. sent the target company's stock soaring $14.25, or 36%, to close at $54.125 on the New York Stock Exchange.
But that gain came only after Grumman's shares had climbed 8.5% Friday on nearly four times the stock's average daily volume on the Big Board.
New York Stock Exchange officials said they are looking into the pre-announcement activity in Grumman's shares, emphasizing that the review is a routine matter triggered by the heavy volume and price movement in the securities.
"It looks like takeovers are coming back.
Whenever we get share-price movement prior to the public announcement, the exchange takes a look at the situation," said a Big Board surveillance official.
Another sign that inside information may have leaked out was a huge increase in Grumman's option volume at the Chicago Board Options Exchange.
"We really noticed the activity, starting late Wednesday, continuing Thursday, and reaching a peak Friday afternoon," said Stephen Taylor, a CBOE trader with Lakota Trading and a market maker in Grumman options.
"Average daily option volume is 100 contracts a day -- on Friday we traded over 1,000 contracts, most of them call options," or bets that the stock would rise, Mr. Taylor said.
"Prudential Securities and Charles Schwab were the big buyers," of the call options he said.
"Those two firms stood out."
Prudential and Schwab officials couldn't be reached for comment late yesterday.
Mr. Taylor said pit traders will file an `unusual activity report' with the CBOE Tuesday.
At Martin Marietta, a spokesman said news of the proposed Grumman acquisition "was closely held within Martin Marietta."
The only thing that could explain the surge in Grumman's stock price "was a buy recommendation from Merrill Lynch on Grumman Thursday," the spokesman said.
A Grumman spokesman said the company had no idea why the stock had moved earlier.
Trading on material, non-public information -- such as knowledge about an imminent takeover announcement -- is illegal.
The New York Stock Exchange, American Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq Stock Market all maintain equity-surveillance departments to detect illegal insider activity.
Enforcement of civil insider-trading laws lies with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which has equity-surveillance operations of its own.
While share prices can rise on a host of factors, such as bullish earnings forecasts by analysts, prior to a material announcement, the recent rash of pre-announcement activity is causing concern among regulators.
SEC officials, as is their custom, declined to comment on any of the recent run-ups in the stock of target companies.
But in general, such price increases are "a source of concern," said Thomas Newkirk, SEC Associate Enforcement Director.
"If there are people trading on inside information, they're going to be sorry."
The recent mergers and acquisitions are providing familiar territory for the SEC, which garnered many headlines -- and settlements -- in the merger heyday of the early 1980s.
"In the late 1980s and early 1990s, a lot of insider trading shifted from M&A to selling ahead of bad news," Mr. Newkirk said.
"We've now turned back to M&A."
Peter Romeo, a former SEC attorney and now a partner with Hogan & Hartson, a Washington, D.C., law firm, finds the recent flurry of predisclosure share price and volume activity upsetting, if, in fact, the moves turn out to be based on the use of inside information.
"If that's the explanation for these price rises, it erodes the integrity of the market," he said.
"The investing public can get the idea that insiders are playing games, making profits at the expense of others," and that the practice may be widespread.
Signs of unusual, pre-announcement trading activity of late include a hefty jump in the share price of Broderbund Software Inc. on the day before Electronic Arts Inc. announced its proposed acquisition of the company Feb. 10.
Broderbund's stock jumped 10% Feb. 9 on nearly three times the average Nasdaq daily volume, and call option volume at the CBOE likewise soared that day.
Similarly, shares of Nextel Communications Inc. climbed nearly 6% on the Nasdaq market just before MCI Communications Corp. announced its proposed purchase of 17% of the company March 1.
Options volume also soared fivefold.
And shares of Home Nutritional Services surged 15% on the day before W.R. Grace & Co. announced its proposed tender offer for the company Friday.
In all three cases, officials at the acquiring companies and target companies said they could not explain the run-up in prices and volume before the public disclosure of the bids.
A spokeswoman for MCI said the company feels "real confident" about its policies to prevent premature leakage of information about transactions.
"We have rigorous policies and procedures, starting with code names," the spokeswoman said.
"We restrict the number of people that know about the deal.
They only bring in the people they absolutely need.
They negotiate off site."
A W.R. Grace spokesman said the company "has a wide variety of procedures to ensure the confidentiality of information relating to transactions involving possible acquisitions."
He declined to elaborate.
Nasdaq officials declined to comment, other than to say they routinely check for unusual price and volume swings prior to merger announcements and the disclosure of other material events.
SEC officials maintain that enforcement of insider-trading laws remains a top priority of the federal agency.
But, some observers point out, other enforcement priorities are absorbing increasing amounts of the agency's time and financial resources.
Under new SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt, the commission appears to be placing greater emphasis on corralling fraud abuses that hurt individual investors, such as financial fraud.
The SEC last October reached a settlement involving Prudential Securities Inc., in which the big brokerage firm agreed to pay at least $330 million into a restitution fund to repay investors defrauded into buying limited partnerships in the 1980s.
The case marked the biggest settlement ever reached with a firm involving individual investors.
Despite the low profile of more recent cases, Mr. Newkirk says the SEC's "insider-trading program is alive and well."
And even with Chairman Levitt's focus on broader investor-protection cases, Mr. Newkirk says the SEC is "probably devoting as much resources to insider trading as we ever have."
And when the SEC does move, it moves with deliberate caution.
Indeed, insider-trading cases can consume years between the illegal trades and the filing of charges.
The SEC spends an average of 18 months investigating most securities-law violations.
"Insider trading and financial fraud take a little longer," said Mr. Newkirk.
Just last week, the SEC filed a complaint alleging insider-trading in the stock of Contel Corp. -- almost four years after the company's stock price shot up on the 1990 news of a merger with GTE Corp.
The timing of the case wasn't unusual but its target was: the husband of the secretary to GTE's chairman and chief executive officer.
The SEC said the husband bought Contel stock and options, unbeknownst to his wife.
The husband, a plumber, agreed, without admitting or denying guilt, to settle by paying back double the $27,000 profit he made.
Investigations of insider-trading cases in general tend to take longer than others simply because they're tougher to prove, Mr. Newkirk said.
"More than any other case, these cases are marked by lying," he said.
And because it's tough to come by evidence to refute an inside trader who insists that his purchases were based on market savvy, rather than an illicit tip, "it takes a long time to finish these kinds of cases," Mr. Newkirk said.
SEC enforcement director William McLucas said the agency has brought charges in "a fairly significant number of insider-trading cases every year" for about 10 years.
"In terms of enforcement priorities, it's a core part of the program," he said.
"We have affected behavior.
We've probably improved conduct within the securities industry.
At the same time, it's a virus you're never going to completely eliminate."
These days, insider-trading cases typically involve lesser dollar amounts than in the high-rolling 1980s.
"It's not as glamorous as it was when you had an Ivan Boesky and a Marty Siegel," Mr. McLucas said.
"But it's still going on."
