The changed tone was evident last week during three days of talks here between Indian leaders and Robin Raphel, the U.S. assistant secretary of state for South Asian affairs.
The trip seems to have calmed some of the anger that has been building up here recently over U.S. criticism of India's human-rights record and a perceived tilt by the Clinton administration toward Pakistan.
It also probably has cleared the way for an early visit to Washington by Prime Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao.
Ms. Raphel, whose previous remarks about U.S. policy toward India drew the ire of the country's media, said she had "succeeded in clarifying some misunderstandings."
In a speech Friday at the American Centre in New Delhi, Ms. Raphel focused mainly on business, declaring that an "economic partnership" between the two nations is growing at a "breathtaking pace."
In discussing the state of Jammu and Kashmir, territory claimed by both India and Pakistan, Ms. Raphel said U.S. policy had been "misrepresented and terribly distorted."
Having been accused in the Indian media of questioning the basis of Kashmir's accession to India, Ms. Raphel skipped over the dispute's past, which includes three wars and countless border skirmishes between India and Pakistan since 1947.
The U.S., she said, wants to focus on how the Kashmir dispute could be ended, not on how it started.
Rather than reiterating the U.S. position that any settlement must take into account the local people's wishes, she praised Prime Minister Rao's "efforts to pursue a political process that will bring an end to fighting in Kashmir."
That was a reference to efforts by the Indian government to organize assembly elections paving the way for Kashmir's first elected government since early 1990.
Ms. Raphel advised India to curb human-rights abuses by its security forces but acknowledged moves being made toward that end.
She also criticized similar violations by separatist militants in the state.
In addition, Ms. Raphel deplored "outside aid to the militants" -- a reference to help from Pakistan and the presence in Kashmir of militants from several countries, including Pakistan and Afghanistan.
The U.S., she added, has made its position "clear in capitals where it needs to be heard" and will continue to pursue the issue.
Speaking privately, Indian diplomatic officials said New Delhi welcomes Ms. Raphel's new enunciation of U.S. policy toward Kashmir but would be more convinced if these views were stated in appropriate U.S. forums, such as congressional testimony.
Indian officials and political leaders say they told Ms. Raphel that the Clinton administration's proposal to supply F-16 fighter jets to Pakistan would add to India's security problems.
Asked about this complaint after her speech, Ms. Raphel said that preventing the spread of nuclear weapons is one of the Clinton administration's top policy goals and that the fighters are linked to "asking Pakistan to take a major nonproliferation step."
Indian officials are gearing up to face pressure on the nuclear issue early next month when the deputy U.S. secretary of state, Strobe Talbott, is to visit India.
India exploded a nuclear device in 1974 and refuses to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty on the ground that it discriminates between nuclear haves and have-nots and doesn't commit the former to destroying their arsenals.
India does insist, however, that it has neither nuclear weapons nor a program to build them.
Mr. Talbott is expected to press for Indian concessions on the nuclear issue in line with U.S. fears that instability or disputes in South Asia could lead to a nuclear war between India and Pakistan.
He is also expected to discuss Mr. Rao's likely visit to Washington.
