Boosted by record trading revenue, Bankers Trust New York Corp. reported sharply higher fourth-quarter earnings.
Two other banks, Bank of Boston Corp. and KeyCorp, also turned in improved results, while Society Corp.'s earnings declined.
Bankers Trust reported earnings more than doubled, while Bank of Boston profit rose by 29% and KeyCorp 14%.
Although Society, which plans to merge with KeyCorp later this year, had a 34% decline, it would have shown a 14% gain if an extraordinary restructuring charge was excluded.
While Wall Street has reacted to the fourth-quarter results of other banks with stock-price-depressing profit taking, investors were impressed with Bankers Trust's better-than-expected result.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Bankers Trust common shares rose $1.125, or 1.4%, to close at $79.
Bank of Boston stock rose 75 cents, or 3.1%, to $24.75.
But KeyCorp stock fell 12.5 cents, or 0.3%, to $36.625, and Society stock also declined 12.5 cents, or 0.4%, to $30.25 a share.
The increased earnings were driven by the continued wide profit margins between the banks' cost of funds and the return they can earn from loans and other assets, as well as better-than-expected trading profits and reductions in loan loss provisions.
For Bankers Trust, the most obvious highlight was $449 million in trading revenue -- the third consecutive quarterly record.
A bank spokesman said traders benefited from continued volatility in interest rates and currency markets.
While the stock market fears that the bank is overreliant on trading activities, which are generally viewed as a volatile source of earnings, Bankers Trust's results were fairly broad-based.
Fund-management revenue reached a record $185 million, up 17% from the previous year.
Fees and commissions climbed 33% to reach $192 million.
Although net interest income was nominally down, it increased by 5% if extraordinary items are excluded.
"They have been building a wider revenue base," said Judah Kraushaar, an analyst with Merrill Lynch & Co., "and that helps to assure investors that their results are sustainable."
In the traditional banking business, lending money, the reporting banks benefited from two industry-wide trends: loan growth and decreased loan-loss provisions.
Those changes were more than enough to overcome flat or slightly decreasing net interest-rate margins.
Loan-loss provisions were clearly a powerful factor in the quarter: Bankers Trust's provision was $23 million, down from $50 million in the year-earlier period.
At Bank of Boston, the provision was $10 million, down from $23 million.
The provision at Cleveland-based Society was $13 million, down from $31 million.
While provisions were falling, lending was growing.
Society's loans outstanding grew at a 12% annualized rate during the quarter, and KeyCorp's at a 5.5% rate, according to analysts.
The most important restructuring charges were related to the KeyCorp-Society merger.
Society reported a $40 million charge as a result of the merger.
Excluding the charge, it would have earned $97 million, or 82 cents per share, in the quarter.
KeyCorp, which is based in Albany, N.Y., also had a number of restructuring charges, some of them a result of the merger.
Without the charges, KeyCorp's fourth-quarter earnings would have been a record $106 million, or $1.01 per share.
