Is the widely noted moderation in health-care costs and spending here to stay?
It wasn't before.
Over the past two decades, whenever the government moved against health-care costs -- or even threatened to act in a major way -- the growth in national health spending has slowed, only to accelerate sharply once the threat of government controls was passed.
In the early 1970s, when President Nixon imposed wage and price controls and proposed requiring all employers to pay part of their workers' health insurance premiums, the annual rise in inflation-adjusted health spending shrank from 9% in 1972 to 3% in 1973 and 2% in 1974.
When the controls were eased and the president's health proposal died in Congress, the increase climbed back to 5% in 1975 and soared to 8% in 1976.
The most graphic example came during the Carter administration, when the White House was pushing a bill to cap hospital charges and crafting a proposal to extend health coverage to all Americans.
The annual increase in inflation-adjusted national health spending slowed from 5% in 1978 to 1% in both 1979 and 1980 -- only to catapult back up to 5% in 1981, once President Carter's proposals had died and Ronald Reagan had replaced him in the Oval Office.
By 1983, inflation-adjusted health spending was growing at 7% a year.
The health-spending statistics were compiled recently by Kenneth Thorpe, the top economist at the Department of Health and Human Services.
The Clinton administration is currently engaged in an all-out effort to keep people from being lulled by a recent spate of good news on the health-cost front.
The White House fears the rosy outlook will sap some of the momentum for overhauling the health-care system.
"If we don't have a plan for cost containment, we'll be back in the stew again," Mr. Thorpe admonished a business audience earlier this week.
There are experts who think that this time could be different.
The health-care market has gone through vast change in recent years, with large employers insisting on discounts from doctors and hospitals, a huge increase in the use of health maintenance organizations and other managed-care networks, and a recent spate of mergers among hospitals and other health-care providers.
"In the past we didn't have the wholesale, widespread consolidations and mergers" in the health industry, says Fred Graefe, a Washington lobbyist, whose clients include hospitals, pharmaceutical companies and manufacturers of home medical equipment.
"The marketplace has changed.
Insurance companies and employers are saying, `Unh, unh.
We're going to get a handle on this because this is our bottom line.'"
The recent news on health costs has been bright.
In 1993, medical costs rose 5.4%, the smallest annual increase since 1973, the Labor Department says.
And after complaining of being stifled by rising employee health costs, businesses have recently reported a moderation in medical expenses.
Some economists, such as Uwe Reinhardt of Princeton, cite the "Hillary factor," referring to Hillary Rodham Clinton, who is leading the administration's health-care reform efforts.
Drug companies, for example, fearing the prospect of government price controls, have said they will hold down prices voluntarily -- and so far this year, they have kept their word.
But Mark Pauly, chairman of the health systems department at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School, says he believes part of the current moderation simply reflects a slowing of the overall inflation rate.
"For some of it, we shouldn't be looking for any cause other than the Federal Reserve and macroeconomic policy," he says.
If Congress fails to pass a major health-care cost-control bill, Mr. Pauly predicts that health-care costs may reaccelerate a bit.
But, he says, citing the changes in the industry, the long-term trend is probably for smaller increases.
Nevertheless, suspicion of the industry will pervade the political debate on Capitol Hill this time around.
House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt, a supporter of the Clinton health plan, opposed President Carter in the 1970s fight over health costs, and offers his experience now as a lesson to those who believe that the problem will solve itself.
"This industry said then it could control costs voluntarily, and costs did slow down," the Missouri Democrat says.
But the minute Congress voted to make the proposed controls voluntary, he says, costs escalated.
David Rogers and Mary Agnes Carey contributed to this article.
