THE SOFTWARE industry is learning how to adopt Hollywood production values in its latest crop of multimedia software.
That means computer owners this year will be able to choose entertainment and education titles that finally rise to TV production quality while offering the viewer a real interactive role.
Unfortunately, a few software companies are using those slick Hollywood techniques to produce story lines featuring Hollywood cultural values as well -- especially gratuitous violence as a way of solving problems.
And that means responsible parents may have to veto some of the multimedia titles with the best visual and audio effects on grounds of offensive content.
To help families sort it all out, here's a brief rundown on three of the earliest computer titles to display real TV qualities.
One -- TuneLand, by a start-up company called 7th Level -- is a wonderful, wholesome interactive cartoon that uses the best animation I've ever seen on a computer.
It makes a preschooler feel as if she's controlling the action in a Saturday-morning cartoon show.
A second, Wallobee Jack, soon to be marketed by WordPerfect, is another TV-like animated feature that lets grade-schoolers solve a mystery.
The third, Critical Path, by MediaVision, is an action title for older kids and adults featuring a real actress and real video scenes that wastes great production techniques to tell a hackneyed tale featuring little but killing.
TuneLand stars a small bear called Lil' Howie, whose voice is provided by comedian Howie Mandel.
The bear plays hide-and-seek in a series of richly illustrated and animated storybook settings -- Old MacDonald's farmyard, a train station and more.
The images and animations were hand-drawn and then transferred to the computer using a technique called anti-aliasing, which eliminates the jagged edges frequently found in computerized drawings.
THE RESULT IS stunning TV-quality animation.
The farm wife chasing around her kitchen after the Three Blind Mice looks just like a scene out of a Warner Brothers cartoon.
Children clicking on nearly any object in TuneLand are rewarded with action, sound or music.
The program contains 40 or so full-length songs beautifully orchestrated in treatments ranging from classical to country to rock-and-roll.
There's even a separate "jukebox" program that lets kids just play the songs, if they're tired of the animated adventure.
TuneLand will be available in stores within a month or so, at a price of under $50.
Unfortunately, it only works on IBM-compatibles running Microsoft Windows and equipped with CD-ROM players.
No Macintosh or disk-based version is planned.
WordPerfect's Wallobee Jack also is an animated cartoon, though less impressive and less extensive than TuneLand.
Aimed at older kids, it follows a kangaroo named Wallobee Jack as he seeks to retrieve a famous Australian artifact before the villain, an evil crocodile, can get it.
The player interacts with the game by trying to find hidden "hot spots" on the screen containing bombs that foil the villain or light bulbs that help the hero.
The game has a smart-aleck, cartoonish quality.
The crocodile is afflicted with familiar devices like exploding cigars, and insults the player if she fails to foil him.
Unfortunately, it gets a little too cute at times.
A slick "host" interrupts at least once to try to sell the user a $15 Wallobee Jack T-shirt.
And if you lose, and the crocodile grabs the artifact, he punishes you by rebooting your computer -- a dangerous feature.
WORDPERFECT will start selling Wallobee Jack as part of its consumer Main Street line in March, for both PCs and Macs with CD-ROM drives.
The title and others in the Wallobee Jack series were developed by Tune 1000, a Canadian company that has licensed them to WordPerfect.
Finally, there's Critical Path by MediaVision, a highly respected maker of multimedia hardware that is launching a new software line.
Critical Path is the tale of a sort of macho woman, muscular and armed, who gets trapped in the factory complex of an evil madman in the aftermath of a nuclear war.
She is constantly threatened with death and is constantly killing people to survive.
Technically, the title is brilliant -- filmed at a special studio, using a real actress and skillfully melding video and animation.
But it's a shame that a company with a good reputation has chosen to introduce such great technology in a title that glorifies violence.
Not only is the theme trite and boring, it just piles on more violent entertainment at a time when parents are saying that enough is enough.
And it echoes, however faintly, another Hollywood theme: that of the stalked woman, even if she is armed.
Some adults may like Critical Path, which is fine.
It isn't gory, in the sense of showing blood and internal organs flying around.
And I'm certainly not saying all interactive computer titles should be kids' cartoons or educational drills.
Adventure stories, even those with a bit of violence, would be welcomed by most reasonable parents.
But stories like Critical Path, with a major focus on violent action, are a problem for many of us.
Critical Path carries a warning label, and I'd like to add my own: Don't buy it for a household with kids if you're concerned with the excess of violence in entertainment.
I hope MediaVision will choose a better theme the next time it decides to use its hottest new technology.
