Notwithstanding the worsening trade tensions between the G-7's two largest economies, the U.S. and Japan, and the resulting surge in the yen, the finance ministers and central bankers plan to devote the bulk of their time to exploring better ways to encourage Russian reform and recovery.
About 90 minutes were set aside for matters involving the G-7 economies themselves, such as how to kindle healthier growth in the sluggish European and Japanese economies.
U.S. officials said that exchange rates -- and specifically the relationship between the yen and the dollar -- aren't expected to be significant topics.
Officials also said they don't plan to issue a formal communique after the meeting -- a decision that suggests they don't intend to signal any major policy changes.
Moreover, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen went out of his way to throttle rumors that Washington and Tokyo had quietly agreed that the dollar shouldn't weaken beyond a level of 110 yen to the dollar.
"These reports are a total fabrication," he told reporters.
Mr. Bentsen said he would meet with Japanese Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii at the margins of the G-7 session.
"I assume that we'll be talking about the framework," he said, adding that he had "no indication" that his counterpart planned to offer new plans for ending the logjam over how much Japan will open its markets.
Meanwhile, he said, the administration is considering "a whole myriad of options" to advance the negotiations, but he refused to provide details.
The Germans called for the G-7 meeting several weeks ago specifically to address mounting divisions in the West over how to push economic reforms in Russia more effectively.
The G-7 countries -- the U.S., Britain, Canada, Italy, France, Germany and Japan -- want to push Russia to make faster progress against inflation and to curb government subsidies for large, inefficient industries.
In particular, the group will be looking at what conditions to set for speeding up the flow of funds from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
The entire topic of Russian aid, meanwhile, is clouded by U.S. outrage over the unfolding spy scandal in which Moscow is alleged to have paid $1.5 million to a Central Intelligence Agency official for highly sensitive information.
Although some lawmakers are calling for a freeze in U.S. aid, Mr. Bentsen indicated that in discussion with Russian officials he would focus on reforms.
"I deal with economics," he said.
Separately, Russian President Boris Yeltsin's speech yesterday was likely to stir new worries in the West about Russia's reliability on foreign policy and economic matters.
Many are growing discouraged about the pace of reform.
An IMF mission in Moscow this week has had a difficult time obtaining basic economic figures, such as Russia's balance-of-payments deficit for last year, that are necessary to evaluate the country's economic condition.
The U.S. hopes to gather support for a package of steps that will form the foundation for a slightly more activist policy.
The steps include pushing the IMF to set clearer standards for what Moscow must do to unlock more aid, including the second half of a $3 billion fund established to soften dislocations resulting from the country's move to a market economy.
In addition, the U.S. will urge the World Bank to be more aggressive in financing development projects; the bank has been slow to negotiate terms for releasing its share of $5 billion to be provided in a G-7 aid plan.
Officials at the IMF and the World Bank, for their part, would like clearer, more unified backing from the G-7 nations, which control the largest block of votes in the organizations.
Michel Camdessus, the managing director of the IMF, and Ernest Stern, a managing director of the World Bank, will attend the Frankfurt meeting.
Mr. Camdessus said recently that the IMF is "the scapegoat" for the slow flow of aid to Russia.
He said that the IMF has moved quickly to supply aid but that economic conditions in Russia are too unsettled to release the funds.
Russia will send three top officials -- central bank President Viktor Gerashchenko, acting Finance Minister Sergei Dubinin and Economics Minister Alexander Shokhin -- to the G-7 meeting.
Officials expect them to request more aid at a faster pace.
But it's unlikely that the G-7 will make more commitments until it has a clearer idea from IMF and other officials that reforms are proceeding.
Discussion of how to spur more growth in G-7 countries through interest-rate cuts, deregulation and measures to promote fiscal stability will be secondary to the search for ways to bolster Russian reform efforts.
