The Irish bond market is small, ignored and unloved.
But it's very, very profitable.
Though it ranks 19th in size on Salomon Brothers Inc.'s list of the world's 20 major government-bond markets, it performed the best last year by delivering a total return of 31.25%.
Measured in U.S. dollars, according to Lehman Brothers International (Europe), the Irish bond market returned 13.75%, or 17.89% if investors hedged their currency risk.
That compares with a 10.68% return for U.S. Treasurys.
"In every which way you want to count it, Ireland outperformed U.S. Treasurys," says Christopher Golden, an international bond strategist at Lehman Brothers in London.
Although European interest rates are forecast to fall further in 1994, no one expects a repeat of 1993's spectacular performance.
Then again, that's true of almost all bond markets, says Jim O'Leary, chief economist at Davy Stockbrokers in Dublin.
Almost none of the world's major securities firms conduct research on the Irish market, but some big investors are in it anyway.
Kemper Investment Management Co. has placed 10% of one its mutual funds in Irish government bonds, also called gilts.
And a major U.S. pension fund for whom Kemper manages several hundred million dollars in global-bond markets has 10% invested in Irish punts, the country's currency, as does one of the firm's global-bond funds.
"We think Ireland is a good story," says Terence Prideaux, a Kemper director in London.
One allure is yield.
At about 6%, six-month punt deposits offer nearly twice as much as U.S. Treasury bills.
The benchmark five-year Irish gilt currently yields just over 5.90%, or about six-tenths of a percentage point more than Treasurys.
The yield looks even better when adjusted for inflation.
Ireland's inflation is 1.5%, one of the lowest rates in Europe.
It could rise this year along with economic growth, but analysts aren't worried.
"The Irish economy isn't booming; unemployment in December was 16.9%, and there's a huge pool of labor waiting for employment," says Mr. Golden of Lehman.
"Where's inflation going to come from?"
Last year, Ireland's borrowing requirement, money needed to finance its current budget deficit and refinance maturing debt, was 2.5% of its total output of goods and services.
This year, Dublin's budget calls for a higher figure of 2.7%, but many economists expect the government to beat that target, as it did in 1993.
Investors also like the government's stability and the relative strength, at least within Europe, of the punt.
Scott Turner, a portfolio manager at Global Advisors, a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America in Newark, N.J., jumped into the Irish bond market in early February 1993.
At the time, Irish bond yields were above 10%, and the punt had just been devalued by 10%.
"We tried to buy everything we could, but we couldn't get everything we wanted," says Mr. Turner.
"Then we bought in large size at government auctions."
At a couple of them, he adds, "we bought nearly the whole auction."
Only $22.5 billion of bonds denominated in Irish punts are outstanding.
At one point, some Global Advisors clients were 15% invested in Irish bonds, and the firm was the single-largest foreign holder of Irish debt.
That percentage has since been rolled back to about 7%, as Mr. Turner took profits.
But he says: "We still like the Irish bond market."
But many money managers dislike the small Irish bond market's lack of liquidity.
"I've looked at it and thought it was cheap, but it is very difficult to trade in any size," says Robert Evans, a portfolio manager at Pacific Investment Management Co. in Newport Beach, Calif.
Part of the problem is that there aren't any market-making firms willing to risk capital to maintain buy-and-sell prices.
Instead, Irish brokers act as agents.
"From a dealing point of view, Ireland is one of the worst bond markets in the world," says Mr. Turner of Global Advisors.
New Zealand's market is nearly half the size of Ireland's, he notes, but in trading terms New Zealand is "like a Mercedes compared to a Volkswagen Beetle."
Ireland's National Treasury Management Agency, set up three years ago to bring professional expertise to the management of the country's national debt, is taking steps to remedy the problem: It has introduced a formal system of benchmark bonds -- sold at key five, 10, 15 and 20 year maturities -- and successfully pushed to have them included in major international bond indexes.
Creating a market-maker system, which would attract big international securities firms and prompt them to research the Irish bond market, is also under consideration.
Not everyone in Ireland is eager to see big foreign competitors.
Nonetheless, John Corrigan, director of domestic debt for the agency, says: "There's a recognition that we need to move forward and adapt the market to modern international practices, if Dublin is to survive as a regional financial center in Europe."
