Provisions in a bill to revamp the telecommunications industry could violate U.S. trade agreements, but any effort to remove them would jeopardize congressional approval of the legislation.
In a recent letter, U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor warned that U.S. trading partners would view the bill as a violation of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the North American Free Trade Agreement.
In addition, he said, the measure would "seriously jeopardize" current telecommunications talks with the European Union.
The bill, co-written by Energy and Commerce Chairman John Dingell of Michigan and Judiciary Chairman Jack Brooks of Texas is designed to let the regional Bell companies offer long-distance service and make telecommunications equipment.
The provisions cited by Mr. Kantor would require the seven huge telephone companies to make equipment in the U.S., and it would cap the value of foreign parts in their products at 40% of the final price.
A sweeping telecommunications bill introduced in the Senate by Commerce Chairman Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina and Sen. Jack Danforth (R., Mo.), contains similar language.
The Clinton administration first raised problems with the domestic-content and manufacturing provisions in a hearing this year.
The provisions have been championed by the powerful phone company unions, and they essentially secure the unions' support for the legislation.
Referring to Mr. Kantor's letter, a spokesman for the Communications Workers of America, the biggest phone union, said the CWA is "deeply disappointed with this wrongheaded stance; We disagree and hope Congress will as well."
Despite Mr. Kantor's appeals, the provisions are likely to remain in both bills.
"Mr. Dingell appears unmoved by Mr. Kantor's pleadings," a senior House aide said.
A senior Senate aide said the provisions "will be included in legislation sent to the president."
Mr. Kantor wrote the letter to Mr. Dingell and Rep. Edward Markey (D., Mass.), chairman of the telecommunications subcommittee in response to an inquiry by the two lawmakers.
"The stakes," he wrote, "are enormous."
The trade office estimated the European public telecommunications market totals about $20 billion annually, while the Japanese market is $10 billion.
"Our negotiations to open these markets, as well as others, are undercut by any action which closes the U.S. market to foreign products and which imposes restrictions on our investors," Mr. Kantor said.
