Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell is engulfed in an escalating dispute with his former law firm in Little Rock that involves over $1 million in expenses and unbilled time charges, and questions about his personal expenses.
Partners at the Rose Law Firm, where Hillary Rodham Clinton also practiced, are unhappy about Mr. Hubbell's representation of P.O.M. Inc., a parking meter firm owned by his brother-in-law, Seth "Skeeter" Ward.
The firm also has asked Mr. Hubbell to provide back-up documentation of certain expenses.
Mr. Hubbell wrote himself checks on the firm's account to reimburse himself for expenses without providing sufficient documentation, according to a person at the firm.
This person says Mr. Hubbell has missed one deadline for providing the information.
The P.O.M. case involves an unsuccessful patent infringement and antitrust suit the company filed against a competitor.
Mr. Hubbell took the case on a contingency-fee basis.
That meant that his brother-in-law would have to pay Rose only if Mr. Hubbell won the case.
Rose, like other large corporate firms, very rarely takes on contingency-fee cases and at least some of Mr. Hubbell's partners didn't learn of the unusual fee arrangement until after he left the firm to join the Clinton administration.
Because P.O.M. lost the case, Rose was forced to swallow roughly $500,000 in unbilled time charges.
Even more irksome to Mr. Hubbell's partners were more than $500,000 in outstanding litigation expenses that the firm expected P.O.M. to pick up.
According to a person at Rose, P.O.M. told the firm that it could not afford to reimburse it for the expenses, some of which involved payments to expert witnesses and patent lawyers.
Charles River & Associates, an economic analysis and research firm that provided an expert witness for P.O.M., sued Rose for $122,000.
That case was settled last June and Mr. Hubbell paid for some of that bill out of his own pocket, according to the person at the firm.
Mr. Hubbell's Washington lawyer, John Nields, who is negotiating with Rose didn't return phone calls.
Ronald Clark, Rose's managing partner, declined to comment, but said last week that the firm had not yet reached any conclusions about its review.
Mr. Ward, of P.O.M., didn't return phone calls.
Usually, unpaid expenses are deducted from the responsible partner's compensation over a five-year period, according to the Rose source.
But that didn't happen in this case because Mr. Hubbell left to join the Justice Department.
At that time, the firm paid Mr. Hubbell more than $100,000 in capital, but nothing was deducted for the P.O.M. expenses.
"We were all pretty up at the time and we did not believe the firm would not be repaid," explains the person at Rose.
Mr. Hubbell recently acknowledged that the firm had asked him "for back-up documentation on certain expenses paid for by the firm."
Rose lawyers and auditors from the Resolution Trust Corp. are reviewing Mr. Hubbell's and other lawyers' bills on a number of cases, including a number of RTC cases.
If improper billings are found, Rose might have to report them to state disciplinary authorities.
Meanwhile, Mrs. Clinton, another former Rose partner, defended the First Couple's handling of the Whitewater controversy in an interview in Time Magazine.
"We did the best we could, always, to be as straightforward on this as we could, based on what we know," Mrs. Clinton said.
She also said she and President Clinton are prepared to pay more in back income taxes if it turns out they underpaid their taxes on the Whitewater land deal in the 1970s and 1980s.
Appearing on ABC-TV's "This Week with David Brinkley," James McDougal, the Clintons' erstwhile business partner in Whitewater, defended the president and first lady more vehemently than ever before.
Quoting from Shakespeare, he dismissed the Whitewater matter as being "full of sound and fury, signifying nothing," and offered anew to take a polygraph test saying Mr. Clinton isn't guilty of any crime.
As for Mrs. Clinton, Mr. McDougal said "she may have done some very sloppy bookkeeping" regarding Whitewater finances.
He also threatened to sue for libel Rep. James Leach (R., Iowa), one of the Clintons' loudest critics in the Whitewater affair.
(Rep. Leach, on CBS-TV's "Face the Nation," said he would stand by everything he has said.)
White House counsel Lloyd Cutler dismissed the notion of the Clintons testifying before Congress.
"There are other ways" to elicit information he said on the Brinkley show.
"After all, the president is running the country."
He dismissed Whitewater as "not much of an affair" beyond possible tax questions.
"So far as the Clintons know, nothing improper was done," he asserted.
While acknowledging meetings between White House and Treasury officials created an appearance problem, Mr. Cutler insisted that White House aides made "no effort" to influence government investigations into Madison Guaranty.
Bruce Ingersoll contributed to this article.
