To help speed its international growth, American Telephone & Telegraph Co. hired a prominent Italian computer executive to run its European businesses.
Pier Carlo Falotti, 51 years old, was named president and chief executive of AT&T's operations in Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
Until recently Mr. Falotti was president and chief executive of ASK Group Inc., a big -- but unprofitable -- computer software company based in Santa Clara, Calif.
But he's best known as an empire builder: the man who oversaw rapid growth in Europe for Digital Equipment Corp. during the 1980s as its top European executive.
Among his goals at AT&T, Mr. Falotti said in a telephone interview, will be to discuss expanding collaboration among AT&T, France's France Telecom and Germany's Deutsche Bundespost Telekom.
For more than a year the three phone giants have been holding inconclusive talks on jointly providing business-communications services.
AT&T, based in New York, wants them as partners for a $350 million five-year plan it has hatched to expand its communications network in Europe.
But any such alliance would stir a political storm in Paris, Bonn and Brussels -- headquarters of the European Union, with many competitors likely to brand it as anticompetitive and to try to get regulators to block it.
Mr. Falotti's appointment to the newly created post is part of a reorganization announced in December.
To spearhead growth abroad, AT&T is grouping all its diverse overseas businesses into three units with their own chief executives -- one each for Europe, Latin America and the Asia-Pacific region.
Currently, Europe provides nearly 10% of AT&T's world-wide revenue -- partly through sales of computers, telephone exchanges and other electronics products.
But for AT&T the big prize would be a chunk of the continent's communications-services market; though gradually opening to foreigners, services in most European countries are still dominated by one local player, such as Deutsche Telekom in Germany.
Thus, AT&T's advances so far have been in a few deregulated niches -- issuing telephone credit cards around Europe, providing data communications in Britain, or helping run basic phone services in Ukraine and parts of Poland and Russia.
At Digital from 1983 to 1992, Mr. Falotti oversaw a near-sixfold growth in its annual revenue in Europe to $6.7 billion from about $1.2 billion, as the European computer market grew and Digital wooed new customers and bought some smaller local companies.
In his last year there, Digital's European operations fell into red ink along with the rest of the Maynard, Mass., corporation.
Mr. Falotti announced his resignation just before Digital founder Kenneth Olsen was ousted by the board.
