The Securities and Exchange Commission is trying for a second time to make it easier for the agency to identify large securities transactions that took place in volatile market sessions.
Under a rule proposed yesterday, securities brokers would be required to maintain electronic records of all trades by large traders.
The traders themselves would be required to register with the SEC.
The SEC also proposed a separate rule requiring broker-dealers that operate automated trading systems to keep records of trading volume and system participants, and to report trading activity each quarter to the SEC.
The rule was suggested in the agency staff's recent Market 2000 report.
The effort to collect large-trader reports dates back to the months following the 1987 stock-market crash, when the SEC and the stock exchanges had great difficulty reconstructing records of the large trades that took place before and during the market drop.
A similar effort to track large trades in the 1989 market drop lasted six months, SEC staffers said.
But the agency's first proposed remedy, offered in August 1991, was roundly opposed by brokers and large traders.
The new proposal incorporates some of the suggestions from those groups, including a different definition of large trader.
The new rule would cover individuals and institutions that trade a minimum of 200,000 shares with a market value of $2 million or more in 24 hours.
It would also apply to traders whose transactions in 24 hours total $10 million or more.
The old proposal defined large traders as those trading a minimum of 100,000 shares or $4 million in 24 hours.
The rule would require brokers to keep records of large traders' transactions and provide those records to the SEC if requested.
"A lot of the information that this deals with is information that the SEC already has access to," said Mark Fitterman, associate director of the agency's market-regulation division.
"The ultimate goal is to permit us as an agency to explain what happens in periods of market volatility."
The SEC will collect comments for 60 days on the large-trader tracking proposal as well as the proposed record-keeping requirements for automated trading systems.
Final rules will be proposed after the comments are studied.
