The once vocal opposition to a proposed energy-partnership settlement by Prudential Securities Inc. has petered out.
At a fairness hearing in a New Orleans federal court yesterday, even plaintiffs' lawyers who had staunchly opposed an earlier proposed settlement in the classaction case rallied behind Prudential's latest settlement offer of $120 million in cash.
Prudential's original settlement plan -- for $37 million in cash and interests in the partnerships in a reorganized form -- was withdrawn.
"We concur with Prudential attorneys now that this is a fair, adequate and reasonable settlement," George Riess, a plaintiffs' lawyer, told federal Judge Marcel Livaudais Jr.
Mr. Riess, who represents about 150 investors, had been a leading objector to the previous settlement offer by Prudential in the case.
About 130,000 investors have accused the Prudential Insurance Co. of America unit of misleading them on the risks and returns of about $1.45 billion in 35 energy partnerships, which have lost about half their value.
Thanks to the increasing support of the accord, it's widely expected that Judge Livaudais will approve the settlement after the three-day fairness hearing, which ends tomorrow.
Even lawyers with many clients who have chosen to opt out of the settlement aren't openly opposing the Prudential accord.
"Some of the people we counseled just flat want it over -- they're willing to take what we view as a cut to conclude it," says George Fleming of Fleming, Hovenkamp & Grayson; 2,000 of the Houston law firm's 7,000 clients in the case have decided to remain part of the class.
Nearly 16,000 of the 130,000 energy-partnership investors have decided to opt out of the settlement, according to Edward Grossman, a lawyer in New York for the class.
Those who opt out can file a private arbitration or court case, or file a claim to tap into a $330 million reparations fund set up by Prudential as part of an October settlement with federal and state regulators.
One prominent objector to the accord remains steadfast.
Stuart Goldberg, a lawyer in Austin, Texas, said investors ought to receive $780 million.
"The central issue is that the prospectuses failed to disclose that this is a commodity fund-not an income fund," said Mr. Goldberg, who represents more than 100 investors.
Mr. Goldberg "did a very capable job, but he didn't give a reason why this settlement should be knocked out," said Clinton Krislov, a lawyer in Chicago who had opposed the earlier Prudential settlement offer but endorses the current one.
