Even as new figures show China's inflation is surging, about 20% of the 2,721 deputies of the National People's Congress abstained or voted against bills aimed at curtailing investments by freewheeling provinces that are driving up prices.
While industrial production rose 18.2% in January and February, inflation surged 20% nationwide -- seven percentage points higher than for all of last year, the State Statistics Bureau said.
The inflation was caused in part by an excess money supply typical of the Lunar New Year holiday, which was in February.
China also eased credit late last year and early this year to aid state enterprises and to cover salary increases for civil servants starting in January.
This year's budget, which incorporates a new tax system aimed at fattening the central government's coffers, also drew a noticeable negative vote from deputies.
More than 20,000 people demonstrated in Prague, against the Czech Parliament's plans to change labor and pension laws.
The proposals would bar workers in state services from joining trade unions and let employers hire workers on short-term contracts.
It would also raise the legal retirement age for men to 62 from 60, and by up to four years for women, who now retire between 53 and 57, depending on how many children they have.
China reversed its policy for cable television, embracing the technology under tight regulation, the official China Daily newspaper reported.
Cable television reaches only 30 million of China's estimated 800 million TV viewers, mostly in cities, but provincial officials have been ordered to plan for its expansion.
Cable TV's proliferation to 1,300 stations and 10,000 community cable-service companies in 1991 triggered a crackdown a year later as the Communist government feared it was losing control of programming.
China indicated it wouldn't let foreign media companies provide more programming.
Major Pacific-region economies will grow an average rate of 4.1% this year, mainly on a strengthening recovery in the U.S. and a slight rebound in Japan's economy, according to the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council's annual survey of 18 Pacific Rim countries.
The region's expansion rate of 3.8% in 1993 set a four-year high.
The area's developing economies grew by a weighted average of 5.8% last year, the most robust expansion since 1988.
Moderating inflation and increased economic integration among the Asian-Pacific countries underscored the 1993 performance.
About 70% of the countries' total trade was with one another.
The Pacific Rim region accounts for about 42% of global trade.
The Bolivian government passed a law permitting the capitalization and privatization of state petroleum, telecommunications, railroad, foundry and electrical companies.
Assets of state-owned companies will be transferred to new private corporations, which will offer half ownership and management control to domestic or foreign investors.
Pension-plan administrators will manage the government's 50% stakes on behalf of the estimated 3.2 million adult Bolivians.
Russia reached an agreement with the government of Azerbaijan to grant a 10% stake in a massive oil-development deal in Caspian Sea to Russia's largest semi-independent oil company.
A consortium of Western oil companies is negotiating to develop the fields, but an accord is expected to be months away.
The project would develop two Caspian Sea fields that hold an estimated total of three billion barrels of light oil.
Development costs could exceed $7 billion over five to 10 years.
An additional $2 billion would be needed for pipelines to transport the crude, which is expected to start flowing about four years after development begins, with as much as 600,000 barrels a day by the end of the decade.
In addition to Russia's involvement through its oil company, Lukoil, the country has a stranglehold on export pipelines, which pass through its territory and give it the power to demand participation rights in the development of petroleum reserves in the former Soviet republics.
Russia may justify such claims because of debts owed to Moscow for exploration and discoveries during the Soviet era.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Taiwan's latest public offering of shares in a state-owned steel company has flopped, dealing another blow to the country's privatization program.
Taiwan's previous sale of a machinery manufacturer also failed to attract buyers. . . .
Traffic offenders in Israel may pay new spot fines by credit card.
Patrol cars will be equipped with card-processing machines.
