Trim and graying, Gerald M. Levin cut an unlikely figure amid the rowdy crush of pop, rock and rap stars at Warner Music Group's Grammy Awards bash.
Yet the bookish chairman of parent Time Warner Inc. schmoozed his way through the 1,800-strong throng that packed into the Museum of Natural History earlier this month.
He shook hands with one Warner-label rapper, Dr. Dre, as he nodded acknowledgment toward another, Snoop Doggy Dogg.
He eagerly fielded country singer k.d. lang's queries about the silo at his Vermont retreat, chatted amiably with Neil Young, and finally headed home at about 2 a.m. to catch a few hours of sleep before rising for his daily 6 a.m. jog.
The 54-year-old Mr. Levin has been making a calculated effort lately to prove his mettle at the show-biz aspects of running Time Warner, in large part to answer critics who say he just doesn't measure up to his flamboyant predecessor, Steven J. Ross.
The charismatic Warner Communications founder, who died of cancer more than a year ago, was wellknown for hobnobbing with pals like Steven Spielberg and Barbra Streisand, whizzing stars around on corporate jets, and treating them to vacations at homes in Aspen and Acapulco.
Mr. Levin, who came up through the cable-TV industry and only recently moved to New York City from unglamorous Port Washington, N.Y., is still no Steve Ross.
But these days, he has good reason to raise his profile as chief executive of the world's largest entertainment company.
Last May, beverage giant Seagram Co. began accumulating Time Warner shares, and announced that it would go up to 15%.
Time Warner responded by reinstating a "poison pill" antitakeover device last month.
Though Seagram officials insist they support Mr. Levin, many observers believe otherwise; the investment has heightened tension at Time Warner to a fever pitch, and speculation is mounting that Mr. Levin's job may be in jeopardy.
Last week, Time Warner stock rose 15% over a four-day period as rumors swirled that Seagram might take a run at Time Warner, speculation that Seagram strongly denies.
The Hollywood rumor mill is already buzzing with talk that Creative Artists Agency chief Michael Ovitz -- who has been critical of Mr. Levin in the past and who is a friend and adviser to Seagram Chief Executive Edgar Bronfman Jr. -- is angling for Mr. Levin's job.
Some industry executives believe another of Mr. Bronfman's friends, QVC Inc.
Chairman Barry Diller, may take a run at Time Warner following his failed bid for Paramount Communications Inc.
Meanwhile, people close to Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. say that the investment firm is interested in some of Time Warner's magazines.
And a new book about Mr. Ross, Connie Bruck's "Master of the Game," portrays Mr. Levin as "ill-equipped" to manage his executives.
While much of the gossip is probably unfounded, and there appears to be no imminent threat to Mr. Levin's job, the rumors have proved a destabilizing force at the company.
Mr. Levin now finds himself defending Time Warner against a maelstrom of innuendo and speculation at a time when he badly needs to concentrate on melding the clashing cultures of the former Time Inc. and Warner Communications Inc. and on positioning the merged company for the future.
Both Messrs. Ovitz and Diller deny the reports of their supposed interest in Time Warner.
"Those that know, know that I have consistently supported Jerry Levin.
Those that don't, get heard from a whole lot more than they should," Mr. Diller says.
Mr. Ovitz, who has advised Sony Corp. and others on studio acquisitions, says rumors fly every time he gets involved in deals.
"Because of my friendship with the Bronfman family, now there is speculation that I'm going to Time Warner," he says.
"I haven't been asked and I have no intention of leaving CAA.
In the last five years, the press has had me out of here so often they ought to put a turnstile at the door."
Time Warner's top executives remain fiercely loyal to Mr. Levin, in no small measure because he leaves them alone to run the conglomerate's various units.
He also retains the support of his board and of large institutional investors, who don't want to see Seagram get control without paying a premium.
A run at Time Warner would be tough in any case; the company has a total market value of about $25 billion, including debt.
Time Warner shares closed yesterday at $41.75, down 12.5 cents, in Big Board trading.
Over breakfast at the company's midtown headquarters, Mr. Levin insists that he isn't concerned about the Seagram camp.
The mild-mannered executive, who started his career as a lawyer, speaks almost in a monotone; even longtime associates say they have never heard him raise his voice.
He remains studiously unruffled even as he defends his record and discusses his adversaries.
Mr. Levin says he recently told Seagram's Mr. Bronfman that he has no intention of asking him to join Time Warner's board, which he reduced in size after Mr. Ross's death.
(Seagram says Mr. Bronfman didn't ask for a board seat and doesn't plan to.)
Mr. Levin has begun meeting with Mr. Bronfman about once every month, but says he would do that with any stockholder of such size.
Seagram's stake is currently 13.6%.
The Time Warner chief says that now he is focused on marshaling all of Time Warner's entertainment and information businesses for the electronic highway of the future.
He is betting $3 billion to $5 billion in new investment over the next several years on this so-called full-service network.
Those grand plans are admittedly risky, as became clear last month when the company was forced into an embarrassing delay of the start-up of its pilot electronic highway in Orlando, Fla.
But Mr. Levin remains undeterred: "I've staked my career on it," he says.
He seems to be working just as diligently on polishing his public persona -- and on raising his profile in the entertainment world, Mr. Ovitz's turf.
Until now, he spent most of his career as a behind-the-scenes deal-maker -- and one notably lacking in charisma.
The father of five, he first joined Time Inc.'s Home Box Office unit in 1972, ultimately rising to become HBO's chairman in 1976.
He shunned the social scene and often worked until midnight.
These days, though, he goes out almost every night of the week.
Monday, for example, he rubbed shoulders with Tom Brokaw and Donald Trump at the annual New York Oscar party hosted by HBO chief Michael Fuchs.
He also makes frequent trips to the Warner Bros. studio lot in Burbank, Calif., stopping in at the commissary to chat with talent like Joel Schumacher, producer of last year's Michael Douglas film "Falling Down."
Recently, he flew to Santa Fe, N.M., to drop in on actor Kevin Costner on the set of "Wyatt Earp," a summer release.
He pens notes to Warner stars such as Clint Eastwood.
Though he remains introverted and at times socially awkward, especially in contrast to the personable Mr. Ross, he has found his own cerebral style, carefully cultivating an image as a deep-thinker.
He describes himself as a "moralist," and says he tries to connect with creative types on an intellectual level.
"You aren't going to see him in a convertible with Madonna," as Walter Isaacson, head of new media for Time Inc.'s magazines group, puts it.
Mr. Levin says he believes his approach is working.
He acknowledges that it has taken "longer than it should have" to meld the former Time Inc. -- a button-down publishing empire -- with Warner Communications -- a freewheeling entertainment giant.
But he describes himself as the first true Time Warner creation, an executive whose first allegiance is to the whole company, not one side of it.
"There is some manifest destiny to the fact that I'm running the company," Mr. Levin says.
"No one could have melded these two companies but me."
Still, rivals argue that the two companies haven't been successfully melded at all -- and that Mr. Levin doesn't have the dynamism and leadership skills to pull the two together.
Time Warner's five businesses -- Time Inc. magazines, HBO, Warner Bros., Warner Music and Time Warner Cable -- are leaders in their industries, but the much-ballyhooed synergy promised in the merger remains elusive.
Most of the units operate as independent fiefs with little coordination or direction from above.
There is little incentive for them to seek business opportunities together.
The divisional fiefs, moreover, occasionally end up feuding with one another.
Robert Daly, head of the Warner Bros. studio unit, and Michael Fuchs, chairman of HBO, battled for more than a year over such issues as HBO's bankrolling of movies made by a start-up studio, Savoy Pictures, which Mr. Daly viewed as putting a competitor in business.
HBO, meanwhile, resisted Warner's demands for stiff fees to air Warner movies.
Mr. Levin finally persuaded the executives to resolve their differences, but didn't demand that they do so.
Mr. Daly says that because he and Mr. Fuchs were able to settle matters themselves, "we actually get along pretty well.
If someone had dictated it, we probably wouldn't be getting along."
Mr. Fuchs agrees.
Mr. Levin says he doesn't mind some jostling at the divisional level.
"These are fiercely aggressive and competitive businesses, and sometimes they crawl all over each other," he says.
"Where it makes sense, they do things together.
People are encouraged to be fierce -- if elbows collide at certain times, I like that, too."
The division chiefs say that independence can pay off.
Warner Bros., for example, made "The Bodyguard" with Whitney Houston even though she records for a Warner Music rival, Sony Corp.'s Arista Records, and so Warner couldn't market the soundtrack.
"We clearly won't damage the creative element of the movie for synergy," says Warner's Mr. Daly.
Mr. Levin says that in any case, there is cooperation between the divisions when necessary.
Several units, for example, are working together to expand in Asia.
And the Time magazine group and Warner Bros. studio are cooperating in a venture called Time Telepictures, which plumbs the magazines for TV-show ideas.
One recent effort: a TV special on Sports Illustrated's swimsuit edition.
Mr. Levin has encouraged such cooperation by standing aside, says Reginald K. Brack Jr., chairman and chief executive of the publishing unit.
"He stayed out of the way, and let it happen where it's natural," Mr. Brack says.
To Mr. Levin's credit, he has been able to retain talented managers who had every incentive to leave after Mr. Ross's death.
Warner Bros. chief Mr. Daly and President Terry Semel are the longest-running management team in Hollywood; when Time acquired Warner they both pocketed more than $50 million and received other job offers.
A loss of either executive might have been devastating.
So, when Mr. Semel considered a much more lucrative offer -- brought to him by Mr. Ovitz -- to run MGM/UA Entertainment and receive an equity stake, Mr. Levin diligently wooed him to stay.
He called Mr. Semel daily, flew out to the West Coast to see him, and even let him use a Warner jet for outside meetings.
Mr. Semel ultimately was convinced.
He received a sweetened financial package, but money wasn't the issue, he says: "It was very important to me that Warner become an even larger supplier of programming and a more diversified company . . . and Jerry convinced me that we were on common ground."
Yet while Time Warner's senior executives support Mr. Levin, the takeover rumors have proved a major distraction at some divisions.
At Warner Bros., for example, Mr. Daly and Mr. Semel, who have a strong track record, wondered what Mr. Ovitz could possibly add to the studio.
Concerned that the CAA chief, a personal friend who also depends on them for business, might be involved in a Seagram bid, they confronted him directly.
The Creative Artists chief assured them the rumors were false, they say.
Messrs. Daly and Semel also told Mr. Levin that they were concerned about the impact of the rumors in Hollywood; a studio's stability is crucial because film projects can require years of lead time.
The last thing creative types want, notes one Hollywood executive, is to have Warner's top brass "worrying about whether . . .
Ovitz or someone else is going to be their boss."
Even without the disruptive speculation, some Time Warner executives say, the chief executive officer may be spreading himself too thin.
He has decided not to name a chief operating officer to help him run the company.
So, in addition to concentrating on long-term strategies and creating synergy, he is charged with overseeing Time Warner's units, a job that some say is too much for any one person to handle.
But Mr. Levin says he couldn't promote one unit head without alienating the others, and that he doesn't need a No. 2 because the division chiefs are so strong.
Inside Time Warner, meanwhile, executives cast a nervous eye on Mr. Levin's unusual reliance on one adviser: Alpine Capital founder Oded "Ed" Aboodi, who had been one of Mr. Ross's closest aides.
While Mr. Ross was alive, Alpine Capital served as Time Warner's in-house investment adviser; though Mr. Levin has since severed formal corporate ties with Alpine, he acknowledges that Mr. Aboodi helps on deals and strategic matters.
The Securities & Exchange Commission is investigating trading in Time Warner stock by the Aboodi family in 1991.
People familiar with the situation say Mr. Aboodi is negotiating a possible settlement with the SEC.
Mr. Aboodi couldn't be reached, and Time Warner declined comment.
Mr. Aboodi had helped both Mr. Ross and Mr. Levin search for partners to help pay down debt from the merger and provide capital for expansion.
Rather than sell assets, Time Warner has sold an 11.6% stake in its movie and cable operations for $1 billion to Japanese giants Toshiba Corp. and Itochu Corp.
U S West Inc. paid $2.5 billion for a 25.5% stake.
With the recent feverish bidding for Paramount Communications, which sold for a whopping $9.6 billion, Mr. Levin has drawn fire from some Wall Street bankers for selling Time Warner's assets far too cheap.
But Time Warner counters that it has only sold interests, not control.
And with the collapse of the proposed merger of Tele-Communications Inc. and Bell Atlantic Corp., some analysts say that the Time Warner-U S West partial investment deal now looks like the better model for telephone-cable cooperation.
Perhaps more significantly, U S West has an option to increase its stake.
The two firms have discussed possibly merging in the future -- and U S West could end up as a white knight, if Time Warner needs one.
For now, though, Wall Street executives say that Mr. Levin appears relatively secure.
They note that Seagram has held onto a 24.3% investment in DuPont Co. for nearly a decade, and Mr. Bronfman claims that it views Time Warner as a similar long-term play.
Unless Seagram sold the DuPont stake to raise cash or made a radical move such as offering DuPont securities as part of an offer, Seagram would be hard-pressed to come up with the funds for a full-scale bid.
Still, the skittishness at Time Warner is understandable given the overheated climate for media assets.
And Seagram's position could change, or another interested player could come along.
"The biggest mistake Jerry Levin could make now is to panic," says an investment banker who handles media deals.
But he adds, "The second biggest mistake would be to be too complacent."
ARISTA RECORDS is a label owned by Bertelsmann Music Group, a unit of Germany's Bertelsmann AG.
A page-one article Friday about Time Warner Inc.'s chairman incorrectly identified Arista as a label owned by Sony Corp.
