Coca-Cola unveiled its long-awaited new diet Coke advertising campaign.
And it appears the soft drink maker borrowed a creative page from rival Diet Pepsi.
The approach is a radical departure from diet Coke's earlier advertising, which was introduced in 1982 with the successful "Just for the Taste of It" slogan.
Some of the new diet Coke spots rely on sex appeal, albeit with a wink and a nod, not unlike commercials for PepsiCo's flagship diet brand.
Perhaps not coincidentally, Lee Garfinkel, who was the creative persona behind the Diet Pepsi spots, is now the creative director at diet Coke's new agency.
The ads are the first creative work since diet Coke's ineffective "Taste It All" campaign was introduced on New Year's Day 1993.
That series, which featured montages of "ministers who surf, surgeons who sculpt, insurance agents who speed. . .on motorcycles," was yanked after only six weeks.
The $60 million account was later placed in review.
And Interpublic Group's Lintas:New York, diet Coke's only ad agency since the beverage was introduced in 1982, was fired.
The new agency, Lowe & Partners, another Interpublic agency, faces the challenge of reviving the brand's sales as consumers are turning away from diet colas.
The new diet Coke spots don't focus on calories.
What's more, they don't even mention the word "taste," which was the backbone of all previous campaigns.
"We used `taste' as a plank very effectively," says Nancy Gibson, diet Coke's world-wide brand director.
"We wanted a new message."
The spots are meant to be amusing vignettes.
Each features an old popular song, ranging from Louis Armstrong's "Kiss to Build a Dream On" to The Band's rock classic "The Weight" to Etta James's "I Just Wanna Make Love to You."
The spots are similar to the approach taken by Creative Artists Agency, the Hollywood talent agency that produced virtually all of the "Always" ads for Coca-Cola Classic.
That is, there isn't one jingle or story line; moreover, the ads seem unrelated to each other.
In one, a gaggle of female secretaries whisper to one another that it is 11:30 a.m., time for their diet Coke break.
They rush to a window where they can stare at a well-chiseled construction worker taking off his shirt.
He's on a break, guzzling down the soft drink.
The women are panting.
They promise to look again tomorrow.
Another ad shows a woman pulling up to a billiard hall in a sleepy, dusty rural town.
She unloads her boyfriend's possessions, throwing them at him while puzzled senior citizens look on.
Then, she chugs a diet Coke, triumphantly speeding away.
A third spot shows a bellhop knocking on the door of a honeymoon suite with a delivery of two cans of the soft drink on ice.
He makes the trip four times, each time to be greeted just by the hands of a man grabbing the soda.
Unlike previous diet Coke spots, with celebrities that included Elton John and Paula Abdul, the new commercials are decidedly free of well-known personalities -- with one exception.
Boxer Evander Holyfield appears in one ad to the unlikely tune of Mama Cass Elliot crooning, "Dream a Little Dream of Me."
Each spot ends with the slogan: "This is refreshment."
The new campaign resulted from extensive research with consumers who felt that diet Coke "doesn't mean fame and fortune," says Ms. Gibson.
Instead, the beverage is a "brief, important, refreshing moment to their day."
Fame and fortune were the linchpins of previous diet Coke ads.
"Taste it all was built on wanting it all," says Ms. Gibson.
"This is built on what we have."
She says that "Taste it all" wasn't "as effective as we wanted it to be."
In fact, Coke bottlers distinctly disliked the campaign.
Diet Coke, says Ms. Gibson, now exists "in a different world" from when it was introduced.
"The focus now is on the simpler pleasures with families and friends," she says.
Consumers drink diet Coke when they "want to push the hold button on the world to take a mental break.
The idea of diet Coke is that it is an important moment of refreshment in the course of a hectic day."
An industry official, who didn't want to be quoted by name, says these new ads are being met with little enthusiasm from bottlers.
Ms. Gibson says she "vigorously" objects to that allegation.
"The response is strong," she says -- "from the bottler to the route drivers."
It will be hard to avoid the new spots, which will begin airing on Turner Broadcasting System's TBS super channel Jan. 22, during the Golden Globe awards.
Some of the prime-time shows for which diet Coke bought time are: "Northern Exposure," "Murphy Brown," "Seinfeld" and "Melrose Place."
Although Ms. Gibson declines to comment on the ad budget, it is expected to be an increase from the previous $60 million.
In the Winter Olympics alone, diet Coke purchased 115 spots.
Diet Coke produced a whimsical spot especially for the Olympics, which shows a videotape of a four-member luge team speeding down the course.
When the tape is shown in slow motion, the team is seen chugging down diet Cokes and mugging to the camera.
Sales of both diet Coke and Diet Pepsi have slipped recently.
Supermarket sales of diet Coke fell 1.4% to $883.5 million in the 40-week period ended Oct. 3, 1993, according to Information Resources' InfoScan service.
Diet Pepsi fared worse, slipping 6% to $614.6 million.
"What we're seeing is massive floor dropping out of the diet market and the market drying up," says Jesse Meyers, publisher of Beverage Digest, in Old Greenwich, Conn.
"As the baby boomer generation has grown, it has gone from beverage to beverage with no loyalty.
They have gone from teas, waters, sports drinks and juice-added beverages.
But the generation hasn't landed to one of these.
The market splintered, and the diet soft drink category suffered the most."
Advertising isn't the only marketing tool that's changing at diet Coke.
The beverage's bottles and cans are undergoing a redesign by yet another ad agency, Fallon McElligott.
No date has been given for when the facelift will be ready.
There aren't any plans to plaster diet Coke's new slogan on the cans, the way "Taste it All" was for a short time last year.
Ms. Gibson says diet Coke tested the new commercials with audiences, including on-air testing in two cities, and received favorable response.
The new campaign will be in all English-speaking countries.
(In non-English speaking regions, the diet product is called Coke Light.)
"`Taste it all,'" says Ms. Gibson, "was an evolution.
`This is Refreshment' is revolutionary."
Magazine advertising pages increased 1% in 1993, according to the Publishers Information Bureau, a year in which many publishers believed total advertising would shrink.
The tiny but welcome gain included two consecutive quarters of decline.
Advertising pages, which had slumped in the second and third quarters, rebounded in the fourth.
Revenue from advertising in 1993 was up 6%, to $7.62 billion.
The 1993 pace was slower than in 1992, when ad pages had increased 2.4% and ad revenue had risen 8.1%.
The biggest revenue gains came from advertisers in drugs and remedies (22.9%); business and consumer services (20.5%); direct response (16.6%); and retail (16.3%).
The smallest gains came from automotive advertisers (1.8%); food (1.8%); and apparel (3%).
Ad Notes . . .
SUPER BOWL SPOT: Norwegian Cruise Line joins the list of advertisers who have plunked down $900,000 for 30 seconds of ad time during the Super Bowl broadcast.
Norwegian, a unit of Kloster Cruise Ltd., is broadcasting two 30-second spots from Omnicom Group's Goodby, Berlin & Silverstein, part of a $30 million campaign called, "It's Different Out Here."
