Now may not be the best of times for an insurance company to join the stock market.
Insurance stocks have nosed down as much as 30% in the past quarter, largely because interest rates have inched up.
And with the Clinton administration predicting a further moderate uptick in short-term rates, it would seem interest rate-sensitive stocks such as those for insurance companies face continued lethargy.
Yet into this weakness comes a new player: Western National, the largest subsidiary of holding company Conseco and the Houston parent of Amarillo's Western National Life Insurance.
Conseco, of Carmel, Ind., plans to divest Western National in early February, offering 30.4 million shares.
Western National will offer an additional two million shares.
At an expected share price of $15 to $17, the deal could be worth as much as $550 million, the largest initial public offering in Texas since January 1989.
But how well will an insurance stock fare in a market where, the consensus holds, interest rates are headed north?
Although most analysts following this company can't talk because their firms are helping to underwrite the offering, those who can comment say Western National should fare quite well, as long as interest rates don't rise too quickly (a steady rise, however, could prove beneficial).
Western National is a marketer of annuity products, the popular tax-deferred investments used mainly for retirement planning.
As one of the few remaining tax shelters, annuities have gained a big following -- premiums nationwide for 1993 are projected to have topped $61.2 billion, up 81% from $33.8 billion sold in 1987, according to Kenneth Kehrer Associates, the Princeton, N.J., publisher of the Newsletter of the Bank-Insurance Industry.
But Western National has limited itself to fixed annuity products, while in recent years it has been the variable annuity sector of the market that has taken off, as investors went in search of higher returns amid low interest rates.
As a result, annual annuity premiums funneling into the company fell to about $600 million in 1993, from a historic high of $1.27 billion in 1991.
Now the company hopes to get back on track, planning to offer variable annuity products this year.
And it's in a good position to regain lost investors because it sells through a hot distributor -- banks.
Bank-sold annuities are the fastest-growing segment of the market; Mr. Kehrer projects it at $40 billion by the year 2000, up from $12.8 billion currently.
Roughly three-quarters of Western National's annual premiums come from this niche.
The company also markets its products to employees of nonprofit agencies -- such as school systems and hospitals -- investing in 403 (b) plans, similar to 401 (k) retirement accounts.
Analysts are enthusiastic about Western National's prospects.
The annuity business is expected to grow further.
Aging baby boomers, now hitting their prime savings years, are expected to pick up billions of dollars worth of annuity products as they prepare for retirement.
And most analysts don't see a rapid escalation in interest rates.
If interest rates were to rise sharply, the company would be severely burdened as investors dump their current low-rate annuities in search of higher returns.
Such an exodus would force Western National to sell low-rate bonds in which it has invested into a marketplace where those bonds are worth less.
But if interest rates ascend gradually -- as is expected -- Western National will benefit by replacing low-rate, short-term bonds that come due with higher-rate bonds.
Investors' interest in annuity products is reflected in the growth of Western National's assets in recent years.
Total assets -- at $8.6 billion -- have more than doubled since 1988.
And although premiums are down, net income is up as a result of the overall growth in Western National's invested assets.
Western National profits by maintaining a spread between what investments earn and the rate of return it guarantees to annuity holders.
Net income for 1993 is expected at $125 million, or about $2 a share, compared with $102.2 million for 1992.
The offering is for 32.4 million shares, but Conseco will retain an additional 29.6 million, meaning 62 million shares will actually exist.
Based on the expected offering price, Western National's stock will come public at between 7.5 and 8.5 times earnings, a discount to what most analysts feel the company is worth.
"In light of the growth that's ahead of them, this is a company that ultimately should trade for 15 times earnings," says Raymond L. Dirks, director of research at RAS Securities, New York.
One additional risk is that Western National is dependent on one product: Nearly 98% of the premiums collected in the first nine months of 1993 was tied to annuities (the remainder came from underwriting about 25,000 life insurance policies).
Western National is seeking to broaden its offerings once it is spun off.
Aside from introducing variable annuities, the company wants to increase its life insurance underwriting.
Seems investors are using good news -- or no news -- to take some profits these days.
Men's Wearhouse, the Houston clothier and one of 1993's top performers, dropped nearly 10% for the week on news that total sales for December increased more than 42%, while sales at stores open at least a year rose nearly 18%.
Likewise, Pancho's Mexican Buffets, the Fort Worth eatery that has revamped its stores and beefed up its menu, shed 9.2% after reporting December sales in restaurants open a year or more leaped 17%, one of that company's best showings.
Dallas's First USA, which in 1993 climbed from $20 to the mid-$60 before splitting 2-for-1 in November, dropped nearly 11% last week; there was no apparent news to spark the fall.
CompuCom Systems, Dallas, gained $1.25, or 31%, after announcing that unaudited revenue for 1993 topped $1 billion, a record and a 40% increase from 1992.
The computer marketer noted that since 1989, it has posted an annual growth rate of 39%.
Thomas Group, an Irving provider of management services, dropped 75 cents and traded at six times its average daily volume on news that it expects an early termination of its contract with Revlon Consumer Products, one of three clients that contribute more than 10% of the company's revenue.
Thomas Group said in a related action it sued Revlon for collection of $3 million due for incentives earned from services provided to Revlon.
Thomas Group officials said Revlon is seeking an early termination of the contract because "Revlon doesn't want to honor the incentive payments."
Western National Corp.
Nine Months ended Sept. 30, 1993*:
Revenue: $560.2 million vs. $499.8 million
Net income: $97 million vs. $77.4 million
