If the stock market is addicted to mutual-fund money, as many pros say, then a survey this week has bad news: After Friday's 96-point plunge in the Dow Jones Industrial Average, investors quit supplying those crucial dollars to stock funds.
A sampling of 138 domestic-stock funds, with $146 billion in assets, shows that the cash flows into these funds dried up for the four business days through Tuesday.
In that four-day period, the funds actually suffered a small outflow of $25 million, according to AMG Data Services, the Arcata, Calif., research firm that performed the study.
By contrast, for the full week ended Feb. 2, the same funds sucked in nearly $387 million.
Robert Adler, president of AMG, warns that the data come from only a sampling of funds, and so may not capture the full cash-flow picture.
Nevertheless, Mr. Adler says, given the market's "reliance on mutual-fund flows . . . this doesn't bode well for the market."
To be sure, investors could come flocking back into stock funds in the days ahead.
And it's clear that fund shareholders didn't panic and dump stock funds en masse following Friday's slump.
Fears about small investors rushing to cash out their mutual-fund holdings in a market downturn have haunted many market prognosticators lately.
Such a move would worsen a stock-market decline, since funds would then be forced to sell more and more stocks to pay off departing shareholders.
However, fund investors have "learned since 1987 that it's the right thing to buy on every dip," says Byron Wien, U.S. investment strategist at Morgan Stanley & Co. in New York.
For people to panic out of mutual funds would take "a fairly prolonged" decline in prices, Mr. Wien says, and "we're a long way from that."
Even so, a market accustomed to being injected with more than $10 billion a month from stock funds, as happened on average last year, could suffer withdrawal symptoms long before investors start redeeming.
Even a decline in cash flowing to funds might make the market look sickly.
For one thing, investors put off by low returns on bonds and money-market funds may be drawn to other investments than U.S.-stock funds.
According to AMG, more than half of the money going into stock funds this year has gone into those that invest overseas.
Moreover, in another bad sign for U.S. stocks, there seems to be no decline in the volume of initial public offerings hitting the market.
Last year, IPOs soaked up much of the cash mutual funds had to invest.
"If equity offerings stayed high, and if cash flows into stock funds diminished, that would be a negative" for the stock market, says Hersh Cohen, comanager of Smith Barney Shearson Appreciation Fund.
Market professionals who track IPOs say the number of scheduled offerings in the pipeline isn't showing signs of dwindling.
"The activity in the market right now is unconnected with what the Fed has done" in tightening short-term rates, says Linda Killian, a principal with Renaissance Capital Corp. in Greenwich, Conn.
"The IPO filing activity continues to be very strong, with pending deals scheduled for pricing over the next eight weeks up more than 25% from a year ago."
Robert Natale, new-issues analyst for Standard & Poor's Corp. in New York, says the continuing vigor of the IPO market is a bad sign for stocks overall, as IPOs will keep soaking up fresh money flows in the months ahead.
"I think this is going to be a deterrent to the bull market," he says.
"The new-issues market is going to be picking up between now and March, which could cause more limited progress in overall stock prices."
He explains: "The volume of filings tends to accelerate into March, when the number of actual offerings often peaks for the first half of the year."
That is because, after accumulating year-end financial data by late February, companies tend to rush to file public offerings.
The AMG survey of funds' cash flows focused on activity at leading growth funds.
The name "growth fund" is somewhat deceptive because it includes a variety of investment styles, including both "growth stock" funds that invest in fast-growing companies and also "value" funds that look for cheap stocks.
Among the funds sampled, Fidelity Magellan, the largest U.S. mutual fund, had an outflow of $85 million in the four business days through Tuesday, the largest outflow from any fund in the survey, according to AMG.
But since the Fidelity Investments fund is so huge, the outflow actually amounted to only a quarter of one percentage point of its assets.
By contrast, Brandywine Fund had an inflow of $44 million, the most positive result of any fund in the survey.
Meanwhile, Robertson Stephens Contrarian, a fund designed to benefit from market declines, had inflows of $19 million, the third-highest in the survey.
SO LONG, SECTOR FUNDS: In an unusual display of candor, Vanguard Group has asked fund shareholders to kill off two poorly performing "sector" funds, or funds that generally invest in a single industry.
Shareholders of the two Vanguard Specialized Portfolios -- for the service-economy and technology sectors -- will vote in May on a proposal to merge the funds into two larger Vanguard funds.
John C. Bogle, Vanguard's chairman, said in a statement that the funds had become a trading vehicle for some investors but had failed to attract long-term investors.
The statement said the decision to kill off the funds was made after "careful consideration of the portfolios' long-term performance records," which had "not measured up to competitive norms."
Sector funds have multiplied in number during the past decade, with top performers attracting hundreds of millions of dollars in assets.
The Technology fund has only $84 million in assets, and its total return of 14.24% for the past five years lagged behind the returns of 80% of rival sector funds, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc.
Vanguard wants to merge its technology fund into Explorer, one of its small-stock funds.
The Service Economy fund, meanwhile, is to be merged into Vanguard's Morgan Growth fund.
Morgan Growth has a better record than Service Economy for the past nine years but not for the past five.
However, since Service Economy has gleaned only $34 million in assets after more than nine years, "we are willing to admit that the concept for the portfolio may have been ill-conceived," Mr. Bogle said in the statement.
The two disappearing funds were managed under contract for Vanguard by Wellington Management Co., a Boston manager of a number of Vanguard funds.
