The Mexican government said it plans to sell $2.4 billion of stock in three banks, apparently in part to make sure it has enough money to address the problems highlighted by the uprising in Chiapas.
The revolt in Chiapas has focused so much attention on the abject poverty that still exists in much of Mexico that -- with presidential elections coming up in August -- the government has said it will sharply increase spending on social problems.
But money is hard to come by.
Economic weakness has cut into tax revenue enough that, even before Chiapas, the government had said it would only break even on the federal budget this year, and many private economists felt the government was being overly optimistic.
The Mexican government doesn't have the luxury of considering running up a big deficit, because that would hurt Mexico's credibility with international investors.
So the government has begun announcing plans to sell many of its remaining holdings in once-nationalized businesses.
Guillermo Ortiz Martinez, deputy finance secretary, said at a news conference that the government will sell by the end of the year its 21% holding in Bancomer, its 8.4% stake in Banco Serfin and its 8.8% interest in Banco Internacional.
He said the sales will complete the government's privatization of the nation's banks, a program that has brought in more than $14 billion over the past two-plus years.
Mr. Ortiz said the sales will be made both in Mexican and in international markets, but didn't provide more details.
His statements about the banks follow recent announcements by government officials that Mexico also plans to sell its small remaining stake in Telefonos de Mexico S.A., the telephone monopoly.
Mr. Ortiz also said that the government will shortly publish rules for foreign banks that want to operate in Mexico.
It had generally been expected that foreign banks would start operating quickly in Mexico, because the North American Free Trade Agreement provides for an 8% market share for foreign banks this year.
In fact, government officials have often talked about wanting foreign banks to quickly start providing more competition for Mexican banks.
That way, Mexican banks would have to begin lowering rates that can still total 20% to 30% on many loans -- in a country where inflation is well under 10%.
But Mr. Ortiz's statement shows that it will still be many months before foreign banks have any kind of presence in Mexico.
Once the finance ministry publishes the rules, banks will be given 90 days to file their applications.
Then the finance ministry will decide which banks get licenses.
Only then will foreign banks start in earnest to move into Mexico.
