Barry Diller's statement conceding QVC's loss of Paramount was brief and to the point: "They won.
We lost.
Just what Mr. Diller will do next is the subject of considerable speculation in Hollywood and on Wall Street.
His announced plan is to build QVC Network Inc., which has emerged from the battle virtually unscarred, into a multimedia company.
Observers say Mr. Diller also may be weighing other options that would give him the entertainment assets he so covets.
"Clearly, Barry Diller is going to be at the top of a lot of lists" of people assembling partners for takeovers in the entertainment industry, said Peter Dekom, a Hollywood lawyer.
Mr. Diller declined to comment on the speculation.
"We're not going to discuss it at any time until an opportunity presents itself that we think is worthwhile," he said.
QVC has "lost time," Mr. Diller conceded.
Even as the battle over Paramount Communications Inc. has dominated Mr. Diller's attention, the home-shopping company has embarked on a costly course of growth, taking on new channels and expanding into foreign markets.
Observers say that the company has a bright future, though it faces near-term challenges, including earnings pressure stemming from the expansion, that now require Mr. Diller's attention.
Though QVC will have to pay its advisers about $30 million in fees, it emerges from the Paramount battle none the worse for wear -- and with virtually no debt.
Although some shareholders are smarting over the decline in its once-lofty stock price, which hovered above $60 before the takeover battle, its securities are already strongly rebounding on the prospects that the vanquished QVC won't have to shoulder a big debt load or issue a flood of new shares to pay for Paramount.
In Nasdaq Stock Market trading yesterday, QVC closed at $50.25, up $1.75 share, or 3.6%.
Even in defeat, Mr. Diller's star is shining bright.
He is garnering high marks for protecting QVC's existing shareholders by not bidding higher for Paramount and by refusing to offer a potentially dilutive price-guarantee to Paramount shareholders.
Such a guarantee, known in takeover parlance as a collar, proved to be the margin of victory for Viacom Inc.
Yet already, the collar will cost Viacom an additional $700 million in newly issued stock if its stock price doesn't rebound within a year from current levels.
"Diller proved that he wasn't imprudent," said Craig Bibb, analyst at PaineWebber Inc.
"Basically, he did what he said he was going to do, which wasn't to destroy shareholder value to get this deal done."
With the battle for Paramount over, QVC is back in business with a powerful shareholder, Tele-Communications Inc.'s John Malone.
Some observers say Mr. Diller could now link up with Mr. Malone and pursue an investment in Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.'s MCA Inc. unit.
Others speculate Mr. Diller could join Seagram Co.'s Edgar Bronfman Jr., who owns an 11.2% stake in Time Warner Inc., in making some kind of a move on that company.
Or he could pursue General Electric Co.'s NBC unit, the network he explored a purchase of before going after Paramount.
If QVC had won Paramount, TCI affiliate Liberty Media Inc. would have been forced to give up its stake in QVC by federal antitrust regulators.
BellSouth Corp. was to buy the Liberty stake in QVC; now Liberty can keep it.
Indeed, QVC will end up with an even more potent backer if the proposed acquisition of Liberty and TCI by Bell Atlantic Corp. is completed.
"We are back -- back with Bells on," said Peter Barton, who heads Liberty.
Mr. Malone has approached officials of Matsushita and its MCA unit about a possible investment in the owner of Universal Pictures.
"Whatever Malone does, I can see him calling up Barry," said Mr. Dekom, the Hollywood attorney.
"Anybody seeking to buy a studio puts Diller at the top of the list as a candidate to run and own part of it."
The most intriguing speculation has Mr. Diller linking up with Seagram's Mr. Bronfman, scion of the spirit concern's controlling family, to wrest control of Time Warner.
Time Warner, increasingly concerned about Seagram's intention, last month adopted a poison-pill defense that would be triggered when someone buys more than 15% of its shares.
That move, in turn, has ignited growing predictions of an ensuing takeover battle.
The Seagram-QVC takeover scenarios began to surface in the last two weeks as QVC's momentum in the Paramount battle began to wane and because of strong links between the two companies.
Mr. Diller and Mr. Bronfman are friends, and both rely on investment advice from Herbert Allen of Allen & Co.
And both also are friends of super-agent Michael Ovitz, who also is advising Mr. Bronfman.
Before Mr. Diller joined QVC, speculation that he might be angling to dislodge Time Warner Chairman Gerald Levin was so rife that Mr. Diller wrote Mr. Levin a note disavowing any interest in the position.
Still, the speculation about a Seagram-QVC attack on Time Warner has reached the ears of Time Warner executives.
"I heard it a week ago," said one senior official.
"But that's only a rumor floating around New York.
I know that Barry knows Junior Edgar Bronfman Jr. well.
They all hang out in the same group."
The executive dismissed the talk, however.
"It doesn't make sense," he said.
But then, on quick reflection, he added: "Anything is possible."
Time Warner declined to comment.
While the speculation continues, Mr. Diller has to tackle the more immediate task of refiring growth at QVC.
In late 1992, QVC launched a growth-boosting program that airs at midnight called "Today's Special Value," which daily featured an extraordinary bargain.
As a result, saidPaineWebber's Mr. Bibb, quarterly revenue growth per QVC subscriber home was 6% to 11% last year.
Without new programs, he estimated that quarterly per-home revenue growth this year will be no higher than 6%.
He said he expects overall revenue growth to slow to 13% this year from 1993's 15%, continuing an annual slide from the 19% revenue gain in 1991.
Mr. Diller is betting to reverse the trend through the launch of new channels and through international expansion.
"On Q," a contemporary-fashion network aimed at viewers 18 to 35 years old, will debut May 16 and air weekdays.
"Q2," offering lifestyle programming, will launch in late May or early June.
The new services are designed, Mr. Diller said, to appeal to "people who look at the current service and say, `it's not for me.'"
The launches will coincide roughly with a major marketing push set to begin in mid to late spring.
"We will start to advertise to people who don't use the service to get them to watch specific programs at specific times," Mr. Diller said.
On the drawing board for next year is an on-line shopping service.
On the international front, QVC launched TV home-shopping services in Mexico and in London in partnership respectively with Grupo Televisa and BSkyB, a direct-broadcast satellite service and unit of News Corp.
Mr. Diller said he expects the Mexico venture to turn a profit within a year and the British venture to be profitable by the end of 1995.
With TCI back in the picture and Paramount behind him, Mr. Diller also is expected to try to restart the aborted merger talks with TCI's Home Shopping Network Inc., QVC's chief rival.
Combining the two "would give Mr. Diller a larger playground," noted PaineWebber's Mr. Bibb.
"There would be a lot of benefits in terms of cost savings."
