Actions in the House and the Senate appeared to remove a traditional obstacle to passage of a nationwide banking bill, the top legislative goal of many of the nation's largest banks.
A House Banking Committee panel voted unanimously to allow banks to establish nationwide branch systems.
In the Senate, meanwhile, Sen. Christopher Dodd (D., Conn.) withdrew an insurance amendment that has blocked passage of nationwide banking in the past.
The actions follow months of lobbying by leaders of major bank companies, which argue that the creation of interstate branch networks could save the industry billions of dollars annually by allowing them to consolidate operations in different states into unified networks.
Passage of such a plan would trigger a wave of acquisitions as companies such as BankAmerica Corp. and NationsBank Corp. scramble to establish cross-country empires, accelerating the current industry consolidation.
Nationwide branch networks would make it easier for consumers and businesses to use one bank to meet all their banking needs, no matter where they are in the country.
For years, efforts to allow the creation of nationwide banking networks have failed because insurance agents, a politically powerful group, have tried to use the bills as vehicles for limits on insurance sales by banks.
The addition of insurance restrictions to previous bills turned the banking industry against the legislation because banks want to preserve their right to sell a wider range of financial products, such as insurance and mutual funds.
Although insurance and other issues could derail the bill as it works its way through Congress, the chances of passage this year are stronger than ever.
Yesterday's congressional action "is very good for interstate.
It opens up the possibility of passage," said Edward Yingling, chief lobbyist for the American Bankers Association.
In the House Banking Committee, the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions voted 29-0 for an interstate plan.
The bill avoids any reference to insurance, and subcommittee Chairman Stephen Neal (D., N.C.) expressed confidence that the bill will make it through the full Banking Committee and the House.
The Senate Banking Committee is scheduled to take up an interstate bill on Feb. 23.
In the past, Sen. Dodd has offered an amendment to restrict the current ability of nationally chartered banks to sell insurance nationwide through units in small towns.
But in a statement last night, Sen. Dodd said he was withdrawing his insurance amendment because he hadn't been able to work out a plan that could win Senate passage.
"While I will continue to support legislation to rationalize bank sales of insurance, I do not want to hold up interstate branching legislation," he said.
-- One year after enactment, the Federal Reserve Board would be able to allow bank-holding concerns or foreign banks to buy banks anywhere in the nation.
-- Eighteen months after enactment, a bank-holding company with units in more than one state can consolidate them into one system.
-- Three years after enactment -- and earlier if states agree -- the Comptroller of the Currency, which regulates nationally chartered banks, may approve these banks' applications to acquire banks across state lines.
A number of consumer and other amendments still could end up slowing or blocking passage of the legislation.
