The swaying of downtown office towers and other structures during Monday's earthquake came close to the design limits imposed on new construction in 1988, experts say.
The extent of the ground movement, more violent than some of the shaking that took place during the deadly 1989 San Francisco quake, surprised some of these quake experts.
The stricter construction standards -- imposed by the state of California in the wake of a quake that ravaged Mexico City in 1985 -- were intended to protect buildings against an earthquake even more powerful than the one that struck the Los Angeles area Monday.
The tougher building standards enacted during the past five years allowed high-rise buildings and newer commercial structures to escape largely unscathed in the latest Los Angeles quake, which measured 6.6 on the Richter scale.
But the massive temblor disclosed striking shortcomings in California's effort to reinforce older buildings and freeways.
"The ground motion that many buildings saw was close to the maximum they were designed to withstand," said Ron Hamburger, a vice president of EQE International Corp., San Francisco, a leading engineering-consulting firm specializing in earthquake-damage prevention and assessment.
The motion was captured by devices that calibrate actual acceleration rates of the ground as the tremors pass through.
For thousands of older buildings that sustained significant damage and sections of the region's highway system -- which buckled or collapsed despite two decades of planning to shore them up for such seismic activity -- current retrofit efforts clearly proved inadequate.
Yesterday, as the full scope of the roadway damage became apparent, earthquake experts and even some state transportation officials predicted that the entire, $1 billion statewide highway retrofit program is likely to be revamped.
Gov. Pete Wilson quickly tried to scotch the idea of increasing taxes to speed up the work.
But questions about why the program is taking so long -- and what criteria state officials relied on to determine the overpasses to be updated firstare likely to become major political issues in coming months.
Thomas Hanks, a seismologist with the U.S. Geological Service in Menlo Park, Calif., said the roadway damage this time appeared to exceed damage caused by the 1971 Sylmar quake.
While noting that Monday's quake was centered closer to heavily-populated areas of the San Fernando Valley, Mr. Hanks nevertheless challenged the effectiveness of the state's highway-improvement efforts.
"We've had 23 years to gather knowledge, pour more cement and install more reinforcing steel," he said, "yet more bridges came down."
Beginning in 1971, the state spent hundreds of millions of dollars installing devices intended to prevent roadways from being knocked off their supporting pillars during periods of seismic stress.
Then, after the 1989 quake that hit San Francisco, the state initiated a second round of construction to reinforce pillars and foundations holding up highways.
So far, only 300 of the 900 bridges and overpasses targeted for such reinforcement have been modernized.
Work on two of the most seriously damaged overpasses was scheduled to start in the next few weeks.
State highway officials said that the worst roadway damage occurred at overpasses where the columns and foundations hadn't yet been reinforced with extra steel or concrete.
At a news conference in Sacramento, James Roberts, chief engineer for the California Department of Transportation, said that unexpected vertical jolting of the highways, coupled with typical horizontal shaking during earthquakes, caused some of the roadbeds to collapse.
Attributing retrofit delays to environmental and technical problems, he acknowledged that now the state will have to come up with a revised priority list of vulnerable roadways based on the location of the latest quake and other factors.
Bridges along the Simi Valley Freeway that collapsed, for instance, weren't near the top of the state's list because they were relatively new and considered sufficiently solid to withstand a severe quake.
State lawmakers years ago adopted a special excise tax to fund the highway improvements.
But another senior consultant at EQE International, which has contracts for some of the design work, blamed much of the delay on the state's bureaucracy.
"The primary limitation is that the State Department of Transportation can handle only a limited number of contracts" at a time, Earl Aurelius said.
"It becomes a management problem."
The apartment buildings, retail stores and even health facilities that took severe damage apparently were built under older versions of the building codes, according to earthquake experts and rescue officials.
Only a tiny portion of such older buildings in the region, these people estimated, have undergone often expensive renovations necessary to shore up masonry or concrete walls to meet today's standards.
The Northridge apartment building that collapsed and killed 16 residents, for example, reportedly had a so-called soft, or unreinforced, first floor that would have to be strengthened by steel supports if it were being built today.
Bill Iwan, an earthquake expert at the California Institute of Technology, said this week's earthquake raises questions about whether enough has been done to improve construction standards to prevent fatalities.
"Did we learn enough" from the previous quakes, "and did we put it into practice?" he asked reporters Monday.
Another result of the quake could be to prompt many owners of plants, shopping centers and other commercial buildings to invest in retrofits.
That's because earthquake-insurance rates are expected to continue their upward spiral, and some businesses may find it more economical to make long-term investments in upgrading facilities.
