Walt Disney Co. is considering launching its own cruise-ship line, perhaps buying two or more vessels and offering vacation packages tied to its theme parks.
"We want to explore the potential of the cruise business," said Disney spokesman John Dreyer.
"Obviously, tour and travel is a major component of our business."
The plans come as Disney is winding up a 10-year relationship with Dial Corp.'s Premier Cruise Lines, which offers family cruises in combination with trips to Walt Disney World.
Under that arrangement, which expires March 31, Premier had paid Disney to bill Premier as "the official cruise line of Walt Disney World" and to use Disney characters aboard its three ships.
The companies decided to part ways last fall after Premier tried to negotiate more favorable terms, and Disney has since failed to reach agreement with other companies to pick up the "official cruise line" business.
It will cost Disney about $300 million for each 2,000-passenger ship it would need to start its own operation.
The company is said to be soliciting bids for two ships in the 70,000 ton, 1,000-cabin range, and construction could begin within the next few months, according to the industry trade publication Travel Weekly.
"I've talked to shipyard executives in Europe, and they've confirmed the visits from Disney executives," added Oivind Mathisen, editor of New York-based Cruise Industry News.
"They're serious about it."
Disney declined to give specifics about the plans, saying only that it is exploring "all possibilities."
Mike Reininger, vice president of product development at the Disney Development Co. subsidiary, is heading the company's investigation of the cruise-line business.
Though Disney doesn't have any expertise with cruises -- except Caribbean ones with robotic pirates -- observers think the venture is a natural extension of the company's theme-park and resort business.
"With a cruise ship, you're looking at a modified hotel business," Merrill Lynch analyst Harold Vogel said.
"They shouldn't have any difficulty doing that."
Bruce Nierenberg, chairman and chief executive officer of American Family Cruises in Miami and a co-founder of Premier Cruise Lines, said he thinks Disney's entry into the business would help his own efforts to get more families onto cruise ships.
"With Disney being the largest tourism marketer in the U.S., it's a real advantage for this industry," Mr. Nierenberg said.
"They aren't going to take customers away from me.
They're going to create customers."
