Led by America West Airlines, carriers slashed coast-to-coast and other long-haul fares by up to 52% on advance-purchase tickets.
The sale represents a boon for leisure travelers but a setback for the industry's efforts to keep fares at relatively high levels, particularly on long-haul routes.
Many carriers, including Delta Air Lines and Continental Airlines, have been cutting fares on routes under 500 miles to compete against low-cost rivals.
To compensate, the industry has been pushing up prices on flights over 1,500 miles -- business fliers saw an 11% increase on those routes last year -- and those fare increases were expected to continue this year.
But America West throttled those plans, for now, by announcing a sale that applies for travel through June 15.
The nonrefundable tickets require a Saturday-night stay and must be purchased by March 10.
To take two examples, a roundtrip New York-San Francisco ticket costs $318, a 52% discount, and the round-trip Boston-Los Angeles price was cut 50% to $328.
Other major carriers, including AMR Corp.'s American Airlines, UAL Corp.'s United Airlines and Delta, said they would match the sale, even on nonstop flights.
These discounts usually reduce airline revenues, and some industry observers were surprised that America West, which has no nonstop flights between the East Coast and California, could force industry giants that do fly nonstop to cut their prices.
"It's stupid from the airlines' point of view; they continue to lie to people about what it costs to transport people," said Joe Brancatelli, travel adviser of Travel Holiday magazine.
The carriers were clearly not pleased by the sale but say their hand was forced.
"This is not something we would have done, but we'll match it to be competitive," an American spokesman said.
The fare initiative underscores the cost advantage that America West has driven between itself and most of the industry.
The Phoenix carrier has substantially driven its costs down in the 2 1/2 years it has operated in bankruptcy proceedings under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
It also announced yesterday a fare sale to Philadelphia that will commence when America West begins service there in April.
The airline also said it would continue a 30% discount off leisure fares that it has been running in many markets for over a year, and that some rivals have matched.
Analysts say America West will continue to be a spur in the industry's hide.
"No airline can afford any significant erosion in passenger levels," says Chris Miller, airline analyst for USTravel, a large travel agency.
"The industry is still hostage to the less-dominant players in the market."
