As owner of Lucasfilm Ltd. and several related high-technology companies, he has firmly planted his feet in both worlds, and has staked his personal future and professional reputation on a melding of the two.
This isn't newfound religion.
Years ago, he left behind a Hollywood whose pettiness and lack of vision he abhorred, and moved his company to Northern California, closer to Silicon Valley.
Much the way he created a new standard for special effects with "Star Wars" in 1977, the 49-year-old filmmaker is leading the way in helping to define just how emerging technologies will affect movie-making and entertainment in general.
Hollywood could be a winner, he says, if studios cough up vital research and development funds.
Technology could help to dramatically reduce the spiraling cost of making films, while offering the promise of making them more exciting.
With his recent TV series "The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles," Mr. Lucas saved the expense of creating elaborate period sets by using computers to "re-create" the backgrounds.
He also used them to make a handful of people look like a crowd -- winning no friends among extras, perhaps, but gaining the attention of studio bean counters.
An interactive fiber-optic network connects the North Carolina production site of his latest movie, "Radioland Murders," with the post-production facilities at his Skywalker Ranch here.
Mr. Lucas "visits" the set every morning without leaving the ranch, chatting with the crew via a two-way video hookup that allows interaction in real time, using compressed digital video.
The entertainment that comes from Lucasfilm -- movies, television shows, computer games and more -- will certainly play a role in the much-vaunted multimedia future.
Mr. Lucas recently sat down with The Wall Street Journal, peered in his crystal ball and had this to say:
The Wall Street Journal: Where do you think we are headed in the next five, 10, 15 years?
Mr. Lucas: There's a lot of hype out there, but there's something real happening.
It's the upgrading of telecommunications in this country, and that will have a tremendous and powerful impact on the way we live our lives.
A lot of the rumbling right now is about home shopping and viewer-on-demand video, and those kinds of things really are going to happen.
If cable operators really want to grow the business, they'll have to compete with the existing home-video market.
But a lot of the key issues have to do with pricing.
If cable operators get greedy and charge, say, $20 an hour for programming -- especially old programming -- I don't think much is going to happen.
But if they get it down to the level of $1 an hour, there will be an instantaneous revolution that will wipe out the home-video business in a year.
WSJ: Do you think people really want all these services?
Mr. Lucas: Definitely.
They don't want it at $20 an hour, they don't want it at $10 an hour.
But they'll take it at $1 an hour.
They'll pay that for movies-on-demand, TV shows-on-demand.
I think the only things you'll get on the TV networks will be info-commercials, talk shows and nondramatic programming.
I don't think they'll be able to afford to put dramatic programs on the air -- it's just too expensive.
Programming that involves creative talent will end up on "pay-on-demand."
That's different from "pay-per-view," which will still be used for big events like championship fights.
For those, they can charge $20 or $40 an hour.
But to sell "Murphy Brown," "Roseanne" or any movies, the price will have to be maintained at a very low rate before people will buy into it.
And they will buy into it.
They would just as soon not go out to the video store if they can get it at home.
WSJ: What about a generational factor?
Will older Americans resist the new technology and leave the 500-channel TV surfing to computer-literate kids?
Mr. Lucas: I don't see it happening that way.
I see it like the cellular phone and the fax machine.
People say, "I don't get it, I don't need it."
But then they'll see it being used and say, "I have to have one of these things."
And it will be hard not to.
People will discover that finding information on a computer will be infinitely easier than programming a VCR is today.
Plus, audio-command technology is here.
That is going to be a major factor.
You can tell your TV, "I want to watch Murphy Brown."
Older Americans, I think, will really go for the home-shopping services as they develop.
The reality is that many of them would like to order up things at home and not have to go out.
WSJ: Besides TV shows, movies and home shopping, what else might people order up on these new TV systems?
Mr. Lucas: Well, I have a game company, and I think view-on-demand games will take off pretty quickly.
It's a little bit problematical about how it's going to work, but it seems obvious that home delivery of games is a natural, because it's a digital medium that you're dealing with.
Interactive games that involve more than one player -- I call them "party-line games" -- will be popular.
You're playing with two or three other people at the same time at various places over the phone.
Visual telecommunications and video conferencing will also add to this.
If you're playing a game with two or three other people, you can see them all as you play.
It's just like being next to them.
WSJ: What impact will digital technology have on Hollywood as it relates to movie making?
Mr. Lucas: The cost of making movies is going to come down.
More filmmakers are going to be able to tell bigger stories.
Take "The Age of Innocence."
It's hard for most filmmakers to get a movie like that off the ground today.
The market isn't big enough, and the cost of doing a period movie like that is too expensive.
But on the "Young Indy" TV series -- which was also a period show with horses, carriages, completely different landscapes, costumes -- we had exactly the same kinds of production values as "Age of Innocence," but we did it for 10% of the cost, thanks to digital technology.
We used the computer to make crowd scenes, when we only had a handful of actors, and to replicate backgrounds that weren't really there.
That just means that more people will be allowed to make big films like "The Age of Innocence" than just Marty Scorcese, a man who's at the top of the field with a huge amount of clout.
More people will be able to do something that's a little bit out of the action or other highly commercial genres.
Studios will hopefully be able to make more movies, and they will then be able to take more chances and make more interesting films.
WSJ: How important is that?
Mr. Lucas: Listen, a lot of the films that I've made have been offbeat, really high-risk movies.
"Star Wars" was a completely high-risk, nobody-out-there-understands-it kind of movie.
Once it came out, it was a big hit because it was so fresh and different.
Because it was so high-risk.
WSJ: What kind of savings are we talking about?
Mr. Lucas: We did a shot in the TV series for $1,500 that would have cost a studio $30,000 if they were doing the same shot for a feature film.
"Radioland Murders," the movie we're working on right now, is an experiment for us in that we're applying the cost-saving technology we learned on the TV series to the big screen.
I don't think we can get that same shot done for $1,500, but we may be able to get it to $10,000 or $12,000.
But even going to $12,000 from $30,000 is a major leap.
And this is just the first step.
We're inventing new technology that I feel very confident will allow us to cut that cost in half again.
Within the next couple of years, we'll be able to take what was a $30,000 shot and do it on the big screen in full resolution for $6,000 or $7,000.
WSJ: Tell me about "Radioland Murders."
Mr. Lucas: The budget is under $10 million.
The average cost of making a movie today is $30 million.
It's the kind of movie I like to make -- it's frantic and crazy and fun -- but it's difficult to get a movie like this made because it doesn't fit into any of the categories that studios like.
This is a really wacko, offbeat comedy, set in 1939 -- and it doesn't have any movie stars.
This isn't a romantic comedy with Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan, so the studio looks at it as this extreme wild card.
If it were to cost $30 million, no one would make it.
Not even with me attached as producer.
But there's this chance it could break out.
Universal Pictures will distribute it, maybe in the fall.
WSJ: Among the studios in Hollywood, how do you rate the various managements and corporate cultures when it comes to melding entertainment and technology?
Mr. Lucas: They're all struggling to figure out what they're doing, what they should be doing.
They come up and we talk about things, but the funny thing is, not many of them listen.
They're spending their money in the craziest ways.
They won't put it where it has to go, in terms of investing in the technology.
They figure somebody else will do it.
We're not talking about huge sums of money -- $10, $20, $30 million -- but it would save them hundreds of millions of dollars if they would just step up to the plate and do it now.
You're not going to see giant, overwhelming profits coming from multimedia for a number of years, but the investment has to be made now.
WSJ: Besides the folks here at Lucasfilm, who are the visionaries in Hollywood?
Mr. Lucas: There are a lot of people working down there, but there isn't anybody that comes to mind that I would say, "Here's somebody who's really got the picture."
The studios are trying to figure out what to do and they're making a lot of interesting decisions.
It's funny.
I've been in the game business for 15 years, and now all of a sudden all the studios are jumping in.
They don't understand the marketplace or who the players are.
Or that the players are bigger than they are.
WSJ: What will going to the movies be like in the next century?
Mr. Lucas: Older theaters will be gone.
I think today's multiplexes are going to expand and become larger entertainment centers that also have Imax theaters and maybe 3-D theaters.
There are going to be bigger, higher-quality images and better sound.
There will be a much higher quality of presentation.
Things like our THX sound system in theaters will add to that.
WSJ: Some people predict a rise in interactive theaters, where audience members push buttons to determine various changes in a plot to affect the outcome of the movie.
What do you think of that concept?
Mr. Lucas: I think that's "smell-o-vision."
People don't want to do that.
People do want to have an interactive experience, but I think they want to play interactive games.
We've got a CD-ROM game called Rebel Assault, where players actually get into the "movie."
At any given moment, players hit a button or turn left and the action changes.
The action shifts according to the way each player responds to certain commands.
That is an interactive movie.
I call it a game, but somebody else will call it an interactive movie.
If you want to see the future, Rebel Assault is the future.
These games are going to become more articulate, more sophisticated and have higher-quality resolution.
There will be better images, more conversations with the characters, and an appearance of an unlimited ability to move around.
But it will be basically the same thing.
WSJ: Isn't the game market kind of a limited business?
Mr. Lucas: Hardly.
Rebel Assault just came out at Christmas, and we've already sold about 400,000 units.
Before this, the industry saw any CD game that sold over 50,000 as very strong.
We can't get it to the stores fast enough, and it's selling through better in Europe than it is here.
More importantly, we've obviously hit a brand new population of game players with it.
For hard-core gamers, Rebel Assault isn't their cup of tea.
But there's a whole market of people who want to be able to sit down and have an interactive experience.
This is sort of the "Jurassic Park" of CD games.
WSJ: Is there any danger that new technology poses for Hollywood?
Mr. Lucas: Sure.
I think you can make "cookie-cutter" movies with computers, and I'm certain some people will start doing that.
Talent is expensive and, at the same time, thinking is hard.
But computers or no computers, movies will always be about storytelling.
I think you're going to find that the things that are worthwhile will involve the slightly psychotic state of a writer that produces the most interesting things to watch.
If you take the "twist" out of movies, you've lost the interest of your audience.
WSJ: The computer-generated dinosaurs that your company's Industrial Light & Magic division created for "Jurassic Park" left audiences dumbstruck.
What was your reaction when you first saw them?
Mr. Lucas: We did a test for Steven Spielberg, and when we put them up on the screen I had tears in my eyes.
It was like one of those moments in history, like the invention of the light bulb or the first telephone call.
A major gap had been crossed, and things were never going to be the same.
You just cannot see them as anything but real.
It's just impossible.
Maybe 20 years from now, 50 years from now, they will look clumsy.
But I'm not sure even that will happen.
I think we may have reached a level here where we have actually created reality, which of course is what we've been trying to do all along.
WSJ: Fans of "Star Wars" are eagerly awaiting the next trilogy of movies.
Some have been hoping the next movie might be ready for release in 1997, the 20-year anniversary of the first movie.
Mr. Lucas: That's possible.
I plan to start work on the screenplays soon, and hope to be in production on the trilogy within the next two years.
I think they'll be done in the next four to five years.
But it really depends on how fast we can make these technological changes.
There are a lot of interesting aspects to the next stories, but if I were to do them the way I'd done the other "Star Wars" films, they would be astronomically expensive, over $100 million.
The first "Star Wars" film cost less than $10 million.
Nobody can afford to make a film for $100 million today.
So we have to sort of reinvent the wheel.
Most of what I'm working for is to be able to do the more fantasy-oriented, high-imagination movies, and be able to accomplish them with a reasonable amount of money.
It's all sort of dependent on how fast the new technology falls into place, but it's coming along pretty fast now.
Mr. King is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Los Angeles bureau.
