In the bleak conditions of the Texas border colonias, an $850 million pension fund sees promise -- and profit.
This month, the Washington-based AFL-CIO Housing Investment Trust, which manages investments for 350 member pension funds, is expected to select three test sites along the Texas border where it plans to build 300 units of affordable housing.
The effort is the first step in a planned $150 million federal, state and private initiative aimed at cleaning up the enclaves of substandard housing along the border.
Also, under the initiative, Texas would become one of the first states to test a new federal program aimed at encouraging pension funds to invest in low-income housing.
But of even more importance to border communities, the initiative represents a concerted effort to tackle the problems of the estimated 300,000 colonia residents -- mostly impoverished immigrants from Mexico -- after years of just talking about them.
"We think it can demonstrate to pension funds that . . . you can do this kind of lending in a safe, secure, prudent way and be contributing toward the creation of very desperately needed affordable housing," says Jim Campbell, who oversees affordable housing investments for the trust.
The AFL-CIO trust is expected to contribute $50 million toward low-income housing efforts in the colonias.
In addition, the Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs has promised $15 million, the first $7 million of which will be available in March.
And the Federal National Mortage Association has pledged $20 million in loan purchases.
Texas housing officials also hope to court an additional $35 million in loans from private lenders.
But Texas housing officials got bad news this week when they learned the Clinton administration's budget included $100 million for colonias assistance in four states.
Although that is a boost to efforts to invest in the colonias, Texas housing officials were expecting $200 million.
As a result, a request for $60 million in Housing and Urban Development funds is expected to be scaled back to about $30 million.
This month, the AFL-CIO Trust will select three sites in the El Paso, Laredo and Brownsville/Edinberg areas.
State housing officials say they hope eventually to invest in or around 24 colonia sites, using the first three projects as models.
Although investment in low-income housing and distressed areas would seem high risk for a pension fund, officials say public subsidy and government guarantees available for affordable housing projects often make them a better investment than traditional loans.
One possible plan for a 100-unit colonia development uses state funds to purchase land and infrastructure.
HUD would subsidize about 50% of the home cost.
A private lender would make a blanket loan for the remaining mortgages (about $20,000 or $30,000 a unit).
That amount would be guaranteed and securitized by Fannie Mae, and the AFL-CIO trust would purchase the securities in a private placement.
Then a low-income home buyer would repay his share of the blanket loan at a rate of about $150 to $200 a month for 10 or 15 years.
What's unique about this plan is that it uses rental assistance funds to ultimately allow the beneficiary to own the home.
In addition, without the AFL-CIO as a guaranteed buyer of the mortage-backed security, it's unlikely the private lender or Fannie Mae would back the deal.
Under that scenario, the trust could earn a 7% to 8% rate of return, depending on market rates.
The trust has a one-year and three-year rate of return of 10.4% and 11.24%, respectively.
State and federal housing officials are hoping the colonias program will convince more private-sector lenders to get involved in affordable housing.
"We're trying to re-educate the lending community," says Henry Flores, executive director of the state housing agency.
But even with massive private investment, state and federal housing officials concede it will be difficult to put a dent in the problem.
The colonias have sprouted up along the border as developers have sold plots of land to low-income residents for as little as $99 down.
Most of these subdivisions have no water or sewage service.
Residents resort to using outhouses, illegal wells and septic tanks, which in most cases are set so close together that what available water there is becomes contaminated.
Colonias are dotted with houses in various stages of construction -- some lots have only poured foundations, others have houses with only two or three walls while the family sleeps in a nearby shack or trailer.
Residents here tend to build their homes from paycheck to paycheck.
The financial structure of the colonias makes it difficult to use public dollars to solve the problem.
Most of the residents who think they own their land really have only a contract for deed -- a high-interest, rent-to-own agreement with harsh late-payment terms.
Housing officials say after one or two late payments, a resident can lose the land along with any property improvements.
Because most residents lack clear title to the property, most public and nonprofit housing groups don't want to invest in the colonias for fear any improvements will revert to the original owner.
Some of the AFL-CIO trust and other housing funds will be spent on developing new homes adjacent to an existing colonia to at least relieve overcrowding.
Housing officials say they will also consider using the funds to help residents win clear title to their property, to bring in water and sewer infrastructure and to rebuild some of the existing colonia homes.
Mr. Flores says he is working on recommendations for state legislators next year to deal with title issues affecting the colonias.
Additional funds for the colonias also are expected to become available from the Farmers Home Administration later this year, and Fannie Mae is looking for other ways the mortgage financing agency can aid the colonias effort.
