Breaux said . . .
Mrs. Clinton will be as popular as ever, "when they find out what really happened, if nothing happened."
-- SEN. JOHN BREAUX (D., La.) on Whitewater, quoted recently by the AP
Mr. Breaux, keep in mind, was trying to defend President and Mrs. Clinton on Whitewater.
Yet even he couldn't resist adding a caveat, just in case.
That about sums up what Whitewater has done to the Democratic mood, which ranges from terror to mere anxiety.
Republicans are hogging the microphones in public, but what's more revealing is what Democrats are whispering in private.
They're as jumpy as defendants before a mercurial judge.
What'll happen next?
What line will they have to defend?
Press conferences notwithstanding (this column was written before last night's), it says something about this president's character when even Democrats aren't sure how much to believe him.
A vanishing species here is a Democrat who will flat-out defend the Clintons.
Sure, every Democrat will repeat the by-now-cliched irony about Al D'Amato as GOP ethics czar, or rip the bloodthirsty press.
But one prominent Democrat claims to be the 25th called by a TV network to talk about Whitewater, everyone else having declined.
Friends of Bill, once treated as celebrities on Capitol Hill, are now getting the treatment.
When Patsy Thomasson, charter FOB, testified about the many White House aides without security clearances, no Democrats came to her defense.
Two weeks ago the party line was no Whitewater hearings; this week the House agreed to them after one of its grown-ups, Indiana's Lee Hamilton, said they were a good idea.
Hill Democrats hate the idea of hearings, but they fear the GOP taunt of "coverup Congress" even more.
Ted Van Dyk, another Democratic grown-up, says that "people like me who care about the party are beside ourselves, because you can't have a failed presidency in the middle of the second year."
He worries this will be the outcome without full disclosure by the White House.
That fear may be overdrawn, but it does illustrate how little residual trust this president can now count on.
When Ronald Reagan stumbled over Iran-Contra, he had his political base to cushion the fall.
Mr. Clinton is instead "a high-wire act," says a Democrat who worked on his campaign.
"There is no safety net."
If he slips over Whitewater, he'll hit the bottom of the pool.
One explanation for this, says iconoclast Rep. Tim Penny (D., Minn.), is "the old adage: He's neither fish nor fowl."
Neither party liberals nor moderates, as writer Joe Klein has also observed, feel he is completely theirs.
"He seems to express solid and admirable principles," says Mr. Penny, adding that he sees no evidence that Whitewater will amount to much.
"But there are so many contradictions, and as a consequence it isn't easy for Democratic legislators to stick their necks out for him."
Congressional Democrats have also learned that the real powers in the Clinton world are the longtime FOBs -- "the Arkansans and Oxford-Yale crowd," says one Clinton adviser.
Leading Democrats are consulted, but they aren't confidants.
And GOP Rep. Jim Lightfoot, an Iowan of moderate bent, says he doesn't know even a single Republican in Congress whom Mr. Clinton "is friendly with."
The result is what another Democrat calls "a marriage of convenience" between Mr. Clinton and Capitol Hill, "not of passion."
But the deepest cause for unease is the mystery of this president's Achilles' heel, his character.
Who is this fellow we elected, anyway?
In 1992 we discovered the policy wonk, the gifted pol, and, even his friends now concede, the philanderer.
But the multitude of stories we now call Whitewater is revealing another side -- the favorite son of an Arkansas business-political oligarchy, the pal of such unsavory types as drug convict Dan Lasater.
Even more so in the case of Hillary Rodham Clinton, who we now know was doing more in the 1980s than raising money for the Children's Defense Fund.
Whitewater has shown she is also a power politician, a lawyer who overlooks conflicts of interest, and even a high-flier in cattle futures (maybe her $100,000 profit is what Mr. Clinton meant when he called Whitewater charges "bull").
Perhaps none of this would matter if the Clintons had left it all behind in Little Rock.
Harry Truman managed to shed the baggage of the St. Louis Pendergast machine as president, after all.
But far from shedding the Arkansas political culture, the Clintons have brought it with them, complete with cronies, a mind-set for cutting ethical corners and the arrogance that often comes from governing a one-party state.
Just as Watergate became more than a third-rate burglary, Whitewater has become more than a two-bit land deal.
It's now a metaphor for this president's character.
And far from being overzealous, the media (me included) that fell too easily for Whitewater stonewalling in 1992 have a duty not to be fooled again.
Even many Democrats seem to understand that Whitewater is about discovering who we really elected.
