Texas' alternative-fuels program, already troubled by delays, has hit an embarrassing $50 million snag -- and to fix it, the state plans to sue itself.
It all started last year when the Legislature, to speed conversion of government vehicle fleets to environmentally friendly fuels, created the Alternative Fuels Council.
The Legislature empowered the council to lend $50 million in state bond money to government bodies converting vehicles.
But, oops, the legislation is missing a couple of sentences -- the ones that should have said government entities that borrow the money must pay it back to the state treasury.
Lacking those, the attorney general's office, which must clear all state bond issues, says it won't approve any fuels council bonds.
"The statute does not provide for a source of repayment," says James A. Thomassen, chief of the attorney general's public-finance division.
Because the Legislature won't meet this year, it can't fix the glitch until at least January -- four months after transit authorities and state agencies are supposed to have converted 30% of their fleets to cleaner-burning fuels.
So -- arguing that the attorney general's office is nitpicking -- the Alternative Fuels Council and the Texas Public Finance Authority plan to challenge its opinion in court.
They plan to file a lawsuit in state district court in Austin (it isn't yet clear whether the suit will name the attorney general or the state of Texas).
The finance authority has authorized spending up to $25,000 on the legal action, to be added to the underwriting cost of the bonds.
Some say the lawsuit shouldn't be necessary.
"I think it's ridiculous for the attorney general to make us go through this when it was obvious that the intent of the legislation was to set up the council and for us to loan out the money," says Railroad Commissioner Barry Williamson, a member of the fuels council.
"This is really what gives government a bad name."
Mr. Thomassen replies: "We have to do a legal analysis, and perceived intentions are not sufficient."
