Stock prices in Tokyo scored a 1.8% gain Friday in improved turnover from a buying spree on the outlook for a Japanese economic recovery, spurred by hopes for resolution of a trade dispute with the U.S.
European bourses enjoyed a breather from last week's instability in the fallout from bond markets' beating and glumness that global interest rates could be heading up.
London equities rebounded, lifted by strength in bond and stock-index futures markets and a positive start on Wall Street.
Frankfurt shares climbed 1.1% but trading continued to be nervous and few institutional investors jumped in.
Many Asian and Pacific bourses, even those that muscled prices up, were still preoccupied by interest rates, and some markets were hammered by jitters about rate boosts, volatility for equities and weakness for bonds.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 115.04, up 0.17, reflecting increases in markets in Europe and the Americas, and a drop in Asia-Pacific markets.
Broadcasting stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 149.79, up 2.54, or 1.73%, with Tele-Communications of the U.S. posting a 7.43% gain in its local currency.
Consumer-services stocks trailed, at 135.15, down 1.81, or 1.32%, with Actava Group of the U.S. sliding 5.36% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which slumped 138.91 points Thursday, surged 360.14 to 19966.00.
Friday's first-section volume was estimated at 410 million shares, up markedly from 294 million shares a day earlier.
Advancing issues outnumbered retreating issues 790-234.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which dropped 13.61 points Thursday, bounced back 19.96, or 1.2%, to 1622.29.
In trading late Monday morning, the Nikkei was up 193.42 points at 20159.42.
The U.S. decision Thursday to revive its "Super 301" trade-enforcement mechanism had a positive effect on the Tokyo market, as expected Japanese market-opening measures to head off U.S. trade sanctions could spur demand in Japan, helping both the economy and corporate bottom lines.
U.S. rules wouldn't allow imposition of sanctions on Japan until Oct. 21.
Stocks also benefited from the Japanese yen's weakening in currency markets, easing pressure on exporters' returns from abroad.
Blue-chip exporters and financial concerns were the top performers Friday.
The market was kicked into high gear by strong purchasing by 16 new Japanese investment trust funds, with 300 billion yen ($2.89 billion) in buying power, and public pension funds also bought positions.
Overall, stock investors were upbeat because of the hoped-for Super 301 outcome, the yen's retreat against the U.S. dollar and the Japanese bond market's signs of bottoming.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index gained 31.5 points, or almost 1%, to 3278.0, just fractionally off the intraday high.
The FT 30-stock index rose 23.7 points to 2563.9.
But volume was a weak 581 million shares, compared with 677.3 million shares in the previous session.
With about 15% of the companies in the 100-stock index to report earnings this week, many players kept to the sidelines Friday.
U.S. jobs data, showing a much larger-than-expected jump in nonfarm payrolls, initially pushed bonds lower in Britain, but the mood in the stock market lightened as sentiment about global interest rates became more positive.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index rose 22.19 points to 2060.09, for a second day of gains, but investors were still nervous about recent volatility and poised for any reversal.
Without any fundamentals to push the market, most dealings were technically driven, such as by basket trading.
In Paris, stocks moved up 1.1% as the market settled down from perturbing economic data from the U.S. and Germany earlier last week that signaled higher inflation and interest-rate increases; equities also got a breather as the French bond market recovered its equilibrium.
In Amsterdam, shares ended higher after active trading, boosted by buying by U.S. investors prompted by favorable Dutch corporate earnings.
In Milan, equities rose, extending the bourse's recovery to a second day, despite cautious trading.
In Madrid, prices jumped 1.6%, lifted by the Spanish bond market's solid recovery and firmer European bourses.
In Stockholm, shares rose, continuing their rebound in heavy activity.
Likewise in Zurich, the market jumped 2.2%, as bargain hunters extended a recovery that recouped most of last week's earlier losses; demand was stimulated by technical factors and positive Swiss economic prospects, and all major sectors posted strong gains.
In Brussels, stocks chalked up solid gains in a technical rebound from steep losses earlier last week.
In Sydney, shares slumped 1.6%, taking the main index down to its lowest level since last Dec. 24, because of a weak bond market, a drop in stock futures and unsettled markets overseas.
The market also was driven lower by news of a sharp rise in Australian inventories for the quarter ended Dec. 31 and increases in economic growth estimates, which increased worries that interest rates will rise and hurt corporate profit growth.
But in Hong Kong, stocks advanced 1.2% in a technical rebound after a recent bear run, though turnover was low, thinning the ranks of sellers, as the market awaited U.S. inflation data for clues on the direction of interest rates.
In Taipei, prices rallied 3.9% to their highest level in more than six weeks, extending an upturn that began the previous day.
Dealings surged after Taiwan's central bank said limits on foreign investment in the stock market could be relaxed soon.
The financial sector led the broad market's climb, as bargain hunters bought underpriced banking issues.
In Manila, prices plummeted 3.4% in busy trading, continuing the sell-off by investors anxious about weakness of overseas markets.
In Seoul, equities fell amid worsening liquidity and a cash drain from the market; investors lost confidence in a perceived support level on the benchmark index and rushed to sell, though late buying by institutions boosted prices from lows.
In Wellington, shares tumbled 1.6%, pressured by volatility in world financial markets as jumpy investors sought a clearer picture of U.S. interest rates.
But in Bangkok, stocks climbed 1.4% as most players regained confidence in the market, though volume remained thin.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
