Grain prices fell amid speculation that growing trade tensions with Japan might disrupt its purchases of U.S. crops.
The speculation was triggered by President Clinton's move yesterday to resurrect part of a trade law enabling the administration to impose tariffs on nations that block U.S. products.
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the soybean contract for July delivery dropped 10.5 cents a bushel to settle at $6.7325 a bushel.
The corn contract for May delivery fell five cents a bushel to $2.86 a bushel and the May wheat contract sank four cents a bushel to $3.4075 a bushel.
U.S. agriculture is particularly vulnerable to retaliation because it is one of the few American industries that runs a big trade surplus with Japan.
Any disruption would give other grain exporters such as China the opportunity to win part of the huge Japanese market for foreign grain.
Although Japan is the biggest foreign buyer of U.S. farm goods, it has an overall trade surplus with the U.S. of roughly $59 billion.
Barring a trade war, Japan is expected to buy about 492 million bushels of U.S. corn during the year ending Aug. 31, which represents about 37% of expected U.S. corn export volume, said Daniel W. Basse, director of research at AgResource Co., Chicago.
Japan is also expected to import about 134 million bushels of U.S. soybeans during the same period, which would represent about 22% of U.S. soybean-export volume.
Washington forecasts Japan to spend $8.9 billion on U.S. agricultural exports.
Massive selling by commodity-fund managers was mostly to blame for the price plunge in the agricultural pits.
Steven Bruce, floor manager at Geldermann Inc., Chicago, said the commodity funds, which he called "blind monsters" overreacted.
Under the trade law, the administration probably wouldn't be able to launch any sanctions against Japan for more than a year.
And most traders believe the Clinton administration would try to avoid embroiling U.S. farm exports.
"What happened was psychological spill over," said Mr. Basse of AgResource.
Crop prices were vulnerable to a big drop because U.S. exports are lagging behind expectations at a time when South America is beginning to harvest a record soybean crop.
U.S. corn-export volume last week was about half the pace forecast by traders.
ENERGY: Petroleum futures prices drifted lower in listless trading.
Crude oil for April delivery was down one cent to settle at $14.75 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Even heating-oil futures failed to draw support despite the latest winter storm that hit New York.
Traders were cautious ahead of the weekend meeting of the Gulf Cooperation Council, whose members are Arab oil producers.
Although little news is expected from the meeting, it will be watched for clues to any change in the position of Saudi Arabia, which continues to produce eight million barrels a day despite weak oil markets.
COTTON: Cotton-futures prices continued to weaken after their long bull run.
At New York's Cotton Exchange, cotton for May delivery was down 1.01 cents to 75.97 cents a pound.
As of Monday, cotton prices are up more than 40% since late November, but in recent days prices have given back some of those gains.
This week's decline mainly reflects profit-taking by traders who have been "long," with wagers that prices would rise, throughout much of cotton's climb, said Sandra Kaul, senior analyst for Smith Barney Shearson.
Yesterday, news reports suggesting that India may reinstate the ability of its exporters to ship out cotton to meet previously arranged supply commitments helped to pressure prices lower, she said.
