Will a mammoth Alpine railway tunnel save Switzerland from the wrath of other European nations?
Swiss Transport Minister Adolf Ogi hoped so as he braved a recent European traffic conference.
The Swiss voted in a referendum last month to ban by 2004 the transit of freight by truck in favor of rail shipment.
And Mr. Ogi said he needs a giant effort to appease his country's irate neighbors.
That effort is called Neat, for Neue Alpen-Transversale, a planned railway route through Switzerland that includes a 57-kilometer-long (35.34 miles) tunnel under the Gotthard Massif.
The Gotthard pass, which leads into Italy, is currently the quickest route between northern and southern Europe.
The tunnel would be the world's longest.
And the total project could cost from 15 billion to 30 billion Swiss francs ($10.45 billion to $20.9 billion).
With the tunnel, trucks could be loaded on trains and carried through Switzerland.
Swiss say they want the loads on rails to avoid the trucks' air and noise pollution that currently plagues Alpine villages.
Mr. Ogi admits to needing all the help he can get in explaining and defending Swiss intentions.
A frosty reception awaited the Swiss delegation at the meeting in Crete this week, observers said.
On the eve of the conference, German Transport Minister Matthias Wissmann threatened Switzerland with retaliation.
If the ban goes ahead, he said, "Swiss can't ask us to open up our roads for their trucks."
On Monday, French Transport Minister Bernard Bosson condemned Switzerland's go-it-alone attitude.
And on Tuesday, European Union Transport Commissioner Abel Matutes, who accused Switzerland immediately after its referendum of breaking faith with Europe, was cool to Mr. Ogi's wish to set a date for EU-Swiss talks on traffic problems.
Nevertheless, Mr. Ogi took to the podium Tuesday, determined to convince representatives from about 40 countries that Switzerland is a "reliable partner."
And he produced his trump card: Neat.
To update Swiss Alpine-rail infrastructure, Neat plans more than 160 kilometers of new double-track railway lines and more than 110 kilometers of tunnels, including the most ambitious Gotthard tunnel.
After Neat is completed, rail-travel time across Switzerland will be slashed: For example, time between Zurich and Bellinzona will be cut to 65 minutes from 148 minutes.
While Swiss engineers say that building the 50-kilometer-long Eurotunnel between France and England was a feat, the Gotthard project could prove more formidable, given the mammoth pressure from overlaying rock, complex geology, and temperatures within the stone mass of up to 50 degrees Celsius.
Furthermore, the softer and more regular Channel sediments were easier to bore through than the Gotthard's tough granites and gneisses will be, engineers observe.
Pushed by fear of retaliation from other European countries, the generally slow-moving Swiss aren't losing any time.
The first explosive charges have been fired for the exploration of the Gotthard strip.
Preparations should be finished next year; construction will start in 1996 and is expected to be completed in about 2006.
Mr. Ogi says Swiss taxpayers will foot the gigantic bill, without any subsidies expected from the EU.
In defense of the project, Mr. Ogi adds: "We are doing this for Europe."
