Digital Equipment Corp. reported a surprise loss in the fiscal second-quarter on a steep 12% decline in revenue, triggering heavy selling of its stock and raising the prospect of more cost-cutting and layoffs.
Digital said a sharp decline in sales of its larger, more profitable computers overwhelmed rising sales of personal computers and workstations.
It was the second consecutive quarter of revenue declines for Digital, which has been struggling like other makers of large computers to make a transition to new technology.
William M. Steul, chief financial officer, said Digital is moving ahead with previously disclosed plans to cut its work force to 85,000 jobs by the end of its fiscal year on June 30, a reduction of 7,000 jobs, or 7.9% of the total.
He wouldn't say whether the company would go deeper than that level, but analysts predicted yesterday that still more cuts would be necessary.
Digital shares tumbled $3.75, or 10%, to $32.75 apiece in New York Stock Exchange composite trading of 2.8 million shares.
Digital, based in Maynard, Mass., posted a net loss of $72.1 million, or 53 cents a share, in the fiscal second quarter ended Jan. 1, compared with a year-earlier loss of $73.9 million, or 57 cents a share.
The results were sharply below most analysts' forecasts of break-even results or a modest profit and suggested that a sustained turnaround was still out of reach.
"It's been one step forward and two steps back," said Steven Milunovich, an analyst at Morgan Stanley & Co.
Digital achieved a profit last year in its fiscal fourth quarter, after two years of losses and layoffs, but has slipped back into the red in the two quarters since then.
Analysts also were rattled by the sharp decline in revenue, which slumped to $3.25 billion from $3.67 billion a year ago.
Digital said about half of the decline in revenue was because of currency translations from overseas markets, which are about 63% of sales.
Mr. Steul said sales of the new Alpha computer design, on which the company has staked much of its future, are now running at 10% of product sales, while older VAX system sales are slowing.
"The VAX is declining faster than the Alpha is rising at this point," he said.
Smaller systems, including personal computers, also are selling well, he said, but these yield smaller profit margins.
Mr. Steul said Alpha sales had been restrained by delays in some commercial-strength software packages for Alpha.
He said it would be another two or three quarters before all of the gaps were filled.
Digital is also somewhat dependent on the adoption rate of Windows NT, a new software operating system from Microsoft Corp. that can run Alpha machines; it was delayed last year but is now widely available.
The first Alpha computers went on sale late in 1992.
"Customers are deferring the conversion to Alpha as long as they can, because converting to any new system is costly and time-consuming," said John Jones, an analyst with Salomon Brothers.
"That's hurting Digital's ability to use its best weapon, which is Alpha."
Alpha systems employ reduced instruction-set, or RISC, chip design, and are rated by independent analysts as the fastest chips currently on the market.
But Digital has so far been unable to persuade other major computer makers to adopt it.
Alpha also faces heavy competition from other new chips, including a group of International Business Machines Corp., Motorola Inc. and Apple Computer Inc., which back the rival PowerPC chip.
Barry Willman, an analyst with Goldman, Sachs & Co., estimated that Alpha system sales rose 18% from the preceding quarter to about $160 million.
By contrast, he expects VAX sales to drop 35% in fiscal 1994, following a 15% decline in fiscal 1993.
Mr. Willman said personal-computer sales were strong, rising to $250 million in the quarter, or double year-ago sales.
After the results were reported yesterday, Standard & Poor's Corp. downgraded its ratings of Digital's $1 billion of senior debt to triple-B-plus from single-A-minus.
The company's commercial paper was lowered to A-2 from A-1.
The rating agency said the downgrade reflected continuing losses through the first half of fiscal 1994 and "greater uncertainty regarding the company's performance."
Digital "operates in a very difficult business environment, exacerbated by a weak European marketplace and a major product transition," S&P said.
Cash balances remain strong at $1.1 billion but have decreased from $1.6 billion at Sept. 30, the agency noted.
Still, S&P said the current rating reflects Digital's "good overall market position, a relatively stable and profitable service revenue base representing about half of sales, and a still-strong capital structure," while overall debt "remains conservative."
