Voice Control Systems Inc. began trying to sell voice-recognition software when the idea still seemed futuristic.
Now its efforts are starting to pay off.
But as the notion of devices responding to spoken commands gains wider acceptance, the tiny Dallas company also faces growing competition from companies that would be only too happy to drown it out.
After 15 lean years, Voice Control's sales surged in the first nine months of last year to $4.6 million, compared with $3.6 million in all of 1992.
The closely held company expects to report its biggest-ever profit for 1993, just the fourth profitable year in its history.
Among other successes last year, Voice Control sold software to MCI Communications Corp., Washington, D.C., for its automated 1-800-COLLECT service, and to McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., Kirkland, Wash., for voice dialing on its cellular-phone systems, allowing users to dial by speaking instead of pressing keys.
"A few years ago, voice recognition was gee-whiz technology that almost nobody was buying," says Ed Tagg, Voice Control's vice president for engineering.
"Today it is finally to the point where it is selling, because it is cost-effective and it works."
Not everybody is sure about that yet.
Sales of voice-dialing equipment for cellular phones, which adds at least $200 to the cost of a $75 phone, have been slow.
And Consumer Reports recently panned a much-publicized voice-controlled VCR remote control from Voice Powered Technology Inc. of Canoga Park, Calif., in part for not understanding users' commands.
Voice Control claims more than 99% accuracy for letters, numbers and some simple words.
But when Mr. Tagg, who speaks with a clipped British accent, says "five" in a recent demonstration, the Voice Control system initially thinks he has said "seven."
The company faces several other challenges.
A 40-employee business, it is pitted against giant rivals, including Texas Instruments Inc. of Dallas and American Telephone & Telegraph Co. of New York, that are commercializing their own voice-recognition technology.
And it trails in some applications, including voice recognition for personal computers.
Still, the company shows promise.
It is one of the first to offer software that understands not just numbers but also the letters of the alphabet, which are harder because they are generally shorter.
The company also has developed a wide range of "speaker-independent" technologies that don't need to be trained to a specific user's voice.
The MCI system asks the person called if he will accept a collect call, and recognizes "yes," "yeah" and "yup" (as well as "no") in a range of accents.
Perhaps most important is the deal with McCaw, whose cellular subscribers can have voice dialing for $5 to $7 a month, depending on the region, plus about 23 cents a minute during dialing.
First offered last month in Texas and being rolled out nationally, the McCaw system allows users to dial by speaking the digits of the number they want to call, or by saying certain preprogrammed phrases, such as "Call office" or "Call home."
Unlike a cellular phone that understands speech, the McCaw system brings customers voice dialing without making them buy new equipment.
So, while sales of cellular phones with voice recognition were estimated at fewer than 40,000 units in 1993, network voice dialing has many more potential customers, says Casey Dworkin, general manager of Personal Technology Research Inc., a Waltham, Mass., market-research firm.
"The cellular network is one of the most important applications of voice technology," Mr. Dworkin says.
"If voice recognition catches on there, it might create a market for it elsewhere."
Voice Control is already trying to create some of those other markets, lobbying car makers to offer seats, air conditioners and stereos that obey spoken commands.
To strengthen its hand in voice recognition for PCs, the company has agreed to merge with Scott Instruments Corp. of Denton, a small public company specializing in that application.
Scott's shareholders will vote on the proposed merger next month; if it goes through, Voice Control will become publicly traded.
And Voice Control is bringing down the cost of voice recognition.
The price of circuit boards using the company's technology will drop by two-thirds this summer, to between $15 and $20, when a unit of Japan's Oki Electric Industry Co. begins supplying a chip designed specifically for the company's software.
An even bigger challenge may remain: intellectual-property law.
Voice Control has a patent pending on the entire concept of using voice-recognition software in a cellular network, as it is doing with McCaw, says Peter Foster, Voice Control's president.
But industry analysts wonder whether such a broad patent can hold up.
Another company, Voice Processing Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., already is negotiating with several cellular carriers to provide software for their networks, though the company says it may be willing to pay royalties to Voice Control.
Another patent threat may come from Texas Instruments, with which Voice Control has already tangled.
(In 1985, TI filed suit against the company, claiming that two of its engineers stole trade secrets when they left for Voice Control; the companies reached an undisclosed settlement.)
For more than a year, Voice Control has held a patent on the concept of voice verification combined with a password -- the type of system that might, for example, be used to get information on one's bank account by phone.
But last month, Sprint Corp. began marketing a voice verification and password combination.
Texas Instruments, which supplied the software to Sprint, has been "working on it since the late 1980s," before Voice Control got its patent, says TI marketing manager Peggy Hart.
Voice Control patent lawyers won't comment.
