"Uncle Tom's Cabin" was a publishing phenomenon when it appeared in 1852, selling 10,000 copies in one week, 300,000 the first year in the U.S. -- and an astounding 1.5 million copies in Great Britain.
The book established Harriet Beecher Stowe as a major American writer.
"So you're the little woman who wrote the book that started this great war!"
Abraham Lincoln is said to have exclaimed to Stowe at their first meeting.
As historian Joan D. Hedrick shows us in this intelligent, thoroughly researched biography, "Harriet Beecher Stowe" (Oxford University Press, 507 pages, $35), Stowe's engagement in the fiery controversies of her time did not set her apart as a visionary or a saint.
A sometime teacher of rhetoric and mother of seven, she was hardly alone in her views on many social and cultural issues of the time: about the role of religion in a secular society, women in a patriarchal society and blacks in a white society.
Like many of her contemporaries, Stowe often was inconsistent, even contradictory.
An advocate of education for women and blacks, she paid little attention to the schooling of her daughters, who were trained for nothing more than housekeeping.
She wrote with passion against slavery, yet her portrayal of blacks, Ms. Hedrick points out, reflects the "blend of philanthropic and paternalistic attitudes" that one historian has called "romantic racialism."
She supported women's suffrage, but would not lend her name to the editorial board of Elizabeth Cady Stanton's journal, Revolution.
Harriet Elizabeth Beecher was born in 1811, the seventh child of Lyman Beecher, a minister, and his wife, Roxana, who died when Harriet was five.
The Beechers were an unusual family, Ms. Hedrick tells us, providing "a mixed-sex culture in which, at the sibling level, a rough equality prevailed.
Although gender distinctions were made within the family, daughters were often exposed to the same influences as sons."
Supervising the schooling was the eldest daughter, Catharine, who had firm ideas about the high quality of education that women should be offered.
At her insistence, Harriet learned such subjects as Latin, Greek, logic and rhetoric.
When she was 24, Harriet married the widower of one of her friends, Calvin Stowe, a teacher of Greek and biblical studies.
Intellectually suited, they were temperamentally opposite.
Harriet was optimistic, impetuous, disorganized; Calvin was unremittingly orderly and deeply pessimistic.
"He predicted doom and death so regularly," Ms. Hedrick remarks, "that it is perhaps not surprising that occasionally he was right."
Their marriage seems to have been one of genuine respect.
Certainly Calvin encouraged his wife's literary work and her independence.
After she published a few pieces under the name Mrs. H.E. Beecher Stowe, he offered some advice.
"You must be a literary woman," he wrote to her when she was in Boston meeting with publishers.
"Make all your calculations accordingly, get a good stock of health, brush up your mind, drop the E out of your name . . . and write yourself only and always, Harriet Beecher Stowe, which is a name euphonious, flowing, and full of meaning; and my word for it, your husband will lift up his head in the gate, and your children will rise up and call you blessed."
Her children were among the assorted relatives to whom Stowe read aloud each evening.
She depended on their comments to revise her work, and on their cooperation in running the household to enable her to pursue her career.
Sometimes she wrested help from unwilling hands.
"{T}he energy with which you often say that you detest housekeeping," Stowe wrote to her eldest daughters, "that you hate accounts & cant keep them that you don't like to write letters & cant write them -- that you hate sewing -- that you cant take care of sick people all these leave a load upon me which if you were differently inclined you might take off."
Stowe began writing to make money in a household that just scraped by on Calvin's small teaching salary, but soon her career became the focus of her life.
She spent at least three hours a day writing in a room of her own, negotiated her own contracts, hounded publishers about publicity, undertook lecture tours and succeeded in making her name a household word.
She loved adulation and took pride in her ability to compete in a man's world.
If her first earnings went, as she disclosed, to buy a featherbed, soon she was buying houses -- a large stone "cabin" in Andover, Mass.; an eight-gabled Italianate mansion in Hartford, Conn.; a winter retreat in Mandarin, Fla.
Her achievements were extraordinary for a woman of her time.
Although Ms. Hedrick tells us that Stowe became "the single most powerful voice on behalf of the slave," and a sought-after speaker on women's rights, Stowe defies definition as a feminist, suffragist, abolitionist -- she simply does not fit any of the molds into which we sometimes press historical figures.
And Ms. Hedrick, wisely, does not try to reconcile or rationalize her subject's complexities.
Instead, she helps us to understand those contradictions by locating Stowe within the cultural context of her time, and in doing so, gives us an indelible portrait of 19th-century America.
Ms. Simon is director of the Writing Center at Harvard University.
