The collapse of TCI and Bell Atlantic's information-highway megadeal raises a question many personal computer makers have been asking for months: What's all the fuss about anyway?
While the top tier of computer companies has jumped into the fray, the rest of the pack -- which accounts for nearly twothirds of all computers sold -- has treated the information-highway concept with disdain.
Now that the merger that set off the frenzy is over, many PC makers may become bolder in pressing their view.
"The PC companies are more realistic than a lot of other people," says Gateway 2000 Inc.'s chief executive, Ted Waitt.
"I'm not losing any sleep because I haven't amassed 12 alliances with umpteen-gazillion different companies."
For all their bravado, though, the information-highway discussion -- and the serious money behind it -- has caught many PC executives off-guard.
While the Bell Atlantic-TCI pact has collapsed, dozens of other deals are being cut without the PC makers' input.
Some pundits are even describing a 500-channel, all-digital interactive future that doesn't involve PCs.
Clearly, some of the skepticism coming from the PC industry represents battle scars that haven't yet healed.
PC executives have already lived through a number of "advances" that never went anywhere or arrived years late.
Remember artificial intelligence and pen-based PCs?
Some computer executives say they see similarities between the ballyhoo surrounding those products and the current fascination with information-highway technology.
"It's all hype," says Safi U. Qureshey, chief executive of AST Research Inc., Irvine, Calif.
At the core of Mr. Qureshey's view is the belief that the PC -- and not the television or any hybrid of the two -- will be the vehicle of choice for cruising the highway.
He notes that TV sets have relatively poor screens for viewing text, can't store information in large quantities and don't have the data-processing power of even weak PCs.
The jazzed-up remote control devices being developed to interact with set-top TV boxes don't have as much flexibility as computer keyboards and the voice-input systems being tested at major computer companies, he says.
Dell Computer Corp.'s chief executive, Michael S. Dell, has also been highly critical of the information-highway hoopla.
"I'm not convinced set-top boxes will inherit the earth," Mr. Dell says.
"It all seems a little funny to me."
Still, it is a distinctly different world these days for all but the biggest PC companies.
Many of them rose to prominence more than a decade ago as the hip, brash jockeys of the Information Age.
But the spate of mergers and alliances involving cable TV, entertainment and telecommunications concerns has raised questions among some analysts about whether personal computer companies, long synonymous with the latest and greatest in technology, have lost their edge.
"These companies have been in the driver's seat for the last 10 to 12 years, and they think they're still there," says Princeton, N.J., writer Steven Schlossstein, who is working on a book about interactive TV.
"I don't think it's hit them yet."
Of course, some of the biggest players in the PC game are working hard to carve out a place for themselves in case this new world does emerge.
Compaq Computer Corp., the hot Houston PC maker, is one of the most aggressive participants in laying the groundwork for the highway, though it hasn't gone public with its efforts.
The company hired a former McKinsey & Co. consultant last year to coordinate its information-highway push and is involved in about 20 alliances relating to the convergence of computers and telecommunications.
The company says many of its deals -- some of which could include acquisitions -- may be announced later this year.
Robert Stearns, the executive spearheading Compaq's information-highway efforts, says he is convinced that television will play a major role in the new electronic order, though he believes the PC will still dominate the work-at-home and budgeting functions that now top most users' lists of what they do with home PCs.
Apple and International Business Machines Corp. also intend to plug into the highway, and both are producing test versions of the so-called set-top television boxes.
According to some scenarios, most of the data-managing and traffic-cop functions of PCs would be handled by soupedup cable boxes sitting atop TV sets.
"This vision is not PC-centric," says James A. Cannavino, IBM's senior vice president and strategy czar.
He envisions a melding of PCs and TVs, with the focus more on entertaining people than on carrying out number-crunching.
For its part, Apple for years has proselytized about the PC as a smart TV.
The Cupertino, Calif., company was among the first to adopt the video and sound capabilities of multimedia computing, and its machines were among the first used at home for games and education.
Rick LeFaivre, vice president of Apple's advanced technology group, says Apple's focus now is to build on its expertise in electronic mail and bulletin boards to help people find the data they need.
While most of the smaller PC companies are highly critical of the highway, they are keeping tabs on it.
Mr. Waitt, for instance, keeps a matrix listing all of the budding industry alliances in case his company someday wants to find a partner and join the frenzy.
Gateway, based in N. Sioux City, S.D., is researching a combination PC and TV similar to products announced by Apple and Packard Bell.
Analysts like Mr. Schlossstein say the broad public discussion of the information highway has caught computer executives in a state of both confusion and denial.
He says joining the new technology world will require many of them to change the way they view their flagship product from a data-storing and number-crunching device to something with broader uses.
"The PC guys don't suffer from angst, they suffer from hubris," he says.
"They talk to other PC guys and share a common PC vision.
I'm sitting here scratching my head and thinking that they may find that their options are limited."
IBM -- Already in set-top box trial with Bell Atlantic.
Sees merger of PC and TV.
APPLE -- Also in set-top trial, but with Macintosh version.
COMPAQ -- Negotiating 20 unannounced strategic alliances and equity deals with telecommunications, software companies.
PACKARD BELL -- Already offers PC TV.
Dominates mass-market retail channel; interested in tie-up with on-line service like Prodigy.
Focused on core PC business, particularly in out-of-the-way markets like China.
Focusing on computer servers as tools that will be used to move around big chunks of data. and TV will play a role, with PC focused on text and TV handling video.
