Unfunded federal mandates are placing severe pressure on taxpayers nationwide, crippling state budgets from Maine to California.
These mandates are federal programs enacted by Congress, but with a catch -- they must be financed with state and local resources.
Through this sleight of hand, Congress compels states and localities to fund programs Washington cannot because of the persistent budget deficit.
This summer, Ohio released a study analyzing the effects of unfunded mandates.
We determined that federal mandates will cost Ohio $356 million in 1994 and more than $1.74 billion in 1992-95.
Federal mandates interfere with a fundamental task of government-setting priorities.
Perhaps the most glaring example is the forced trade-off between Medicaid and education.
In the past five years, education declined as a share of state spending at a time when educational improvement should be one of our highest priorities.
Many states cannot spend a greater share of tax dollars on education because new Medicaid mandates consume more and more state resources, increasing to $263 million for Ohio in 1995 from $185 million in 1992.
While most mandates may reflect well-intentioned policy goals, many impose excessive costs without any discernible benefit.
For example, recent federal highway law requires states to use a scrap-tire additive in highway pavement.
By 1997, this mandate will cost Ohio more that $50 million a year because early tests show that rubberized asphalt is two to three times more expensive than conventional pavement.
(The national cost is roughly $1 billion.)
To put this $50 million figure in perspective, for the same cost Ohio could repave 667 miles of rural highways or rehabilitate 137 bridges.
Incredibly, this mandate was enacted without any assessment of its impact, and experts have real questions about the durability and environmental effects of rubberized asphalt.
Unfunded mandates, also pre-empt important state initiatives.
In Ohio, for example, we developed a comprehensive solid waste management plan, yet we are required to change most of our landfill rules to conform to federal standards that in some respects are weaker than our own.
Ohio regulators are also increasingly being swamped by federal paperwork requirements, inhibiting cleanup of landfills that pose environmental risks.
Cities and localities in particular are heavily burdened by environmental mandates.
Last year a Columbus, Ohio, analysis found that environmental mandates will cost nine Ohio cities $2.8 billion over 10 years.
The Safe Drinking Water Act, responsible for many of these costs, requires the Environmental Protection Agency to identify 25 new substances every three years that local systems must test for in their water supply.
Because EPA arbitrarily must identify a set number of substances -- without any assessment of local conditions or health risks -- cities nationwide must bear the costs of testing their drinking water for pesticides used only in Hawaii to protect pineapple crops.
Governors, mayors, county officials, and state legislators are working together to fight mandates and to pool their clout in Washington.
But Congress continues to pass, and the president continues to sign, legislation imposing unfunded mandates.
The past session of Congress enacted no less than 13 bills imposing new costs on states, including several the president claimed as major accomplishments during his State of the Union address.
Congress and the president must end this irresponsible practice.
The nation can no longer afford the local tax burden and service reductions necessary to fund programs dictated by Washington.
Mr. Voinovich, a Republican, is governor of Ohio.
{See related article: "Governors' Dilemma: Budgets Out of Control..." -- WSJ Jan. 31, 1994}
