The collapse of the deal between Bell Atlantic Corp. and Tele-Communications Inc. is likely to force a re-evaluation of other negotiations between cable and phone companies, industry executives concluded last night.
More than any other deal, the Bell Atlantic-TCI proposal set the climate for the frenzied trend toward convergence of the one-time rival industries.
Its collapse likewise is expected to send a chill, if only temporary, across the continuing talks between potential partners who must grapple with the complex market and regulatory issues now facing both industries.
Yet, industry officials and advisers say, the technological and financial forces that are pushing the two industries to merge are unrelenting.
They say that the expense of upgrading cable systems into computerized information highways necessitates such mergers and that each industry needs the other's expertise.
"The inevitable thrust of the industries will go forward," said Charles F. Dolan, chairman of Cablevision Systems Corp., the nation's fourth-largest cable operator.
"This technology we have and the services we are providing have progressed beautifully."
An executive at one of the Baby Bells concurred.
"A lot of the fundamentals are still there.
The cable industry is looking for greater insights into the phone industry, and the phone industry wants to know the cable industry better."
Still, officials in both industries agree that striking a deal in the current regulatory environment is an enormous challenge.
For one thing, the value of cable properties has been shifting with successive rounds from Washington of cable rate cutbacks and restrictions on rate increases.
Last year, the Federal Communications Commission ordered a 10% rate rollback, followed this week by an additional 7% cut.
Moreover, all future rate increases are tied to inflation.
The actions have taken a toll on cable companies' finances, including cash flow, the crucial variable in valuing a cable company for a deal.
Moreover, cable companies complain, the hit on their finances hammers their ability to upgrade their systems into two-way information superhighways.
While the FCC steps up its regulation of cable operators, Congress is considering legislation that would break down barriers between the two industries.
This adds another level of uncertainty as the two industries evaluate potential partners.
"Don't ever lose sight of how important the government and regulators are to the entire equation," the Baby Bell executive said.
Looking forward, as cable and telephone executives re-evaluate their positions, pending deals may fall short of an outright merger or sale.
U S West Inc.'s $2.5 billion investment in Time Warner Inc.'s cable and entertainment unit could prove to be a model for deals to come.
While both partners maintain their independence, they can mine each other's expertise as they build interactive communications systems.
Several large cable operators are believed to be in the market for partners, including Cablevision Systems, Continental Cablevision Inc., TeleCable Corp. and Houston Industries Inc.
Among phone companies, Sprint Corp., GTE Corp., MCI Communications Corp., Ameritech Corp. and Pacific Telesis Group are without cable partners and believed to be looking.
Despite yesterday's news, much of the industries' future is already set.
Last year, cable and phone companies made deals at a furious pace.
In addition to the U S West and Time Warner transaction, Nynex Corp. invested $1.2 billion in Viacom Inc.; Southwestern Bell Corp. formed a cable venture with Cox Enterprises Inc.; and BellSouth Corp. bought into Prime Management Inc.
With the prospect of spending billions of dollars to upgrade their networks, and with the market for such interactive services largely unknown, cable and telephone companies can split the risk through joint efforts.
"It's not going to stop the evolution of these industries in coming together, but it may cause these deals to happen at a more rational pace," said John Waller, head of Waller Capital Corp., a cable broker.
"And that's not a bad thing.
