No one, however, took the time to add up all the resources these operations needed or to assess the overall logistical burden of providing them across so broad a geography.
Viewed incrementally, everything was still possible.
Viewed cumulatively, the situation was nothing short of a disaster in the making.
In Japan today, as things have started to go badly on the economic front, virtually no one has been willing to do this kind of addition.
The Ministry of Finance says that with a bit more support, everything will be fine.
The Banking Bureau says that given lower interest rates, it can handle all current difficulties in the financial sector.
The Securities Bureau says that with a bit more help from the postal savings and pension funds, it can keep the Nikkei at a healthy level.
Even business leaders, who are willing to admit that the situation is troublesome, claim that if only the government will stimulate the economy a bit more, everything will be fine.
This is irresponsible nonsense.
It is not merely fiddling while Japan burns; it is piling up all available violins to make their use as tinder more convenient.
As citizens and consumers, we Japanese should know the rhetoric by now.
We should be able to recognize when government is planning to bail out industry at taxpayers' expense.
We should be able to do the necessary sums.
And we certainly should be able to demand that our leaders do them, too, and will act on the results.
1. In 1994, I will give up, once and for all, reliance on herbal remedies when major surgery is clearly needed.
Let's start with the facts, no matter how unpleasant.
In Tokyo, the long-term value of commercial property is now at least 70% less than it was in 1989.
However, because there have been so very few transactions during the past several years by companies fearful of realizing paper losses, the market has actually adjusted by only 25%.
We do not, therefore, really know how low it will ultimately plunge -- only that there is still a huge distance to go.
"Huge" is the critical term here.
At its peak, the value of Tokyo's property market was twice that of all the real estate in the U.S. Losing, at a minimum, 70% of that value is not, by any stretch of the imagination, an easily managed economic event.
Multi-trillion-dollar losses are precisely what Japan's financial system faces.
Any honest economic surgeon will confess that not every bank can or should be saved, despite the bureaucratic reflex to do so.
So long as hopelessly weak banks are kept afloat, bad investments aren't written off, insolvent institutions aren't allowed to go under, and stock prices are kept artificially high, the patient can't be helped.
The drastic surgery needed here is the kind that will restore transparency and freedom to a market that has long known only the intrusive hand of government control.
2. For 1994, I will give up, once and for all, the argument that admitting the need for this surgery will cause a panic.
Unlike in 1945, the Japanese people today know that success, let alone victory, isn't possible as things now stand.
They aren't prisoners of doctored government information; they can read and see and hear for themselves.
Nor do they believe that performing the necessary financial surgery will trigger a panic.
They know that the government has immense hidden assets -- national land and intellectual properties, for example -- that can be used to cushion the inevitable post-surgery adjustments.
They know that in the area of residential property, for example, it is only antiquated tax laws on capital gains and cumbersome regulations on selling unproductive farmland that keep more than 160,000 acres of land in the greater Tokyo area off the market for productive residential development.
(That's twice the amount now devoted to private housing.)
And they know that individually they have extensive savings to spend -- if only they had something to buy.
If prices in Japan for the things people really want to buy -- and housing is at the top of the list -- fell to even halfway reasonable levels, those private savings (roughly $6 trillion) would flow rapidly into use.
Ironically, the more the government keeps stock and property prices high, the less appetite the private sector will have for them; hence the need for more artificial stimulation.
By contrast, where prices are falling -- on automobiles and consumer electronic goods, for example -- there is no pent-up backlog of demand.
Our living rooms and closets and garages are already full.
Few of us need a third TV set or a second fax machine.
We have money to spend, but we put it in the bank because there is nothing in Japan that we want to buy at current price levels.
We already have the money, but we save it or use it to travel abroad.
If we want to go skiing for four days, it is cheaper for us to go to Canada than to Hokkaido.
We amuse ourselves by playing pachinko, at $170 billion a year the largest industry in the country.
We don't fear panic and we don't need fiscal stimulation.
What we do need are markets that work -- and a willingness on the government's part to recognize that, in Japan, prosperity now flows, if it flows at all, from consumer sovereignty, not from bureaucratic efforts to spend taxpayers' money.
3. For 1994, I will give up, once and for all, the illusion that we are going to "produce" ourselves back into the heady economic days of the 1980s.
It is a baseless hope to postpone the need for drastic market surgery on the ground that the manufacturing performance that fueled Japan's success during the 1980s will kick in again as soon as the current world-wide recession eases.
It will not.
Things have changed fundamentally.
Most important, the manufacturing base in the U.S. has been revitalized.
Our own transplant operations in the U.S. have shown us that we can produce goods of the same quality there as at home but at a cost savings of 30%.
This cost difference isn't going to disappear.
Today, the average family income in the U.S. is roughly $40,000, a number that hasn't increased in real terms for a dozen years.
In Japan, the comparable figure is $72,000.
At the same time, of course, countries like China are coming onto the scene, with competent workers who earn, perhaps, 1% of what their Japanese counterparts earn.
We simply can't compete with this labor-cost disadvantage from a domestic production base.
Nor can we match the flexible labor practices of these other venues.
Nor do our companies have any recent experience in dealing with unions that will certainly protest the kind of restructuring that U.S. companies have experienced.
As a result, nearly all new investment in Japanese manufacturing is going not to Japan but to North America, China and the other developing economies in Asia.
These countries are poised to deal with the wealth -- creating opportunities of the 21st century.
We are still trying to recreate the manufacturing opportunities of the 1980s.
Japan's recovery, when it comes, will be driven by a resurgent housing market, coupled with all the secondary demand that it triggers.
It would be nice to think that our leaders will make -- and honor -- such New Year's resolutions as these.
The signs, however, aren't encouraging: a weak government coalition with precious little room in which to maneuver beyond offering up the usual stimulation packages; scared bureaucrats who think only of stimulation because anything else would be an admission that the policy tools they wield no longer work; and industry executives who call out for stimulation because the prospect of serious restructuring is so unpalatable.
So, good resolutions aside, more stimulation is what we probably will get.
And like the $300 billion spent since August 1992, it will fail.
Its failure will do much to precipitate an economic crash, first in Japan and then with a domino-like effect in the other industrialized economies.
Unlike in 1945, these economies are well and truly integrated.
Japan, remember, financed one-third of the U.S. deficit during the 1980s.
When Japan goes, the consequences will not stop in Japan.
Mr. Ohmae is a director of McKinsey & Co.
