Employer costs for prescription-drug benefits jumped 15% last year, about twice the rate of overall health-plan expenses, according to Foster Higgins, an employee-benefits consultant.
The findings indicate that despite growth of managed-care strategies to contain health costs and pledges from drug manufacturers to hold down price increases, many employers are still having difficulty holding down the cost of prescription drugs for their workers.
The survey, covering 2,395 employers, also found that growth in overall health costs was shaved to 8% last year, compared with a 10% increase in 1992.
And it showed that, for the first time, a majority -- 53%, to be exact -- of U.S. employees who were covered by health insurance were enrolled in a managed-care program, up from 48% in 1992.
"The most successful approach we see in holding down costs is getting more and more employees into managed care," said David Rahill, principal at Foster Higgins.
The overall results provide further evidence of a general moderation in health-care inflation.
Last month, for instance, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that medical-care prices rose just 5.4% last year, the lowest annual increase since 1973.
But the results for drug benefits run counter to that trend and may reflect a variety of conflicting forces in the market.
For one thing, said James A. Norton, managing consultant in Foster Higgins's Stamford, Conn., office, more companies are trying new techniques to manage their drug costs and the initial impact of such strategies often is to increase costs.
That's because of the "shoebox effect."
For example, prescription cards automatically record claims that employees might otherwise have stuffed in a shoebox and never filed.
Another factor, Mr. Norton said, might be the growing use of new drugs such as Prozac, an antidepressant marketed by Eli Lilly & Co.
Many experts said they believe that consumers are seeking -- and physicians are prescribing -- such medicines for conditions that don't call for pills.
"The consumption of drugs by the population is increasing steadily each year, and not necessarily because the rate of disease is increasing."
It appears unlikely that drug-price increases contributed significantly to the rise in corporate costs since prescription drug prices went up just 3.1% last year, according to the producer-price index.
Compared with the 15% rise in employer-drug costs, revenues at the major drug companies grew about 5%, noted Jack Lamberton, an analyst at NatWest Securities Corp.
A Merck & Co. spokesman said growth of membership in managed-care plans could account for some increase in employer-drug costs because the plans tend to use drugs more aggressively to hold down hospital and other health-care expenses.
But because managed-care organizations negotiate discounts, their increased utilization -- and increased cost -- might not increase drug companies' revenues proportionately, said a spokesman for McKesson Corp., which owns PCS Health Systems Inc., a big manager of pharmaceutical costs for health plans.
According to IMS America Ltd., which collects data on prescriptions dispensed in the nation's pharmacies, individual prescriptions were up 5% in 1993, but those distributed by mail-order pharmacies, which are heavily used by managed-care organizations, were up 15%.
Other findings from the survey showed that the average total health benefit cost per employee was $3,781 last year, up from $3,502 in 1992.
Costs at health-maintenance organizations rose 6.5%, while those in traditional fee-for-service plans grew 7.1%.
At managed-care networks known as preferred-provider organizations, or PPOs, costs were up 5.5%, while at so-called point-of-service plans -- HMOs that provide members with the option of getting care outside of their network -- increases were 8.9%.
Unlike traditional HMOs, both PPOs and point-of-service plans offer members the option -- at increased out-of-pocket costs -- to see doctors outside of the health plan.
Nearly all of the enrollment growth in managed care occurred in those types of plans, while traditional HMO membership was almost flat, the survey found.
"The desire to have some choice is a key selling feature of any new" health plan, Mr. Rahill said.
Preserving choice of doctors is emerging as a key issue in the national debate over legislative proposals to reform the health-care system.
The survey also found that for small employers -- those with 10 to 499 employees -- total average health-benefits costs were $3,240, compared with $4,117 for employers with at least 500 workers.
Smaller companies generally offer a less generous benefits package, require their employees to pay higher out-of-pocket costs and don't provide retiree benefits, Foster Higgins said.
Elyse Tanouye contributed to this article.
