The after-school routines of Jenny Gates, 10 years old, and her brother Ryan, seven, are predictable.
After a quick trip to the refrigerator, Ryan often plays a Mario video game at their home in suburban Detroit.
Jenny reads a book or sits down to a game of Clue with a friend.
Who is using the time better?
"I am," Jenny says proudly.
"Video games are for morons."
But the activity may not be as mindless as Jenny Gates thinks.
A growing number of psychologists and educators say girls may be putting themselves at a disadvantage by not playing video games more often.
While video games are often criticized as the bane of learning, playing them may be a quick-and-dirty entry point into the sometimes daunting world of computers.
"The guys just go `ticky, ticky' and wait to see what happens on their screens," says Mary Ware, an education professor at the State University of New York at Cortland.
"Girls sit there wondering if they're going to break the machine."
Boys play video games far more than girls do.
According to NPD Group Inc., which tracks retail sales, 75% of video games are bought for boys.
The gap is wider for more advanced systems.
A usage survey by Nintendo Ltd. of its older games, which run on an eight-bit chip, showed males outnumbered females 59% to 41%.
Among users of its more powerful 16-bit Super Nintendo Entertainment System, though, 82% are male.
Similarly, 80% of the players on Sega Enterprises Ltd.'s 16-bit system are male.
Surveys of children aged nine to 14 show that girls have a broad range of interests, from making new friends to shopping to reading to getting involved in after-school activities, says George Harrison, Nintendo's director of marketing.
Boys, however, tend to be fixated on one or two hobbies, such as collecting baseball cards or playing video games.
Video games aimed at girls -- including Echo the Dolphin and a series of Barbie games -- have been disappointments; a handful appeal equally to both sexes, including Nintendo's Tetris and Sega's Columns, two games in which players align patterns and objects.
But a majority of video games feature violence, often aimed at females, and stress certain cognitive skills that, academic researchers generally agree, males are better at, such as depth perception and spatial reasoning.
"Boys are good at navigating through a maze, particularly video-game mazes that consist of geometric configurations," says Eileen McMahon, a Los Angelese researcher on children's interactive media.
Ms. McMahon, who is also a consultant to video-game companies, including Sega, notes that "when girls navigate through space they need visual landmarks," much as in real life.
"Ask a woman for directions and she'll say, `make a left turn at the Shell gas station and a right at the gingerbread house,'" says Marilyn Droz, a special education teacher and researcher in Royal Oak, Mich.
"A guy goes: `Go down six stoplights, then you go five blocks east.'"
Research on the practical benefits of playing video games is in its infancy.
But some experts wonder if a passion for video games early in life lays a foundation for a career in technology.
Ms. Ware, who has taught college computer classes, observes that boys and girls participate in about equal numbers in beginner computer programming classes, and both sexes do equally well.
"But girls tend to drop out of Programming 2 and Programming 3 courses" when they get more intricate, she says.
Not all experts agree that video-game skills can be transferred to real-life endeavors.
"The problem with eye-hand coordination is, it doesn't necessarily transfer to anything else," says Jeffrey Derevensky, a McGill University associate professor and child psychologist.
One area of application is jet fighting, researchers say.
But "the world can use only so many jet fighters," says Prof. Derevensky.
The gender gap in technology today has turned into a women's rights issue of sorts.
Peggy Charren, the former head of Action for Children's Television and a critic of video-game violence, says "a part of me calls for more educational video fare and a part of me says, where are the video games to interest our girls, even if the stuff's terrible?"
The industry has a relatively small time window to interest girls in video games, adds Michealene Cristini Risley, a senior executive for Sega of America Inc., a Redwood City, Calif., unit of Japan's Sega Enterprises.
"You have to get them by age 12; otherwise you're not going to see them again until after age 25," she says.
"It's going to take some initiative by manufacturers," agrees Laurie Thornton, a spokeswoman for Capcom U.S.A. Inc., a video-game maker in Santa Clara, Calif.
"Right now, it's a question of the chicken or the egg.
Manufacturers say they're not making more games for girls because girls aren't interested, and girls say they aren't interested because manufacturers aren't making more games for girls."
