Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, is right to resist the Clinton administration's plan to impose a single bank regulator above the Fed, the FDIC, the comptroller of the currency and the OTS ("No Single Regulator for Banks," editorial page, Dec. 15).
The pretense that an inefficient regulatory regimen can be improved by adding one more layer of regulation is wrong.
Subordinating the Fed to an overarching regulatory apparatus for narrow shortterm political purposes would be harmful not only to the national economy but to the urban and rural poor, single mothers and minorities on the economic margins who have the most to lose from inflation and high long-term interest rates.
From de Tocqueville to Hayek, the greatest observers of political economy have argued that the more centralized administrative regulation becomes, the less responsive it is to the vital needs of society.
Overregulation makes financial institutions more conservative, timid and unwilling to take risks of innovation either in the forms of savings and credit or in their own investment strategies.
Numerous studies show a lack of available credit in minority communities.
The automatic explanation of this outcome is that it is produced by racial bias.
What is unexamined, however, is the role of excessive regulation in discouraging institutions from providing credit to minority enterprises and home owners, especially in high risk urban areas.
Just as the administration's effort to centralize banking regulation is misguided, so its monetary policies are mischievous.
Money, after all, represents one of the most solemn moral commitments a government can make: the promise that the nation's money will hold the same value as far into the future as the eye can see.
Anything less -- or more -- than that, for example policies that cause price level inflation or deflation, unjustly revokes that promise and defrauds the public of expectations on which -- by virtue of their labor, savings and investment -- they have a natural right to expect.
When the central bank, for whatever reason, adopts policies aimed at any goal other than long-term price stability, it breaks that trust in the future value of money, undermining faith in the most solemn government commitments.
People are then compelled to adapt to changing monetary values and uncertainty by raising long-term interest rates.
The inefficiency and miscoordination caused by monetary uncertainty reverses all the benefits we have seen over the past year, such as more affordable housing, 1.8 million new jobs and increased confidence in our economic future.
Those who have wealth will be able to adjust and protect their assets.
The full impact of this will be borne by those who do not own homes, farms, businesses or other assets that could hold value while monetary values are being manipulated.
This will have a disparate impact on minorities and the poor.
Keeping the commitment to a stable currency is a task that can be discharged by following a price rule such as linking the dollar to gold, which the U.S. did until 1971.
There is reason to believe that the Federal Reserve Board has been silently targeting price levels for some time now, producing the decline in interest rates that has been the current economic expansion.
If this policy were made explicit either by the Fed or by statute, we are confident that further rate reductions to the 3%-4% area could be forthcoming as people regain trust in the dollar's long-term value.
A phenomenal outpouring of capital for long-term private and public investment could make feasible all kinds of projects, including the urban infrastructure improvements we need but only dream about today.
Russell G. Redenbaugh
(Commissioners Robert P. George and Carl A. Anderson also signed this letter.)
