The House Ways and Means health subcommittee's narrow approval of a health-care bill Wednesday injected critically needed momentum into the movement to overhaul the U.S. medical system.
But the panel's deliberations serve as a cold lesson in the political realities lawmakers face as they work on health-care legislation.
To get a bill through even the liberal-leaning subcommittee, lawmakers had to trim benefits proposed by President Clinton.
They also had to push back their chairman's proposed effective date for requiring that all employers pay part of their workers' health insurance.
Even then, the package nearly fell apart in a fractious debate over financing.
The panel's 6-5 vote was but one step in a long and arduous process.
But it seems increasingly clear, judging from the subcommittee's deliberations and the closed-door discussions of other congressional panels, that Congress is moving toward a less ambitious scheme than the president's package.
Specifically, it appears that:
-- President Clinton's bottom line, health insurance for all Americans, still appears on track.
But the guaranteed benefits package almost certainly will be scaled back.
It's possible that more benefits could be phased in over time.
-- The large, mandatory health insurance purchasing cooperatives that Mr. Clinton would require all employers with fewer than 5,000 workers to join won't survive.
Instead, a system of voluntary "health alliances" to help give small businesses clout in the health-care market is likely to be adopted.
States are likely to be given the option of setting up a mandatory alliance system if they wish, however.
-- The Clinton "employer mandate" requiring all companies generally to pay 80% of their workers' health insurance premiums will be rewritten to impose less stringent requirements on small businesses than large companies.
A possible alternative is a hybrid system, in which the employer mandate will apply to larger companies while workers in smaller companies would have to acquire insurance on their own, with help from the government.
-- The idea of establishing some government-run option for unemployed and lower-wage workers -- the Ways and Means subcommittee proposed a new arm of Medicare -- may be gaining support.
-- To grapple with the gnawing issues of cost, changes in the health system will likely be phased in over a longer period than President Clinton suggested.
The Ways and Means subcommittee's deliberations this week showed there is a strong distaste in both parties for broad-based taxes; the subcommittee's working majority of six Democrats almost fell apart when Rep. Sander Levin (D., Mich.) refused to vote for a new, 0.8% payroll tax to pay for the bill.
To keep their deliberations from breaking down, the Democrats ultimately agreed to a 1% payroll levy only for companies with more than 1,000 workers.
An issue sure to come up again and again is the idea of capping the tax benefits granted employer-paid health benefits.
This concept is embraced by numerous Republicans and conservative Democrats because it aims to make consumers of medical services more price-conscious, thereby helping to stabilize prices.
It also is attractive to some Democrats because it could yield a lot of revenue to cover the uninsured.
Labor groups fiercely oppose the idea, and many liberal Democrats denounce it as a tax on working Americans.
But even some who have opposed it in the past say it should be revisited.
Rep. Pete Stark (D., Calif.), the chairman of the Ways and Means health subcommittee and the primary author of the bill that passed the panel this week, has discussed the idea of phasing out the tax benefits at higher income levels while keeping it for most blue-collar and middle-class people.
The White House was eager to fortify support for health-care overhaul and give lawmakers a sense of momentum before they return to their home districts this weekend for a two-week recess.
President Clinton, Vice President Al Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton all attended a Senate Democratic luncheon on Capitol Hill yesterday, where Sen. Bob Kerrey (D., Neb.) bluntly warned that the administration's bill didn't have 35 votes in the Senate and told them they must begin to seek some compromise.
"I'm still optimistic but we have got to start writing," said Mr. Kerrey later.
"The time for generalized arguments is over."
Shortly after lawmakers return to Washington in mid-April, the five principal committees with jurisdiction over health legislation hope to begin drafting bills.
While President Clinton's 1,342-page proposal has been serving as a framework for committee discussions, only two panels -- the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, headed by Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.), and the House Education and Labor Committee, run by Rep. William Ford (D., Mich.) -- are likely to approve a bill that bears strong resemblance to the White House plan.
In the full Ways and Means Committee, Democrats have a 24-14 majority.
With no Republican support likely, they can afford to lose only four of their members.
And four already look doubtful: Rep. Mike Andrews of Texas opposed the Stark bill in the subcommittee vote; Rep. L.F. Payne, a Virginia Democrat, will have trouble with its proposal to raise cigarette taxes $1.25 a pack; Rep. Bill Brewster of Oklahoma is a conservative, and Nebraska Rep. Peter Hoagland has big insurance companies in his district.
Mr. Hoagland has organized a group of undecided Democrats on the Ways and Means panel, which is circulating a compromise proposal that includes, among other things, voluntary alliances and an 80% employer mandate with both a four-year phase-in period and subsidies for small businesses.
President Clinton, for one, said the Stark subcommittee's bill would meet his minimum requirements.
"Certainly if it were to be enacted by the U.S. Congress, I would sign it because it meets the fundamental criteria I laid out of covering all Americans with health care," he said in a nationally televised press conference.
But Mr. Clinton said he doubted the bill would be as successful as his plan in controlling medical costs.
For all of Rep. Stark's liberal credentials, his bill is more conservative than a plan introduced by Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.) in 1991.
The fact that the Chicago Democrat is now saying the subcommittee bill must be scaled back shows how he and other Democrats are trimming their sails this year.
"I'm like a palm tree these days, swinging back and forth," said Mr. Rostenkowski, making light of assorted statements he has made on the prospects for health-care legislation.
The Chicago Democrat agreed that the subcommittee bill draws on major portions of his own past proposals.
He seems driven by an almost territorial imperative to keep the White House away while he works his panel.
"I don't want them commenting on everything," he said.
Meanwhile, in the House Energy and Commerce Committee, Chairman John Dingell (D., Mich.) and health subcommittee Chairman Henry Waxman (D., Calif.) have been working on a compromise that would retain an employer mandate, but place less of a burden on small firms.
"We're getting closer," Mr. Dingell said yesterday of his efforts to get votes.
Mr. Dingell asserted that business interests find the compromise plan's proposed 1% payroll tax on firms with more than 1,000 workers "acceptable," given what is in the bill "as a whole."
"We're going to save them money by the reforms," he said.
In the Senate, Finance Committee Chairman Daniel Patrick Moynihan has acknowledged that changes must be made in the administration's package.
But he took heart from a 63-35 Senate vote yesterday killing a budget proposal that would have prevented the use of proposed savings in Medicare for the health-care initiative.
"Good," said the New Yorker, "We have 63 votes for health reform."
Many observers are counting on the Finance Committee, whose membership includes the leaders of both parties and has an 11-9 Democratic majority, to draft the compromise that can ultimately clear Congress.
In a speech yesterday, Sen. John Chafee (R., R.I.), a Finance Committee member and the author of a leading Republican alternative bill, predicted: "In April, the Senate Finance Committee -- and I believe we are the centrists -- will be getting together with the leadership and drafting a bipartisan bill."
