It hasn't been pretty for European equity investors.
Stocks of the region's 100 largest companies are ending the quarter down about 3.2%.
The fate of some of Europe's biggest bourses has been even more ghastly, with London dropping about 7.5%, Paris falling 5.3%, and Zurich 3.9%.
Compare performances like that with the previous three quarters, which saw average gains of around 8%.
Indeed, most investors would have been far better off putting all their money into ultra-safe investments such as short-term deposits in marks, for example, which would have earned them about 1.5% for the period.
Prospects for the second quarter don't look vastly better, and the markets seem likely to shine only on those who meticulously pick the few companies that have restructured recently and are growing in the current sluggish European economic environment.
"The underlying story is that there is some sort of recovery going on in Europe, but it's not a particularly strong one," said Jimmy Burns, European investment manager at Stewart Ivory & Co. in Edinburgh, Scotland.
"Volatility is the name of the game for most markets, so you would be better off selecting a handful of growth stocks rather than playing a whole market outright."
Behind the wretched returns posted by most European stock markets in the first three months of the year lay a lot of broken-hearted fund managers who were betting on a very different scenario.
The Bundesbank was supposed to begin the year dishing out healthy dollops of official interest-rate cuts as regularly as once a month.
Instead, all Germany's central bank had to offer for the first three months of the year was a 1/2-point reduction Feb. 17 that left a ravenous market, primed to run on easier credit terms, starving for more.
Just as importantly, the U.S. Federal Reserve Board's about-face in monetary policy Feb. 4 set off serious selling on global bond markets, which in turn did a lot to drag equity prices lower.
"Last year European markets were fueled by liquidity from the U.S., especially institutional investors," said Albert Edwards, global strategist at Kleinwort Benson Securities Ltd. in London.
"But following the Fed tightening, the flow of funds has dried up, and that's why Europe has struggled."
Many strategists are recommending that the only profitable way to play the European recovery story is to be careful and select companies that have been aggressively cutting costs and using increased profits to buy market share.
"One should be looking for companies going through the process of restructuring," said Ronald Armist, a director of Lombard Odier Portfolio Management in London.
"You have to factor in the strong possibility that European interest rates might not fall as far as people currently think."
Mr. Armist has been buying companies such as Nedlloyd Groep NV, a Dutch transport company and medium-size companies in the United Kingdom that look poised to benefit from the country's modest economic recovery, such as Pizza Express PLC and construction material group Wolseley PLC.
Mr. Burns at Stewart Ivory also favors some of Europe's lesser-known companies, including Brioche Pasquier SA, a French baker with a broad distribution network, and Colruyt NV, a discount food-store concern in Belgium that seems to be winning a domestic price war.
Certainly the strategy going into the next quarter should be skeptical, if not downright defensive.
Some think there is even worse in store for European bourses, notably David Roche, a strategist at Morgan Stanley International Ltd. in London.
Mr. Roche believes that the current downturn world-wide is only half over, and thinks his rivals at other major brokerage firms have been too bullish about the strength of the recovery on the continent and are placing too much hope in the relatively unimportant economies of Scandinavia, Switzerland and Denmark.
He expects the only sizable economy to post real growth this year will be Britain's, but that its gross domestic product will increase by a figure nearer to 2% than the 3% widely forecast because of a series of tax increases, the latest of which will kick in next month.
Mr. Roche said core European countries, including France, Germany and the Benelux countries, may suffer a decline in output or at least stagnation this year, while peripheral countries will show modest pickups in their economies, yielding total regional growth of plus or minus 0.5%.
Tokyo stocks slumped 1% amid skittishness about a tumble on Wall Street and the resurgence of the yen.
London stocks rose on a technical bounce at the close after a session dominated by sharp losses.
Frankfurt shares skidded 1.5% in very thin trading, amid investor nervousness and lower bond prices.
In Mexico City, stocks fell following the assassination of presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio, but a late upswing braked the slide.
World-wide, stock prices fell in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 114.15, down 0.78, reflecting decreases in markets in all regions.
Oil-drilling stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 113.44, up 2.05, or 1.8%, with Rowan of the U.S. posting a 5.2% gain in its local currency.
Heavy-machinery stocks trailed, at 135.68, down 2.82, or 2%, with Dobson Park Industries of Britain sliding 6% in its local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which rose 75.80 points on Thursday, fell 201.42 points to 19836.48.
In trading Monday, the Nikkei rose 133.31 points to close the morning session at 19969.79.
Friday's first-section volume was estimated at 340 million shares, down from 359.4 million shares a day earlier.
Retreating issues outnumbered advancers 682-349.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which inched up 0.19 point on Thursday, slid 4.56 to 1610.35.
The Nikkei opened at its session high of 19973.40 and immediately fell on a plunge in Chicago in stock futures linked to the benchmark index.
Late buying by individual investors seeking dividends cushioned the drop.
In Mexico City, the government reassured investors about economic policy the stability of the peso, converting what could have been a steep drop into a buying opportunity.
The market was closed Thursday because of Mr. Colosio's slaying.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index advanced 7.3 points to 3129.0.
The FT 30-stock index rose 4.6 points to 2473.1.
Volume was 847.5 million shares, compared with 702.9 million shares a day earlier.
Prices reversed their early decline as investors decided that two sessions of losses were enough.
Shares also were lifted as participants finished squaring books on the last day of the current two-week trading account.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index sank 31.62 points to 2130.06.
Early buying shifted to selling as Wall Street mounted heavy losses in early trading and U.S. bonds sank in European trading.
In Milan, shares, including those traded electronically, rose 1.1%, despite expectations for a flat performance ahead of Italian general elections.
In Stockholm, prices plunged 1.9% in thin trading, pummeled by turbulence in Swedish bond and foreign exchange markets.
In Singapore, stocks slumped 1.2%; investors worried about poor performances of regional bourses and the Korean nuclear situation.
In Kuala Lumpur, prices tumbled 1.4% on profit-taking.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
