It's starting to look as if Big "D" could be the big star of the Texas economy this year.
That may sound a bit odd, particularly for a town hit by a raft of high-profile corporate layoffs and cutbacks in defense spending.
But the Dallas area has emerged as a significant jobs producer in recent months.
Construction is surging, trade is humming, and the unemployment rate has dropped sharply.
And that may be just the beginning.
After racking up 29,750 new jobs in 1993, the six-county area is expected to add at least 37,000 more this year, or 2.6%, according to an average forecast by six area economists.
And even that could prove pessimistic.
"I think Dallas is potentially a sleeping giant," says Keith Phillips, an economist with the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Mr. Phillips forecasts 2.7% job growth, but says he wouldn't be surprised to see employment leap by as much as 4%, or 57,000, this year.
"Dallas is fixing to grow faster than anywhere else, with the possible exception of Austin," adds Jon Hockenyos, managing partner of Texas Perspectives Inc., Austin, who expects the job growth in Dallas to reach 3%.
To be sure, everything isn't rosy.
Big companies, such as Texas Utilities Co., have been relentlessly downsizing their Dallas headquarters; defense contracting, while not as important to the Dallas economy as it is to Fort Worth's, has taken some body blows; and the financial-services and real-estate sector -- once the city's centerpiece -- has about 12,000 fewer jobs than it did at the peak in 1986.
What's more, the central business district remains one of the sickest in the nation, with over a third of its office space now vacant, and little to suggest a quick turnaround.
So, why is the outlook suddenly so optimistic?
The answer isn't simple.
"It's hard sometimes to describe what's causing the underlying strength because it's not one or two industries," says Mr. Phillips.
"You've got to come back to the low cost of doing business, the central location, and high quality of the work force."
Such factors made Dallas the leading spot in the nation for new corporate facilities and expansions in 1993, according to the most recent issue of Site Selection magazine.
The Dallas area boasted 188 new facilities that either involved an investment of $1 million, created at least 50 new jobs, or resulted in an increase of at least 20,000 square feet of real estate, the trade publication reported, edging out Charlotte, N.C., and Cleveland.
-- Dallas is diversified.
"Houston's a one-trick economy" that has suffered from the decline in oil prices, while "Dallas isn't that singularly dimensioned," says Gerald Higgins, an economist with the Texas comptroller's office, noting that industries such as telecommunications are surging in the city.
-- Small business is cooking.
Growth of smaller enterprises is starting to kick into high gear, even though it may be flying under the radar right now.
For instance, three-month-old Computer Directions Inc., a temporary-help agency offering the services of computer professionals, is adding two people a week to its payroll -- including many who have been laid off by bigger companies.
-- Construction is on a roll.
Few things propel an economy like building projects, and Dallas has them in spades: Construction jobs are up 9% over last year, compared with a 2% jump for the state as a whole.
Home building is leading the rebound, and 1994 new-home sales "could be within 10% or 15% of the all-time high in 1986," predicts Ron Witten, president of M/PF Research Inc., a Dallas realestate consulting firm.
-- Nafta.
Although it's too soon to see much real effect from the North American Free Trade Agreement, Dallas already is enjoying the psychological benefits.
One big boost: The city has reportedly been chosen to host the Nafta Labor Secretariat, which will oversee the accord's labor aspects.
-- Interstate trade.
As the transportion and trade hub for the Southwest, Dallas is "the regional center for a region that's doing very well," says M. Ray Perryman, president of Perryman Consultants Inc., Waco.
Now, the Big Picture: Employment in the Southwest will likely grow between 2% and 2.5% this year, according to new projections by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
That's better than the rate projected for the U.S. as a whole, although it's only a marginal improvement over the growth rate registered in the Southwest last year.
Of the three states tracked by the Fed, New Mexico has the hottest prospects, thanks to high-tech business expansions and relocations, and will likely notch 3% job growth.
Texas is expected to come in second, with 2.2% employment growth and "broad-based growth across most industries."
Bringing up the rear, Louisiana is likely to see just a 1.1% increase in jobs, because of its heavy dependence on the energy sector.
Louisiana's one bright spot: the construction and opening of casinos, the Fed notes.
