Tiburcio Ruiz, a 23-year-old peasant farmer, and dozens of companions seized this sprawling cattle ranch in the state of Chiapas two weeks ago and plan to farm it.
With the land, he says, comes a chance for a future.
"The government must buy us this land," Mr. Ruiz says in the smoke of a campfire.
"We're not leaving it."
Emboldened by the Mayan Indian uprising New Year's Day, people in Chiapas are seizing land throughout the impoverished state.
The seizures, largely at the edge of rebel strongholds, are a bold attempt to force the federal government to comply with the old, often-broken promise that land would be given to any peasant who could farm it.
Since the uprising, angry cattlemen say that more than 200 properties in the county of Ocosingo alone have been "invaded," and that the pace has quickened in the last two weeks.
The call for government land reform has not only been one of the major demands by the Chiapas rebels but resonates throughout Mexico, where nearly a third of the population still live on farms that are typically small and inefficient.
But the government faces a dilemma.
If it splits up big ranches and farms to hand land to peasants, it will make Mexican agriculture even less efficient than it is now.
The North American Free Trade Agreement will penalize any inefficiencies, because the Mexican farmers with a handful of acres will have to compete with Americans whose farms of hundreds or thousands of acres justify the use of the latest equipment.
If the government takes land from its owners, it could scare away the foreign investment and know-how that it believes is critical to straightening out Mexico's woeful farming industry.
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has attempted to make agriculture more efficient by pushing through sweeping legal changes, among them ending a decadesold program that awarded farming rights on small plots of land to the nation's peasants.
Though 3.2 million Mexican families eventually won such plots, the farms have proved inefficiently small, even as a family food source.
Still, if the government doesn't figure out a way to once again pass some holdings on to the peasants -- who feel they are entitled to land as their legacy from the bloody 1910-1920 Mexican Revolution -- Mexico may face more unrest, and not just in Chiapas.
For example, in Chihuahua state, across from Texas, squatters often seize land from the wealthy.
In a play off the name of Chiapas rebel leader Subcomandante Marcos, a national farm leader agitating for greater farm aid in the heartland state of Jalisco has taken to calling himself "Subcomandante Max."
At Rancho San Jacinto in Chiapas, Mr. Ruiz and his companions insist the ranch should be broken up into parcels and given to them because of its size.
Peasant farmer leaders suspect it's an illegal accumulation of land at more than 1,000 acres, even though it may have multiple owners.
The Mayan squatters, who say they aren't aligned with Chiapas's rebels, say they took matters into their own hands because they aren't confident the peace talks will address their problems.
Some of the Mayan squatters at Rancho San Jacinto actually come from a farm that peasants own communally.
But in a tale familiar throughout the countryside, the land has been passed down to so many sons and daughters that it can no longer support its 250 residents.
Moreover, Mr. Ruiz says, the land is strewn with rocks and is waterless.
Other squatters have waited years to get land promised under the old Mexican constitution, and many have actually died in the land fights over the last 25 years, according to human rights reports.
At Rancho Jotola, 36-year-old Manuel Aquilar, shows government documents detailing his community's 25-year battle for land.
In 1975, several men were badly beaten by cattlemen's thugs and one man died from his wounds, according to testimony in one document.
"We're always stepped on because of our humility," says Mr. Aquilar.
"The rich see us and they treat us like animals."
In the face of invasions by groups like Mr. Ruiz's, scores of ranchers have abandoned their lands and moved cattle to a neighboring state, fearing their cattle will be stolen or slaughtered.
At Rancho Santa Rosa, just outside Ocosingo, Ineyda Solis checks on her home, with its showcase cedar-wood staircase, but decides she shouldn't return.
"I don't want to come back and live here because of my little girl," she says softly, cradling her nine-month-old baby.
"What if someone comes in the night and we have to flee?"
Even the foreman at nearby Rancho Mosil refused to stay.
Its owner, Jose Barragan, says he, his family and his employees are afraid to live there.
He recently paid $5,000 to move half his cattle to a nearby state.
But some ranchers seem to be preparing a counterattack.
Ocosingo cattlemen have already set up a "committee of defense" to counter the peasants "council of vigilance."
Hundreds of cattlemen, seeking a government crackdown on the squatters, demonstrated on Saturday in the tourist city of San Cristobal de las Casas.
The cattlemen only scoff at talk that the government will buy land and give it to impoverished Indians.
"We have the right to own land, and no one here is going to sell it to anyone," says Mr. Barragan, the rancher who owns Rancho Mosil.
Cattleman Porfirio Martinez adds: "Tell the government to apply the law.
Because if there is another outbreak of violence, we all lose."
