In a setback for General Motors Corp., a Frankfurt district court rejected GM's plea that Volkswagen AG should temporarily suspend seven managers it hired away from the U.S. auto maker last March.
However, the decision in this civil case has absolutely no influence on the central debate between the two companies: GM's allegations that former purchasing czar J. Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua and his colleagues absconded with a hoard of sensitive GM documents when he defected to VW.
The hiring away of a whole team of GM managers by VW constituted a further systematic attempt to unfairly damage a competitor, GM maintained.
But the Frankfurt court ruled that, "despite remaining doubts," it couldn't be proved that unfair competition practices played a role in the seven men following Mr. Lopez to VW.
Because of Mr. Lopez's personal dynamism and the close team spirit among his subordinates, it couldn't be ruled out that the men followed him on their own initiative, the court said.
VW can continue to employ the seven men, and GM must bear 80% of the court costs, the court ruled.
The German car maker seized on the ruling as a triumph confirming its innocence -- not only in the labor-poaching dispute but also more broadly in connection with the allegations surrounding Mr. Lopez.
No criminal charges for industrial espionage have been filed and VW has at all times denied wrongdoing, but public prosecutors in both the U.S. and Germany have been investigating the case for months.
"The district court has unambiguously established that there were no unfair competition practices of any kind in connection with the switch of the former GM/Opel employees to VW," the German car maker said.
That response angered GM.
"The statement by Volkswagen AG about the Frankfurt district court addressing the issue of industrial espionage in its ruling . . . is factually inaccurate," Adam Opel AG, GM's German subsidiary, said in a statement.
Opel Chairman David Herman stressed that the labor-poaching dispute was a "legal sideshow" separate from the more important matter of the criminal investigations.
GM said it hasn't decided whether to appeal the ruling.
