Mobil Corp. announced that Lucio A. Noto will take over as chief executive when Allen E. Murray retires from that post at the end of February.
Individuals familiar with Mr. Noto, 55 years old, say Mobil's profile is likely to become more prominent under him.
As chief financial officer, a post he held for several years until just last year, Mr. Noto met widely with analysts and investors.
And even after his appointment as president and chief operating officer last year, he remained accessible.
Known as Lou by friends and other executives within the company, he is described by people who have met him as "outgoing, amiable and energetic."
He focuses on details and is said to know almost every facet of Mobil's businesses.
He even went to the extreme at one point of going to work at 5:30 a.m. to observe the workings of an outside service that gathers newspaper clippings concerning Mobil, said an individual familiar with that visit.
Mr. Murray, who became chief executive in 1986, has run Mobil, one of the world's largest oil companies, on a low-key basis, almost shunning publicity.
Mr. Noto's appointment wasn't unexpected.
When he was elected president last year, it was assumed then that the board of directors, of which he is a member, had chosen him to succeed Mr. Murray upon his retirement.
Until that point, however, Mr. Noto was one of possibly three contenders for the job.
Mobil observers say he was up against two other directors -- Paul J. Hoenmans and Eugene Renna -- who also are top executives at the company.
It appears that Mr. Noto, like Mr. Murray, will consolidate management power under himself when he takes on the top spot March 1.
Mr. Murray retained the titles of chief executive officer, chairman, president and chief operating officer until he peeled off the last two upon Mr. Noto's election to those posts.
A company spokesman said Mr. Noto will assume all four titles as well.
Mobil has been slowly restructuring itself during Mr. Murray's tenure.
Under his guidance, Mobil's total debt declined by 30% to $8 billion, annual dividends rose by 48% to $3.25 and a flabby refining and marketing business was whipped into shape.
It is thought that Mr. Noto, who has been at the company for 31 years, will keep the company focused on its strategy of cost-cutting while concentrating on the core oil and chemicals businesses.
But analysts say he will likely bring an increased sense of urgency to the challenge of keeping Mobil a highly profitable company during coming years, when oil prices are expected to remain depressed.
Mr. Noto "has much more of a financial orientation than the typical oil-company chief executive," says Constantine Fliakos, an analyst for Merrill Lynch & Co. and former Mobil executive who knows Mr. Noto.
Indeed, Mr. Noto's background is eclectic.
Fluent in Italian, he has a degree in physics from the University of Notre Dame as well as a master's degree in business administration from Cornell University.
He held major positions in marketing and planning for Mobil, working in the diverse locations of Japan and Italy.
He also lived for a number of years in Jidda, Saudi Arabia.
People familiar with his career say he was instrumental in striking many of the deals with the Saudis that have proven to be the anchor of Mobil's business operations in that region.
The company has about 10 joint ventures with the Saudis.
