Loral Corp., stepping into the crowded satellite-communications race, is expected to announce today that it has arranged enough funding, $275 million, for the first phase of the Globalstar mobile-telephone system it is assembling with partner Qualcomm Inc.
New York-based Loral, primarily a defense-electronics concern, also will name seven other partners or investors for the proposed 48-satellite, $1.8 billion system.
They are AirTouch Communications, being spun off from San Francisco-based Pacific Telesis Group; Alcatel-Alsthom CGE of France; a venture formed by DaCom Corp. and Hyundai Electronics Industries Co., both of South Korea; the Deutsche Aerospace unit of Daimler-Benz AG of Germany; Vodafone Group PLC of Britain; and Alenia Spazio SpA of Italy.
Qualcomm is based in San Diego.
Partners in the project have invested as much as $37.5 million each.
With the exception of the Italian company, the new partners are expected to have roles as providers of the mobile-phone service that Globalstar will begin providing through local phone networks in Europe, Asia, Africa, North America and South America.
The first 24 satellites are due to be in place in April 1998.
Less than a year later, the companies expect to have all the satellites in place.
By 2002, they anticipate having 2.7 million subscribers and annual revenue of $1.6 billion, and by 2012 as many as 16 million users world-wide are projected.
The determination of Loral to press ahead with Globalstar turns up the heat on rivals moving into the global satellite-communications market.
Earlier this week, communications and computing giants McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. and Microsoft Corp. announced plans for an 840-satellite communications system costing $9 billion.
Those plans have sparked widespread skepticism among technologists over the scale.
Globalstar's most direct rival, however, remains the 66-satellite Iridium Inc. project led by Motorola Inc., although TRW Inc.'s proposed 12-satellite Odyssey system would be another competitor.
Some Iridium backers are among those who believe the Federal Communications Commission will ultimately issue no more than two licenses for such systems, but Loral Chairman Bernard Schwartz said he is closer to that process "than most people," and at least three such systems are likely to win government approval.
Mr. Schwartz, who has supported the president politically, has close ties to the Clinton administration.
Mr. Schwartz said "a very big distinction" setting Globalstar apart from other satellite systems is that nearly all Globalstar investors provide communications services themselves, and will help in delivery of Globalstar service in their areas.
That will speed local approvals and hold down costs, he said, adding that their expertise and their large stake combine to offer a unique "validation" of the system.
With these edges, Globalstar system can be highly competitive, he said.
The scale and cost of the McCaw-Gates project is daunting, he said, and Iridium promises to cost about $2.10 a minute, more than three times the 65-cent-a-minute service price projected by Globalstar.
Iridium, based in Washington, D.C., has said its total cost will be about $3.37 billion, sharply higher than Globalstar's.
But, said Iridium spokesman John Windolph, "You get what you pay for" with a higher signal strength for Iridium, and service direct to users' handsets, without passing through local telephone systems.
He questioned whether Globalstar's estimates of per-minute costs include all charges added by local phone companies.
And he noted that Iridium's $800 million in first-phase financing, already complete, includes investments by numerous service providers, among them Sprint Corp. in the U.S. and others in Canada, Japan and Italy.
Some analysts argue that in the end, each of the satellite-telephone ventures is pursuing a slightly different market.
Iridium, for instance, will appeal to high-end users such as executives who want to be reached anywhere, anytime at any cost, while Globalstar will appeal to far-flung governments and communities seeking a lower-cost service.
As the competition heats up, however, others say some projects are likely to fade away or fail eventually.
"The problem is they're all chasing effectively the same market and they're all chasing the same money," said Jeremy Rose of Communication Systems Ltd., a consulting firm in St. Albans, England.
Added Mel Phelps, a telecommunications analyst for Hambrecht & Quist in San Francisco, "The Darwinian theory will prevail I'm sure."
