The chairman of Alexander & Alexander Services Inc. resigned, increasing the likelihood of major changes for the struggling insurance broker.
T.H. Irvin, 60 years old, will be succeeded by board member Robert Boni, 65, former chairman of steelmaker Armco Inc.
Mr. Irvin will remain chief executive officer until a successor is found.
For years Alexander & Alexander, the nation's second-largest insurance broker, has reported disappointing earnings and a steady stream of special charges.
Most recently, the company took a write-down to acknowledge accounting irregularities in its benefits consulting business.
Mr. Irvin, who has been with Alexander for 40 years, said he and the board decided he should step down "to accelerate the pace of change and effect improvements in operations and earnings."
The company has begun what it called an "international search" for a new chief executive.
Shareholders applauded the move.
"This has been an insular company with an insular board," said John Fields, senior portfolio manager with Delaware Management Co., which owns about 7% of Alexander & Alexander's stock.
"That they are looking outside for an agent of change is very significant."
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, Alexander & Alexander rose 25 cents to $19.50.
New management is likely to speed up cost cutting that is already under way, which could mean more layoffs, analysts say.
Alexander now employs 14,200 people, down from 18,000 in 1987.
The $1-a-share annual dividend is also in jeopardy.
In addition, Alexander & Alexander might seek to get out of customer segments that don't deliver strong profits.
It has already reduced its number of small clients because of the high costs of servicing that business.
"The changes could be dramatic," said First Boston analyst Vanessa Wilson.
"The board is clearly thinking about shareholder value.
The fact that they're willing to get tough is a whole change in culture at this firm."
Insurance brokers act as middlemen between insurance buyers, mostly corporations, and insurance companies.
They make money on brokerage fees as well as interest income earned on the insurance premiums they collect from customers and pass to insurance companies.
Despite continuing problems from past acquisitions, analysts believe Alexander & Alexander's strengths make it attractive to potential acquirers.
With 500 offices around the country, a blue-chip clientele and revenue of more than $1 billion a year, analysts think aggressive management could rapidly increase profitability.
Some of Alexander's problems, however, are beyond its control.
A six-year slump in commercial insurance prices has damped results, and uncertainty over health-care reform has been a drag on its consulting business, which accounts for about 16% of earnings.
