The Big Three auto makers are escalating their campaign to persuade clean-air regulators in California and the Northeast to back away from a 1998 deadline for auto makers to mass produce electric cars.
General Motors Corp.
President John F. Smith Jr. and Ford Motor Co.
Chairman Alexander Trotman, in separate appearances here last week, said the auto industry can't meet the 1998 deadline.
Mr. Smith argued that the mandate should be suspended until the industry produces better battery technology.
At the same time, the two auto executives said the Big Three still are looking for a way to collaborate on electric-vehicle production should their lobbying fail.
Last year, it appeared that proposal had died amid bickering among rival factions at GM, Ford and Chrysler Corp.
The comments by Messrs. Smith and Trotman signal that Detroit's Big Three are determined to fight plans by California and 12 Northeastern states to force sales of so-called "zero-emission" vehicles within four years.
"We don't have the know-how to get there with a vehicle that customers will pay for," Mr. Trotman said, declaring Ford will fight to roll back the 1998 California deadline.
Mr. Smith took a softer line, suggesting a deal that would result in electric vehicles, but later.
Mr. Smith said he wants to meet with California's Air Resources Board so that he can convince the powerful regulatory agency that GM's best electric vehicle, the Impact, won't meet most consumer needs until a new generation of battery technology emerges.
New batteries aren't likely to emerge before 1998, the year that the regulatory board wants auto makers to begin selling such zero-emission vehicles, Mr. Smith said.
"There ought to be a way of tying this electric-vehicle mandate to a second generation" of batteries, Mr. Smith said.
"We still need major breakthroughs before the electric vehicle can be sustained in the marketplace."
Mr. Smith also suggested that a mandate to make "zero-emission" vehicles could be tied to the success of the Clinton administration's so-called "super-car" initiative with the Big Three and the auto makers' $260 million U.S. Advanced Battery Consortium, a joint research program with the electric utility industry and the Department of Energy.
"As proud as we are of the Impact and all the rave reviews it has received, we think we can make the electric vehicle more practical and less costly if given more time," Mr. Smith said.
Generally, auto makers expect electric cars to cost thousands more than conventional vehicles.
Whether Mr. Smith's proposal will win a following among skeptical regulators is uncertain.
What's clear is that Detroit's efforts to derail the electric-car bandwagons in California and the Northeast haven't worked so far.
Despite heavy lobbying, regulators in 12 Northeastern states and the District of Columbia last week voted to push ahead with a regional plan to adopt California's strict program for reducing vehicle emissions, including its zero-emissions component.
Should that proposal become law, auto makers would have to market emission-free vehicles such as electric cars for nearly half of the nation's vehicle market.
The consensus among auto makers -- including Japanese manufacturers -- is that the industry can't meet the regulatory demands with available technology.
If auto makers are forced to meet the 1998 mandate, Mr. Trotman said, the result will be expensive, under-performing vehicles that customers won't buy.
"You can't mandate technology," Mr. Trotman said.
