Law-firm paralegals may perform sufficiently sophisticated work to disqualify them from receiving overtime pay, a federal-court jury has found in a case that could affect compensation policies at many law firms.
Paralegals perform a wide range of duties at law firms, from clerical tasks such as photocopying and assembling documents to work resembling that done by lower-level lawyers, such as drafting legal briefs.
In the case at hand, the U.S. Department of Labor sued Page & Addison, a small Dallas law firm, under the Fair Labor Standards Act, seeking $40,000 in back wages for the 23 paralegals who worked at the firm from 1989 to 1991.
The agency contended that the paralegals were subject to the act's overtime provision and thus entitled to time-and-a-half pay for work in excess of 40 hours a week.
The Dallas jury disagreed, concluding that the paralegals are eligible for "administrative exemption" from the provision because they perform important work and exercise discretion and independent judgment.
The firm's managing partner, Murry Page, said the firm fought the suit at the unanimous behest of its paralegals (except for a former paralegal who complained to the Labor Department).
He said the paralegals viewed the suit as a threat to their professional status and job security.
One of the paralegals, Jan Browning, said: "Legal assistants who are paid on a salary basis are treated differently from those who are paid hourly.
There's a psychological difference."
The 12-lawyer firm saw the case as threatening its competitiveness in the tight market for legal services.
"Paralegals do an awful lot of the work young lawyers do," Mr. Page said.
"It permits you as a law firm to charge much lower rates to your clients."
Page & Addison's 11 current paralegals are billed to clients at $60 to $65 an hour and the firm's starting attorneys at $100 an hour.
If the firm had been forced to give its paralegals overtime, it could have been cost-effective to replace them with lawyers, Mr. Page said.
A Labor Department attorney declined to comment about the case.
Diane Soroko, president of the 17,000-member National Federation of Paralegal Associations and a paralegal at Long, Aldridge & Norman in Atlanta, said the group isn't sure what impact the verdict will have but thinks the case was the first one concerning paralegal overtime to go to trial in federal court.
Although the paralegals at Page & Addison sided with the firm in this case, Ms. Soroko said, "the paralegal profession is fairly split on this."
A poll taken at the organization's annual meeting last year found 51% of paralegals supported exempt status, which wouldn't require that they receive overtime pay, and 49% favored nonexempt status that would qualify them for the extra compensation.
In a survey of paralegals conducted last year by Legal Assistant Today, a publication based in Costa Mesa, Calif., 59% of 490 paralegals who responded said their firms didn't compensate them for overtime.
A paralegal at a Dallas firm not involved in the court case, who didn't want to be identified, said overtime is important for paralegals because they don't have as many incentives -- such as partnership -- as young lawyers have to work long hours.
"In circumstances where people are called upon to work a number of hours of overtime -- 20 or 30 hours a week -- the overtime provides immediate compensation for their work," she said.
Even if the Dallas verdict is upheld, that doesn't mean all paralegals would be exempt from overtime pay requirements.
Paralegals' responsibilities and the degree of independence they exercise vary widely.
Some paralegals have supervisory duties and are considered executives.
Others, however, do little or no work requiring them to exercise discretion and independent judgment.
At Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom in New York, which has about 1,000 lawyers and more than 200 paralegals, such distinctions are already made in payment of paralegal overtime.
"Many of our paralegals are paid overtime but there are others who do not receive overtime based on their specific duties and responsibilities," said Earle Yaffa, the firm's managing director.
Mr. Page said he thinks the Dallas verdict will force the Labor Department to carefully consider the actual duties performed by paralegals before concluding that they are eligible for overtime.
Already, he said, a half-dozen firms around the country have contacted him because they expect to make a similar defense.
"I think what you're going to see is a lot of law firms that heretofore just caved in are now going to fight it," Mr. Page said.
(U.S. Dept. of Labor vs. Page & Addison P.C., U.S. District Court, Dallas, No. 912655.)
The Americans with Disabilities Act doesn't require fast-food restaurants to ban smoking, a federal judge has ruled.
The case was brought against McDonald's Corp. and Burger King Corp., a unit of Grand Metropolitan PLC, on behalf of three children with asthma and a woman with lupus.
The complaint alleged that the fast-food chains discriminate against people with respiratory ailments because smoking aggravates their breathing problems, forcing them to eat elsewhere.
But last week, Judge T.F. Gilroy Daly threw out the claim, saying requiring a total ban on smoking wasn't reasonable because some restaurants "can accommodate a `no-smoking' area."
Robert Farr, the lawyer who filed the case, said he would appeal the decision.
Last month, McDonald's announced that all of its more than 1,400 company-owned restaurants would voluntarily become smoke-free.
A spokeswoman for the company said the move was unrelated to the lawsuit.
(Staron vs. McDonald's, U.S. Dist.
Ct., Hartford, Conn., No. 3:93CV00665)
NOTED: James Martignoni, a former senior trader for the New York branch of ABN-AMRO Bank NV, a Netherlands-based bank, was sentenced to 21 months in prison for fraudulently inflating the value of the bank's foreign-exchange portfolio by about $70 million.
Following a three-week trial in November, a federal court jury in New York found Mr. Martignoni, 29 years old, guilty of 16 counts of fraud, making false book entries and conspiracy.
Judge John F. Keenan also imposed a term of three years' probation to follow the prison sentence.
Edward Felsenthal contributed to this article.
