German Chancellor Helmut Kohl asked Britain and Spain to make concessions on voting rules and fishing rights in a stalemate that threatens the European Union's plans to add four members on Jan. 1.
The European Parliament could reject an enlargement package with voting rules making it harder to enact EU laws.
EU officials sought flexibility by assembly members to approve expanding the 12-country bloc if negotiations can be wrapped up next week.
Pacts have been set with Austria, Finland and Sweden.
Talks with Norway broke down over differences with Spain on fishing rights, and the voting-rights issue.
Britain, backed by Spain and Italy, wants to retain the ability of two large countries and one small nation to block EU legislation.
Mr. Kohl urged Britain to accept a proposal backed by most EU nations to adjust voting rules to account for membership by Austria, Finland, Norway and Sweden.
And he said Spain should accept a compromise on fishing.
His highly unusual public statement reflects the importance Germany places on allowing the four wealthy states to join the EU.
Guangzhou aims to slash the number of bicycles in the southern Chinese city to one million from three million by the year 2010 and to curb motorcycles.
City officials blame bikes for clogging the boomtown and, defying logic, embrace the central government's goal for individuals to own cars under the policy of "getting rich."
While bicycle use is widely viewed as a way to help ease environmental problems, Asian cities' new wealth has been accompanied by chronic traffic tie-ups and pollution from poor auto-fuel quality.
The Paraguayan state-owned airline stopped flying and said it wasn't likely to resume operations.
Lineas Aereas Paraguayas, which has $41 million of debt, said it didn't have enough money for jet fuel.
It has run a monthly deficit of $1.3 million.
For LAP to reopen, the government would have to pay the carrier's vendors $15 million.
But Paraguay has indicated it wants to privatize LAP.
The international airline, with about 300 employees and a three-plane fleet, flew to Miami and South American cities, after dropping European routes in December.
As men have increasingly migrated from China's farms to cities for jobs, women handle two-thirds of the country's agricultural production, the official China Daily said.
Women account for 70% of the rural labor force, and their numbers are expected to rise to 185 million, or 77%, in the year 2000, while the number of men falls to 55 million.
Despite literacy and health-care improvements, rural-women are less mobile and are paid 22% less on average than men.
Even so, as economic reforms expanded opportunities, many female farmhands have taken jobs in township enterprises, where 50 million women account for a third of those employees.
Faced with a challenge to his government, Slovakian Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar has sold off chunks of 29 state-owned companies, but disclosed little about the buyers.
This prompted corruption allegations, but having essentially scrapped a coupon-privatization program, the Slovaks haven't found an alternative.
Parliament has been deadlocked for months over control of privatizations.
As a result, Slovakia's economic transition has ground to a halt, with just 121 firms having been sold to private owners since Mr. Meciar's election in June 1992.
The World Bank, dangling as bait a loan to service Bulgaria's foreign debt, urged the government to accelerate privatizations.
To qualify for the credit, state radio said, the World Bank is considering requiring Bulgaria to sell off 70 state-run enterprises and to liquidate five insolvent state companies.
Bulgaria must make monthly payments of $10 million in interest to foreign creditors and a single payment of $865 million in principal as part of a rescheduling of its commercial debt.
Russia's ambitious privatization program has begun to change the way former state companies operate, an official said, declaring, "Restructuring has started."
Maxim Boiko, director of the government's Russian Privatization Center, which coordinates foreign technical assistance, said a survey of privatized firms in the Moscow and Vladimir areas found that in the past year, 60% have changed their range of products and fired employees.
The government is developing programs to help the firms find investors and adapt to the market.
It also is setting up a consulting network on topics such as marketing and management.
Almost 10,000 midsize and large enterprises have been sold off, with an additional 4,000 to shift to private hands by midsummer, when Mr. Boiko said 70% of workers will be in the private sector.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Kuwait's emir donated $2 million to build an Islamic school in New York. . . .
Bermuda, a British colony since 1612, advised Queen Elizabeth II that it is considering independence.
The mid-Atlantic resort island, where two-thirds of the 60,000 residents are of African descent, has the world's third-highest per-capita income, after Switzerland and Luxembourg.
