The Americans may be coming to Vietnam, but the Asians and the Europeans are already here.
With the lifting last week of the U.S. economic embargo against Vietnam, U.S. companies such as PepsiCo Inc. and American Express Co. are scrambling to get back into this market of 72 million people after 18 years of being almost completely shut out.
But while the Americans were away, Asians, Australians and Europeans were making hay, setting up investments totaling $7.5 billion since 1987.
And while investment opportunities still abound in aviation, infrastructure, oil exploration and other sectors, Ministry of Commerce official Hoang Ngoc Cu says that in some fields, including motor-vehicle manufacturing, "it's too late for the Americans to come in."
On the road to Ben Tre, a provincial capital about 54 miles south of Ho Chi Minh City, Asian brand names leap out at the traveler.
Tiger, the Singaporean beer, is prominently for sale all over.
"Honda" repair shops are everywhere -- not because the Japanese brand is in such frequent need of servicing but because the motorcycles are so popular that "honda" has effectively become the Vietnamese word for motorcycle.
Last year Ben Tre Province, a rice, sugar and coconut growing zone in the Mekong River Delta, received its first foreign investments.
Provincial officials say a Belgian company invested $480,000 in a facility to process coconut husks, while a South Korean company committed to a $7 million investment in a 2,470-acre banana plantation.
Altogether, 60 delegations of foreign investors made the trip to Ben Tre Province in 1993 -- all of them from Asian or European countries.
Tran Van Nghia, vice chairman of the province's Standing People's Committee, expects 100 delegations this year.
So far, at least, Mr. Nghia sees no indication that Americans will be among the 100.
The rush of Asian and European investors took some of the sting out of the U.S. embargo.
As a result, the Vietnamese reaction to the embargo's lifting was subdued, both in the media and on the street.
Many Vietnamese were happy to see the embargo go but didn't think its lifting would have much real economic impact.
"Vietnam thought that if the embargo was not lifted, other countries would not come to Vietnam to invest -- but many countries have come," says Tran Cong Man, vice secretary general of the Vietnam Journalists' Association.
For foreign investors, Vietnam is one of the world's last relatively untapped opportunities, with a large population and plentiful natural resources, including oil.
Though run by a Communist party that brooks no opposition, the country is committed to building a market economy and has reduced the number of state enterprises to 7,000 from 12,000.
While annual per-capita purchasing power is low -- only about $350 -- the economy is growing at 7%-plus a year, and inflation is under control.
The Vietnamese people seem highly motivated, and they offer the foreign investor a low minimum wage ($35 a month) and a high literacy rate (88%).
The Vietnamese government is eager for foreign investment -- it hopes to lure an additional $20 billion of it by the end of the decade -- and offers terms that on paper, at least, are liberal.
In practice, red tape and corruption plague would-be foreign investors, but the government is trying to fix these problems.
Out of the $7.5 billion committed by foreign investors, about $2 billion has been spent so far; government officials say they are reasonably satisfied with that ratio.
Nguyen Mai, vice chairman of the State Committee for Cooperation and Investment, or SCCI, predicts that Vietnam will receive $4 billion in foreign-investment commitments this year and $1.5 billion of actual investment.
Most of the money will come from Asian and European investors.
"We don't see 1994 as a year when we'll receive a rush of new flows of investment from the U.S.," Mr. Mai says.
It "will be a year of more and more Americans coming to further their studies" of Vietnam's investment potential.
The foreigners with the biggest investment commitments in Vietnam as of last week were companies from Taiwan ($1.54 billion) and Hong Kong ($1.25 billion).
Taiwan's government, fearful of becoming too economically dependent on China, has encouraged investments in Vietnam, and many big Taiwanese companies have jumped at the opportunity.
One, the closely held Ching Fong group, is investing $228 million in a cement factory in Haiphong, $55 million in motorcycle-manufacturing facilities and $15 million in an investment and trust company.
Ching Fong is said to be the largest single foreign investor in Vietnam.
Just last week, two Taiwanese firms joined France's Total SA and Vietnam's state-owned Petrovietnam in agreeing to conduct a feasibility study for Vietnam's first oil refinery.
The two are state-owned Chinese Petroleum Corp and China Investment & Development Co., whose largest single owner, with a 30% stake, is a holding company of Taiwan's ruling Kuomintang.
Japanese and South Korean investors are also moving into Vietnam fast, especially in electronics and motor-vehicle assembly.
Mr. Mai says the SCCI has received 17 proposed investments from Japan's Mitsui & Co. alone, and eight from South Korea's Daewoo group.
Some Vietnamese officials expect the lifting of the U.S. embargo to trigger a flood of Japanese interest.
The officials think Japanese companies have been holding back, trying to avoid angering Washington by seeming to take advantage of the embargo to snatch opportunities from American rivals.
With Americans now free to compete, "maybe sooner or later the Japanese will overtake the Taiwanese and become the largest foreign investors," Mr. Mai says.
