What do an IRS examiner, a former professional football player and a Houston homemaker have in common?
Answer: They're all trying to break into the Texas salsa market.
And they have plenty of company.
Lured by the state's reputation as the mecca of salsa, scores of hopeful entrepreneurs have launched their own brands in the past few years.
There's Zorba the Buddha and Bubba's Suicide Salsa, Kay's Hot Stuff Salsa de Tomatillo and Buzz's Tex-Lou Magic Salsa.
Last year alone, 50 Texas-based salsa products, including new brands and variations on existing brands, hit the market.
That was nearly 20% of all new salsa products nationwide, according to New Product News, a Chicago trade publication.
Good news, perhaps, for salsa lovers.
But for salsa makers, the mad rush to market has the makings of a disaster.
Faced with stiff competition, especially from well-heeled, established giants, the smaller fry are finding it harder to get shelf space, let alone sell the stuff.
The likely upshot: a market shakeout.
"There are more `me-too' salsa companies in Texas than you could imagine," says Park Kerr, owner of 14-year-old El Paso Chili Co., who predicts that most of the new arrivals will fail.
"These people don't understand that the market is already saturated."
Even the market leaders are being jostled by the crowd, according to statistics gathered by Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service, a Chicago-based market-research concern.
Despite a 1.8% increase in the sales of Mexican-style sauces in Texas, to $57.8 million, six of the top 10 brands in the state actually saw Texas supermarket sales decline in 1993.
San Antonio-based Pace Foods Inc., in business since 1947, saw Texas supermarket sales drop 3% last year, to $29.6 million.
(The company's sales of its sauces at discount warehouses were up.)
Old El Paso Foods Co., Anthony, saw Mexican sauce sales in its home state dip 0.2%.
Nationwide, sales of Mexican saucesincluding salsa and picante sauce, a morewatery version of the standard blend of tomatoes and jalapeno peppers, grew 11%, to $629 million.
For several years now, sales of Mexican sauces have even exceeded those of ketchup.
With these kinds of numbers, no wonder so many amateurs have plunged into the business -- particularly in Texas, where salsa was a household word decades before the trendsetters caught on in other states.
"There's one in here every week," says Ron DiFranco, owner of DiFranco Foods Inc., an Austin salsa maker that also manufactures bottles and labels for others.
Mr. DiFranco bottles almost anybody's salsa for a per-jar fee, but not before first warning of financial perils, "I tell them not to quit their jobs," he says.
Mr. DiFranco should know.
Back in 1986, introducing his own hot sauce saved his food business from bankruptcy.
But new entries into the market have cut his Texas per-store monthly sales from about four cases (of 12 jars each) five years ago to about a case and a half today.
To boost sales, he's shipping his Bubba's Suicide Salsa and Estella's salsa to less-crowded Northeast and Florida markets.
Still, succeeding in Texas provides an enticing challenge to many entrepreneurs, who feel that braving the obstacles here will prepare them for national success.
"If you can make it in Austin, you can make it anywhere," says Royce Miller, 51, an Internal Revenue Service examiner who is working nights and weekends to start a salsa business.
The first hurdle is to get an appointment with store buyers, whose desks are already filled with salsa jars.
"You've got about eight seconds to hit them before they say, `I never want to see another salsa in my life,'" says George Hammerlein, a Houston distributor.
Scott Silverman, a buyer at Rice Epicurean market in Houston, says he gets requests for interviews from 150 salsa makers a year, but sees only about one a week.
He immediately rules out anybody who cooked the sample at home, because supermarket products must be made in state-licensed kitchens.
After that, he looks for bar coding, which would allow his store to put the salsa through the automated checkout.
He also looks for liability insurance "in case somebody gets sick" after eating the salsa.
Even after meeting those basic requirements, only about 10% of the salsas Mr. Silverman considers make it to the shelves, based largely on packaging, marketing and the results of in-store demonstrations.
(Taste is rarely a factor.
"Most of them are so similar," Mr. Silverman says.)
It also costs money to get into stores -- about $80,000 for a big market like Houston, says Mr. DiFranco.
That's partly to cover the costs of "slot fees" paid to grocers for shelf space.
A slot fee for a small salsa maker might be a free case and a couple hundred dollars per store, Mr. DiFranco says.
The money also includes the cost of demonstrating the product at grocery stores -- a crucial step to convince stores that the salsa will sell.
"I'm Frank, and this is Frank and Bryan's salsa," exclaims Houstonian Frank Laux to shoppers at Randall's in Houston on a recent Saturday morning.
Mr. Laux quit his job as franchise manager for new products at Mars Inc.'s Uncle Ben's unit a year and a half ago, and teamed up with a colleague to concoct their own salsa -- and start a new business.
He now spends every Saturday and Sunday in supermarkets across the state, urging people to sample his SunSalsa, SunSalsa Verde, and SunSalsa Queso, a cheese concoction.
Frank & Bryan Foods Inc. is represented in about 200 stores, considered a good start after less than a year in business.
Mr. Laux expects the company to be profitable by its third year.
Would-be salsa kings put in more than long hours to try to break through the clutter.
They also must buy success with promotions, according to Bet-Del Foods Inc., the company that introduced Herb's Party Salsa a year ago.
Nathan Laviage, a former Mexican restaurant owner and president and part owner of Bet-Del, says he has been keeping his salsa moving with price cuts and two-for-one promotions, on which he loses money.
So, while sales in 1993 were a respectable $60,000, Bet-Del posted a net loss of $64,000.
"It's tougher than I thought," concedes Mr. Laviage (whose friends call him Herb).
One entrepreneur who hasn't had much trouble breaking into the market is Curley Johnson, a 58-year-old former punter for the New York Jets, who started bottling his own Curley's Salsa 15 months ago and says his Austin-based company has already made a slight profit.
Mr. Johnson, whose salsa bottle shows a football helmet filled with vegetables, has a sure-fire technique for getting interviews with powerful store buyers: "I just flash my Super Bowl ring and I'm in," he says.
Those that don't have the cachet of having been a former pro-football player need to find other ways to stand out.
Best of the West Inc., a gourmet food marketer in Austin, has cooked up a peach salsa, named Buckaroo Twenty Four-Kick Peach Salsa.
Guiltless Gourmet Inc., also of Austin, labels its Guiltless Gourmet salsa as having "no fat, no oil," which -- though true of many other salsas -- helps catch the eye of health-conscious buyers.
Still, uniqueness usually doesn't last very long in the salsa business.
Tiny Houston-based Lindy Foods, which five months ago found a niche in green salsa with its Auntie Martin's Cilantro Sauce Supreme, now faces competition from at least a dozen green salsas, says company owner, Lindy Nowell, who was a homemaker when her entrepreneurial interest was sparked by news reports about the growing popularity of salsas.
If all else fails, some try a religious pitch.
Salsa Divino, made by Desert Pepper Trading Co. in El Paso promises to be the "answer to your prayers."
The label, adorned with a drawing of the Virgin of Guadalupe, reads: "Out of the quiet desert night where the wind blows cool and you can see directly into the heavens, comes a salsa that will inspire your eternal devotion."
But even Salsa Divino has competition.
A Colorado manufacturer makes an equally inspirational hot sauce -- with the name, Religious Experience.
Under the heavy odds, countless Texas companies start up, make salsa for a year, and are forgotten.
One dropout who many do remember is Maria Rose, a 41-year-old Austinite who honed her cooking skills on an Oregon commune.
After five years of making salsa under her Zorba the Buddha label, Ms. Rose, who was working 17-hour days, seven days a week, found she was "barely breaking even," and discontinued her red salsa in 1992 and her green sauce several months ago.
"A lot of people think it's glorious, but actually it is no small thing to be in the food business," says Ms. Rose, who is now attending acupuncture school.
Yet despite the odds, some people, like Mr. Miller, the tax examiner, persevere.
After a year, Miller's Texas Salsa has earned shelf space in only about two dozen stores -- but Mr. Miller trudges on, selling anywhere he can, to anyone he can.
"I think it's picking up," he says, adding: "I'm in only one store in Houston, Butera's Supermarket on Bissonnet.
If you're in the neighborhood I'd appreciate it if you'd stop by and pick up a jar."
Source: Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service
