Germany's OeTV public-sector and transportation union accepted a contract with concessions and a temporary wage freeze -- the stingiest for these workers since the republic's 1948 founding.
Under the 15-month settlement retroactive to Jan. 1, the 3.5 million federal, state and municipal employees will get a 2% pay raise, but not until July 1 for the lowest-paid workers and Sept. 1 for the others, keeping the overall average raise to 1%.
OeTV was the third big German union after the metal and chemical workers to abandon lofty job-security and pay demands, as employers aim to dismantle labor inflexibility that has hurt Germany's economic competitiveness.
With OeTV, the government achieved an unexpected cost-neutral wage deal that undercuts inflation, as unprecedented concessions by the workers will shave costs and offset the small pay increase.
Fringe-benefit cuts include a freeze on annual bonuses of a month's pay.
The Lebanese Parliament authorized the reopening of the Casino du Liban, on a scenic site overlooking the Bay of Jounie just north of Beirut.
The move is part of the government's plan to revive tourism in Lebanon, once the Mideast's entertainment center.
The casino's gambling halls and spectacular floor shows were a major attraction before the establishment was closed because of shelling in the conflict from 1975-90.
The casino, 50%-owned by the state, will get a 30-year gambling license.
Congo's government eliminated 9,000 names from its bloated payroll, after finding that some public servants used fictitious names to draw as many as 10 paychecks each.
The firings included 3,000 people hired with false credentials and 1,000 past the retirement age of 55.
The move was part of an accord with the International Monetary Fund but fell short of the deal to halve the government's $21 million monthly wage payments; the layoffs will save less than $2 million a month.
Congo, with a population of 2.5 million, also asked its 80,000 civil servants to justify their work, signaling more dismissals.
Cambodia received emergency aid pledges totaling $773 million to rebuild an economy struggling after decades of civil war, land damage and poverty.
The pledge total, at a Tokyo meeting of more than 30 nations and 12 multi-national bodies, was inflated by repledging of some funds previously committed but not disbursed.
Representatives lauded the government, formed last May, for curbing inflation, boosting tax revenue and stabilizing the currency.
But problems remain with a budget deficit, foreign debt, poor law enforcement to combat banditry, and basic services such as phones and irrigation.
Coal miners' protests spread across Russia, as more than 30,000 workers went on strike, seeking to force the government to pay back wages.
But union leaders in some areas said they weren't prepared for an extended walkout and would resume work, while miners in the northwest picked up their tools after they received pay for December and January.
In the south, nine of 26 pits closed by strikes were reopened.
Unions say the government owes miners $360 million in back pay, while consumers owe the industry $600 million.
Finland's transport union said it would halt today all deliveries of food, including import and export shipments, to support a strike by 30,000 food production employees.
The transport union has 48,000 members, including truck drivers and port workers.
Last Thursday, most food production in the country was halted when employers began a nationwide lockout after contract negotiations with unions broke down over pay.
The Saudi Arabian cabinet banned satellite dishes and related devices that pick up television signals from abroad.
The decree marks an effort to regulate programs in the conservative Muslim kingdom.
Dish use surged after 1990, when Saudis sought news about Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
The decree allows seizure of dishes and bars imports and production.
Violators may be fined up to $133,000.
The Information Ministry will cull programs from international networks for showing on cable TV to ensure they conform to "religious and social values."
Foreign programs contrasted with those on state-run TV, which has cut scenes of couples holding hands in foreign films and barred programs from a Saudi-owned network in London because female announcers didn't cover their heads as required by the kingdom's Islamic laws.
Muslim fundamentalists and state preachers have condemned the dishes.
The muttawa, or religious police, have taken potshots at rooftop dishes.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
China intends to build an aircraft carrier, a Beijing military official confirmed, following a magazine report of plans to build two fleets with a carrier each. . . .
In Paris, Notre Dame's three main doors will be cleaned with laser technology.
The work, to remove dirt without damaging color remaining in saints' sculpted clothes, will mark the first major restoration of the cathedral's portals since the mid-1800s.
The 13th-century design served as a pictorial Bible for the illiterate.
