Water rising behind the Sardar Sarovar Dam on the Narmada River in western India began submerging homes, after flooding farmland.
Work on the irrigation and hydroelectric project is in its first stage.
The dam system is to be the world's biggest, surpassing the nearly completed Itaipu dam on the Brazil-Paraguay border.
The Indian network, involving 30 large and 3,000 smaller dams stretching from southeast of New Delhi to the Arabian Sea in the west, will provide drinking and irrigation water to 40 million people.
It will uproot a million people and flood 600 villages and 865,000 acres each of forests and farmland.
The water level started rising late last month when the dam's sluice gates were closed to start storing water.
Water was seeping into homes in the village of Vadgam, 500 miles southwest of New Delhi.
Some residents refused to leave.
Environmentalists have campaigned against the project since 1987.
A 1992 review by the World Bank, which financed part of the work, said India hadn't done enough to resettle displaced villagers.
A Swiss petition drive gathered enough signatures for another vote on joining the European Economic Area.
Swiss voters in December 1992 rejected membership in the EEA, which consists of the 12-country European Union and five of the seven European Free Trade Association members.
As Liechtenstein has close economic ties to Switzerland, it too is outside the EEA but has said it wants to join.
The Swiss petitions go to executive and legislative branches for position statements before ballot scheduling.
The federal government and business favor EEA membership, which opponents say would threaten Swiss neutrality and independence.
About 2,000 members of western German banking unions held a brief warning strike.
The two unions said employers hadn't made a wage offer in three rounds of talks on a 1994 contract for 450,000 banking employees.
Negotiations resume tomorrow.
More demonstrations are planned for today and Friday.
The unions have promised to limit bank departments affected by the walkouts, to avoid interrupting business for customers.
In yesterday's protests, about 900 workers disrupted traffic in the banking center of Frankfurt.
About 20,000 people marched through Budapest, demanding press freedom and protesting dismissals of 129 employees of Hungary's state radio.
The procession, sponsored by a human-rights watchdog group, Democratic Charter, embarrassed the center-right government, which views itself as a pioneer in Eastern Europe's transition to democracy.
Hungary's government, which has complained of biased treatment by the media, denied any role in the dismissals; state radio blamed a tight budget.
Opinion polls show trouble in the May election for the government, accused by opposition parties and newspapers of trying to silence its critics.
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam's commercial hub, plans to spend $200 million this year to upgrade its roads, water supply, and electricity network.
The outlay would triple similar spending last year.
The Asian Development Bank has approved a $76 million loan to help finance drinking-water improvements in the southern port city, formerly Saigon, home to about four million people.
The city also earmarked $15 million to electrify outlying villages and increase network capacity.
Meanwhile, in the capital, Hanoi, industrial production in this year's first two months increased 25% to $22 million from a year earlier.
Russian television and radio, which used place names created after the Soviet Union broke up in 1991, dropped the pronunciations in favor of traditional names.
The new names, adopted to acknowledge local customs, offended some Russians, while others said embracing the old names smacks of linguistic colonialism.
Under the new policy, Belarus once again is referred to as Byelorussia, Moldova as Moldavia and Kyrgyzstan as Kirgizia.
The Kazakh capital is called Alma-Ata rather than Almaty, and the Russian republic of Tatarstan again is Tataria.
The state-run broadcasters' decision reflects some Russians' desire to protect their culture and language from being degraded or distorted by other nationalities of the former U.S.S.R.
A state TV official said the move doesn't insult the other republics' dignity.
Yet in these far-flung republics, where local languages and cultures have re-emerged, the Russian programs are widely popular as sources of news and entertainment.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Indonesia received World Bank approval for a $350 million credit to back a $680.5 million project to upgrade and repair 2,600 miles of roads and bridges. . . .
Moscow's medical service said at least 258 people froze to death this winter.
Most of the victims were drunks, whom the Russian capital's police no longer take to sobering-up stations, as crimped funds are aimed at curbing growth in crime.
