The Internal Revenue Service is battling personal-injury plaintiffs over a multimillion-dollar question: Are punitive damages taxable?
The issue has divided federal courts around the country.
Despite a setback last year in the U.S. Tax Court, the IRS has mounted a vigorous attack in several cases in which taxpayers are seeking refunds for taxes they have paid on such damages.
The IRS maintains that punitive damages are a windfall and should be taxed as if they were income, much like gambling earnings.
But taxpayers argue that the damages are excluded under one hotly contested sentence in the U.S. tax code, known as Section 104 (a) (2).
That section says income taxes aren't owed on "the amount of any damages received . . . on account of personal injuries or sickness."
In one of the latest rulings on the issue, a federal court in Gulfport, Miss., said last month that punitive damages in physical injury cases are, indeed, taxable.
The court said the Tax Code's exclusion applies only to compensatory damage awards, which are those that serve to reimburse plaintiffs for injuries actually incurred.
Under Mississippi state law, "punitive damages are awarded not to recompense for loss due to a personal injury; rather, they are awarded to punish and deter," Judge Dan M. Russell Jr. said.
As Judge Russell noted in his opinion, however, "a consensus on this issue within the federal judiciary is nonexistent."
At least three other federal district courts have ruled in favor of the IRS since 1991.
But the U.S. Tax Court, a special court that hears cases brought by the IRS against taxpayers, has ruled twice that punitive damages in such cases aren't taxable.
The split in the courts has created an odd situation for taxpayers.
Those who don't report the damages as income are likely to face a claim brought by the IRS; and, under court procedures, such cases go before the Tax Court, which has rebuffed the IRS's position.
But if the individual pays the tax and then seeks a refund, the case would have to be pursued in federal district court -- where the IRS has had better luck.
Both the latest Tax Court decision and the Mississippi ruling have been appealed to federal appeals courts.
Because so many cases are pending in different jurisdictions, "down the road either Congress will have to clarify the law or the Supreme Court will decide it," said Ljubomir Nacev, a professor at Northern Kentucky University Chase College of Law in Highland Heights, Ky.
Prof. Nacev, who represented the taxpayer who won in the punitive-damages case before the Tax Court last year, said, "The IRS is trying to get a result from Section 104 (a) that isn't justified by the law."
Congress amended the section in 1989 to say that punitive damages are taxable in cases that don't involve physical injury, such as libel suits or commercial litigation.
Prof. Nacev maintains that if Congress had intended to tax punitive damages in all cases, it wouldn't have written the amendment only for nonphysical-injury awards.
Prof. Nacev said confusion about the issue has affected the way settlements are structured, as winning parties try to arrange the payments under categories that aren't taxable.
He said the IRS's position also may lead trial attorneys to decide that the taxability of jury awards should be brought to the attention of jurors.
In the Mississippi case, punitive damages of $1.5 million were paid in a life-insurance dispute involving the death of a prominent Biloxi surgeon.
The estate paid $300,465 in income taxes on the award in 1988, but then sought a refund.
Clyde H. Gunn III, an attorney for the estate, said the punitive damages should be excluded because they "arose out of a physical injury," the death of the surgeon in a plane crash.
Mr. Gunn, of Biloxi law firm Corban & Gunn, said the threat of stiff IRS penalties made it necessary to pay taxes and later seek a refund, rather than refuse until the IRS came to collect.
"We couldn't afford not to pay the tax on the hope that we were right," he said.
A $32 million fee award to attorneys for bondholders hurt by the collapse of the Washington Public Power Supply System may have been inadequate, a federal appeals court ruled.
The decision stems from a $687 million settlement that the attorneys won to cover bondholder losses incurred in the wake of the 1983 collapse of WPPSS, the biggest municipal-bond default ever.
The appeal was brought by 25 law firms for plaintiffs in the case.
The lawyers had sought fees totaling $103 million -- roughly three times their normal hourly rates -- to reflect the years of litigation and the risk of nonpayment if they had lost.
Such "multiplier" awards are fairly routine in class-action lawsuits, but a U.S. district judge in Arizona had denied the request.
In a ruling last week, the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco said the lower court "abused its discretion" in refusing to enhance the fee because of the risks associated with the case.
The appellate panel ordered the lower court to recompute the attorneys' award.
The case had been closely watched by securities lawyers, who were concerned that the lower award would be upheld on appeal.
"It would have discouraged lawyers from taking contingent cases," said Melvyn Weiss, a New York securities lawyer and lead attorney in the bondholder case.
"We are pleased that the Ninth Circuit has seen fit to give us another opportunity to demonstrate the value of our services."
Including interest, the WPPSS settlement is valued at about $800 million, he said.
(In re: Washington Public Power Supply System securities litigation, Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, No. 91-16669, 91-16685, 91-16687)
Richard B. Schmitt in Washington contributed to this article.
