Philip Morris Cos. is expected to sue ABC News today, challenging a recent report suggesting that the tobacco industry adds nicotine to cigarettes to make them more addictive.
The Feb. 28 story by ABC's "Day One" program has created a public relations nightmare for the industry.
It has prompted a letter from Food and Drug Administration Commissioner David A. Kessler saying he was considering evidence that could result in the FDA's regulating cigarettes as a drug, which would likely lead to a ban on them.
The letter was sent to the Coalition on Smoking or Health, an antismoking group that had previously petitioned the FDA to regulate some cigarettes as drugs.
Because FDA regulation would require congressional support, it is highly improbable.
Nevertheless, it has depressed tobacco stocks and raised concerns about increasing hostility toward the industry.
Philip Morris, which has scheduled a news conference in Washington this morning with its top two lawyers, wouldn't confirm that it planned to sue, but several industry executives said they had been told a lawsuit would be filed against ABC, a unit of Capital Cities/ABC Inc.
It isn't clear what legal grounds Philip Morris would pursue.
In a statement, the company said the briefing would "respond to recent allegations made against the industry and against Philip Morris specifically."
A spokeswoman for ABC declined to comment.
Dr. Kessler is scheduled to appear on Capitol Hill tomorrow to testify on the FDA and tobacco, and the expected Philip Morris suit is seen partly as an attempt to deflate Dr. Kessler's testimony.
Philip Morris maintains that Dr. Kessler's interest in tobacco is part of a calculated move by the Clinton administration to pressure the industry to accept the president's proposed increase in the cigarette tax.
"It's hard to think that a 75-cent excise tax proposal and some of these other initiatives aren't related," said William I. Campbell, the head of Philip Morris's U.S. tobacco unit, in a recent interview.
"Mr. Campbell's unfounded speculations aren't worthy of serious response," said an FDA spokesman.
Philip Morris is increasingly filing lawsuits to challenge its attackers.
It has sued the city of San Francisco and the Environmental Protection Agency in the past year.
The decision to sue ABC is somewhat surprising because it could open the secretive cigarette-making process to legal discovery.
The ABC report has created a thorny problem for Philip Morris.
After watching the show, many viewers had the impression that the cigarette industry was "spiking" tobacco with nicotine.
Also, news reports about the FDA letter suggested that new evidence about the addition of nicotine was the main reason for Dr. Kessler's interest in cigarettes.
In fact, much of the "Day One" show focused on a decades-old process involving reconstituted tobacco.
In that process, the industry grinds tobacco, extracting the nicotine and water to make a sheet of tobacco, and then adds back the nicotine.
Less than half the tobacco in most cigarettes is reconstituted, and the process doesn't apply to regular tobacco leaf used in cigarettes.
The process actually reduces the amount of nicotine in cigarettes.
The process is described in some detail in the 1979 Surgeon General's report on smoking.
It cites the use of reconstituted tobacco as one reason tar and nicotine levels in cigarettes have declined.
But the perception of lacing cigarettes with nicotine, which Dr. Kessler's letter alludes to, stirred up the media.
The process was denounced by a number of newspaper columnists and editorial writers.
A New York Times editorial said the FDA's "revelation" that manufacturers are "deliberately adding nicotine" to cigarettes, if true, is "a crime of unconscionable dimensions."
In an interview yesterday, Steve Parrish, general counsel of Philip Morris USA, said he felt that the company had been defamed by ABC.
"The harm," he said, "is when they say we spike cigarettes with nicotine."
In an interview last week, Craig L. Fuller, a senior vice president at Philip Morris, indicated he felt the company had grounds for a suit against ABC.
"They have grossly overstepped their bounds," he said, "and they had information, had they chosen to use it, that would have avoided the inaccuracies in their reporting."
