When the dust clears from the current correction in stock prices, keep a sharp eye out for tempting takeover targets.
Just keep in mind that with some 4,600 publicly traded small stocks, it won't be easy to pick those targets.
Money managers say slumping stock prices may increase the allure of small companies as takeover candidates, particularly among well-managed concerns in the technology, health-care, financial-services and media sectors.
"Consolidation is going to be a big deal this year," predicts Charles Glovsky, portfolio manager of State Street Research's Small Cap Growth Fund in Boston.
"In the past month, four of the companies in our portfolio of 71 stocks were bought wholly or partially -- that's more takeover activity we've seen on a monthly basis than at any time in the past five years."
Those targeted stocks in State Street's $500 million-asset portfolio included Florida-based health maintenance organization Ramsey-HMO Inc. (acquired by United HealthCare Corp.); education-software developer Broderbund Software Inc. (to be bought by video-game software publisher Electronic Arts); computer-animation software group Softimage Inc., (acquired by Microsoft Corp.); and wireless specialized mobile radio company Nextel Communications Inc., in which MCI Communications Corp. took a 17% stake for $1.3 billion.
But no one should ever invest in a company solely because of its mooted takeover potential, counsels Mr. Glovsky.
"The way to play a takeover strategy is to buy fast-growing, quality companies that have been trading at attractive valuations -- if in the current correction those valuations contract even further, those issues become increasingly attractive targets" for a bid, he explains.
A host of factors is driving the takeover flurry in small stocks this year, he believes.
For one thing, a lack of pricing power is forcing many mid-capitalization companies to seek growth through acquisitions of competitive secondary and tertiary players, he asserts.
"We talk to over 1,000 companies every year, and what we're hearing from the vast majority of these firms is that their customers won't stand for price increases -- consequently, growth is going to have to come from other areas, including acquisitions."
What's more, he notes, a number of rapidly growing small companies are running into capacity problems that could hamstring further growth and impede cost-reduction efforts.
As a result, a lot of "tertiary competitors will be looking to sell out to larger companies to achieve economies-of-scale," he says.
The State Street fund manager thinks a couple of other stocks in his portfolio have ample takeover potential.
Rexall Sundown Inc., a closely held purveyor of vitamins and nutritional supplements, "represents an attractive acquisition for companies hoping to expand into over-the-counter pharmaceuticals," Mr. Glovsky says, noting that the stock -- trading at around $21 a share -- has nearly doubled from around $11 in mid-December.
Mr. Glovsky also expects to see further consolidation moves in the highly speculative wireless segment of the telecommunications arena, particularly following MCI's infusion of capital into Nextel.
A likely takeover target, he says, is Pittencrieff Communications Inc., a smaller specialized-mobile-radio company operating in Texas and other parts of the Southwest.
The company might soon be wooed by the likes of the newly beefed-up Nextel or other larger wireless players, he says.
Other money managers predict the takeover drumbeat will intensify in the beaten-up health-care sector, where cost-cutting is the name of the game as companies gear up for pending health-care reform legislation.
On Friday, for example, Healthdyne Inc. said its 68%-owned home-infusion subsidiary, Home Nutritional Services, entered into a definitive merger agreement with W.R. Grace & Co.
Healthdyne said W.R. Grace will seek all of the Home Nutritional shares outstanding for $7.85 each in cash.
The move is the latest in a recent wave of mergers in the home-infusion niche market: early last month, T2 Medical, Cura flex Health Services Inc., Medisys Inc. and HealthInfusion Inc. announced an agreement to merge as Coram Healthcare Corp., with some 200 home infusion centers nationwide; in January Caremark International Inc. said it would purchase Critical Care America, Medical Care America's home-infusion subsidiary, for $175 million.
Joel Tillinghast, manager of Fidelity Investment's Low-Priced Stock Fund (a $2.2 billion-asset portfolio), thinks National Health Laboratories Inc. and Universal Health Services Inc. could both attract takeover interest in two of the larger health-care sectors -- laboratory services and hospitals.
National Health, he says, will see its earnings decline this year, but the clinical-lab service company remains a strongly "cash-generative business offering huge economies of scale," to a potential acquirer.
Universal Health, an acute-care hospital operator, is currently trading at a relatively low multiple of earnings for the hospital industry, which "has been a fertile area for takeovers," he says, citing recent acquisitions by burgeoning hospital Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp. (formerly Columbia Hospital Corp.)
The Fidelity manager also sees lots of takeover potential in the financial sector, where "valuations remain pretty moderate."
Among those bank issues that could attract interest, he cites: Independent Bank Corp. of Rockland, Mass.; Andover Bancorp of Andover, Mass.; St. Paul Bancorp of Chicago, and Dime Savings Bank of New York.
At T. Rowe Price in Baltimore, a focus on potential takeover candidates is directed largely at the media and telecomm sectors.
"We would not hunt down investments simply on takeover speculation," says Charles "Chip" Morris, executive vice president of T. Rowe's New Age Media Fund.
"That doesn't mean if we like a stock -- and if its fundamentals are good -- that we wouldn't also consider its value as a takeover candidate."
Specifically, Mr. Morris likes companies that have been building franchises in "fragmented markets that are increasingly dominated by a few big organizations."
He also favors companies with solid cash flow and strong brand-name recognition.
One of his top picks as a potential takeover play is Enquirer/Star Group, publisher of the racy National Enquirer tabloid.
He thinks the company's introduction of a Country lifestyle magazine this spring could spark interest, possibly from media entrepreneur Rupert Murdoch.
One troubling aspect of the recent flurry of takeover bids has been the sharp rise in the stock price of recent acquisition targets before the mergers are announced.
For example, Nextel's shares jumped $2.125 a share, or nearly 6%, on the day before the announcement of MCI's acquisition of its large stake in the wireless company, and Home Nutritional's shares surged 87.5 cents, or 15%, on heavy volume Thursday amid speculation the company could be acquired.
Chip makers drew buyers and bonds stabilized, pushing small-company stocks solidly higher.
The Russell 2000 Index of small-capitalization stocks gained 1.56, or 0.59%, to end at 264.71.
The Nasdaq Composite Index zoomed 5.97, or 0.76%, to 790.55.
Both indexes posted only modest gains Friday morning but jumped higher as bonds rebounded.
Advancing Nasdaq issues topped decliners, 1,732 to 1,312, on Nasdaq National Market volume of 276,958,200 shares and total volume of 318,175,000.
On Thursday, National Market volume was at 279,207,000 shares with overall volume at 318,358,000.
Among the gainers were VLSI Technology, San Jose, Calif., which gained 1 3/4 to 14 1/2 ; Advanced Semiconductor Materials International, the Netherlands, which added 1/8 to 3 1/8, and Cyrix, Richardson, Texas, which moved 7/8 higher to 32.
Among the decliners were shares of Ben & Jerry's Homemade, which fell 1 7/8 to 18 1/8 following a company forecast that marketing and start-up costs associated with its new Smooth ice-cream line would pressure the company's 1994 earnings.
Earnings wouldn't keep pace with sales growth in 1994, the company said.
It wasn't more specific.
The company in Waterbury, Vt., reported net income of $7.2 million, or $1.01 a share, on sales of $140.3 million for the fiscal year ended Dec. 25, 1993.
