Operators of the Perry nuclear power plant near Cleveland settled their lawsuit with General Electric Co., apparently ending a wave of litigation that had sought billions of dollars in damages from GE for a defective containment-vessel design.
Terms call for GE to make a cash payment and provide discounts on "future purchases" to Centerior Energy Corp.'s Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co. and Toledo Edison Co. units, Ohio Edison Co. and its Pennsylvania Power Co. unit, and Duquesne Light Co.
The amount of the cash payment wasn't disclosed.
Citing a confidentiality agreement, the utilities wouldn't say how close the settlement came to initial damage estimates.
A 1988 Ohio study cited by the Perry utilities had said GE's design errors created "hundreds of millions of dollars of excess costs."
Their suit, filed in federal court in Cleveland in 1991, hadn't specified damages, but alleged breach-of-contract and fraud and asked that any award be trebled.
The utilities don't expect a material impact on their results, because the payments and discounts will be recorded over a period of years.
They said GE will make outlays to the five according to their ownership of the Perry plant; the Centerior companies have a 51% interest, 35% is owned by Ohio Edison and Pennsylvania Power, and Duquesne Light has 14%.
GE said the settlement "results in the preservation of our relationship with a valued customer."
A spokesman said there weren't any suits remaining over the containment-vessel issue among operators of the 39 so-called boiling-water reactors it has built in the U.S.
He wouldn't estimate the Fairfield, Conn., company's total settlement costs.
The problems with its steel-reinforced containment vessels surfaced when GE reported in 1974 that certain accidents could damage the structures, designed to hold the nuclear fuel immersed in water and create steam to drive turbines and make electricity.
Utilities that had bought the GE systems contended that in an early GE design an emergency shutdown channeling steam into "suppression pools" under the containment vessel could create violent waves that would damage it.
GE maintained that the design problems reflected Nuclear Regulatory Commission requirements that had taken effect after the plants were built.
But a number of utilities contended that GE knew of design flaws before it sold the plants.
Safety wasn't an issue in the disputes, but rather who would pay for repairs that were made to containment vessels to prevent the potential problem.
GE has been able to keep settlement terms secret in several agreements with utilities around the country.
In March 1992, Washington Public Power Supply System settled a lawsuit that had sought $1.2 billion without terms being disclosed.
Long Island Lighting Co. also settled a suit that had sought $400 million in June 1991.
In the same month, however, Pennsylvania Power & Light Co. valued its settlement from GE at $80 million in cash, services and discounts.
And Illinois Power Co., which settled with GE without filing suit, valued its package of discounts on GE equipment, services and fuel purchases at $65 million.
