The impending federal budget debate will test Washington's true grasp of the world economy.
The challenge for President Clinton and Congress is to figure out how to use fiscal policy to promote national growth in a global economy.
It won't be easy, because Washington debates over the budget are usually disengaged from the economics of growth.
Both political parties have been consumed with questions of who will pay more taxes and who less, and who should gain new benefits and who should receive less.
These opposing versions of a primitive tax-and-spend paradigm inform most economic thinking in political circles: Liberals simply focus on increasing spending and, when necessary, taxes too.
Conservatives concentrate only on cutting tax rates and, when possible, spending as well.
For the new budget to be a genuine instrument of growth policy, it should be reorganized around a new strategy based on the real terms of competition in the global economy.
This strategy, which I call "cut and invest," proposes that government use the budget both to promote higher levels of public and private investment and to actively encourage vigorous market competition to drive private-sector innovation and productivity.
The strategy relies first on cutting federal spending and tax subsidies that insulate certain industries from competition.
But it also requires us to define what truly are public investments -- and then to direct public resources toward them.
In effect, cut and invest is a way for the proponents of investment and the proponents of deficit reduction to put their money where their mouth is -- and improve America's competitiveness.
To begin, global markets, as distinct from a national economy, require that companies match or surpass their foreign competitors in the quality and use of basic resources -- principally, the skills of workers, technologies of production, and infrastructure systems.
The budget can and should do more than simply promote capital formation by restraining spending -- which, in any event, was substantially achieved in last year's budget battle.
(Under current law, federal expenditures are projected to rise by 20% over five years, while over the same period the private economy is expected to expand by 28%.)
The new budget also should recognize, as Adam Smith did, that in certain areas of education and training, basic research, and economic infrastructure, markets normally generate less investment than the economy could profitably use.
Genuine public investment is different from other spending.
It is called for only in those specific areas where markets invariably fail to generate appropriate levels of private investment, and its only purpose is to expand the private economy's capacity to create wealth.
A pro-growth budget also must actively strengthen domestic competition, because only competitive pressures will drive firms and workers to make the most of private and public investment.
The task facing businesses in the global economy involves organizing productive factors from around the world -- research and development, materials, labor, product and process design, financing, marketing, packaging and distribution -- to produce the goods and services demanded by market segments around the world.
Global competition, in short, requires that firms learn to innovate efficiently in every aspect of production.
To this end, the new budget should phase out many tens of billions of dollars of specific spending and tax subsidies that insulate particular American industries from healthy market pressures.
(Trade protections and certain kinds of economic regulation have a similar effect on an industry's incentives to innovate and become more efficient.)
These domestic subsidies cost the U.S. jobs, business formation, and overall growth.
Not only do they reduce normal competitive pressures to innovate for foreign competition, but they also place industries not receiving favored treatment at a disadvantage, by effectively raising their costs of capital and labor relative to subsidized sectors.
The result: Industries receiving subsidies become less competitive, and those denied them have incentives to take advantage of globalization and move some of their operations abroad, where labor costs are lower or special subsidies are available.
Growth policy does not dictate, as orthodox conservatives often suggest, that the new budget should end every instance of special-sector spending and tax treatment.
In some cases there are legitimate social purposes, such as health-care spending for the poor or incentives for middle-class home ownership.
In addition, some subsidies offset genuine market failures, such as spending to protect bank depositors and tax incentives for R&D. Global markets require that the president and Congress cut those programs and tax provisions that artificially raise the rate of return for particular industries for no overriding social or economic purpose.
But as both Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton quickly discovered, special interests usually can block serious congressional action to phase out their subsidies.
A new way has to be found to unravel this web of political influence.
Congress and the president should create a Commission on National Competitiveness and Industry Subsidies, modeled on the Base Closing Commission.
This independent body would identify and evaluate spending programs and tax provisions that provide anticompetitive transfers to particular industries and recommend to the president an annual package of reforms.
The president would submit the package to Congress, which would have to vote on the package without amendment.
This commission could start with the 68 specific spending and tax subsidies listed in the accompanying table, totaling $225 billion over five years.
These savings plainly could finance substantial new public investment and an added measure of deficit reduction -- as well as pressing social reforms in welfare and law enforcement.
In every way, a cut-and-invest strategy would leave the U.S. more productive and competitive in the world economy.
Mr. Shapiro is vice president of the Progressive Policy Institute, a think tank affiliated with the Democratic Leadership Council, and was a principal economic adviser to President Clinton in the 1992 campaign.
This article is adapted from a report being issued this week by PPI.
