The examiner's report in the Phar-Mor Inc. bankruptcy case, filed Jan. 19 in Youngstown, Ohio, exposed a compelling tale of fraud and corruption.
In my role as attorney for Jay Alix, examiner in the case, I had a bird's-eye view of one of the largest cases of financial fraud in U.S. Bankruptcy Court history.
It led not only to Phar-Mor's bankruptcy but ultimately resulted in a $1 billion equity loss to Phar-Mor's shareholders.
Phar-Mor, the Midwestern discount retailer, was forced to lay off thousands of employees and close nearly half of its 300 stores.
The price tag in the Phar-Mor case brought it into the spotlight.
But many less dramatic cases of corporate fraud never make it into the headlines.
In a 1993 KPMG Peat Marwick survey of the nation's top companies, 76% of the respondents said they had experienced fraud during the past year.
Nearly a fourth of the respondents claimed losses of at least $1 million, and almost two-thirds reported actual or potential losses of more than $100,000.
Even more striking was the revelation that nearly half of the companies surveyed conceded that the fraud could have been discovered earlier if warning signs had not been ignored.
Fraud comes in many guises, among them financial statement manipulation, misappropriation of funds, check forgery, false invoices, theft, purchases for personal use, kickbacks, credit card misuse and manipulation of checks, expense accounts and accounts receivable.
Annual audits rarely expose such fraudulent activities -- in part because audits are not designed for that purpose, but also because the perpetrators of fraud anticipate audits and cover their tracks accordingly.
-- Train all employees to detect fraud.
Directors, officers, managers and others must all assume responsibility for understanding how fraud occurs and be able to identify the warning signs.
Some "red flags" include: failure of certain departments to pay bills when due; diminishing income or sales; growing inventories, accounts receivable and accounts payable that are inconsistent with the business's revenue, size and direction; and late or incomplete monthly financial reporting.
Declining profits or cash-flow problems, particularly as compared with past results or competitors' results, could also indicate problems; in some cases, they may even trigger fraud.
This was the case at Phar-Mor, where fraud originated with attempts by certain officers to match the company's actual results with targeted results.
As actual results deteriorated compared with targeted results, the magnitude of the fraud increased.
-- Establish and maintain an appropriate management information system (MIS).
Appropriate MIS systems are not only critical to the efficient management of a company, but also serve as a deterrent to generating false or misleading information.
According to the examiner's report, Phar-Mor's MIS was inadequate on many levels, including warehouse management and inventory control, purchasing, accounting and human resource management.
At one point, a Phar-Mor vice president raised concerns about the company's MIS systems and organized a committee to address the problem.
However, senior officials involved in the scheme to defraud Phar-Mor dismissed the vice president's concerns and ordered the committee disbanded.
-- Establish appropriate internal controls for all accounting procedures.
Avoid an accounting system that allows for the circumvention of the normal accounts payable auditing and approval system.
Phar-Mor's accounting department bypassed the system in numerous ways, including through its maintenance of a supply of blank checks on two bank accounts.
Irregular payments were made on typed checks drawn from one of the accounts.
-- Hire an internal auditor.
One effective safeguard against fraud is the use of an internal auditor -- an individual who reports to an audit committee of the board, rather than to management.
In mid-1991 -- several years into the fraudulent activities at Phar-Mor -- the retailer hired an internal auditor.
However, the auditor was required to report to one of the officers involved in the fraudulent activity, who was also a member of the audit committee.
According to the examiner's report, efforts on the part of the auditor to perform his job were thwarted by management.
However, he did raise questions and may well have been on his way to exposing the fraud when, in July 1992, an anonymous tip triggered the discovery.
-- Recognize warning signals within employee ranks.
Familiarize yourself with your employees' personal goals, such as higher salaries, bonuses and promotions, as well as their personal problems, including drug use and gambling.
Ambition and/or financial needs can motivate employees to risk their reputation in exchange for quick cash.
Be particularly wary of the employee who works excessively long hours, with little or no time for vacations and very little to show for the extra work time -- fraudulent activity can be tedious, requiring diligent monitoring.
Also, be sensitive to changes in the behavior of your employees, including changes in personality and attitude.
One way to stay in tune with employee attitudes is to cultivate an open atmosphere and provide a forum for grievances.
Employees who perceive that they are being treated unfairly may find it easier to steal from the company.
-- Consider establishing -- then publicizing and enforcing -- a corporate code of ethics.
Phar-Mor adopted a business ethics policy in 1989 that recommended that the company maintain a system of internal controls and comply with legal standards and generally accepted accounting principles.
However, officers questioned by the examiner said they were not aware of its existence.
If despite taking precautions your company finds itself the victim of fraud, you should react swiftly and leave no doubt as to your intentions.
Begin by launching an extensive in-house investigation, followed by the dismissal of the responsible parties, reporting of the fraud to authorities and the institution of civil or criminal actions, if appropriate.
Phar-Mor's bitter lesson should serve as a warning -- or, at the very least, a reminder -- to individuals involved in corporate management of the destruction that can be wrought by disingenuous, ill-intentioned individuals driven by greed or need.
Directors, officers and managers alike would do well to re-examine their own operations for warning signs and to adopt -- and enforce -- stringent measures to prevent fraud in the workplace.
Mr. Williger is a partner in the Cleveland office of the law firm that served as counsel to the examiner in the Phar-Mor bankruptcy case.
