Few changes unnerve managers more than throwing out the traditional 9-to-5 work schedule.
Some fear employees will run amok, coming in at midnight or worse.
Many managers dread getting bogged down administering offbeat schedules.
Some raise what Paul Rupert, manager of flexibility consulting for Rodgers & Associates, a unit of Work/Family Directions Inc., calls "the Flat Earth query: `How will I know they're working if I can't see them?'"
Others fear flexibility will rob them of control.
"The whole idea of flexibility is that you don't make rigid schedules," says Angela Parsons, a Stride Rite Corp. customer-service manager whose department is on flexible schedules.
"You have to go with the flow, and that's scary."
But as a growing number of companies experiment with broad moves toward flexibility, they are discovering some key ingredients to making it work.
First, work goals and criteria for success must be made clear.
Responsibility for performance and team effort must be shifted to employees.
And there can be no taboos on talking about personal or family needs in the workplace, since these issues play a big role in employees' ability to pitch in when flexible scheduling situations demand it.
Shortly after Harris Bank set a sweeping new alternative-scheduling policy, Minerva Solano got the kind of flextime request every manager dreads.
One employee, a clerical worker who processes bankruptcy documents, wanted to start her eight-hour workday at 5:30 a.m.
Concerned about safety, Ms. Solano, a vice president and collection manager, denied the request.
"I thought, `If there was an emergency, who would be here to help her?'"
Ms. Solano says.
But the employee rebounded with an argument of her own.
A few other workers, including security guards, are already at the bank at that hour, she said.
Besides, she could save an hour of work time by gaining quicker access to the printers she needed.
"Her arguments were very creative," says Ms. Solano, who agreed to try the new schedule.
Flexible scheduling works best when employees take responsibility for meeting their own work goals and set their own criteria for success.
To help implement Harris's policy, Kimetha Walther Firpo, a vice president and work-and-life program coordinator, created a new form that requires employees asking for flextime, job sharing, compressed work weeks, part-time or work-at-home arrangements to explain how the change would help the company and how their work should be evaluated.
The three-page form is saving managers time by forcing employees to think through their role in meeting company objectives.
Of 83 employee requests in the past four months, managers have turned down only three.
Shifting responsibility to employees on flexible schedules can actually make a manager's job easier.
When Ms. Parsons' boss asked her to put her department on flexible schedules, "I was very nervous," she says.
Concerned that her group's new hours would make it hard to cover absences, she posted alphabetical lists assigning employees to back each other up.
"It wasn't working very well," she says.
Then, employees "came to me and said, `Angie, why don't we just ask who needs the extra cash?'" she says.
Their plan worked.
Other common fears evaporate in time.
The worry that flexible scheduling would touch off a stampede for the exits, for instance, was common at U.S. Bancorp, says Tenora Grigsby, a consultant who is working with the the Portland, Ore., bank holding company.
But when U.S. Bancorp made alternative schedules available to all 200 employees in one customer-service department, only about 25% sought to change their schedules, Ms. Grigsby says, and fears of scheduling nightmares evaporated.
