Sobers the U.S.
FOR THE CLINTON administration, this week is turning into the woozy morning after the big Russia party.
But that's not all bad, because it's time for a more sober look at where Russia is headed and how the U.S. can use what little influence it has along the way.
The sobering-up is occurring, of course, because as soon as President Clinton finished pledging his support for economic reformers in Moscow and left town, those same reformers began bailing out of the government.
Economics Minister Yegor Gaidar, the personification of economic reform, resigned in disgust.
And it's becoming clear that Boris Fyodorov, the finance minister and another reform champion, will either depart or assume a less prominent role in the new Russian government.
Aside from frustrating Mr. Clinton, those developments brought a dose of gloom to the administration yesterday.
Gloom seems appropriate.
Panic, however, isn't.
It's possible that what's unfolding in Moscow is the end of meaningful economic reform and the re-emergence of an unreformed cadre of old Communists with no interest in economic reform or cooperation with the West.
But Clinton-administration optimists see another possibility.
They hope that, in the aftermath of the December elections and the increased power given to ultranationalists and old Communists, Russia may simply be headed into a temporary period of bad policies and deterioriating conditions.
Once those policies are discredited, that may open up a new chance for reform.
At that point, with the retrogrades' credibility shot, the reformers can regain the upper hand, with their authority enhanced.
ANYBODY WHO has watched the Russian saga over the last five years recognizes this cycle; both Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin at various times drifted between reformers and the old guard.
The fact is that nobody knows which scenario to bet on now.
Amid this uncertainty, what's needed is a more consistent American approach, one that both recognizes the limits of American ability to control events and avoids actually hurting the very cause of economic reform.
This kind of approach begins with an acknowledgement that the U.S. can't control or forecast events in Russia.
That will require the Clinton administration to resist liberal voices that call for pulling the plug on the North Atlantic Treaty Organization or radically reducing American defense budgets.
Just as the Russia story will take years to unfold, so should the ultimate decisions about precisely what to do with NATO and what level of defense spending is safe in the long run.
The second step is to stop overpromising the amount of help the U.S. and its allies will give to Russia.
The West may never recover from the bitterness it engendered in Moscow by promising big aid packages in both 1992 and 1993, which Russians later discovered were more smoke than substance.
AND FINALLY the administration would do well to more clearly and consistently spell out its approach to Russian economic reform.
The Clinton administration shot itself in the foot a few weeks ago by proclaiming that Russia's economic "shock therapy" had offered the Russian people too much shock and not enough therapy.
That line, which the administration soon abandoned, undercut the reformers by seeming to confirm their critics' complaints that economic changes were simply doling out painful medicine without offering any relief to the Russian people.
The fact is that, so far at least, Russia hasn't had either enough shock nor enough therapy.
The sensible approach for now is to keep funneling in plenty of direct American aid, particularly aid that will reach beyond Mr. Yeltsin's confused government and help small businesses, big companies that are struggling to privatize and free-market experimenters outside Moscow.
That will help keep nourishing the seeds of a free market in Russia, even if the central government pulls away from a reformist line.
And if the theory about Moscow's political cycles proves correct, the West should prepare now to jump in, once reformers regain their political footing.
International financial institutions should then be ready to move in with more money, provided more quickly than before.
In particular, economic reformers will need a big dose of Western help to hold down the government's budget deficit, which is driving the need to print more rubles and fueling the inflation that robs the average Russian of the sense that economic reforms are offering anything positive.
The International Monetary Fund has been too bureaucratic and technocratic when it's had openings to help in the past.
Now that the elections have given the West a glimpse at the dark side of change in Russia, there won't be any excuse for letting that happen again.
