Negotiators for breast-implant makers and plaintiffs reached an agreement in principle on all major remaining issues in the $4 billion silicone breast-implant settlement, the U.S. court system's largest product-liability pact.
The agreement would offer compensation to any woman in the world with illnesses allegedly related to silicone breast implants.
People familiar with the talks said key portions of the tentative accord were hammered out over the weekend in Birmingham, Ala.
Negotiators hope to present the deal later this week to federal Judge Sam C. Pointer Jr. of U.S. District Court in Birmingham, who supervises all federal breast-implant litigation.
If matters proceed according to the current schedule, Judge Pointer could set public hearings in the next several weeks on whether the agreement is fair and whether he should approve it.
Following final court approval, women with implants could begin deciding as early as this fall whether they want to get compensation from the settlement fund or pursue individual litigation.
As the agreement is written and currently interpreted, women -- to preserve their legal rights -- would then have to notify a Birmingham court-appointed administrator of their intent to participate or to "opt out" and pursue separate lawsuits.
Executives and directors of major manufacturers participating in the talks haven't signed a final version of the settlement, so glitches still could arise.
And a 25-member plaintiff-lawyer advisory committee hasn't been consulted.
But negotiators on both sides said they consider these steps to be largely formalities.
"The deal is done," said one participant.
Another said, "We've got a deal, unless somebody backs out of a commitment previously made."
The main corporate participants in the talks are Dow Corning Corp., a joint venture of Dow Chemical Co. and Corning Inc., Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. and Baxter International Inc.
Also expected to sign the agreement, according to participants in the talks, are chemical supplier Union Carbide Corp. and a number of smaller companies that made implants containing silicone gel and polyurethane foam.
The sole major manufacturer that hasn't reached agreement on funding the settlement is Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co. of St. Paul, Minn.
General Electric Co., a one-time silicone supplier, also is holding out, as is McGhan Medical Corp., which was owned by 3M from 1977 to 1984; McGhan now is a unit of Inamed Corp.
During the culminating hours of the weekend talks, 3M continued to provide the main drama, as it has in recent weeks.
The company last fall rejected the chance to join the settlement, but it and two other companies recently lost a jury verdict of more than $30 million in a Houston breastimplant case.
In recent weeks, 3M has sought to join the agreement.
Three 3M lawyers stayed in Birmingham throughout the talks, repeatedly asking to join the sessions and even seeking Judge Pointer's intercession on their behalf, participants say.
But people familiar with the events say 3M was rebuffed by lawyers for the plaintiffs, who now are insisting 3M kick in $500 million up front -- double the amount discussed last fall -- if it wants to join the global deal.
Plaintiffs' negotiators are demanding that the $500 million be paid into the fund much faster than sums paid by other manufacturers.
Such a payment thus would represent a higher percentage of the fund than 3M's one-time market-share percentage, estimated at about 7%, according to participants in the talks.
3M's assistant general counsel, Thomas Boardman, who was in Birmingham, declined comment on the events other than to say 3M continues to negotiate.
3M has said it plans to appeal the Houston verdict.
Details also began to emerge of how attorneys' fees would be parceled out by the global fund to lawyers representing women with implants.
Judge Pointer said in a court hearing that no more than 25% of the total $4 billion fund would go for attorneys' fees and costs, and that at least 75% of the fund would go to women who allege silicone-related illnesses.
The judge explained that the 25% figure would include the extensive administrative costs of running a compensation program for about one million women.
The 25% figure also would include the often-large costs to attorneys associated with taking depositions and pursuing other expensive fact-finding in lengthy litigation.
Participants in private sessions with the judge said he disclosed his intent to honor plaintiff-lawyer contingency-fee agreements, even those set at a higher percentage than 25%, at least in instances where attorneys have done substantial amounts of work.
