Paul Shellito's surgical practice at Massachusetts General Hospital often stretches from 7 a.m. to 8 p.m., and he handles a full load of emergency cases on weekends.
In his spare time, he teaches at Harvard Medical School and publishes research on colon surgery.
Yet a powerful insurer has been urging Dr. Shellito to pick up the pace.
To hold down costs, Tufts Associated Health Plans, which hospitalizes more than 800 patients a year at MGH, wants doctors throughout the elite teaching hospital to discharge patients faster.
Some physicians squawked at first.
But after more than a year of detailed case reviews, even hard-liners such as Dr. Shellito have largely conceded the fight.
"It's changed the way I practice," he says.
"Tufts is very good at finding ways to get patients out of the hospital sooner with only a little inconvenience.
They've put the monkey on my back.
Now, I'm haggling with patients about going home the evening of the day I see them."
The lives of doctors at many prestigious teaching hospitals are changing under powerful pressure from health-maintenance organizations and other insurers that run "managed-care" cost-control programs.
These payers are sending big blocks of patients to hospitals that offer cost-effective care; they are shunning those that they believe charge too much.
For decades, teaching hospitals were nearly immune from belt-tightening drives, thanks to their reputations for top-notch care in complicated cases.
"But those days are over," says William Kelley, chief executive officer of the University of Pennsylvania Medical System.
"Anybody who thinks you can attract patients on quality alone, without paying attention to cost, will go out of business."
In Philadelphia, Dr. Kelley's hospital is paring $5 million from annual expenses so it can land some big HMO contracts.
An austerity campaign in Minneapolis has helped the University of Minnesota Health System win three managed-care contracts since 1991 -- while slashing its payroll 18%.
And at Stanford University Hospital in California, the transplant unit is cutting costs sharply to get business; it offered one HMO a $40,000 discount on the standard $160,000 rate for lung transplants.
Teaching-hospital executives are betting that they can achieve these savings without hurting patient care.
They see many ways to "re-engineer" care by eliminating waste, getting work done faster and having patients wind up their recoveries in cheaper, nonhospital settings.
But unlike big corporations, where top management can issue orders to its employees, hospital executives must delicately sell these strategies to hundreds of largely independent doctors.
The physicians have final authority in deciding how to treat a patient.
And at many teaching hospitals, top doctors earn more and are far more renowned than even the institution's chief executive.
The struggle to cope with managed care is especially fierce at Massachusetts General, which consistently ranks among the nation's five best hospitals in surveys by U.S. News & World Report.
It is the lead teaching site for Harvard Medical School, and its doctors have achieved breakthroughs in areas ranging from gene mapping to artificial skin for burn victims.
MGH also is one of the biggest and most expensive hospitals in the U.S.
The 1,018-bed hospital admits nearly 40,000 patients a year and handles 550,000 outpatient visits.
It is moderately profitable on patient revenue of about $500 million a year, thanks largely to fee schedules that can be 30% higher than those at nearby community hospitals.
But during the past three years, a series of shocks showed the elite hospital's vulnerability to a freeze-out by health plans wanting to save money.
In 1991, Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Massachusetts set up an HMO without using MGH at all.
Then, last fall, Harvard Community Health Plan yanked away its pediatric referrals in favor of a rival bid from nearby Children's Hospital.
With that one stroke, MGH faced the loss of 26% of its pediatric patients.
Its doctors were alarmed.
"You guys could go the way of IBM," Jay Gellert, a California health-care consultant, warned MGH executives in a closed-door meeting last year.
"IBM saw fundamental change coming but couldn't react to it.
So it ended up frittering away one of the strongest franchises in American history."
Those events jolted MGH's administrators and doctors into action.
The hospital recently negotiated discounts with four managed-care plans -- including Blue Cross's HMO.
These health plans now account for about 13% of the hospital's admissions, up from less than 5% in 1991, and could hit 25% or more in a few years.
"We decided that managed care couldn't be ignored and that our best bet was to work with it," says Richard von Rueden, the deputy director general.
Like many MGH executives, Dr. von Rueden contends that if the hospital gets things right, it could become a national model of how to marry high quality and cost controls.
MGH is allying itself with family doctors in the Boston suburbs, and it plans to merge with a major local competitor, Brigham & Women's Hospital, in a deal that could create the biggest U.S. hospital.
The aim is to assemble a vertically integrated, low-cost medical conglomerate that HMOs will love.
The doctors who give MGH its aura, though, are deeply split over that approach.
Many say it is necessary and inevitable.
A few even like it.
But others wonder whether fine points of patient comfort will be sacrificed to save money.
And many older doctors grumble about a loss of autonomy as they increasingly feel nudged to order fewer tests, discharge patients faster and keep an eye on the bills.
Such tensions are playing out in the orthopedic-surgery department.
A team of younger doctors, led by 42-year-old John Siliski, is picking over two common operations -- hip and knee replacements -- to look for ways to standardize care and rehabilitate patients more quickly.
"This is the way we want to practice," Dr. Siliski tells a group of nurses at a brainstorming session, as he points to a vast diagram showing how the typical knee-replacement patient should be treated, day by day.
The flow chart looks like something in an auto plant, and no wonder.
Knee replacements are becoming increasingly routine; last year, MGH performed 416 of them.
Though barely six months old, this flow-chart approach is already paying off, Dr. Siliski says.
Patients' average hospital stays have fallen 22%, to 6.8 days, mostly as the hospital ensures that steps such as physical therapy are done promptly, without the minor delays that often occur in big institutions.
And the average bill has shrunk 17% to $16,566.
"We're trying to do to ourselves what Tufts would otherwise end up doing to us," he explains.
Yet some of Dr. Siliski's colleagues remain uneasy.
One, Fred Mansfield, says he has less freedom to let an emotionally stressed patient stay an extra day in the hospital.
"It's harder and harder to make the personal connection with patients when you don't have the power to make a little room in the system," Dr. Mansfield says.
"You can't be the benevolent father-figure anymore.
You're just a provider."
In other departments, the HMOs' thrifty values are colliding with time-honored habits of a teaching hospital.
MGH doctors order 20% more X-rays and other radiology tests than do those at community hospitals -- partly because the teaching hospital sees unusually sick patients and partly because much of the care is provided by young doctors in training who would rather have too much information on a patient than too little.
Even allowing for those special reasons, health plans suspect that some MGH doctors order excessive tests.
Several dozen doctors have agreed to examine their recent radiology usage -- on the condition that they discuss their findings internally, rather than with the health plans.
That's as it should be, says James Richter, an internist at the hospital, adding: "In the end, I trust our judgment much more than I trust a health plan's."
Health-plan executives say they don't want to be preachy, especially when dealing with a hospital as renowned as MGH.
"We could say 'We aren't going to pay for this' and end up with a lot of big battles," says Joseph Gerstein, Tufts's medical director.
"But what we want is for physicians themselves to say: `This is the right thing to do.'"
Sometimes, a friendly approach pays off.
In the past year, Tufts began paying MGH doctors $70 a patient to make an extra bedside visit late in the day instead of waiting until the next morning.
As a result, the doctors are discharging far more hospitalized patients in the evening, avoiding the costs of another overnight stay and saving the health plan a lot of $2,000 per-diem charges.
"If there's one thing that managed care has taught us, it's that you don't write in a patient's chart: `Doing fine.
Home tomorrow,'" Dr. Richter says.
MGH's new ethos is to discharge such patients that night.
Similarly, in the gynecology department, the average stay for surgery has been shortened 16% in the past two years, mainly by switching away from big doses of narcotics that were easy to administer but so impaired patients' digestion that they couldn't be discharged for days.
With different painkillers, patients are leaving the hospital faster.
Such steps save money and improve quality, says Arlan Fuller, the head of gynecology.
They also keep his department alive.
"We're the high-cost provider in town," Dr. Fuller says.
"If we aren't judicious in the way we use resources, we won't get patients."
A gloomier view comes from doctors pioneering new treatments.
Thomas Spitzer, for example, joined MGH last summer to set up a unit to treat breast-cancer patients with high-dose chemotherapy and bone-marrow transplants.
Such therapy is unproven but promising; it can cost $100,000 or more and is available only at a few dozen top-tier hospitals.
Dr. Spitzer says he doesn't mind a little discounting to get business, but he was flabbergasted when some out-of-state health plans offered to send him patients if he would slash total charges to just $50,000 per case.
The implication: If he didn't agree, the plans would go elsewhere.
"I didn't see this coming at all," he says.
To save money, he adds, he might have to discharge patients after two weeks in the hospital and finish treatment on an outpatient basis.
Even so, he says, he questions whether he can treat patients properly for anything approaching $50,000 each.
"If this is managed care, I'm not thrilled about it," he says.
But the bottom-line approach appeals to Peter Slavin, a soft-spoken MGH doctor who also holds an M.B.A. from Harvard Business School.
Dr. Slavin heads a hospital task force that is looking for extra efficiencies, and his personal computer holds data on 40 projects.
Among them: creating flow charts that could cut heartsurgery costs and reviewing use of a major antinausea drug in chemotherapy.
"My greatest frustration is the pace of change," Dr. Slavin says.
"It takes a great deal to get this very proud, 180-year-old institution to change so quickly.
We've got 40 projects on our list.
There should be another 100.
Yet we're struggling to keep these 40 going."
Nevertheless, some veteran doctors think the tug-of-war between the traditionalists and the efficiency squads may be good.
One is Barry Levine, an MGH internist who was assigned to spend three months helping Tufts review payment disputes at the hospital.
Dr. Levine says that while his peek inside the HMO's world made him much more attentive to cost issues, he hopes that his medical perspective left a mark on Tufts employees, too.
"I truly believe that managed health care is the answer," he says.
"It's working.
But we have to be very careful not to get overzealous.
Patients have human needs.
You can't always apply predetermined formulas to them."
