The calls came late at night, when the club he was playing was dark, or when he was depressed and not playing at all.
Woody Shaw, a trumpet player and composer, was sometimes seized with a consuming desire to talk in questions.
They were seldom about music but rather about politics, racism and existence (like Duke Ellington's song, "What Am I Here For?").
The conversations were challenging, like his music.
I never could be sure what would be around the next corner he took.
At the time, in the late 1970s, Woody Shaw had earned great respect among musicians who had heard him with, among others, Joe Henderson, Art Blakey and combos of his own.
Miles Davis, never known for easy praise, said of Shaw: "Now there's a great trumpet player.
He can play different from all of them."
Woody played both in and out of the mainstream modern jazz tradition -- hard bop and also freer music that made structural sense, unlike the chaotic flummery of some of the "experimental" players of the time.
His temperament was essentially lyrical, as was that of a key influence, Clifford Brown.
He could be exultant, reflective and always played with total authority.
He often improvised lines that danced, and his tone was warm and crisp.
Dexter Gordon, with whom Shaw worked, said: "The thing about Woody is he's done his homework.
He's hip to Louis Armstrong and covers the whole spectrum."
Shaw named his son Woody Louis Armstrong Shaw.
Born in North Carolina in 1944, he grew up in Newark, N.J.
His father had sung with the Diamond Jubilee Singers, thereby deepening his son's roots through gospel music.
But Shaw was also curious about the European tradition and became a skilled classical trumpet player.
He wanted to go to Juilliard but, he told Chuck Berg in an interview: "I couldn't have gone because I didn't graduate from high school."
He had dropped out to go on the road with a jazz band.
Shaw influenced a number of young players who heard him in clubs and on records.
Wynton Marsalis, shortly after he joined Art Blakey's Jazz Messengers in 1980, applied for -- and was awarded -- a grant to study with Shaw.
And recently, alto saxophonist Antonio Hart paid tribute to Shaw in his Novus/RCA album, for Cannonball and Woody, particularly in appreciation of Shaw's use of wider intervals than had been customary among trumpet players.
Those leaps have since been further developed by Wynton Marsalis.
For all the esteem in which he was held by musicians, Woody Shaw never broke through in terms of big record sales.
The 1970s was an ormolu age of fusion and funk in jazz and Shaw would have none of either.
Along with the diminishing momentum in his career, by the early 1980s he had gone through the breakup of his marriage.
He died in 1989.
Jazz-record producer and historian Michael Cuscuna -- a longtime friend of Shaw -- recalls:
"While recuperating from depression and resulting substance abuse at his parents' home in Newark, he ventured into Manhattan to see Max Roach at the Village Vanguard.
By the early morning hours, he was alone in a Brooklyn subway station when he fell into a passing train, which resulted in a lost arm and, after months in the hospital, his death in May 1989.
"Whether his eyesight (he was legally blind from retinitis pigmentosa, which he had all his life) or New York Transit's random violence caused the accident is something we will never know.
And no, it was not suicide, as anyone who knew Woody can tell you."
Cuscuna is one of the principals in Mosaic Records, which produces expert reissues of otherwise unobtainable records.
A lasting achievement by Mosaic is "The Complete CBS Studio Recordings of Woody Shaw."
(Three CDs, $49; four LPs, $44.
Both prices include postage.
Mosaic Records, 35 Melrose Place, Stamford, Conn. 06092.)
Woody Shaw used to recall that when his future seemed limitless, Freddie Hubbard and Lee Morgan, both much esteemed jazz trumpet players, told him he would be the next great jazz horn in the line of Louis Armstrong, Roy Eldridge, Dizzy Gillespie, Miles Davis and Clifford Brown.
Listening to Woody on trumpet, fluegelhorn and cornet throughout these 1977-79 performances on the Mosaic set affirms the judgment of Hubbard, Morgan and Miles Davis -- even if most of the jazz public didn't catch on.
Much of the music consists of originals by Shaw, but there are also standards.
Among the young sidemen are musicians who have since become figures of jazz consequence.
Among them: trombonist Steve Turre and drummer Victor Lewis.
Woody Shaw's is the dominant voice.
With acute musical intelligence, daring and a constant compass, he brings it all together -- with abiding lyricism.
I miss those late-night calls.
They were not complaints.
They were questions.
And Woody Shaw left us with the hardest question of all.
What was he doing in that Brooklyn subway station?
And how did he fall?
