Private eye Edmund J. Pankau claims to have pulled off exploits that would make Sam Spade envious.
In his two-decade career, the 48-year-old investigator, according to published reports, helped nab a notorious gang of jewel thieves, videotaped Donna Rice and former U.S. Sen. Gary Hart together, and rushed into a burning building to snatch a computer printout of the financial holdings of deposed Panamanian leader Manuel Noriega.
Mr. Pankau has gained a colorful notoriety, particularly in Texas.
Nearly all major newspapers in the U.S., including this one, have quoted him.
Phil Donahue, Larry King and Joan Rivers have all interviewed him.
The headline of a 1992 New York Times page-one article billed him as "A New Breed of Sam Spade."
That story was followed by a book deal with Macmillan Inc. for his autobiography.
But whether Mr. Pankau's larger-than-life image is justified is an open question.
Writer Robert Pack, who signed to work on the autobiography, spent six months researching his subject's claims.
And he began to worry that the detective who built his career on sniffing out untruths might be telling a few himself.
"I do not believe it is possible to produce a true, libel-free, original book about your life and career," Mr. Pack wrote Mr. Pankau last April.
In an accompanying 15-page statement, which became public last week as part of a lawsuit, Mr. Pack argues that the sleuth couldn't document claims he made before signing the book deal.
Mr. Pack says Mr. Pankau promised -- but never delivered -- new information on the Iran-Contra scandal, and details of big figures in white-collar crime.
According to Mr. Pack's statement, Mr. Pankau's promises may "constitute fraud" against him and Macmillan.
The publisher declines to comment.
The statement became public when Mr. Pankau filed a defamation suit against Mr. Pack in state district court in Houston last month.
The suit, seeking more than $5 million in damages, charges that Mr. Pack "is spreading vicious and unsubstantiated statements about Ed Pankau's veracity, moral character and honor."
Mr. Pankau's attorneys, in attaching Mr. Pack's statement as evidence, filed a motion to seal it from public view.
District Court Judge Michael Schneider initially left it open, pending a hearing on the motion.
At Mr. Pack's request, the case was moved to U.S. district court in Houston where a motion by Mr. Pankau's lawyers to seal parts of the files is pending.
Mr. Pack, who collaborated with former White House spokesman Larry Speakes on a bestseller about the Reagan administration, declines to comment.
He is under an order prohibiting him from commenting, according to the lawsuit, as part of a case he has pending against Mr. Pankau with the American Arbitration Association.
In an interview, Mr. Pankau, who heads his own Houston firm, Intertect Inc., disputes Mr. Pack's version.
He says several of the apparent contradictions about him resulted from misquotes by others.
Some former clients defend Mr. Pankau's competence.
Monty E. Pendleton, a Houston consultant, says Mr. Pankau tracked down real-estate holdings of one of his debtors.
"He's got a big ego and likes to brag," Mr. Pendleton says.
"But he also delivers."
Mr. Pankau worked for clients ranging from banks to the federal government.
Since 1989, he has done 32 jobs for the Resolution Trust Corp. -- mostly searches of public records -- and collected about $150,000 in fees, says an agency spokesman, adding, "He was an average performer."
In Mr. Pankau's 1992 book "Check It Out!" -- a how-to on finding out about the people in your life -- he advises would-be private eyes not to be shy about telling a fib.
"The true secret of the supersleuths is often a glib-tongued, smooth-talking little pretext, a white lie. . . ."
One of Mr. Pack's biggest complaints, according to his statement, is that in his interviews with Mr. Pankau -- some of them taped -- the detective contradicted himself repeatedly.
Business Week said that Mr. Pankau was a Green Beret in Vietnam; one article -- in a 1992 issue of Florida State Magazine -- said he was wounded in combat.
But Mr. Pankau told his biographer he was never in Vietnam, according to Mr. Pack's statement.
When pressed by Mr. Pack to explain, he allegedly gave several stories, once saying he had flown over Vietnam and landed briefly -- never leaving the plane -- and another claiming he had been in Vietnam for a couple of days but wasn't allowed to talk about it.
Army files from the government's National Personnel Records Center in St. Louis show Mr. Pankau spent two weeks in Okinawa, but otherwise served entirely in the U.S.
His files don't indicate that he was a Green Beret or that he was wounded -- data normally included in military records, says a spokeswoman for the center.
Mr. Pankau says in an interview that he was a Green Beret for several weeks in Okinawa, teaching native forces how to pack and maintain parachutes.
He also says he was injured once but can't talk about it, adding that Mr. Pack's version of their conversations is inaccurate.
Mr. Pankau has built his image partly on his experience with the Internal Revenue Service.
"Check It Out!" recounts how Mr. Pankau's boss at the IRS tracked notorious jewelry thieves by screening subscription lists of jewelry magazines for people with criminal records. ". .
`Murph the Surf' and his gang never did figure out that we nailed them by finding their address on a jewelry magazine subscription list," Mr. Pankau writes.
But when Mr. Pack told Mr. Pankau that "Murph the Surf" was jailed before Mr. Pankau began working for the IRS, the private eye said he had "forgotten" that, and changed his story to say the unit had investigated other members of the gang, according to Mr. Pack's statement.
John McRae, a supervisor at the Miami IRS unit when Mr. Pankau was there, disputes even the scaled-down version, saying, "I don't remember anything about `Murph the Surf.'"
Mr. McRae says Mr. Pankau was a trainee, not a full-fledged agent, and stayed less than a year.
Mr. McRae says he remembers Mr. Pankau only because he failed the background check.
"That's very rare," Mr. McRae says, adding that he doesn't remember why Mr. Pankau, then in his mid-20s, failed.
The IRS's Florida offices say their records don't go back far enough to have that information.
Mr. Pankau now says he wasn't there when the IRS investigated "Murph the Surf."
As for the background check, Mr. Pankau says, "I do not feel I failed the background check.
I never personally got the results."
And he adds that he resigned his position.
One of Mr. Pankau's most renowned feats was the time he supposedly snatched a list of Gen. Noriega's holdings from a burning building.
New York Times reporter Steve Lohr wrote in the paper's Feb. 20, 1992, edition: "Mr. Pankau was in Panama on an insurance investigation during the American invasion. . . .
In the confusion, he slipped into a building and made off with a computer printout listing more than $800 million in assets held in 18 countries, assets he is convinced are General Noriega's . . . ."
A similar version appears in "Check It Out!"
Mr. Pankau begins, "I just happened to be in Panama during the 1989 invasion, sitting in a bar. . . ."
But Mr. Pankau now says he wasn't in Panama when fighting broke out.
In an interview, he says that the Times story was a "misquote" and that his employees, not he, were in Panama.
Mr. Lohr, the Times reporter, was traveling and couldn't be reached.
The U.S. Attorney's Miami office, which in 1992 successfully prosecuted Mr. Noriega on drug trafficking charges, considered using the document that Mr. Pankau claims lists Gen. Noriega's holdings, but didn't because "it was not possible to verify" its authenticity, says assistant U.S. attorney Michael P. Sullivan.
Mr. Pankau says he has been "retained" by the Panamanian government to track down Mr. Noriega's assets -- a contention disputed by Eusebio Marchosky, who heads Panama's effort to recover the assets world-wide.
One of Mr. Pankau's most noted escapades is the story he told about videotaping Ms. Rice and Sen. Hart together, which he recounted in a 1992 article in the Washington Post.
The version he gave Mr. Pack was even more detailed, claiming, according to Mr. Pack's statement, "It was he who caught Gary Hart with Donna Rice; and that he tipped off the Miami Herald, which resulted in 1987 news stories that knocked Hart, the leading contender for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination, out of the race . . ."
James Savage, associate editor for investigative reporting at the Miami Herald, says Mr. Pankau never informed the Herald or gave it any pictures before its story on Sen. Hart's relationship with Ms. Rice.
"I was the editor on the story.
I would have known," Mr. Savage says.
In an interview, Mr. Pankau says his investigators gave information to the Miami Herald.
When told of Mr. Savage's denial, Mr. Pankau says the photos went to a client whose identity he doesn't know, and he suspects the client tipped off the Herald.
