STUNG BY THE recent cold snap, many residents of the Northeast want to get out of town.
Travel agencies in New Jersey are reporting record bookings for February to sunnier climes.
In Pennsylvania, AAA Travel Agency, part of the American Automobile Association, says bookings to warm spots are double last year's level.
Royal Caribbean Cruise Line's weekend sailings have nearly sold out.
And hotels in Waikiki have been booked through February's end.
"It's just unprecedented," says Joyce Miller, an AAA agent in Lancaster, Pa., where more than a dozen snowstorms have hit since the beginning of January.
"People are coming in and saying, `We have got to get out of here.'"
February is typically busy for travel agents, as parents and students start planning vacation for spring break.
But with this year's weather, clients can't wait even a week to get out of the cold.
"They've just had it," says a Travel Network agent in West Milford, N.J.
Take Michael Coscia, for instance.
After weeks of pushing stranded cars in knee-deep snow, the 32-year-old patrolman for the West Milford Police Department called his travel agent, booked a trip to the Bahamas and fled with his girlfriend -- all in just 48 hours.
While under the Bahamas's 85-degree sun, Mr. Coscia went scuba diving, sent postcards to his friends back home and "laughed like hell," he says.
But the laughter stopped when 12 inches of snow fell the night he returned home.
"I know it's supposed to snow here," says the New Jersey native, "but this is crazy.
I'm just sick of it."
Next week, Mr. Coscia is leaving to spend three days in Myrtle Beach, S.C.
CONQUERING JET lag is becoming more than a cottage industry, as the global marketplace puts more demands on the business traveler.
Circadian Travel Technologies of Bethesda, Md., markets a computer software package that customizes and prints sleep schedules for overseas fliers and determines when they should be exposed to bright light.
For $379, the company also sells a plastic, battery-powered visor that shines simulated sunlight into the eyes, "fooling" the body into maintaining its internal clock.
Management Consulting International of Corona del Mar, Calif., has a similar program.
The Tudor Hotel in New York City recently outfitted six "circadian rooms" with clocks and special window shades that help travelers stay on their home time zones -- if they stay in the room.
And the Argonne National Laboratories in Argonne, Ill., has developed the anti-jet-lag diet, which involves eating certain foods and then fasting before and during long trips.
While some fliers experience only minor fatigue from jet lag, others can suffer stomach upsets, headaches or depression.
"It's misery for some people," says Martin Moore-Ede, a professor of physiology at Harvard Medical School and director of the Institute of Circadian Technology, a nonprofit research group.
Jet lag occurs when the body's "biological clock" is disrupted by changes in the daylight cycle.
Dr. Moore-Ede says two-thirds of those who fly through time zones have "significant" jet lag.
Others put the figure at 75%.
Bob Wilner, a human resources director who goes to Beijing twice a month, alters his diet and takes supplemental vitamins to alleviate his chronic "washed-out feeling."
For the past year, he says, he has used the Circadian Travel Technologies light visor with good results.
Still, sales of the visor have been tepid, and the Tudor Hotel says its circadian suites are only 10% occupied.
Marketers insist that sales will improve with time, but Mr. Wilner admits people stare when he wears the visor on a plane.
"I try to hold up a newspaper because I'm tired of explaining it," he says.
NOW THAT THE 17th Olympic Winter Games are over, Lillehammer, Norway, is recovering nicely, thanks partly to the money 300,000 people may have unwittingly added to its coffers.
Norway's value-added tax, or VAT, similar to a retail sales tax, accounts for 18% of the price of most goods, including souvenirs and memorabilia.
But while tourist purchases of at least 300 Norwegian kroner, or about $40, are eligible for a VAT refund, many unwittingly forfeit it when they leave the country.
Europe Tax-Free Shopping, a unit of Chicago-based Advance Ross, is one of the largest VAT-refund services in Europe, with a network of 70,000 merchants and retailers.
Check refunds are available through participating merchants and are cashed, minus a 20% service charge, at the Europe Tax-Free Shopping booths at airports.
Tourists are expected to spend nearly $2.1 billion in Norway this year, and forfeited VAT refunds throughout Europe are expected to be $30 million.
Last year, ETS refunded nearly $5 million in Norwegian VATs, although neither the company nor Olympic officials are sure how much tourists spent at this year's Winter Games.
ETS says the average VAT refund is around $25.
Tourists can also collect VAT refunds on their own by sending sales receipts to foreign governments, but checks take months to process and are usually written in foreign currency.
MIAMI International Airport says it will surpass New York's Kennedy Airport as America's leading international airport by 1995.
Miami, which ranked second last year with 12.4 million overseas passengers, is growing at about 7% annually.
Kennedy, which handled 15 million international passengers last year, is growing at 2% to 4% annually.
"How dare they?" said a Kennedy spokeswoman of Miami's claims. . . .
One of the proposed uses for Denver's Stapleton Airport, which is slated to close on March 8: a giant tournament track for bicycle-racing and roller-blading.
