National Steel Corp., plagued by quality, labor and operations problems that have excluded it from the steel industry's recovery, faces big obstacles fashioning a turnaround.
The No. 4 steelmaker says it's game.
Managers, who, among other things, were diverted by a headquarters move, are once again focusing on the basics of steelmaking and trying to overcome start-up glitches.
Some customers, forced to look elsewhere for steel last quarter, seem willing to give National a second chance.
"We believe we're going to see profits in the second quarter," says Ronald H. Doerr, National's president and chief executive officer.
Yet success could prove difficult.
The Mishawaka, Ind.-based company is also burdened by high costs, a weak balance sheet and big capital spending requirements.
Moreover, low-cost minimills are springing up around its big Granite City, Ill., plant.
"If you're going to have some bad luck, they had it all in 1993," says Harry Lester, director of the United Steelworkers union district that includes National.
Past-due orders doubled, and National was forced to cut its orders by 100,000 tons in December, prompting customers to look elsewhere.
The company's yield -- the amount of liquid steel that is eventually shipped as finished prime steel -- fell as National hit kinks with the start-up of its joint-venture galvanizing line.
National also missed customer specifications half the time in making ultra-low carbon steel using a new vacuum degassing process.
"Naturally there are some losses that go with these things," Mr. Doerr says.
These problems and others resulted in a fourth-quarter net loss of $138.8 million, worse than the $99 million loss in the year-earlier period.
Even after subtracting $107.7 million in charges, National showed a loss, which is becoming rare industrywide, as shipments and prices climb in a strengthening economy.
Shortly after National released its financial results, James N. Howell, the company's chief operating officer, resigned, the latest in a major management shake-up that has included the general managers of the steelmaker's three major plants.
Mr. Doerr blames National's ailments on distractions.
Among them were the headquarters move to Mishawaka from Pittsburgh, coke oven and galvanizing line start-ups, an initial public offering and labor contract negotiations.
These factors resulted in a failure to execute the basic "blocking and tackling" of management, Mr. Doerr says.
Now National, which is 76% controlled by NKK Corp. of Japan, is fighting to win back customers' confidence.
Mr. Doerr says National is reaching customer specifications 70% of the time on ultra-low carbon steel, and the company should see higher overall yields.
Butler Manufacturing Co. is watching National's progress closely.
The Kansas City, Mo.-based maker of steel buildings looked to National for much of its steel before National's string of problems, which forced Butler to divide more of its business among other steelmakers.
"We understand that people have operating problems," says Don Pratt, Butler's president, adding that National "could earn their way back."
But, "they have to tell us that they're ready for more tonnage," he adds.
National says it's heading in that direction, but other hurdles stand in its path.
The company's Granite City plant is watching nearby minimills expand, while others are setting up shop.
The plant already sits between Nucor Corp.'s two flat-rolled mills, one in Hickman, Ark., and the other in Crawfordsville, Ind.
Charlotte, N.C.-based Nucor is expanding capacity at both mills by a combined 1.8 million tons this year.
Meanwhile, a joint-venture minimill between Canada's Co-Steel Inc. and Dofasco Inc. is slated to start up next year in Gallatin County, Ky., with capacity of about one million tons a year.
And Regina, Saskatchewan-based Ipsco Inc. has plans for a flat-rolled minimill in Iowa with one million tons a year of capacity.
It's scheduled to start up in early 1996.
National's Granite City mill enters this battle with antiquated ammunition.
Its hot-strip mill, which processes slabs of steel into flat-rolled steel, lacks the modern gauge and shape controls that its competitors have, says John C. Tumazos, an analyst with Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette.
Mr. Doerr says National has started upgrading the hot-strip mill, a $100 million, three-year project.
A total modernization of the Granite City mill could easily top $200 million, estimates Mr. Tumazos.
Still, some analysts point out that National forked out its biggest amount ever -- $350 million -- for one project for a new coke oven at its Great Lakes mill outside Detroit.
It should've spent the money on improving finishing operations to meet customers' growing demands for better-quality steel, they say, especially since coke substitutes are in the works.
Mr. Doerr says National needed a dependable supply of coke used in blast furnaces in making liquid iron, and that viable coke alternatives remain long shots.
"We wanted to be sure that at the end of the day we were going to be able to satisfy our customers' needs," he says.
National's need for capital spending is driven largely by one of its biggest customers -- the automotive industry, which demands the highest-quality steel.
But can National afford it?
Its balance sheet is weak.
Mr. Tumazos estimates five possible accounting adjustments -- including the economic costs of lifetime employment guarantees and eventually shutting its Granite City mill -- could cut National's common equity to a $300 million deficit from $208.5 million on the positive side.
National's capital program already has fallen victim to its liquidity problems.
Mr. Doerr says the company pulled back its annual capital spending budget to $125 million this year from $200 million annually, from 1984 to 1993.
Meanwhile, labor relations, once considered among the best in the industry, have deteriorated.
The steelworkers union and National are at odds over the idling of the company's iron-ore pellet unit, where workers went on strike.
"The issue at the pellet plant is not a labor issue," says Mr. Doerr.
"It's a business issue."
The company can buy the pellets for less than it can make them, he says.
Workers say they lack direction and were disheartened by the departure of Mr. Howell, whom they considered a solid operations man.
Says the union's Mr. Lester, "People are uncertain what in the world is going on in the company."
