Simmering tensions inside Mexico's ruling party between hardliners and forces pushing for broader democratic reforms seem likely to keep the political scene jittery until very close to the August presidential election.
One of the sources of uncertainty had been expected to disappear when Manuel Camacho Solis -- who has become a national symbol for those pushing for a more open political and social system -- either declared himself a candidate in the Aug. 21 election or formally said he wouldn't run.
Although Mr. Camacho has been trying to keep people guessing, to increase his influence within the Mexican government, the assumption had been that he would have to decide by next Tuesday, the filing deadline.
Now, however, some political analysts and Mr. Camacho's supporters say that Mr. Camacho could keep his prospects alive through July 21, assuming he doesn't become a declared candidate by Tuesday.
They say that he could become a candidate as late as one month before the elections by persuading another candidate to step aside.
Mr. Camacho recently negotiated the high-profile peace agreements following the uprising in Chiapas and has long had wide popular appeal, particularly in the capital, where nearly a quarter of the voters live.
Thus, any of a half-dozen small parties with presidential candidates could substitute the 47-year-old Princeton-trained politician as the party's standard bearer.
To be sure, the longer Mr. Camacho waits to declare himself, the harder time he will have building a campaign organization.
But he could still be a credible challenger to Luis Donaldo Colosio, who edged out Mr. Camacho as the choice of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI.
Without Mr. Camacho in the race, opinion polls show Mr. Colosio having little trouble with the candidates from the other two major parties.
Political observers say that, because Mr. Camacho poses the only real threat to Mr. Colosio, he has been facing intimidation to keep him out of the race.
They trace the intimidation to hard-liners within the PRI and to others who have been able to make fortunes trading on their influence and who have an obvious interest in making sure that the PRI remains in control, as it has for more than six decades.
The observers also say that Mr. Camacho's hard-line opponents have, among other things, initiated audits of almost every project he and his associates were involved in while he was mayor of Mexico City.
They also say Mr. Camacho's opponents have managed to arrange the firings of many of the managers Mr. Camacho left behind when he resigned as mayor late last year.
The political observers also took it as a threat to Mr. Camacho when a front-page column appeared over the weekend attacking one of his top aides, Alejandra Moreno, as being a free spender and being carefree in awarding contracts.
In the world of Mexican journalism, it is relatively easy to place columns, so the observers took the column as a sign that many of them would all face personal attacks if Mr. Camacho runs for president.
A spokesman for President Carlos Salinas -- who has backed Mr. Camacho's efforts to negotiate peace in Chiapas, even when they included the prospects of national political reform -- played down the concerns among those close to Mr. Camacho.
The spokesman said that lots of people are facing audits now because the last year of a presidential term is typically when those in office try to grab as much money as they can.
The spokesman also said that it is normal for someone such as the new mayor of Mexico City to replace his predecessor's appointees.
Still, many of those in the Colosio camp clearly have no use for Mr. Camacho.
One member of the Colosio campaign says darkly: "If Camacho accepts the candidacy for another party, we'll finish him.
He'll be a traitor."
The government has responded to the political uncertainty with a flurry of reforms, including the unprecedented statement that foreign observers will be allowed into the country for the elections.
Additionally, the government will establish a new electoral prosecutor's office and authorize an independent audit of voter rolls by May 11 to correct the sorts of problems that an opposition party uncovered when it did a sample examination recently and found phantom voters registered at the addresses of a children's museum, a statue and a guard's station to the presidential residence.
Still, the unclear outlook on the political scene has been weighing on the Mexican stock market, which has given up all the more than 10% gain it registered early in the year.
And a recent incident shows just how high political tensions are running, thanks to the rebellion in Chiapas and the divisions within the PRI.
Two weeks ago, as the PRI's presidential candidate stumped in the capital's hillside shanty towns, Mr. Colosio was surprised by a chanting band of masked youths, dressed to look like the Chiapas rebels.
One of them, Ernesto Estrada shouted, "We've been struggling for 18 years against the misery here.
All we ever get is electoral fraud."
Mr. Colosio surprised everyone by shouting back, "In the reformed PRI, we now have democratic spaces."
Then he turned over his microphone so Mr. Estrada could make his own stump speech -- but not before a reporter for this newspaper was roughly grabbed by the arm by a PRI official annoyed that dissidents were receiving press attention.
