Everyone knows that actors are very different in so-called real life from the characters they play on screen or stage.
Actors have private lives and private points of view; professionally, however, they have to think themselves into the personality and the worldview of their role.
This is the process that the great Russian director Konstantin Stanislavsky referred to in the title of his classic work, "An Actor Prepares" (1926).
It is also implied by the word persona, which comes to us from the Latin word for the mask worn by actors in the theater of ancient Rome.
Great actors are masterfully adept at keeping this crucial distinction straight in their minds.
An extraordinarily graphic example of how the same thespian can express two people's voices out of both sides of the same mouth recently came to light in the form of a press-release "interview" with Henry Winkler.
The unnamed interviewer poses the same question to Mr. Winkler and to Mr. Winkler/Monty Richardson.
Monty Richardson is, of course, the eponymous hero of "Monty," a new Fox-TV comedy series about "an outrageous, ultra-right talk show host."
Monty airs Tuesdays at 8 pm ET.
The interview follows verbatim.
Q: Do you think birds like the spotted owl should be protected?
A: (Monty) Yes, so they are plump enough to make a good holiday meal.
A: (Henry) We have to take care of the house we live in, because there's not going to be another one.
That includes taking care of all the creatures on this earth.
Q: What do you think of the new campus speech codes?
A: (Monty) Everyone is buckling under pressure, being too thin-skinned.
You're taking away freedom of speech.
A: (Henry) If we as a group can not realize that just respecting each other is one of the crucial guidelines to getting along, we're in trouble.
Q: What do you think of schools making part of their curriculum books like "Heather Has Two Mommies?"
A: (Monty) It's a biological impossibility, and if Heather has two mommies, they should win the Nobel Prize for Science.
A: (Henry) If that's what's happening, it's so important that we don't stick our heads in the sand.
We have to address these lifestyles as part of our society.
Q: Do you think a woman's place is in the kitchen?
A: (Monty) Yes, 24 hours a day -- no, make that 22 hours, she can spend some time in the bedroom.
A: (Henry) You're talking to a man whose wife has a very busy life, an important job . . . so, no.
Q: What do you think of using animals for medical research?
A: (Monty) As long as they don't damage the skins for a good coat, I don't mind.
A: (Henry): It's probably a good thing to take good care of the animals . . . they were here first.
Q: Do you think sexual harassment is a legitimate concern for women in the workplace?
(Monty) Come on!
It's part of the sport and fun of having to work with women . . . and secretly, women enjoy it too.
A: (Henry) Very simply, you treat others the way you'd like them to treat you.
Q: Do you think the film and television industry should be more responsible regarding violence in the media?
A: (Monty) I wonder if there's enough violence to eradicate part of the population of this country.
A: (Henry) I think it's a small component of today's problems . . . we need to address health care, day care, child care, education first, to build a sense of self-respect in children and in the family.
