There was tension at last week's White House senior staff meeting as top aide George Stephanopoulos chided counselor Bernard Nussbaum for dragging his feet.
The issue wasn't a headline-dominating one like Whitewater or trade with Japan.
Instead it was about Jonathan Pollard who, though not nearly as well known, arouses as much passion as those other controversies.
Pollard, a naval intelligence officer, was convicted in 1987 of spying for Israel and given a life sentence.
A powerful effort to commute his sentence and let him out of prison could arrive at President Clinton's desk in the near future.
The support to free Pollard is intense and impressive in scope.
It includes the government of Israel, many prominent American Jewish organizations and non-Jewish politicians ranging from liberal Democratic Sen. Carol Moseley-Braun to New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani to right-wing televangelist Pat Robertson.
They paint a very sympathetic picture.
Pollard was naive but zealously committed to Israel, worried about the threat the Iraqis and terrorism posed to that important American ally.
Thus he gave the Israelis top-secret information as a matter of conscience.
Moreover, it's argued, the prosecution deceived him into a plea bargain, leading him to believe both he and his wife would get a much lighter sentence.
It's a very appealing argument.
It's also largely untrue.
If Mr. Clinton caves in to this pressure it not only would be a triumph of political expediency over principle, but would establish a dreadful precedent in the post-Cold War world; that point was dramatically reinforced Tuesday when a top CIA official and his wife were charged with spying for Russia, now supposedly an ally.
For Jonathan Pollard is a traitor who sold out his country for big bucks.
(His supporters' contention that he is not a traitor because he was in the pay of an ally is nonsense; he plainly betrayed his country.)
The Israelis continue to lie about their complicity -- contending this was a "rogue operation" unknown to the government -- while showing the chutzpah to pressure the president to release an American spy.
Legally, Pollard proponents insist he was duped into a plea-bargaining agreement in order to get his wife and accomplice, Anne, an easier sentence (she did get a relatively light sentence).
But a U.S. Court of Appeals panel rejected this argument, 2 to 1, and a reading of the majority opinion is persuasive.
"There is simply no way that Pollard's sentence, harsh as it is, can be thought to stem from a fundamental defect that caused a miscarriage of justice -- without robbing those words of all meaning," wrote Judge Laurence H. Silberman, a conservative, and Ruth Bader Ginsburg, a liberal now on the Supreme Court, noting that charges of prosecutorial breaches were raised only three years after they allegedly occurred.
The argument that Pollard was a misguided but guileless man who acted out of deep conviction conveniently overlooks that he was a well-paid spy.
The initial payments were $1,500 a month from the Israelis, but he then demanded a raise to $2,500 monthly.
In addition, his Israeli handlers agreed to place $300,000 in a secret Swiss bank account made out to a fictitious Danny Cohen.
He also got an all-expenses-paid three-week honeymoon in Israel and in Europe; his wife got a $7,000 diamond-and-sapphire ring.
This was a very well-heeled conscience.
Pollard was spying for an ally but the claim that his sentence was unfair because it was harsher than comparable cases is bogus and irrelevant.
Top intelligence officials and defense secretaries as diverse as Caspar Weinberger and Les Aspin all say none of the other cases involved even a fraction of Pollard's sensitive security compromises.
The information Pollard turned over was so sensitive that officials still insist they can't provide specifics.
But they concur in an assessment some years ago by George Carver, a former top CIA official, who wrote in the New Republic that it was a "wholesale theft of ultrasensitive, highly classified internal U.S. documents that in their raw `un-redacted' state the United States could never show to any foreign power without grave danger to its own security."
The data "outlined U.S. military capabilities, training plans, and projected movements," Mr. Carver wrote, as well as "sensitive intelligence on a variety of foreign nations and topics" that compromised not only collection systems but "in some cases the likely identities of human agents."
Prosecutors insist that Pollard's focus was far greater than direct threats to Israel; they say he also stole information helpful to South Africa, apparently for the Israelis to barter, and on China, apparently to help his wife's business dealings.
Thus it's no surprise that all the top national security officials adamantly oppose any deal for Pollard.
The State Department predictably has waffled and is thought to be closer to the Pollard camp, as reportedly is White House counselor Nussbaum.
Some Justice Department officials favor clemency, but Attorney General Janet Reno, so far, has refused to recommend that.
And some top political operatives are lining up with the national security team, including Mr. Stephanopoulos and political adviser Rahm Emanuel, once a volunteer in the Israeli army.
The president, who so often has a tin ear on national security issues, ought to consult with his handful of military confidants, like retired Adm. William Crowe, if he has any doubt as to how strongly the intelligence community feels.
The Pollard case is especially distressing for American Jews.
For years the Jewish community has been deeply sensitive over unfair but oft-repeated charges of "dual loyalty" or even of putting Israel's interests ahead of America's.
Yet Pollard clearly was an American who put Israeli interests well above his own country's.
But the pressure from Israel is considerable.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who was defense chief when Pollard was enlisted as a spy, wrote President Clinton on Pollard's behalf last Oct. 22 and talked to the president about it personally at the White House in November.
Right before Christmas, Elyakim Rubinstein, Israeli cabinet secretary, wrote another special plea to Mr. Nussbaum.
This is the country that's never wavered from its initial insistence that the state of Israel "has no connection with Pollard."
Nobody believes that.
Moreover, every one of Pollard's handlers has been rewarded.
"Given the historic generosity of the U.S. in intelligence as in other matters, until the Israeli government comes clean, I see no need for us to do anything," asserts James Schlesinger, former defense chief and CIA director.
Mr. Schlesinger has it exactly right.
If the Israelis came clean and everyone acknowledged what a despicable act Pollard performed -- then, and only then, would clemency be in order.
