Convex Computer Corp. plans to unveil today a long-awaited supercomputer based on massively parallel processing, in a bid to revive its growth prospects and return to profitability.
Although the supercomputer industry is overcrowded with competition, Convex said its new system outperforms others, and analysts say its prospects will be aided by features that ease development of applications software.
Hewlett-Packard Co., which owns a 5% stake in Convex and makes key parts of the new computer, said it will help sell the new machine, which could be a significant boost.
Robert J. Paluck, Convex's chief executive officer, said the company has already sold one computer in the new Exemplar series and expects more sales in coming months, but "quantities in the first half will be small," with full availability and "meaningful product revenue" beginning in the second half.
Mr. Paluck said he is "comfortable" with analysts' projections that the company will continue to report losses until late this year.
The balance sheet remains strong, with more than $70 million in cash, Mr. Paluck said.
The new computer is key to the future of Convex, Richardson, Texas, which reported a net loss of $61.3 million, or $2.43 a share, on a 17% revenue decline to $193.1 million last year.
It was the company's third straight quarterly loss.
The new Exemplar Scalable Parallel Processor systems contain from two to 128 of Hewlett-Packard's PA-Risc microprocessors.
The smallest systems can cost as little as $145,000 and a large system can cost as much as $8 million.
Exemplar makes Convex the latest entrant into massively parallel supercomputing, a technology that gangs together large numbers of microprocessors to work as a single machine.
Mr. Paluck said that Exemplar provides about three times the performance of comparably priced versions of Convex's traditional vector supercomputers.
Jeffry Canin, an analyst with Salomon Brothers Inc. in San Francisco, said, "It's a very key product, and on the positive side, I think it's a very well-thought-out design."
But Salomon isn't recommending the stock, Mr. Canin said, "because we see the normal product transition risk."
Convex is expected to introduce a new version of its C-3 line later this year, but sales will probably be limited to existing customers, Mr. Canin said.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Convex shares rose 25 cents to $7.125.
By using Hewlett-Packard's chips in Exemplar, Convex engineers are trying to solve one of the biggest hurdles for any new computer design -- getting applications software.
Exemplar can run software already written for the PA-Risc chip, which has about one-third of the market for workstations based on reduced instruction-set computing, or Risc.
If developers rewrite as little as 10% of the code in an application to run in parallel, the program will run far faster on Exemplar than it can on the workstations, Convex says.
Hewlett-Packard says it will help sell Exemplar as a "compute-server" that works with workstations to perform difficult computations.
"Joint selling makes a tremendous amount of sense," said Gary Eichorn, Hewlett-Packard's vice president, workstation systems group.
"Every time a large Convex system gets sold, a whole pile of workstations gets sold with it," he said.
