WHITEWATER ROILS the White House hierarchy as rumors swirl.
While Hillary Rodham Clinton has no plans for a Ferraro-like press conference, senior advisers urge the president to put his personal lawyer, David Kendall, out front to calm the Whitewater waters.
The search begins for a permanent White House counsel; political aides push for savvy former Tip O'Neill aide Kirk O'Donnell, but others tout U.S. Judge Patricia Wald.
Meanwhile, associate counsel Kennedy comes under increasing fire.
Talk of replacing chief of staff McLarty diminishes, since he is one of the few old Arkansas hands still standing.
But if a change is ultimately needed, Washington insiders top the list of possible replacements.
Gergen clashes with new deputy chief of staff Ickes over ideology and Ickes's suspicions about Gergen's loyalty to the president.
But Gore, McLarty and liaison chief Alexis Herman rally to his defense.
On the rise is John Podesta, who has become Ickes's top aide for damage control.
SUPPORT GROWS for a gambling tax to pay for welfare overhaul.
After weeks of searching for spending cuts to pay for Clinton's proposal, the administration returns to the option of raising an estimated $4 billion over five years, mostly from a 4% excise tax on net gambling revenue, except state lotteries.
Withholding taxes on winnings would also be increased.
Adding to the urgency of the issue is that the latest draft of Clinton's plan has been drawing yawns on Capitol Hill.
At the moment, only $4 billion is earmarked for the program by the time it is to be fully effective in 1999.
The gambling tax would at least go half the distance toward funding the $2 billion annual cost of child care for the working poor, a crucial feature in keeping welfare rolls from growing.
THE ADMINISTRATION REELS from Christopher's disastrous China trip.
White House officials now say they should have "pulled the plug" on the trip when China began arresting dissidents.
Other administration officials complain the secretary of state's aides were so eager to portray him as a tough talker they ignored the warning signs that the trip would exacerbate Clinton's dilemma over whether to renew China's trade status.
Commerce and Treasury officials plan to push for broader stewardship of China policy.
Some want a top-level White House meeting to deal with the trip's fallout.
Commerce complains it didn't know the State Department's human-rights chief would be meeting with a high-profile dissident while a senior Commerce official was in Beijing promoting trade.
A Chinese veto of U.N. sanctions on North Korea over nuclear inspections would make it all but impossible for Clinton to reward China on the trade issue.
FED POLICY MAKERS are to finally decide at Tuesday's meeting how much and how promptly to disclose information about their monetary-policy meetings.
The likely outcome: more disclosure than is now the case, but less than congressional critics are demanding.
POWELL BLASTS another retired Army general, John Cushman, for criticizing Powell's handling of Clinton's first year.
In a letter to a Navy magazine, the former Joint Chiefs chairman accuses Cushman among other things of "intellectual dishonesty," of reaching the "height of arrogance" and of weaving "a web of innuendo and misinformation."
WHITE KNIGHT?
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission faces another bruising authorization battle this year, making it ripe for another merger effort by the SEC.
But SEC Chairman Levitt is standing by his pledge that he won't mount a hostile takeover.
Asked at a congressional hearing about the CFTC, Levitt deadpans: "What's that?"
RADICAL CHANGES in U.S. strategy may result from the Pentagon's reconsideration of nuclear arms in the post-Cold War world.
The Pentagon wants to edge away from the conditional "no first use" pledge and say that nuclear weapons may be employed as a last-ditch defense against biological or chemical weapons.
Also being discussed, but unlikely, is removing the nukes from nearly all remaining U.S. ICBMs.
ALTMAN VOWS he won't follow Hubbell and quit under fire.
The deputy Treasury secretary tells aides he hasn't done anything wrong and won't resign.
So far, there isn't any sign that he is being pressured to do so, but insiders already speculate on possible successors, including White House aide Bowman Cutter and Ex-Im Bank chief Ken Brody.
Disgruntled present and former RTC employees, resentful at what they complain was Altman's arrogant and disdainful attitude when he took over as acting RTC chief, savor his difficulties.
Some begin voicing criticism they had previously kept to themselves; others circulate old memos to try to embarrass him.
Bentsen, leaning increasingly on the few remaining longtime loyalists on his staff, summons senior aides to try to boost spirits.
MINOR MEMOS: The World Bank plans a session on "the implications for leadership in times of turbulence."
Its name?
"Permanent Whitewater." . . .
Kansas Rep. Roberts says the politically correct term for farmers and ranchers is "agro-Americans."
