There is no doubt the FAA needs fixing, but an air traffic control corporation is not the answer ("Gore's Gang Gets It Right," Review & Outlook, Jan. 17).
Management of traffic in the public interest is a government function from the town stoplight to New York harbor to the nation's airways.
An air traffic control corporation would be run under majority control of 15 to 20 airline companies, but would be funded mostly by ticket taxes and user fees paid by air passengers, shippers and aircraft operators.
(The airlines themselves now contribute little or nothing in user fees.)
Where would the interests of those "paying customers" be served?
Today, they are overseen by Congress, the people's elected representatives.
And since the air traffic system is the eyes and ears of the FAA's regulatory functions and safety enforcement, do the airline companies propose to undertake a share of their own regulatory and enforcement oversight?
The result will be an expensive and disruptive parallel bureaucracy to which government and Congress abdicate their responsibilities to enforce regulation and protect the public interest.
Examples of privatization abroad are meaningless to this nation, which has 60% of the world's aircraft and all but one of the globe's 20 busiest airports.
And foreign privatized systems, burdened with liability insurance, debt service, and labor troubles, are far more costly to their economies -- and the traveling public.
Corporatization of our sole (and in effect, monopoly) air traffic control system is not the model to induce private enterprise efficiency in government.
A privatized monopoly system would lack competitive or economic incentives to create such efficiencies.
The corporation structure, per se, is not a panacea.
Private corporations were hired by the FAA in the 1980s to bypass government's procurement and personnel failings and produce major elements of the massive ATC upgrade.
These corporations were unable to handle the massive software development, systems integration and project management problems.
Was the FAA a "bad customer," hindering work with its changing specifications, cumbersome procurement and uninspired personnel management?
Of course.
But if we want to fix government, then let's fix government.
A business exists to maximize economic return.
A government exists to maximize public benefit.
No amount of imagined gain in efficiency will offset the loss of public control of either the town stoplight or the nation's air traffic system.
So let's fix the FAA, not sell it out -- with the air traffic system -- to the highest bidder.
Frederick, Md.
