SHELLING, GUNFIRE SHATTERED a Sarajevo cease-fire hours after it began.
Heavy artillery shells and machine-gun fire struck the Bosnian capital late yesterday, witnesses said.
The fierce but brief attack followed a day of relative calm as Serb forces, threatened with NATO air raids, agreed to a cease-fire and allowed U.N. peacekeepers to move into their frontline positions.
The gunfire came from the direction of a hotly contested area near Vrbanja Bridge that was not handed over to the U.N. peacekeepers.
Bosnian Serb political and military leaders gave conflicting reactions to NATO's ultimatum Wednesday ordering Serbs to halt their shelling.
The NIH has dropped its three-year attempt to patent thousands of gene fragments found by one of its scientists.
Though the government agency said it hoped its action would end a rush by companies and other countries to file similar patent claims, the decision may have come too late to have an effect.
The Senate approved $8.6 billion in relief for victims of the Los Angeles earthquake, the costliest disaster aid package in the nation's history.
The 85-10 vote came after the rejection of several proposals for spending cuts that would have sheltered the budget deficit from the cost of quake relief.
An independent counsel bill was passed 356-56 by the House after lawmakers rejected a GOP plan to have the neutral prosecutors conduct all criminal probes of Senate and House members.
The bill, similar to a Senate-passed version, would allow court-appointed counsels to investigate top government officials.
Rostenkowski reimbursed the government $82,000 for possibly improper purchases from the House Office Supply Service over a six-year period.
The Illinois Democrat, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, made the payment last week.
A federal judge ruled in Seattle that a Washington state law restricting the number of times members of Congress can put their names on the ballot for re-election is unconstitutional.
Plaintiffs seeking to overturn the congressional term limits in the law included House Speaker Foley.
Clinton is expected to issue an executive order today requiring federal agencies -- and possibly government contractors -- to monitor the effects of their actions on environmental health in minority communities.
The order is said to be vague about the extent to which private companies will be covered.
Gunmen in northern Somalia seized five Britons -- including two members of Parliament -- and a Somali, but a relief official said all six hostages were freed yesterday after being held overnight.
U.N. officials have warned of an upsurge in clan violence as peacekeepers withdraw.
Protests by unarmed peasants spread in Mexico's impoverished southern state of Chiapas.
The peasants seized mayors' offices in three villages near the city of San Cristobal de las Casas.
Pope John Paul II promised to fight a European Parliament resolution proposing that homosexual couples be allowed to marry and to adopt children.
The pontiff said, "We can't let this pass."
Thousands of civilians have died in attacks by government and rebel forces in Sudan, according to a U.N. report, which also alleges that children are being kidnapped for use as slaves or soldiers.
A court hearing is set for today in Oregon to consider a request by Tonya Harding to block the U.S. Olympic Committee from holding a hearing that could lead to the skater's expulsion from the Winter Games.
Russia's former economics chief urged formation of a new, broad-based reformist party ahead of the 1996 presidential vote.
Gaidar's action came amid a split within Russia's Choice, a pro-reform alliance he leads in parliament.
Mandela registered his African National Congress as a political party in preparation for South Africa's first all-race elections in April.
Meanwhile, an umbrella group of right-wing white politicians, the Afrikaner Volksfront, said it would boycott the vote.
