THERE ARE A significant minority of businesses that aren't complying with the federal family-leave law, a study finds.
Among 300 employers surveyed by consultant William M. Mercer and the University of California at Berkeley, 8.6% either aren't guaranteeing the jobs of people who take leaves or are letting managers decide whether the workers get their jobs back.
Job guarantees are a core provision of the law, which, as of last August, mandates up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for childbirth or the illness of oneself or a family member.
Another 10% of employers surveyed say they won't continue health benefits through leaves, though it is mandated by the law, and 5% say they limit leaves to less than 12 weeks.
"The extent of noncompliance was a surprise to me," says Janice Stanger, a Mercer consultant in San Francisco.
In another sign of trouble, more than half say they won't develop an appeal procedure to resolve family-leave disputes.
"This could lead to significant problems, because it is the disputed cases that are likely to lead to problems and go to court," Ms. Stanger says.
Response to the law may be falling short partly because employers are swamped by new employee-related legislation.
More than 20% of companies surveyed said they haven't yet written policies on family leave but plan to.
COULD THE ORGANIZATION Man be evolving into Mr. Mom?
Not likely.
But a growing body of research suggests many male professionals wish for a better balance between work and family and get frustrated when employers don't recognize that desire.
In a recent article in Harvard Business Review, Michael Kimmel, an associate professor of sociology at State University of New York at Stony Brook, claims that "a new organization man has emerged, one who wants to be an involved father with no loss of income, prestige and corporate support -- and no diminished sense of manhood."
Based on a summary of recent research, Dr. Kimmel says few men fit stereotypes of the distant father and work-obsessed breadwinner.
Amid corporate downsizing, men are no longer able to count on career for self-fulfillment or even financial security.
And the rise in working women has brought men closer to their children.
Thus, "today's organization man carries a briefcase while pushing a baby carriage," he says.
Yet most companies haven't caught up with the change and pressure men to hide their participation at home.
A man, for instance, is more likely to call in sick after a baby is born than to take parental leave.
Unless corporations make family involvement easier, they "will lose their best and brightest men," Dr. Kimmel predicts.
While the evidence is anecdotal, the article echoes findings by other researchers.
A national study by the Families and Work Institute, a nonprofit research and consulting firm in New York, found managers and professionals -- the kinds of workers in the Kimmel study -- were more dissatisfied with the amount of time spent at work than other kinds of workers, saying they wanted to spend 8.8% less time at the office, compared with 5.8% for others.
Charles Rodgers, president of Rodgers & Associates, a unit of consultant Work/Family Directions, says he hears "an increasing degree of frustration" from men in focus groups.
Mr. Rodgers recalls a computer-firm manager saying "with considerable anger" that he began his 10-hour work day at 7 a.m. in order to coach his sons' Little League team in the evening.
But his boss reproached him for leaving early.
"A good many men have decided they don't want to be the kind of fathers their fathers were, but there's absolutely no recognition of that fact" by most employers, Mr. Rodgers says.
At the same time, "things have gotten more pressured and unstable at work," leading men to keep quiet.
The result: Many men are "silently frustrated," he says.
THE CLINTON administration's work-family guru tackles the high cost of child care.
Faith Wohl, a former DuPont human resources executive who led the chemical maker in setting up early work-family programs, was hired in late 1993 to help turn the General Services Administration, which provides services to two million federal workers, into a model of family-friendliness.
The GSA runs 92 of the nation's approximately 350 nonmilitary employer-sponsored child-care centers and plans to open 40 more.
In its first public report on its child-care operations, which serve both federal and private-sector workers, the GSA said last week that it has improved program quality and cut teacher turnover by raising pay.
But affordability is a problem, says Ms. Wohl, who heads the GSA's office of workplace initiatives.
Tuition at GSA centers, at $46 to $121 a week, is too high for many families.
GSA hopes to provide models to help private employers solve the affordability problem.
It is considering using proceeds from its recycling program to subsidize tuition.
GSA is teaching fund-raising skills to center staff and directors, as well as collaborating with private employers to share costs.
The high cost of quality child care "is a big issue the whole country faces," Ms. Wohl says.
THE TUPPERWARE party gets a '90s look from a Concord, Mass., marketer of kids' educational software.
Consultants for BrightIdeas sell software at home parties, as well as companies and schools.
Three-fourths of its salespeople are formerly employed professional parents looking for job flexibility. . . .
Troy, Mich., boasts the only chamber of commerce to offer members manager training in work-family issues and referrals on child and elder care.
DuPont, Kmart, Saturn and other members also work together on flexible scheduling and sick child care.
