By pressing a rare antitrust charge against two defense contractors, the Justice and Defense departments said they are trying to enforce a new code of behavior for companies competing in a shrinking market for weapons.
In a news conference at the Pentagon yesterday, officials said the action against Alliant Techsystems Inc. and Aerojet General Corp., a subsidiary of GenCorp Inc., was intended to "send a message to defense contractors" that some so-called teaming arrangements to bid on defense contracts are illegal.
The two companies, which had teamed up to manufacture cluster bombs for the military, agreed to a consent decree under which they would lower the government's cost for the $133 million contract by a total of $12 million.
Referring to teaming arrangements, Robert Litan, a deputy assistant attorney general for the Justice Department's antitrust division, explained they were allowable and sometimes necessary for companies to hang on in a declining market.
The one between Alliant and Aerojet, however, violated the Sherman Act because "it divided up the market and caused a dramatic increase in price," he charged.
In a statement after the Pentagon's news conference, Aerojet's president, Roger Ramseier, objected to Mr. Litan's remarks.
The agreement between the two companies, he asserted, "was not anticompetitive and it did not cost the government or the taxpayers a single penny."
Aerojet, based in Sacramento, Calif., agreed to the consent agreement, according to the company's statement, "to avoid a lengthy and costly litigation with the government on this matter."
In a release late yesterday, Alliant, based in Edina, Minn., said it remains "firmly convinced" that the teaming arrangement "was and is legal and compliant with government contracting and antitrust law and policy."
The company agreed to the consent decree, Alliant asserted, only in order to avoid costly litigation.
Until 1992, the two companies competed in supplying cluster bombs to the military.
In the summer of 1992, however, they teamed up to provide a joint bid, according to Jamie Gorelick, the Pentagon's general counsel.
The bid, according to the U.S. officials, raised the price of cluster bombs by more than $1,000 apiece.
Used heavily during the Gulf War, cluster bombs damage vehicles and troops over a wide area by scattering small bomblets.
Previously, they had cost the Pentagon $13,600 apiece.
Mr. Litan said there had been only four antitrust challenges to defense company mergers in recent years.
"This is an unusual event," he explained.
Ms. Gorelick called the case, which was instigated by charges from the Army and prepared by the Justice Department's office in San Francisco, a "perfect example of how DOD and DOJ can and will participate" to prevent the government from being overcharged.
