With President Clinton's European visit at an end, no doubt the American public's attention has begun to drift to matters domestic.
We in Central Europe have no such luxury.
Two years ago, Central Europe would have welcomed NATO's "Partnership for Peace."
The proposals for joint exercises, training and consultations were exactly what the new democracies expected the West to offer.
Today, with Russian nationalism on the rise, it is too little too late.
Naturally, Central European states should make the best of what is on offer.
Some NATO spokesmen have made the argument that Partnership for Peace is candidate membership in all but name.
A litmus test of this will be whether Central European armies are offered the kinds of adjustment programs once offered to other aspiring members, such as Spain or Portugal.
Central European officers are already being trained at Western academies.
Now whole staffs should be invited to join in planning sessions and exercises.
The West should also help bring Central European military communications and command-and-control systems into line with NATO specifications to ease communication in case of emergencies.
Moreover, it should advise the Central Europeans on how to spend their defense budgets more rationally, perhaps by suggesting which Warsaw Pact-era sites should be maintained for possible NATO use.
Central European armies would also jump at the chance to conduct peacekeeping on NATO's behalf, provided the West foots the bill.
Through its 20 years of experience in United Nations missions, the Polish army, for example, is well qualified to do this.
Poorer countries have always supplied mercenaries to richer ones, and there is no need to be shy about it.
Even if these policies are all carried out over the next few years, and even if the intentions behind the Partnership for Peace are honest, we Central Europeans can be forgiven for feeling, nevertheless, a certain disappointment.
This is not just because we were excluded from the NATO security guarantee.
We were also dismayed by some of the arguments in favor of our exclusion, and the tone adopted by some Western leaders.
For example, Lord Carrington, NATO's former secretary-general, argued against the alliance's enlargement because: "First, this would lead to considerable disquiet by the Russians . . . .
Second, a number of the existing NATO members would not be very happy to guarantee the so-called integrity of Poland and some of the other countries."
The "so-called" tells us a lot about the West's resolve to come to the aid of Europe's new democracies.
The most eloquent expression of the Western attitude was a Newsweek cover of a few weeks ago that showed a frightened little Russian bear -- a mascot from the Moscow Olympics -- standing amid dozens of nasty black guns aimed at him from all directions.
Who threatens him: the West?
Central Europe?
The cover didn't say.
The compassion for the little bear is laced with fear.
He does, we are told, still own 30,000 nuclear warheads.
So we mustn't do anything that might annoy him.
Better to talk to him gently and feed him lots of honey.
This mix of sentimentality, naivete and fear is exactly what drove appeasement in the 1930s.
The discussions about enlargement ignore one of the 20th century's most painful lessons: So far as security is concerned, Western Europe cannot insulate itself from the East.
It is no coincidence that World War I, World War II and the Cold War were largely fought in and about Central Europe.
If Hitler had succeeded in dominating Central Europe unopposed, with Czech industry, Romanian oil fields and Polish slave labor, he could have dominated the rest of Europe, and almost did.
The Cold War of 1945-89 reinforces the lesson that whoever controls Central Europe is a threat to Western Europe as well.
It was only by occupying Central Europe, after all, that the Soviet Union posed a direct challenge to the West.
The old joke about NATO says that the alliance was designed "to keep the Russians out, the Americans in and the Germans down."
Undiplomatic language excepted, these are still valid goals.
Reassured that they are protected from both Germany and Russia, the Central Europeans -- the Poles, Hungarians, Czechs and Slovaks -- could become catalysts for democratic reform in nations farther East.
In particular, Ukraine, which has yet to reaffirm its pledge to give up nuclear weapons, would be more likely to live up to its commitment if it bordered on NATO area.
Contrary to received wisdom, NATO's vacillation isn't helping the cause of reform in the East.
In Central Europe, NATO's decision is already materially harming reform prospects.
The Czech Republic has canceled its planned army reduction.
Poland also is likely to stop cutting its defense budget.
Money that should be allocated to credits for emerging private companies instead will be spent on restarting old Warsaw Pact arms factories.
Partnership for Peace was a good idea when it was conceived.
But with Russian chauvinism on the march, it is now time to go further.
Mr. Sikorski is a former Polish deputy minister of defense (1992).
