PepsiCo Inc. posted a 67% gain in fiscal fourth-quarter net income, reflecting stronger domestic snack-food and restaurant sales and a restructuring charge a year earlier.
The Purchase, N.Y., beverage, food and restaurant concern said earnings for the quarter ended Dec. 25, 1993, rose to $442.5 million, or 55 cents a share, from $265.6 million, or 32 cents a share, a year earlier.
The 1992 quarter included restructuring charges of $128.5 million, or 16 cents a share.
Fourth-quarter sales rose 14% to $7.72 billion from $6.8 billion.
The per-share results fell a couple of cents short of analysts' forecasts, reflecting the dilutive effect of acquisitions during the year and continued problems with international restaurant results.
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Pepsi closed at $39.625 a share, off 75 cents.
In soft drinks, analysts said, traditional carbonated beverages are showing sluggish growth, because of a shift among consumers to other drinks.
But Pepsi's beverage operating profit grew 10%, largely because of sales of alternative drinks, such as Lipton iced tea and Ocean Spray fruit drinks.
PepsiCo's restaurant business showed strong growth in U.S. markets.
Sales at outlets open at least a year rose 5% at Pizza Hut, 10% at KFC and 7% at Taco Bell.
KFC, which had been a disappointment to analysts, had its best quarter since PepsiCo acquired it in 1987, thanks to a rotisserie chicken product, which appeals to a different segment of consumers than its traditional fried meals.
"That product may bring in more white-collar suburban customers who know their cholesterol counts," says Joseph J. Doyle, analyst at Smith Barney Shearson Inc.
But PepsiCo is still struggling with KFC's international business, facing a continuing decline in Australia.
McDonald's Corp. has adopted its value menus in that market, so KFC meals are comparatively overpriced, Mr. Doyle said.
The soft performance overseas offset the strong domestic performance at KFC; as a result, KFC's fourth-quarter profit fell 16%.
Profits for all of PepsiCo's international restaurant operations fell 41%.
In snack foods, PepsiCo's new Doritos Tortilla Thins, Rold Gold pretzels and other products boosted fourth-quarter operating profit in that segment by 12%.
