Coal miners in the arctic city of Vorkuta, Russia, ended a six-day strike after Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin ordered the government to pay back wages to the workers in the state-run sector.
But labor unrest continued, as workers in dozens of other state-owned industries also have gone without paychecks from the cash-pinched government.
Miners in a Pacific coast province began a strike for back pay, and teachers nationwide protested for higher education funding.
The government, which has repeatedly caved in to various groups' demands, yesterday responded to outraged vodka producers.
Mr. Chernomyrdin rolled excise duties back to 85% from 90%.
The vodka industry had said the increase had forced them to raise prices to uncompetitive levels and caused temporary layoffs.
In an unconfirmed report, the Russian Information Agency also said the government would triple to 300% the import duties on foreign vodka.
Imported, smuggled and home-made brands are said to have captured as much as half the market.
Hungary devalued its forint currency 2.6% against a basket of the U.S. dollar and German mark, in an effort to sharpen its export edge.
The dollar has appreciated against other European currencies and thus pulled the forint up against those units in Hungarian export markets.
The move to improve Hungarian exporters' earnings also is intended to maintain their employment.
The devaluation was the second this year.
The forint was devalued 1% on Jan. 1.
Last year, the currency was devalued 15% in five steps.
About 30,000 workers in Belarus held a one-day strike to back the political opposition's demands for the government's resignation and parliamentary elections.
In Minsk, the capital, several thousand demonstrators threatened a general strike next week unless their demands are met.
The Minsk protest was backed by workers in several other cities in the former Soviet republic.
Labor unions and opposition parties charge that the government is corrupt, favors communism and opposes political and free-market reforms.
They want a coalition government and multiparty elections in the nation of 10 million people.
Chinese authorities released three U.S. citizens who were detained five days with seven other people, apparently under new decrees barring foreigners from many religious activities.
The group, which had planned to meet Christians in rural areas, was held at a home in Henan province last week, according to Christian Solidarity International and Amnesty International.
China's constitution grants freedom of religion, but proselytizing is prohibited.
China this month unveiled rules forbidding foreigners from other religious activities, such as forming schools or organizations.
Two million people in India are infected with HIV, which causes AIDS, and about 100,000 have full-blown AIDS, a specialist on the disease said.
I.S. Gilada of the independent Indian Health Organization said the officially reported figures of 13,254 HIV and 459 AIDS cases are far understated.
He said authorities in India, the world's second most populous country, have insufficiently publicized prevention or perils of HIV infection.
He said that if the current rate of the virus's spread is unchecked, AIDS cases in India could increase to between three million and five million by the end of this decade.
EUROPEANS WARY OF U.S. MOVES
The European employers federation Unice warned of possible retaliation if some proposed foreign-investment measures become law in the U.S. Unice is most concerned about a proposal to restrict foreign-owned businesses in the U.S. from participating in high-technology programs sponsored by Washington.
Unice said 3.2% of the U.S. work force is employed by U.S. affiliates of European companies.
Estonia plans to inaugurate its voucher system of privatization, with distribution of the certificates to begin in July and 50 midsize firms to be sold off this year.
A voucher management program will be set up through commercial banks.
Estonians will get vouchers based on length of employment and may exchange them for shares in state-owned companies deemed to be financially healthy, including a brewery and tobacco firm.
Public sales of stock also will be introduced.
Since 1991, auctions and tender offers have been used to privatize Estonian businesses.
That process has put more than 1,000 small firms and 54 large enterprises in private hands.
About 80% of small storefront and service businesses have been sold off.
Privatizations of 75 large businesses are scheduled for this year, but a third of them could be declared bankrupt because of their excessive liabilities.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
North Korea opened a 40-lane bowling alley in Pyongyang, the capital.
The cash-strapped Communist state, which aches to attract tourists, foreign investment and technology, said the army-built complex, with saunas, a restaurant and a shop, is available for international games. . . .
A study by doctors at Bristol University in England said patients with anxiety and depression can benefit from reading poetry rather than taking medicine, saving the British health service money, too.
