Cooper Cos. and former co-chairman Gary Singer were convicted of participating in an illegal junk-bond trading scheme that generated $3.5 million in profits.
Mr. Singer, co-chairman of the health-products company from 1988 until 1992, was convicted of 21 counts, including racketeering charges, conspiracy and fraud.
The company was convicted of seven counts of fraud but was acquitted of conspiracy.
Unlike Mr. Singer, the company wasn't charged under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law.
In U.S. District Court here, prosecutors alleged that Mr. Singer paid $700,000 in corporate funds to two former junk-bond analysts in return for information about planned junk-bond purchases.
That information enabled the Cooper executive to buy the bonds, both for the company's and his family's accounts, ahead of the transactions, prosecutors alleged.
Mr. Singer then resold the bonds, making $3.5 million in illegal profits, prosecutors charged.
At trial, prosecutors described Mr. Singer as driven by "greed and arrogance."
Defense attorneys for both Mr. Singer and the company maintained that the former executive was duped by the junk-bond analysts.
The two analysts previously pleaded guilty to charges related to the scheme and testified against Cooper and Mr. Singer.
The defense attorneys also suggested that the substantial profits were made simply because the junk-bond market was "hot" in 1991.
Sentencing was set for March 25 for both Mr. Singer and the Fort Lee, N.J.-based company.
Because he was convicted under RICO, Mr. Singer could face forfeiture proceedings to recover the illegal profits he allegedly made.
Mr. Singer also faces the possibility of a stiff prison sentence, and both defendants face possible fines of several hundred thousand dollars.
Charles Stillman, an attorney for Mr. Singer, said the verdict will be appealed.
Theodore V. Wells Jr., an attorney for Cooper, said the company is considering whether to appeal.
Both Messrs. Stillman and Wells said the jury's decision appeared to be inconsistent on some points.
For instance, the same acts were involved in several of the charges, but the jury didn't convict on all those counts.
"The potential inconsistency is something we need to explore to see what impact, if any, it will have on the future of this case," Mr. Stillman said.
Cooper's supportive stance toward Mr. Singer has drawn the ire of the Securities and Exchange Commission, which maintains the company -- at the expense of protecting shareholders -- backed Mr. Singer after the allegations against him were disclosed.
The SEC has a separate civil lawsuit pending against Cooper, Mr. Singer and Mr. Singer's brother, Steven, also an executive at the company.
The Singer family controls about 10% of the company's stock, said William McLucas, the SEC's director of enforcement.
The SEC's suit makes some of the same allegations that were in the criminal case and adds some other alleged violations.
The SEC suit asks that the defendants be ordered to turn over more than $3 million in alleged illegal profits and pay additional civil penalties.
Cooper, which has reported losses over several quarters as a result of breast-implant litigation and has recently announced a debt restructuring, makes contact lenses, surgical equipment and runs psychiatric hospitals.
It was taken over by the Singers, who had previously run a Westchester, N.Y., construction business, and another family in 1988.
But within a year of the takeover, most of the company's divisions, including its breast-implant division, were sold in a series of controversial deals and its stock price tumbled about 70%.
The alleged wrongdoing occurred in 1991.
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Cooper closed at 62.5 cents, down 12.5 cents.
