News Corp.'s Star TV reported a big increase in households receiving its Pan-Asia satellite-television service.
Gary Davey, the newly appointed chief executive of Star, said the results of the network's latest viewer study show the number of homes receiving at least one of Star's channels in a 13-country sampling of its viewers more than tripled.
According to the survey, conducted for Star by market research firm Frank Small & Associates, one or more Star channels could be seen in 42 million homes as of November, up from 11.2 million in January.
The latest study was carried out in 13 of the 53 countries in the network's broadcast reach, from Israel to Japan.
The results were welcome news for Star, which people close to News Corp. say has been the object of a power struggle between Fox Inc. and British Sky Broadcasting, both controlled by News Corp.
Last month, James F. Griffiths, chosen to run Star by News Corp.
Chairman Rupert Murdoch, was removed from his post by BSkyB Chairman Sam Chisholm after five months on the job.
Mr. Griffiths since was named a senior vice president at Fox Inc.
Last weekend, Mr. Davey, a protege of Mr. Chisholm who is credited widely with helping turn around BSkyB, succeeded Mr. Griffith.
The survey results show the number of Star's viewers in China grew dramatically over the 10 months, despite an edict issued in October by Beijing that sought to limit the reception by Chinese citizens of uncensored foreign broadcasts.
That directive was interpreted widely as a slap at News Corp.
According to the survey, the number of homes able to receive Star in China stands at 30.5 million, more than a sixfold increase.
Star's latest study was scheduled to be released in early December.
But Star suspended the field work in China for about a month following Beijing's edict.
The field work was conducted by the Chinese State Statistical Bureau under contract from Frank Small.
The new figures don't offer a detailed look at Star's viewer habits, such as how long they watch or what programs they favor.
Mr. Davey said studies later in the year would offer more precise data.
In India, Star's second-largest market, the broadcaster's penetration more than doubled to 7.3 million.
Taiwan, where the number of viewer homes rose 20% to 2,30,000, remains Star's third-largest market.
Thai viewer homes more than quadrupled to 142,000.
In the Middle East, where Star is received in more than one million homes, penetration more than doubled.
Growth in percentage terms was greatest in South Korea, which jumped more than nine times to 183,838 homes.
But viewership there was measured over a longer period, June 1992 through November.
