Conflicting messages from medical experts have left American women uncertain about when, and whether, to get mammograms.
And a definitive answer to the question appears to be many years away.
The National Cancer Institute recently said it found no conclusive evidence that regular mammograms reduce the death rate from breast cancer for women under 50.
It withdrew its recommendation that women begin routine mammography in their 40s, saying women should consult their health professionals and decide for themselves whether to take the test.
Other groups, including the American Cancer Society, the American Medical Women's Association and the American Medical Association, have challenged the NCI's new position.
They are still recommending that women in their 40s have routine mammograms.
The AMA even recommends women start with a baseline mammogram at 35.
Deborah Masters, 42 years old, says she had been getting regular mammograms for five years.
The news of the NCI change confused and worried her, in part because she thought it meant that the radiation was dangerous.
"It was horrifying," she says.
Ms. Masters is not alone.
Since the NCI's guideline change in early December, a Michigan breast-cancer screening program has received dozens of phone calls from women asking why they got reminders to come in for their mammograms, which they thought they didn't need anymore, says Carol Garlinghouse, a senior consultant on the project.
Even women in their 50s, whose benefit from mammography isn't disputed, have called, she says.
The National Alliance of Breast Cancer Organizations has received hundreds of inquiries from women asking why the experts disagree, whether they should take mammograms and whether the examination is dangerous, says Amy Langer, the group's executive director.
The NCI's change in recommendation was the result of a review of clinical trials on the value of mammography.
While none of the studies was perfect, the data showed an undeniable benefit for women between 50 and 69 years old, but less clear results in the 40-to-49 age group.
For the younger women, there was no statistically significant improvement in survival rates for those who had regular mammograms.
Mammograms of younger women are more difficult to interpret because their breast tissue tends to be denser, says Edward Sondik, deputy director of the NCI's division of cancer prevention and control.
Mammography misses about 40% of cancers in younger women, he points out.
Women who have negative results from mammograms may also be less vigilant about doing regular breast self-examinations, where many breast cancers are still found, Mr. Sondik said.
Mammography also inevitably produces a small number of false positives, which can lead to costly and unnecessary procedures.
For older women, that risk is worth it, but for younger women it may not be, he adds.
"Our position is that we cannot try to insulate women from the facts, and the facts are there is disagreement among professionals," says Barry Kramer, NCI's associate director of the early detection and community-oncology program.
Nevertheless, many physicians who work with breast cancer say screening women in their 40s is worthwhile.
In the Michigan program, 45% of the breast cancers detected over the program's two years were in women under 50, says Ms. Garlinghouse.
Daniel Kopans, director of breast imaging at Massachusetts General Hospital, says about 35% of the cancers detected in his radiology practice are in women under 50.
Gerald J. Joseph Jr., a New Orleans physician, recalls finding a tumor in the routine mammogram of a 35-year-old patient.
Today, several years later, the patient has had two children and is doing fine.
"Without a mammogram, I'm not sure that would have happened," Dr. Joseph says.
Critics of the NCI change argue that while a benefit of screening younger women wasn't proved, it also wasn't disproved.
The studies reviewed by NCI didn't include enough women between the ages of 40 and 49 to determine whether there is a benefit to that age group, says Dr. Kopans, an associate professor at Harvard Medical School.
Each year, nearly as many women in their 40s are diagnosed with cancer as women in their 50s, he says.
"Nothing changes suddenly at 50," he adds.
Erwin Bettinghaus, a member of the NCI's national cancer advisory board, who along with the majority of other panel members disagreed with the change, says, "I don't believe the science is far enough along to make a definitive statement one way or another."
Dr. Kopans and others suggest that the NCI, a branch of the government-run National Institutes of Health, was influenced by political and health-care cost-containment pressures.
He points out that the Clinton administration's health-plan recommendations mirror the NCI's guidelines.
"Clearly it was a political decision," he says.
NCI officials deny the organization was under any political pressure, adding that discussions about changing the guidelines were under way before the presidential election.
The NCI does have supporters.
The American College of Physicians, whose members are mainly internists, agrees that screening should begin at age 50.
Stephen Wyatt, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's cancer prevention and control program, says, "We've been very supportive of our colleagues at the NCI."
Among women who want to continue having mammograms, concerns have arisen that insurance companies or government programs will stop paying for the examination because of the NCI stand.
Dr. Carl D'Orsi, professor of radiology at the University of Massachusetts in Worcester, Mass., says about a half-dozen women in December asked about having their mammograms done before the end of the year because they were worried their insurance might drop coverage.
The American Cancer Society has also received calls from women concerned about losing insurance reimbursement, says Harmon Eyre of the organization's medical affairs and research unit.
The CDCP is re-evaluating its National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program to decide whether its funding of state screening programs should be limited, or more heavily targeted, to women over 50, Mr. Wyatt adds.
Among private insurers, Kylanne Green, director of managed care at the Health Insurance Association of America, says she isn't aware of any changes in coverage prompted by the NCI change.
But, she adds, the case presages similar conflicts bound to come up in revising the health-care system.
Cost-effectiveness analyses may determine that mammography doesn't pay off in women under 50, she says, "yet it's very difficult to look at that objectively when you realize how many women die of breast cancer."
