Vienna -- In 1895, the world's first Jewish museum opened its doors in Vienna, sponsored by the Society for the Collection and Conservation of Artistic and Historic Monuments of Judaism.
As the society's name indicates, the museum's aims were at once all-encompassing and unclear.
Should a Jewish museum focus on the religious or the cultural, the artistic or the historical; on Judaism in a universal or a local context?
Questions of identity were effectively put to rest when the Nazis confiscated the collection in 1938.
November 1993, 98 years after the opening of that first museum, saw the unveiling of the new Jewish Museum of the city of Vienna.
In many ways, its goals are as all-encompassing as those of its predecessor.
How, after all, can one condense the multiplicity contained within the notion of "Jewish culture" into a tidy museum exhibit?
Rather than present a single definition of the term, the museum celebrates many different aspects.
Is "Jewish culture" fine arts and the contemporary world, as the show "The Song of Songs" (through Feb. 13) presents in pastels and sculptures by German artist Heinz Mack?
Or should the focus be intellectual and social history, exemplified by an exhibit (through March 5) of photographs and texts from the 1934 International Psychoanalytic Congress in Lucerne, just after Hitler came to power in Germany?
A central focus is Jewish culture in Vienna.
The main exhibition, called "Teitelbaum Used to Live Here" (through May 15), literally places 30 Jewish objects on a huge map of the city that covers the entire floor.
On the map are an illuminated marriage contract (ketubah) of 1391; Sartre's draft of a screenplay about Freud; a light bulb from Vienna's first light-bulb factory, founded by Zionist Johann Kremenezky in 1880; an assortment of calling cards from various Barons de Rothschild, Hugo von Hoffmannsthal, Gustav Mahler and so on.
One point on the map -- but only one point -- is a length of yellow fabric embossed with the six-pointed star, displayed beneath a list of Nazi deportations from Vienna to the death camps.
In a separate alcove is a postwar tape recording of Austrian federal government meetings, rife with stereotypes and prejudice about how to handle the Jewish community.
The eponymous Teitelbaum was not a famous resident of Vienna.
There were, however, 16 Teitelbaums listed in the 1938 telephone book.
Today there isn't a single one.
Jewish culture as part and parcel of Viennese life is a thing of the past.
In light of this, the museum's task is to re-create a world.
The whole institution was thrown together at terrific speed.
In 1986, Vienna's mayor, Helmut Zilk, announced that he was committed to the idea of a Jewish museum; in 1993, with elections and the possible end of his term approaching, he decided to make good on his pledge.
A space was found in the Eskeles Palace at the center of town.
By the time the lease was signed, the new director, historian and professor Julius H. Schoeps, and his staff had just four months in which to assemble the shows and catalogs.
The unwonted speed at which all this was carried out demonstrates that whatever a Jewish museum in the German-speaking world may be, it is unavoidably a political (and politically correct) issue.
The haste may create future problems.
The Eskeles Palace is rather small for large-scale exhibitions, such as the Chagall show scheduled to arrive from Jerusalem next year.
As the building is a designated landmark, it will be hard to get permission to expand it, although an architectural competition has been planned.
It will be difficult to house the extensive permanent collections, which include the Berger collection (10,000 objects relating to the Ashkenazi Jews), the Jewish Community collection (which includes the holdings of the original Jewish Museum) and the Schlaff collection of 5,000 anti-Semitic objects (the basis for a show planned for 1995).
"The museum won't be completely finished for another two to three years," says curator Gabriele Kohlbauer-Fritz.
Still, it's off to a good start.
"The response has been tremendous," she adds.
Central to the concept of the museum is the fact that it was once impossible to separate "Jewish culture" from that of the larger society, a particularly poignant point for all those people who'd always thought of themselves as plain Germans or Austrians until the 1930s.
The Nazis made this essentially artificial separation with tremendous efficiency.
One could argue that emphasizing the "Jewishness" of Mahler or Schoenberg over their universal qualities as artists is to continue the artificial division.
In an American context, it might be; in German-speaking countries, it's part of the desperately needed process of rebuilding and reclaiming Jewish culture and identity.
In this museum, Dr. Schoeps hopes to create a place that is not merely a tourist attraction, but an active part of the community, of intellectual and artistic exchange.
Furthering this are the lecture hall; the Cafe Teitelbaum; and a branch of the bookstore Literaturhandlung, which, founded in Munich 11 years ago by Rahel Salamander, is the most renowned purveyor of Judaica in the German-speaking world.
"A Jewish museum has to be careful not to limit European Jewish history to the perspective of Nazi murders," states Dr. Schoeps in the "Teitelbaum" catalog.
His solution: to define the museum not only as a monument to the past, but as a place capable of restoring a plethora of Jewish identities to the future of Vienna.
Ms. Midgette is a writer in Munich.
