Flush with a favorable credit rating, the city of Prague is finding plenty of suitors for a proposal to float its first bond issue in decades.
City officials hope soon to pick a lead manager for the $150 million to $250 million issue, and some say as many as 70 financial institutions will submit proposals.
City officials say about 50 proposals have come in, with others expected before the deadline at the end of February.
The bond proposal has attracted huge attention in the international financial community for several reasons.
For one, there's an element of novelty.
Prague along with the Czech National Bank are the only two entities across the former East bloc to receive an investment-grade rating.
Standard & Poor's Corp. has awarded the city a triple-B rating, the same as the central bank.
"It's a very romantic issue, the first municipal issue in Eastern Europe," one London investment banker says.
"It's difficult to think of another city in Eastern Europe that could get an investment-grade rating."
For their part, banks and securities firms are trying to build track records as bond managers in a region almost entirely unfamiliar with the concept.
As one banker here put it: "There are not that many East European deals to go around these days, and this is a new and very interesting issue.
Everyone's trying to get his foot in the door."
But as finance giants such as Nomura Securities Co. and CS First Boston Inc. jockey to win the mandate, many concede the package remains wrapped in mystery.
Prague Mayor Jan Koukal surprised the financial community when he announced the bond proposal to finance necessary improvements of the city's subway and road systems.
"Frankly I was a little taken aback that the city was choosing this route, because it's not entirely clear how it intends to pay the money back," says another Prague-based banker who, as the others, declined to be named.
"As it stands now, the city doesn't have the explicit power to tax."
Jiri Klumpar, head of the central bank's financial-markets section, says he has little doubt about the city's ability to repay its obligations.
The city owns huge amounts of very valuable real estate and receives millions of dollars a year in fees from both local and international businesses.
And although no Czech municipality has the explicit power to tax, that is expected to change in a few months with a major revision of the tax system.
Officials at the central bank and elsewhere say they remain concerned by what appears to be a lone effort on Mr. Koukal's part to secure a major bond issue without consulting those in the government that oversee such things.
Neither Mr. Koukal nor his two aides in charge of the bond proposal could be reached immediately for comment.
The issue, likely to have as much as a five-year maturity, may be the only government-backed bond from the Czech Republic this year.
Last year the central bank and the federal government sold several large bonds to build up foreign-currency reserves and to cover past budget deficits.
But with the government now running well in the black and with reserves totaling nearly $4 billion, Mr. Klumpar says no foreign funding will be needed for quite some time.
Janet Guyon in London contributed to this article.
