Last winter three U.S. executives huddled in a hotel room here and decided to take a shot at resurrecting one of Eastern Europe's most famous truck makers.
With plenty of swagger to go around, the threesome vowed to make Tatra Koprivnice profitable again by March 1995.
In return, former Chrysler Corp. executive Gerald Greenwald and his partners, David Shelby and Jack D. Rutherford, would receive undisclosed monthly salaries and a 15% stake in Tatra, with the latter alone then valued at about $140 million.
Today, with one year down and one to go, the talk at Tatra remains as gung-ho as ever, but results have proven spotty at best.
The company sold nearly 1,000 fewer trucks last year, and it is expected to have gone deeper into the red.
And though distributorships are in the works for Brazil, the Middle East, North Africa and even Alaska, efforts to tap the broader American market have gone nowhere.
"We all thought North America would be a long shot, and so far it's been just that," says Mr. Rutherford, a former head of manufacturing at International Harvester and now a Chicago-based investor specializing in ailing enterprises.
Tatra's rebirth was certain to be tough.
When the Americans took over, annual sales at the sprawling plant had tumbled in just three years to just more than 5,000 trucks from about 13,000.
Debt had soared to nearly $140 million, and the truck maker's traditional buyers to the East were all but broke.
But what struck many as strange about the American partners was that none planned to spend more than one week a month at Tatra.
Their remaining time would go to other pursuits in the U.S., amounting to what some here called "management by remote control."
On taking charge of Tatra last March, however, the partners laid out a basic plan: slash the work force of 10,000 by as much as 20%; renegotiate Tatra's huge debt to lenders and suppliers and instill a sales-driven mentality in managers.
Most important, though, was their promise to introduce the brawny Tatra truck to Western markets from the Amazon to Alaska.
"We look forward to showing everyone that we can do what we say we can do," Mr. Greenwald told reporters last spring.
His team, allied under the name GSR Inc., measures its achievements in terms of promises made good.
More than 2,000 workers have lost their jobs since GSR took over.
Inventories have been cut nearly in half.
And Tatra's debt, while only slightly smaller than last year, has been shifted to longer-term obligations.
However significant these changes may have been, Tatra's shareholders got a major blow in December when word got out that Mr. Greenwald, thought to be their principal savior, might soon take the top job at UAL Corp., the parent of United Airlines.
The 58-year-old executive quickly moved to quell the disquiet by assuring shareholders that he'd fulfill his obligations at Tatra even if he got the UAL job.
But that idea sounds peculiar to Jozef Horak, director of Tatra's largest shareholder, Prvni Investicni, and first vice chairman on Tatra's board.
"The reaction here to this announcement was not very favorable," he says.
"A job of UAL's size would require 100% of anyone's time."
For his part, Mr. Greenwald refuses to say a word about any possible work arrangement with UAL.
What's important, he says, is that he and his partners have signed a contract with Tatra, and they will live up to it.
Mr. Greenwald gained fame in the early 1980s as a chief architect of Chrysler's recovery.
That fame has carried him far ever since.
After resigning the No. 2 job at Chrysler in 1990, he went on to lead a failed union buyout of UAL that earned him $9 million in compensation.
He then moved on to two other jobs in as many years, the second as president of Olympia & York Developments Ltd., the troubled Canadian real-estate concern.
He quit there to take over Tatra last April.
Were he to sign on with UAL, it would be his sixth job in four years.
The Tatra turnaround, Mr. Greenwald now concedes, appeared a lot more grueling once he took a closer look.
The company's sales and distribution network, he says, turned out to be "much weaker than we'd ever thought."
And the American market has proven far less hospitable than predicted, largely because Tatra trucks, renowned for their durability in brutal terrain, are also gas guzzlers.
So for now, the company is setting its sights on North Africa and the Middle East.
Then there's China, which accounted for nearly a quarter of Tatra's 1993 sales.
It is also angling for a big engine contract from the Russian truck giant Kamas, whose own engine plant was destroyed by fire last year.
That contract alone could be good for 20,000 engines a year.
Yet such talk carries little weight with Tatra's rank and file, who have seen the company's production drop to just 2,000 trucks last year from around 15,000 in 1988.
"This country has turned into an Alaska for Americans wanting to plunder the place from afar," says one technical designer with 20 years experience at the plant.
"The only changes I've seen have been bad ones, like lower production and fewer jobs."
Still, Messrs. Greenwald, Shelby and Rutherford do have their defenders, even though praise for the three is often tempered with qualifications.
"Everything is changing, but very slowly," says Jan Vala, a Tatra engineer with 19 years at the company.
"Resistance is so extreme that if they tried to change everything at once, the system would break down."
The three Americans refuse to disclose figures for Tatra's performance last year, beyond how many trucks were made and how many sold.
More relevant numbers, they say, won't be made public until the release of Tatra's annual report in April.
Even so, despite assurances last spring that their stake in Tatra would depend entirely on its performance, Mr. Rutherford now says that GSR's share will jump to 10% by next month.
The remaining 5% share will come next year, so long as Tatra shows even $1 of profit, he adds.
All in all, Mr. Horak of Prvni Investicni defends GSR's performance, contending that the threesome have made important steps to turn Tatra into an efficient company.
"But we would be a bad board," he adds, "if we were satisfied with last year's results, which were worse than we had expected."
Tatra's plunging sales, Mr. Rutherford argues, are due largely to the lingering European recession and what he calls a "complete downturn in the world's truck market."
Yet such realities do little to dim the partners' optimistic forecasts for the year to come.
After all, the Americans have their reputations at stake.
"It's hard for people to see that money is not our incentive right now," says Mr. Rutherford.
"Our incentive is to do the best we possibly can for the company.
It's a matter of personal pride."
