Like other U.S. companies, Tiffany & Co. detects a new scent in Europe.
Call it Eau d'Amerique.
When the Manhattan jeweler launched its Tiffany fragrance in Paris last June, it held a bagel breakfast at the Ritz, showed the film "The Making of an American Jeweler" and played Gershwin in the background.
"We think our American appeal is an asset," Tiffany's spokeswoman explains.
After hiding, or at least not flaunting, their Yankee roots for years, U.S. companies in Europe are now proud to be American.
That's because European consumers, it seems, are proud to buy American.
American consumer-goods companies are finding that many Europeans see the U.S.A. label as a stamp of quality.
Bernard Barnett, editorial director of Campaign, a U.K. advertising magazine, says "the idea of associating America with high quality is quite a new thing in this market."
To be sure, Europeans have long showed enthusiasm for Marlboro cigarettes, Levi's jeans and Coca-Cola-products with strong American identification.
But now, using down-home American imagery in advertising and marketing, even luxury goods can trade on being American.
Jeep, calling itself "The American Legend" in Europe, has seen its sales there surge to 25,000 last year from 18,000 in 1991.
Goodyear sells its tires in Germany with images of Indy cars and promotions for trips to the States.
Budweiser, after floundering in Europe, has made a name for itself as a premium brand with an earthy, American ad campaign.
British print ads tout Schott bomber jackets and Red Wing work boots.
"In the 70s and 80s there was a shift toward much more Europeanness; there was a backlash against American imagery," says Garry Titterton, executive vice president of the advertising firm McCann Erickson Europe.
Now, "the American image is very positive in some surprising places."
What's more, Europeans are paying premium prices for American goods.
A six-pack of Budweiser costs about $7 in Britain compared to $4 here; Bose Lifestyle hi-fi equipment costs 30% more in the U.K. -- up to $3,000 for a whole system.
Some attribute the new desire for things American to world-wide distribution of U.S. films and increasing travel to the States.
European teenagers wear baseball caps and L.A. Raiders jackets; surveys have shown that many want to learn English and would happily move to America.
Waving the flag doesn't automatically bring success -- as demonstrated by the Euro Disney debacle.
And it's not clear how far U.S. firms can stretch their American appeal.
"German is synonymous with quality engineering, Italian is synonymous with style, and French is synonymous with chic," says Roger Parry, development director for Aegis Group, a London marketing firm.
"But I'm not exactly sure what American conveys.
It isn't as clear a statement."
Still, American companies are seeing how far they can promote their nationality.
Lands' End, the Wisconsin mail-order firm that set up shop in the U.K. last fall, announced in its catalog and ads: "We're Lands' End Direct Merchants, from America."
Its catalog talks about Wisconsin and uses American spellings.
The company says sales are soaring.
The rugged American look appeals to Tom Windridge, a retired carpet executive from Northwest England.
After visiting the States four times in the past five years, he became hooked on "the unusual quality of the goods" he found.
So when he spied the Lands' End ad in a British magazine, he ordered the catalog and got himself a denim shirt.
Jeep launched its Cherokee in Europe in 1988 with an American theme.
Its biggest spurt came last year with the debut of the top-of-the-line Grand Cherokee.
It might seem foolish to try to sell Jeeps in the U.K., where the home product, Land Rover, already has a solid reputation.
But Thomas L. Bernardin, president of Bozell/North, a Detroit advertising firm that handles Jeep, sees "much more open-mindedness to American products."
The latest print ad in the U.K. features a Jeep with English plates in front of a log cabin with an American flag.
Kentucky-based Brown-Forman, which manufactures Jack Daniel's and Southern Comfort, has been using a U.S.A. theme since it started selling in Europe more than two decades ago.
But only recently have Jack Daniel's and Southern Comfort liquors posted double-digit growth in Europe.
"There's no question Jack Daniel's and Southern Comfort have benefited enormously from being American brands," says Lyons Brown, marketing director for Northern Europe.
Jack Daniel's print ads throughout Europe and the U.S. contain scenes of Lynchburg, Tenn.
Jim Beam's U.K. print ads, which compete with Jack Daniel's, read "The American Spirit Since 1795."
Like Brown-Forman, Anheuser-Busch Inc. has found that blue-collar Americana gives its Budweiser brand cachet.
The brewer began its push here in 1984 with high-glitz pub-scene ads, including a takeoff on the Top Gun movie.
After five years of lackluster sales, Budweiser switched to a more down-home theme and a new slogan: "The Genuine Article."
Print ads include Montana lake fishing and a Nevada truck stop.
A television ad, running in Spain, Sweden and Italy, portrays a card player's train ride through Utah.
Seeing others' success, some U.S. companies with no clear American image are creating one.
A British ad for Blistex, for example, is a testimonial from a fictitious dopey blond "Miss Idaho Lovely Lips" who declares the stuff "America's best-selling lip cream."
Nordic Track, a unit of Acton, Mass.-based CML Group Inc., found that most European consumers thought Nordic Sport ski machines were Scandinavian.
So it launched an ad with the headline "Now from the U.S.A.: The World's Best Aerobic Workout."
The ad mentions American doctors' endorsements, and its brochure boasts that it has sold two million in America.
Nordic Track has sold tens of thousands since it opened in the U.K. in October, 1992 -- even though its price is 50% higher in Europe.
It's also moving into Germany, the Netherlands and France.
Bose Corp., the American maker of Lifestyle hi-fi systems, has tried a similar tack.
When it launched its full line in Europe in September (at a 30% premium to the U.S.), it used print ads featuring praise from the New York Times.
Its television ads and showroom videos talk about its founder's affiliation with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and it brags that its systems are used in the States in GM cars and by NASA.
Europe's customers are tuning in to that message.
Matthew Oxford, a young civil servant from Cornwall in southwest England, splurged on a system, junking his British model.
Mr. Oxford says he used to have a "typically European attitude" toward the U.S.: "rather tacky, lacking in taste."
But after four American vacations, he's revised his opinion.
At a film studio in Florida, he spied the Bose system at work and decided to get one for himself.
"I'm much more prepared to accept American goods," Mr. Oxford says.
"I'm very fond of America."
