Germany's big metal-workers union threatened widespread walkouts if employers continued to insist on lower labor costs in deadlocked talks.
IG Metall's contract with employers expired Dec. 31.
In negotiations applying to most of Germany's 3.8 million metal workers, the Gesamtmetall employers group rejected union demands for a 6% wage increase or 2% with job guarantees.
Gesamtmetall wants to secure jobs by cutting costs through wage freezes, more flexible shifts, and cuts in vacation days and bonuses.
The union vowed to strike once the grace period for the talks expires Jan. 28.
But analysts termed the union warning hollow, given Germany's worsening unemployment and its ailing automotive and machinery sectors, as well as the chemical workers union's agreement this month to a sub-inflation 2% wage increase for 1994.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl was said to back a wage freeze for millions of German public servants, whose OETV union will seek a 4% raise in talks that start tomorrow.
ISRAEL MAY COMPETE IN U.S. NICHE
Israeli companies will be allowed to compete in the U.S. civilian satellite market, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's office confirmed.
In a letter notifying Mr. Rabin of the decision, President Clinton said Israeli exports of satellite technology to the U.S. would help "maintain and strengthen Israel's qualitative edge."
Mr. Rabin had asked the U.S. to lift the ban on Israel's participation in satellite contracts.
In Israel, U.S. Commerce Secretary Ron Brown told Israel radio the move would produce jobs both in Israel and the U.S.
In the Czech Republic's first major case of computer fraud, an employee of the Czech Savings Bank in Sokolov was convicted of stealing about $1.2 million and sentenced to eight years in prison, a Czech newspaper reported.
Martin Janku appealed, saying he only meant to expose the bank's inadequate security system.
After moving the money by computer to his own account in the bank over nine months, he was detained when he tried to make a big withdrawal from a branch and was recognized by a teller who had met him in computer training.
He returned $1 million but said $166,666 was stolen from his car.
Citing cuts in Russian government grants, the Moscow lab that has preserved Lenin's body for 70 years is offering commercial mortuary services -- including mummification.
In a venture with an undertaker, the Center for Biological Structures will perform long-term embalming, a six-month job, for at least $250,000 -- a breathtaking sum in Russia even with the center's full guarantee and post-sale inspections every two years.
Former clients included notable communists such as Ho Chi Minh of North Vietnam.
Now the center sees its market as "rich people in the West and the U.S. who would like to preserve themselves for the future."
The chairman of the Italian state-owned electric utility Ente Nazionale per L'Energia Elettrica, Franco Viezzoli, was arrested in a crackdown on mob infiltration of construction projects in the southern region of Calabria.
The company, known as ENEL, is one of the largest implicated in Italy's investigation of organized crime.
Mr. Viezzoli was detained in Rome in connection with alleged rigging of bids for a power plant, and 30 other people were arrested, including ENEL officials and suspected underworld figures.
The European Union Commission adopted guidelines for energy investment through the year 2000 aimed at expanding or improving distribution of electricity and natural gas throughout the 12-country bloc.
The EU, formerly called the European Community, is trying to improve competitiveness and employment in the energy sector.
Among priorities, the commission said spending should focus on connections of isolated electricity networks and links among EU and non-EU grids.
It also called for delivering gas to unserved regions and expanding pipeline capacities.
Spending on basic public-works projects in Mexico this year will total about $16 billion, up 20% from last year's outlays.
The infrastructure total includes $11.15 billion in private investment, a 17% increase from 1993, and government spending of $4.87 billion, up 24%.
Of the private sum, 40% will be invested in terminals, buses and cargo trucks.
Other plans include new toll highways, seaport installations, and improvements in airports, railways and telecommunications.
Highways will get almost two-thirds of the public-works funding to meet this year's road-building goal of 1,488 miles.
The government also unveiled a March bond issue of $500 million for international investors, with proceeds to finance more highway work.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Sweden said the number of business bankruptcies last year decreased 12% to 18,731 from a year earlier.
The total represents one failure for every 26 Swedish companies.
Sectors hit hardest were restaurants, hotels, real estate and construction . . . .
An airport upgrade to meet global standards and an international commercial center are planned for Bacau, Romania, 185 miles northeast of Bucharest.
Great Wall Industrial Corp. of China is the general contractor on the $330 million project, which could generate 12,000 jobs.
