WORKERS' STRESS over family problems peaks with harsh winter weather in the East and the earthquake in the West.
The cold and quake have shattered the precarious balance between work and family for many people.
Operators of work-family help lines -- including Partnership for Elder Care, New York; Partnership Group, Lansdale, Pa., and Working Solutions, Portland, Ore. -- report increases of 6% to 100% in stress-related calls.
"On a stress scale of one to 10, more people are at the eight level than we've heard in the past," says Mary Kay Leonard, a vice president of Work/Family Directions, a Boston consultant.
In New York, many workers worry about aged relatives trapped in their homes by snow and ice, says Partnership for Elder Care, an employer consortium.
One Wall Street employee "was pulling out his hair" because his recently widowed father in Chinatown was calling him several times a day at work, asking him to visit, says Nora O'Brien, a Partnership social worker, who found an emergency-meal service and a companion to visit the father.
Throughout the East, school shutdowns are forcing employees to bring kids to the office, prompting several employers to ask for help setting up snow-day child-care programs, Ms. Leonard says.
"We also hear lots of stories about lost mittens and torn snowsuits, which become a big deal because parents are already at the end of their rope."
In Los Angeles, wrecked commuting patterns prevent many from making child-care connections.
One manager called the Partnership Group to complain about an employee who shaved an hour off his work day to allow extra travel time to his child-care center.
Counselors negotiated a plan for his child to stay at the center longer each day.
Many children have been too traumatized to return to school or child care.
One Los Angeles father called Work/Family Directions with his wife and sleepless, tearful seven-year-old on the line, asking for reassurance for the child.
At Working Solutions, parents are encouraged to use the disaster to teach children such values as sticking together and coping calmly with crisis, says Leslie Faught, president.
"This is the sort of thing that the child will remember 30 years later and say, `During the earthquake my mom was there and she said . . .'"
BY SUPPORTING workers who care for aged relatives, employers could play a crucial role in improving long-term health care for elderly Americans, a General Accounting Office study says.
Family members' ability to care for an aged relative is a leading factor in preventing nursing-home admissions, the study says.
Relatives' availability to help, which depends partly on support they get from others, can have a bigger impact on whether an aged person goes to a nursing home than the elder's condition, research shows.
Flexible schedules and elder-care information services are important employer benefits for caregivers, the study says.
But, it says, while more than 23 million working Americans have access to those benefits, they aren't widely used for elder care.
"What's lacking is the employers putting the programs together strategically and promoting them for elder-care purposes," says James Musselwhite, a GAO senior social science analyst who helped write the report.
Many companies also limit elder-care programs to full-time and permanent staff.
"Since most long-term care is provided by family and friends, an employer's support is extremely important," Mr. Musselwhite says.
Without family members' continued ability to care for the growing number of frail elders, "we would be in very big trouble" in providing longterm care, he adds.
EMPLOYERS PLAY A growing role in collecting child support, creating a mountain of paperwork.
In an effort to locate deadbeat parents and make them pay up, 14 states have enacted laws requiring employers to report new hires, and 18 states are considering similar measures.
A University of Wisconsin study shows that such new-hire reporting increases child-support collections by 20% in the first year.
But the requirements vary so much that compliance is a headache for multistate employers, says Debera Salam of the American Society for Payroll Management, a group of 450 big employers.
Some states require new-hire reporting within five days, which is difficult for big, decentralized companies.
Others require reporting of temporary hires and payments to independent contractors.
"Some temporary agencies turn over 16,000 employees in a year, so you could be calling in 100 people every day," Ms. Salam says.
"We can see that this information is beneficial."
But new-hiring reporting can get very costly for employers.
A federal measure to standardize the reporting is tied up in the welfare-reform debate.
The state laws come atop a federal mandate that, effective this year, requires employers to withhold all child-support payments from noncustodial parents' paychecks unless parties to a divorce agree otherwise.
The law has one auto maker cutting 6,000 child-support checks every pay period.
THE MS. FOUNDATION is planning a little something for the boys on its second annual Take Your Daughters to Work Day April 28.
It's offering lesson plans for teachers of boys left in the classroom, explaining research showing girls have lower self-esteem.
Organizers also urge trips to child-care centers to teach boys about "the work of caring." . . .
Microsoft's employee E-mail network for parents, Baby Alias, shares tips on pediatricians, child care and cloth-vs.-paper diapers.
The most controversial question of the moment: Should you let your kids sleep with you?
