It is 26 degrees below zero in the sun.
Vapor rises from the solid slab of ice that is Larry Sutton's hillside driveway.
In 1988 this pine-scented town in the Berkshire Hills was rated the 26th best place to live by Psychology Today magazine.
"That's nice," says Mr. Sutton, bundled up in muffler, down jacket and a deer-hunter's cap.
"Right now I'll settle for any town with traction."
Mr. Sutton, perched atop a snow bank, is scattering bird seed in the driveway -- not to give his feathered friends a nibble, but to give the ground some bite.
As he descends from the mound, Mr. Sutton takes two steps and goes down on his bum.
Reaching into a 50-pound bag of Natural Fruit N' Berry Bird Food, he casts a few more handfuls onto the frozen terrain.
Facing a deep freeze that has turned entire towns into ice rinks -- and brought with it a shortage of salt and sand -- frustrated Northeasterners are hurling an array of odd substances at the ground in a sometimes futile bid for footing.
Supermarkets and hardware stores report a run on cat litter.
Ashes, anti-ice agents from before the days of packaged goods, are making a strong comeback.
The list of antiskid substitutes has been for the most part organic, environmentally correct and limited only by the imagination: fertilizer, seaweed, dirt, fish nets, sawdust, cinders, wood chips and burlap.
"Some of this substitute stuff works, like cat litter and ashes, but other things . . .
I'm not so sure about," says Joe Picard at the Department of Public Works in Worcester, Mass.
"I'm not saying these people are crazy.
In fact, I'd call it Yankee ingenuity."
To some, this isn't a laughing matter.
The National Safety Council in Chicago, which keeps track of accidental deaths, warns that the highest number of casualties occurs in January, when an average of more than 1,000 people die from falls outside the home.
Snow and ice are chief culprits.
"I feel it is the duty of each head of household in the Northeast to provide his family with a roof over their head, food in their belly and good footing in the winter," says Antonio Galli of Port Chester, N.Y.
"Every time I step out of the house these days . . . it's an ice jungle out there."
Spoiled by five years of relatively mild winters, merchants have been caught offguard by arctic conditions.
It has averaged about 20 degrees below normal for this time of year, with new record lows set in many Northeastern cities.
In Lancaster, Pa., people have poured into stores during breaks in the weather to buy up just about everything in garden supplies, including plain old dirt, says John Snyder, garden department manager at Stauffer's of Kissel Hills.
"Dirt must . . . be helping, because we keep running out of stock."
Penni's Supermarket in Marblehead, Mass., has been out of rock salt for two weeks, although cat-litter supplies have been replenished.
Manager Stephen Murphy spared customers the trauma of fighting over the last bag of salt: "I snatched it up myself."
Salt makers assure that the salt is on its way, though impatient retailers like Mr. Murphy say, "it sounds like the proverbial check in the mail."
At Akzo Salt Inc., a unit of Akzo NV of the Netherlands, "we have the salt," says Robert Jones, vice president of marketing for the "highway chemical division" in Clarks Summit, Pa.
The company's salt mines in the U.S. and abroad have been working nonstop, he adds, but "we just can't get it to the stores as quickly."
Mr. Jones says an armada of 20 ships is speeding to the East Coast from South America and the Caribbean with half a million tons of salt.
New Yorkers can ill-afford the wait.
Under city regulations, snow and ice must be removed from sidewalks by merchants and residents within four hours of a snow storm, unless the storm ends later than 9 p.m.
Fines range from $50 to $100.
When the ice is unmeltable -- as has been the case in the past few weeks -- the city's Sanitation Department Action Center recommends strewing ashes, sand, sawdust or cat litter.
Littering laws will not be enforced in the emergency, the department assures.
"In a pinch, use kosher salt," which has larger grains than average table salt, advises Bruce Bertram, technical director for the Salt Institute, an association of salt manufacturers.
What works best, however, is a matter of debate.
At the Park Square Grill in downtown Pittsfield, conversation one recent evening centered on roads so slippery that police aren't chasing speeding motorists, and on what works on sidewalks.
Josh Siguard, a kitchen-tile specialist, likes fertilizer, particularly urea, which occurs naturally in animal urine and is also available in crystallized form.
"It's great for lawns underneath the snow," Mr. Siguard argues between rounds of video trivia games.
Jack Duffy, a friend, likes burlap.
"When I go brrr, I think of burlap," says the pistachio connoisseur, who saves the sacks in which the nuts are sold.
"It's like walking on a Brillo pad."
But the favorite salt substitute seems to be cat litter.
Before selling his Pizza Express shop in Glen Burnie, Md., earlier this month, Ken Clark issued 50-pound bags of cat litter to his drivers, so they could throw it on roads or customers' walks to make deliveries.
"It's good for people in a hurry," he says.
Bird seed, of course, has the unique fringe benefit of feeding "a handful of foolhardy worm-starved birds that haven't migrated south," says Pittsfield's Mr. Sutton.
Joe Logan, who fishes off the StarShip out of Boston, likes seaweed best.
It litters the decks and sides of boats, as he anchors "up and down the Northeastern coast waiting for the ice in the harbors to thaw," says Mr. Logan.
Seaweed is salt-rich, he notes, but "I also lay down my idle nets for extra safety."
If still confused about the various merits of strewn detritus, the winter weary may write away to Dow Chemical Co. for booklets, including "What are the hottest de-icers on the market?" and "Get a Grip on Winter."
Says spokesman Doug Brownfield, "We're in an unprecedented third run this winter."
