It came to me via Federal Express in a slick, black package that looked more like an exotic gift from Sharper Image than what it was: a phone.
But this was no ordinary phone.
It was the Motorola MicroTac Ultra Lite, Classic Gold Edition.
The ultimate cellular phone, guaranteed to keep me tapped in and in touch, anytime and anywhere.
As thick as a pack of cigarettes and maybe an inch taller, this $700 baby boasts 120 memory slots, nine "one-touch turbo dial locations," and not one, but two, user manuals.
So began my reluctant entry into the Age of Wireless.
This sleek little "Star Trek" communicator is merely the crude prelude to a much-hyped future only a few years away.
The manufacturers of this gadgetry are coming on to us with the imagery of tomorrow.
Faxes at the beach.
Calls from the floor of the Grand Canyon.
Compact, flip-down computers on every seat back of every commercial flight, able to zap files and missives to those waiting below.
Just Let Me Tan But in this high-tech, hellbent-for-leather rush to link up and unwire, the industry seems to have overlooked those of us who just want to be left alone.
I don't want to get a fax at the beach, thank you; sunscreen and pulp fiction will be fine.
Should I ever explore the wonders of the Grand Canyon, only to find you reaching into your backpack to answer the chirp of your Ultra Lite, please pray that I'm not carrying a handgun.
As for a flip-down computer in every seat-back tray, perish the thought that a passenger might prefer to take a little break and read a good book.
We wireline Luddites, millions of us, already grimace every time we see some self-important pedestrian pacing down the street while blabbing into his or her cellular.
We burn to interrupt and ask: "Just what is so damned important?
Like you can't wait to get back to the office?"
Irene Nesbit of Nesbit Systems Inc. in Princeton, N.J., a software designer, bought a cellular phone, but she refuses to carry it out of her office.
"My goal is not to tote," she says.
When she spots a cellular stroller, "I look at them and want to be a bad person and yell `Brain cancer!
Brain cancer!'"
Why would anyone want to be in touch, anywhere and anytime, all the time?
Our jobs just aren't critical enough, of such life-and-death significance, as to demand it.
Something must be said for the importance of loafing.
Maybe a little downtime is actually a boon to productivity, an efficient way of letting our engines cool so they can run better when it's time to turn on again.
In this incessant clatter of chatter and faxing and beeping, where is the time for thinking?
Or doodling?
A certain self-importance and vanity, and a sliver of insecurity, are at the heart of this unwired desire.
It is as if the company will fall apart without us.
(It won't.)
Or the boss will realize we weren't all that necessary, after all.
(He, or she, has already figured that out.)
Or, in the Charlie Brown theorem, the fear arises that if you don't go wireless, everyone else will be gabbing on their cellular phones -- about you.
Yet, and this is the scary part, some of the resisters among us wrestle daily with a deep-seated urge to give these gizmos a try.
We hate wireless, and yet we find ourselves starting to want one.
That subconscious clash plays out at lunch with two friends.
Dining at Sfuzzi in the airy Winter Garden of New York's World Financial Center, the three of us fix hard on a chubby, wispy-haired guy waiting to be seated.
He is talking intently into a bulky cell-phone, an ancient model.
"I hate people who use cellular phones," one pal vents.
"Most people in America hate people who use cellular phones."
"Yeah," responds the other, "but I secretly want one."
And there you have it.
We worry about getting left behind.
This venture into the ether threatens to turn into a replay of disco in the 1970s: Everyone, it seemed, knew how to do "the hustle" except me, even after I bought a pair of platform shoes.
Never did catch up.
And so, we have started poring over all those newspaper ads blaring prices below $75 for the latest pocket phone.
On trips to the supermarket to pick up a carton of milk, we wish we could make an instant call back home to ask what else we were supposed to get.
Wireless temptations abound all around us, and the lure will grow as the next generation of acronymic sirens -- PCS (personal communications services) and PDAs (personal digital assistants) -- takes hold.
The other day in New York, I entered a taxicab and was startled to see a credit-card cellular phone with an LCD screen that instructed: "PICK UP."
Now I'm trying out my Ultra Lite, on loan from Motorola Inc.
I carry it everywhere, just itching to have someone, anyone, call me on it.
This is, after all, research.
(It's also expensive: My first bill runs $131.40 for 30 minutes of conversation and start-up costs.)
Soon I realize: If I relent and embrace this untethered technology, a whole new set of fears comes into play.
What if no one wants to call me, or needs to call me?
What if I just don't rate in the ranks of the anytime-accessed?
The dirty little secret of the pocket-phone crowd, you see, is the existence of an unwritten pecking order.
The elite members of the cellular sect never leave their phones on, for goodness' sake; then anyone would be able to call them.
They carry their phones blissfully turned off, so they can reach anyone they like, whenever the fancy strikes them.
The low end of the pecking order takes the opposite tack: Their phones are always on, so the boss can reach them.
So, if the wireless world evolves in the way much of the rest of life does, this will get to be a little like high school, when the cool kids, who smoked Marlboros on the front steps, left the rest of us feeling inadequate and longing to sit next to them.
Perhaps you've already had a cellular snub.
My previous boss was a fervent wireless convert.
She used her flip-set phone whenever she got the chance.
Every morning, she would place a scratchy, humming call to me in the office as she sped down the highway in a cab on her way to work.
Usually, it was to let me know she'd be arriving in 10 minutes.
This division between the "accessors" and the accessed will grow as wireless advances.
In a lab at Bellcore, the research arm of the regional Bell companies, earnest engineers in neckties are experimenting with a phone system that tracks your every move.
It knows when you're at home in the morning, so it can send calls to the phone in your living room.
When you climb into your car, the system knows to forward calls to your car phone.
When you park and get out, the system senses it and routes calls to your breast pocket.
When you walk into work, the system sends calls to where they should have been going in the first place: your office.
It is kind of cool that the technology exists to do all this.
All too often in high-tech, however, vendors thrust new powers upon us simply because they can, without first figuring out whether anyone wants to or needs to.
The soldiers in this wireless revolution are oblivious to such cranky observations.
A reporter friend in Los Angeles defends her cellular phone: "It's a tool.
You can't be a hard-news reporter out here and not have one.
I don't use it to make nail appointments!"
At Motorola, in Schaumburg, Ill., senior vice president Merle L. Gilmore is a prideful wireless warrior.
His family uses four cellular phones, he takes walkie-talkies on ski trips, and his belt holds a nifty alphanumeric pager that is almost never off.
"When I'm out and don't have it with me, it's like I could miss an opportunity," he says, proudly fingering his beeper.
"A lot of people thought wireless is a controlling device.
It really is a freedom device."
And yet there is something compelling about my little Ultra Lite as it reclines in its charger like a baby in a cradle.
I pick it up and flip open the bottom.
Press the PWR button, and the keypad is bathed in green light and emits an electronic burp that is kind of cute, actually.
Dial up my old office phone right next to me, the phone rings, and I carry on a conversation from one ear to the other.
And then it occurs to me: There is so much I haven't yet tried.
The 90-page manual holds many mysteries: how to recall the last 10 numbers dialed, or store a 32-digit number under "BOB" and call him with the touch of one button.
You can even "arm" this phone with an alarm.
If someone tries to use it without entering your secret code, it will automatically dial your regular number to let you know it has been stolen.
Alas, Motorola says the trial is over, the Ultra Lite must be returned.
But I'm pushing to keep it longer.
It's not as if I like it, or anything.
I just need to do some more research.
Call me whenever.
We'll talk.
Mr. Kneale is a news editor in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.
