The final unraveling of Bell Atlantic Corp.'s breathtaking bid to acquire cable titan Tele-Communications Inc. began with Bell Atlantic Chairman Raymond W. Smith poised in front of a television set on Tuesday morning.
He was watching CSPAN.
On-screen, the Federal Communications Commission had just imposed a new 7% reduction in cable subscriber rates.
Mr. Smith, watching from Bell Atlantic offices in Arlington, Va., shrugged, left the room -- and set a numbers-crunching team to work to come up with a new and lower price to offer for TCI.
The next day, in a law office in New York, Mr. Smith and three lieutenants faced off against TCI Chief Executive John C. Malone and four other TCI men, who were braced to resist.
By midafternoon, the deal was dead.
And so went one of the largest flameouts in the history of corporate mergers.
Ultimately, the sharply divergent cultures of Bell Atlantic and TCI -- and the stubborn convictions of their respective chief executives -- worked against the would-be partners in trying to fashion a final deal.
The gap proved too difficult to bridge as the deal got snagged on Bell Atlantic's sliding stock price and on concerns over TCI's future cash flow.
In the wake of the collapse, the industry's hellbent rush to wire up America has lost the two champions that were ready to spend the most money, the most quickly, to serve up new interactive services -- some $15 billion to $20 billion over five years.
Bell Atlantic and TCI now are adrift and separated, despite their avowed belief that they simply couldn't enter the multimedia future without one another's help.
And a future that had envisioned titanic combinations of phone companies and cable giants may get rewritten, creating what one TCI adviser calls "a new paradigm."
Instead of gobbling up entire companies, rivals may seek smaller-scale partnerships and technology-sharing pacts along the lines of U S West Inc.'s 25% stake in Time Warner Inc.'s entertainment business.
Larger deals won't disappear altogether, but the frenzy to do them will almost certainly abate.
Yet Bell Atlantic's Mr. Smith, for one, had dismissed milder approaches as inefficient and less likely to work when he mounted the TCI deal four months ago.
Publicly, both companies managed to blame the FCC and Washington -- Bell Atlantic in polite tones, TCI in blunter, blistering criticism -- for their own failure to complete what could have been a far-reaching deal.
Messrs. Smith and Malone say that the parting was friendly, that they admire and like one another, and that they look forward to pursuing joint ventures together, albeit nothing approaching their original hopes.
Both companies are trying to keep their gaze focused on the future.
The phone giant, with its prodigious $5 billion in annual cash flow, says it will proceed with plans to deliver home shopping, movies on demand and other interactive services to 1.2 million homes by the end of next year, and to eight million homes by the year 2000.
It also wants to pursue programming ventures with TCI's Liberty Media, which owns stakes in cable channels including CNN and TNT; it may, it says, seek separate partners in various markets rather than one grand ally.
And at TCI, potential new deals are expected to be a pressing topic at a board meeting today.
Mr. Malone has already intensified his pursuit of a Hollywood studio.
One prospect: Sony Corp., which is peddling at least part of its cash-draining entertainment operations, which include the Columbia Pictures and TriStar studios.
Mr. Malone has also approached the MCA unit of Matsushita Electric Industrial.
"We're already on to the next deal," says one TCI man.
In a conference call yesterday, a buoyant Mr. Malone raised the prospect that TCI might join with an existing partner, QVC Inc. chief Barry Diller, in pursuit of a new deal, now that QVC has lost its fight for Paramount Communications Inc.
Added Mr. Malone: "We'll come out of this bigger and better and stronger than ever."
Despite those rosy outlooks, some outsiders ask how two power players could let what some people see as a short-term blip derail such boldly ambitious plans to shape the interactive future.
The business world had been stunned by the notion that Bell Atlantic, a staid and heavily regulated product of the sclerotic Bell System, could dare to acquire TCI, paragon of the bare-knuckle, freewheeling world of cable entrepreneurs.
Mr. Smith had prided himself on his efforts to free his company from the cautious and conservative ways of the past.
But old ways die hard.
When the two CEOs took the podium Oct. 13 to announce their pairing, Mr. Malone couldn't resist citing Bell Atlantic's "stuck-in-the-mud conservatism" and his hope of transforming it into "a more outspoken, more entrepreneurial enterprise."
According to a person in the TCI camp, Mr. Malone had continuing concerns about the differences in corporate culture.
He even drew up a list of 23 questions articulating his concerns.
Did Bell Atlantic have the backbone to break its tradition of paying annual dividends?
Did it have the stomach for high-growth ventures?
Was it committed to leading the way into the interactive era, or was it just giving lip service to the idea?
After the deal was announced, Mr. Malone dispatched aides to grill senior Bell Atlantic executives, who were also asked to name the five most effective top managers and explain why.
The survey was hardly encouraging, according to one person familiar with the exercise.
In many instances, according to this person, Bell Atlantic executives could name no more than three highly-effective managers.
The bottom-line assessment: Change wouldn't come early, or easy.
The culture clash became evident soon after the deal was announced.
The agreement at first blush seemed startlingly simple, even elegant.
Bell Atlantic would issue new nondividend shares to pay $11.8 billion for most TCI cable systems, which reach into one-quarter of the nation's 60 million cable homes.
Later, the Baby Bell would pay more stock, worth upward of $4 billion, to acquire Liberty Media's enviable stable of cable channel stakes.
Bell Atlantic would assume the two cable firms' combined debt of almost $10 billion.
But the dickering started within days of the deal's debut.
"There was tension over pricing almost from the start," says one person in the TCI camp.
Mr. Malone, known for renegotiating even after terms have been reached, began pushing for new terms almost immediately, as Bell Atlantic stock slid.
The stock had surged to a high of $67.625 the day after the TCI deal was unveiled, well above the $54 level Bell Atlantic had guaranteed to TCI.
But the shares started slipping a day later and dropped below the $60 mark by Dec. 31, never to rebound.
(Yesterday, Bell Atlantic shares rose $1.75 to close at $54.50 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, while TCI shares dropped $1.875 in Nasdaq trading to $22.375.)
The slippage made it all the more difficult to put a hard value on the new nondividend shares that Bell Atlantic would use to pay for TCI.
The shares would probably trade below the price of regular Bell Atlantic stock, since they would lack the $2.68-a-year dividend -- but TCI and Bell Atlantic couldn't agree on just how much lower.
TCI argued the new shares would trade at a deep discount, and therefore Bell Atlantic should have to pay out even more than the 220 million shares it had already pledged for the cable systems.
But Bell Atlantic wasn't eager to flood the market with still more shares; it already expected the initial phase of the deal to dilute its earnings per share by upward of 35% for a few years.
Draining earnings even more might anger institutional investors and other shareholders, and invite unkind scrutiny from consumer advocates and federal and state regulators.
The rough-hewn frontiersmen at TCI were unaccustomed to losing any sleep over such sensitivities, after years of seeing their company vilified in Washington as a monopolist and corporate heavy.
Entrepreneurs who had built TCI through brassy tactics and with a prescient eye on the future, Mr. Malone and TCI founder Robert Magness embraced the long-term view and an abiding belief that they could build value.
The TCI men, therefore, were less than entirely sympathetic when their new partners at Bell Atlantic began worrying about the cable company's cloudy near-term outlook for cash flow.
Wall Street had some concerns, too.
TCI's stock price dropped 26% from the time the Bell Atlantic deal was announced to the day it was scuttled; while that was partly due to Bell Atlantic's own slide, the TCI drop was even sharper than the 21% decline in Bell Atlantic shares.
By the time of the final confrontation this week, the two sides had renegotiated the deal three times.
Always, Bell Atlantic's first concern in evaluating each package was how it would play among its various constituencies in Washington, on the state level and on Wall Street.
Bell Atlantic loathed the idea of paying too high a price for TCI in a milieu of uncertainty in Washington over how much cash cable systems would be allowed to generate.
TCI had a contrary concern: Should Malone & Co. sell out at a lower price than they deserved during that same short-term period of uncertainty?
Still, the two partners were able to arrive at their fourth and, they hoped, final accord on Monday of this week.
Through a complex array of formulas that spanned 50 pages, they agreed that Bell Atlantic would pay about 0.6 share of new nondividend stock for each share of the combined TCI-Liberty, down from an indicated ratio of 0.65 initially.
That would total 372 million shares of new stock -- for everything.
At the $53-a-share rate that Bell Atlantic's regular stock had closed at last Friday, that would total $19.7 billion, plus the assumption of $9.6 billion in debt.
Put another way, and including debt, the entire price would come in at about $2,000 per TCI cable subscriber, down from $2,350 originally, one knowledgeable executive says.
"We had gotten pretty close," says Lawrence T. Babbio Jr., one of Bell Atlantic's chief negotiators and the chairman of its international businesses.
But the two sides left open the opportunity to negotiate further after the FCC decision came out the next day, he says.
(The TCI camp disagrees, saying they thought the price was firm and that Bell Atlantic had pledged to absorb any impact of an FCC ruling).
On Tuesday, Mr. Smith and his Bell Atlantic team watched the FCC proceedings live on TV.
He had hoped the FCC would only freeze cable rates rather than impose a new cut.
When he saw the 7% reduction imposed, "I knew it was going to put us in a difficult situation," he said in an interview yesterday.
Even TCI executives projected the new rate cut would reduce their company's cash flow -- by 15%, or about $144 million a year.
That might seem less than devastating given that the combined companies would have had annual revenue of $17 billion and cash flow of $6 billion.
But the lower rate would have reduced the combined companies' ability to raise new capital by at least $900 million a year, at a time when they were planning to spend billions on the elusive information highway.
Bell Atlantic executives were further spooked by other elements of the FCC action, such as linking future cable-rate increases to inflation and creating new levels of oversight that hadn't existed before.
"This was not going to be just a one-time reduction in rates," says Bell Atlantic's Mr. Babbio.
Mr. Malone had put in a call to Mr. Smith immediately after the FCC action appeared on C-SPAN; when they finally talked hours later, the two agreed to meet the next day in New York.
Neither said so, but they both knew the deal was on shaky ground.
At this point the two sides diverge in their account of events, and the disagreements raise questions about their repeated claims that they have split amicably.
Mr. Smith's version: The Malone team arrived at the meeting -- held at the offices of Bell Atlantic's legal advisers, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom -- and Mr. Malone soon launched into a discourse on why the deal now wouldn't work.
Mr. Malone told the Bell Atlantic executives, "You wouldn't be in your right mind if you accepted the current terms" that the companies had set on Monday, Mr. Smith says.
But, he says, Mr. Malone added that "I cannot budge a nickel."
Mr. Smith says that -- still thinking he could salvage the deal -- he countered with other ways they might be able to work the numbers.
He says he gave up when Mr. Malone's lawyer pulled out an already-prepared press release announcing the deal's collapse.
"At that point, it was pretty clear that John was serious," Mr. Smith says.
The TCI version of events is that it was Mr. Smith who opened with a litany of reasons why the deal in its current version wouldn't work.
Mr. Malone took the floor only after becoming convinced that Bell Atlantic was refusing to stick to the previous day's agreement, his supporters say.
As for the press release, one person on the TCI side says it hadn't been drafted for the Wednesday meeting -- it was written weeks earlier, when TCI executives thought the deal was in danger of collapsing as the parties missed the first of three deadlines.
"Everyone, in essence, had blessed the deal," says the high-level member of the TCI camp.
But "when the FCC announcement came out, Bell Atlantic executives were frightened out of their minds."
Mr. Malone was almost as pointed in a conference call with the news media yesterday.
He softened some of his previous criticism of the FCC action and said the bottom line on why the deal didn't go through was that Mr. Smith was "unwilling to go forward with a price that was on the table three days ago.
We were unwilling to see any reduction in the price."
And the TCI chief executive said his company isn't typically rattled by measures the FCC takes -- unlike some of the "Chicken Littles" out there.
Mr. Malone further took a shot at the seven Baby Bells as a group: Washington may view TCI as a monopolist, he said, "but these guys have been monopolists for 120 years."
John J. Keller contributed to this article.
