Pressure is building on Capitol Hill to regulate hedge funds.
In recent days, House Energy and Commerce Chairman John Dingell, (D., Mich.), House Banking Committee Chairman Henry Gonzalez (D., Texas) and House Telecommunications and Finance Subcommittee Chairman Edward Markey (D., Mass.) have called for closer regulatory oversight of hedge funds, private investment partnerships that typically are heavily leveraged and often make big financial bets in the markets.
Mr. Gonzalez, arguing that banks should provide more information on their exposure to hedge funds, said the Banking Committee will hold an April 13 hearing to which key regulators and hedge-fund operator George Soros have been invited.
He said hedge funds "deserve extra scrutiny because their massive clout, fueled by large credit lines from banks, is used for speculative purposes."
Reps. Dingell and Markey, citing new concerns about the trading activities of hedge funds and their ability to roil global financial markets, recently asked the Treasury to adopt a rule requiring hedge funds to report their large positions in U.S. government securities upon request.
They also urged the Securities and Exchange Commission to tell Congress if the registration and reporting requirements of federal securities laws should cover hedge funds.
Hedge funds have had losses of hundreds of millions of dollars in foreign-exchange markets in recent months.
SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt has said he wants more information on their activities.
Mr. Levitt has been asked to testify at next month's Banking Committee hearing, along with Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve Board chairman; Eugene Ludwig, the comptroller of the currency, and Barbara Holum, the acting chief of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
"Before we get to the crisis stage with hedge funds, all the regulators should develop the means to better understand the risks posed by hedge funds.
This can only be done by increased disclosure," Mr. Gonzalez added.
A 1992 joint Treasury-SEC-Federal Reserve report on the government bond market cautioned that "the sheer size of the positions taken by the hedge funds raises concerns about systemic risks that these funds may introduce into the financial markets."
