I take extreme exception to the nasty-minded comments made by Gloria Steinem concerning the behavior of Texas Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison in your Dec. 14 page-one article "Other Nations Elect Women to Lead Them, So Why Doesn't U.S.?"
While Sen. Hutchison's political philosophy and her legal difficulties tend to give one pause, it is more alarming to watch Ms. Steinem, a leader of so-called "strong" and "independent" women, fulminating in a most undignified fashion about another strong and independent woman whose only fault, other than those mentioned above, is of having committed the unpardonable sin (from a feminist perspective) of having the audacity to possess a different point of view from that of Ms. Steinem and her devotees.
But if one examines Ms. Steinem's malicious depiction of Sen. Hutchison as "a female impersonator" more closely for its semantic implications, a not-especially-original aspect becomes far more evident, namely the traces of a far earlier -- and more pernicious -- mindset shared by those who participated in the struggle for women's suffrage: the putative moral superiority of women, with men as base, sinful creatures ready to undermine all the hard work of women at the first opportunity.
Allowing women to vote, so they said, would serve as a tempering influence upon male evil (a rather quaint notion severely undercut by the tendency, until very recently, toward very similar voting patterns in both men and women).
Ms. Steinem and her movement are the carriers of this feminist argument into the present day; in suggesting that there is something sinister in presumed political cross-dressing, Ms. Steinem perpetuates the very myths about separate and appropriate spheres of behaviour based solely upon gender that her ideological enemies might use against her.
More outrageous, however, is Ms. Steinem's belief that women cannot trust one of their own who "looks like us and thinks like them."
What can one make of this statement, coming as it does from a woman who, by her own admission, spent five years dating a man who treated her badly and who would not end the relationship because she did not want to exist without a man in her life, while simultaneously acting as the spokeswoman for an organization dedicated to the liberation of women?
By all accounts, Sen. Hutchison appears to have her personal life under control; at the very least, her ideology, unlike that of Ms. Steinem, is more or less consistent.
If Ms. Steinem wants to know why many women have recently been rejecting the label of "feminism" while still retaining the desire to work hard and to achieve success by "masculine" standards, one might respectfully suggest that the redoubtable Ms. Steinem examine the not-so-subtle stench of hypocrisy that envelops her movement.
The suggestion that Clinton's focus on domestic concerns may mean that women can overcome the commander in chief syndrome is nonsense.
And the debunking of the parliamentary system explanation of why nations (including some that treat women as chattel) have chosen women as chief executives is wishful thinking.
The final issue is not whether women can be effective mayors, governors or legislators; it is whether they can serve as commander in chief.
Can a woman send other women's sons to die in battle?
Do a whole lot of ordinary voters think so?
In a parliamentary system the woman selected is personally known to those who choose her.
Did any member of the British Parliament doubt that Maggie Thatcher could send other women's sons out to die?
I think not.
In a presidential system where the commander in chief is chosen by ordinary folk in the beauty shops and barbershops, in the bridge clubs and bars, there is great (though mistaken) doubt.
When a woman is chosen president it will be a woman who, unlike Bill Clinton, is respected for her foreign not her domestic policy position.
Judith A. Best
Cortland, N.Y.
