The nation's stockbrokers earned average 1993 paychecks of a record $128,000, up 10% from 1992, thanks to a surge in trading activity by small investors.
But not all brokers are happy: Some will get a smaller slice of commissions than before, as some firms cut payouts.
Unlike salaries in most of corporate America, the compensation of many brokers is tied directly to the trading commissions they generate.
Brokers get to keep a portion of such commissions, typically 25% to 45%, depending on the overall volume of business they generate and the types of products they sell.
Consider the situation of some top brokers at PaineWebber Group Inc.
Those who generated 1993 commissions of, say, $450,000 got to keep 42% of that amount, or about $189,000.
But this year, PaineWebber is trimming the big brokers' commissions to 40%.
PaineWebbber says the small cut in compensation for some brokers stems from a new compensation plan that funnels the same sales commission to brokers, no matter whether they sell internal, or "proprietary" investments, or outside products.
Previously, PaineWebber had paid slightly more for proprietary products than for external investments.
"My brokers on average took a maximum two percentage point cut in pay" because of the new compensation system, says Joseph Grano, PaineWebber's brokerage chief.
"No one likes to see a cut in pay," Mr. Grano adds, "but brokers are very fairly compensated."
The overall surge in brokers' paychecks comes as the Securities and Exchange Commission intensifies its pressure on securities firms to change brokers' compensation, saying that the current system of commissions prods some brokers to cheat customers.
The SEC is concerned that paying brokers based on how much in commissions they drum up encourages them to sell more and more, without regard to how suitable the trades are to client needs.
Recently, some brokerage firms have moved more toward paying brokers for the client money they bring in to the firm and how well clients do, and less on the amount of trades they generate.
This often is done by arranging "wrap accounts," directing clients' money for an annual fee to a handful of professional portfolio managers.
The upshot: Brokers earn more if their clients do, too.
And they lose if such accounts don't fare well.
Johnny Pribyl, a PaineWebber broker in Oklahoma City, generated half his business last year from wrap accounts, up from 30% several years ago.
"All we have to do to make more money is make the clients' accounts grow," Mr. Pribyl says.
What has fueled the recent boom in broker compensation is frenzied trading activity by small investors, particularly through mutual funds.
Net sales of stock mutual funds totaled a record $134.95 billion in 1993, a 67% jump from $80.73 billion in 1992, the prior record, according to the Investment Company Institute, a trade group.
The nation's 91,000 brokers will be in even more demand during the next few years, some analysts say.
This is partly because employees increasingly are being required to make their own investment decisions regarding their retirement portfolios; in the past, many employers filled that role.
"As more people are in charge of their retirement funds, they will need financial advice more than ever," says Jeffrey Schaefer, research director at the Securities Industry Association, a trade group.
Meanwhile, brokers' 1993 median compensation, the level that separates the top and bottom halves of brokers' production, was a record $86,050, according to Wall Street executives.
That's 10% higher than 1992's median figure of $78,227, but 33% below 1993's average compensation.
The gap is partly due to a minority of superstar brokers who each generated commissions of $1 million or more; these heavy hitters boosted average pay levels.
"The million-dollar producers aren't as rare as they used to be," says Dan Jamieson, editor of Registered Representative magazine, a trade journal.
"But the average broker in the average office often makes $50,000, $60,000, $70,000 -- they're not bringing home half a million bucks," he says.
