Small businesses are increasingly turning to employee-leasing companies that hire the client's employees, provide them with health insurance and other benefits, and then lease the employees back to the client.
But there's a problem: As many as 500,000 such workers may not have the health-care coverage they think they have.
The potential crisis has come to light following a federal investigation into the business practices of Hazar Inc. -- a San Francisco company that claims to be the nation's largest employee-leasing concern -- and other leasing companies.
Last month, agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the U.S. Department of Labor raided the offices of Hazar, which until a few weeks ago was run by a convicted felon.
In a search warrant request filed in federal court in San Francisco, the FBI alleges that Hazar engaged in criminal fraud and money laundering as it embezzled large sums from the benefit plans of at least 6,000 workers.
The company denies the allegations and says it is cooperating fully with investigators.
Hazar's president, Bert Danzig, says the company has hired an outside auditor to examine its books.
He attributes any problems to "bad business decisions" made by Hazar's former controlling shareholder, Robert "Skip" Anderson.
Mr. Anderson and his attorneys didn't return repeated phone calls.
Despite the potential for problems, many leasing concerns deliver a much-needed service.
"There are many legitimate employee-leasing companies, and there are good reasons small employers use them," says Charles Lerner, director of enforcement for the Labor Department's pension and welfare benefits administration.
"The problem is that there's a growing number of scams because of the crisis in health care {provision} facing small businesses."
Small businesses pinched by health care and worker's compensation demands have become easy prey for leasing concerns that sell employees bogus insurance, according to Mr. Lerner and other law enforcement officials.
Employee-leasing started to catch on in the mid-1980s, when the cost of health and workers' compensation insurance skyrocketed.
By pooling a large number of employees from many small companies, employee-leasing concerns have the leverage to get discounts.
According to the National Association of Professional Employer Organizations, a trade group based in Arlington, Va., there were 2,178 employee-leasing concerns managing health insurance and other benefits for 1.6 million workers last year, compared with 98 such companies managing about 10,000 workers in 1984.
Hazar was founded two years ago by Mr. Anderson and others to capitalize on this demand.
Before founding Hazar, Mr. Anderson had already tested the waters.
Between 1989 and 1990, he ran UMC Inc., a leasing business based in Huntington Beach, Calif.
And from 1990 to 1991, he was an executive with American Workforce Inc., an Addison, Texas, leasing company that collapsed in 1991.
In a criminal case filed last year in federal court in Dallas, the Texas attorney general's office alleged that Mr. Anderson and others associated with American Workforce participated in defrauding 5,000 workers of $27 million in health and retirement benefits.
The suit, which seeks $250 million in damages, is pending.
Mr. Anderson's practices at UMC Inc., which the U.S. attorney's office describes as an "inactive" business, resulted in a criminal indictment for mail fraud last December in federal court in Los Angeles.
According to charges filed there by the U.S. attorney's office, Mr. Anderson tried to get lower rates from an insurance carrier by lying about the size and safety record of UMC's work force.
That case is also pending.
California's Employment Development Department has also filed five liens against UMC for $324,000 in unpaid employment taxes.
None of these instances are Mr. Anderson's first brush with the law.
He pleaded guilty to bankruptcy fraud charges in federal court in San Francisco and was sentenced to two years in prison and five years' probation in 1989.
He served only six months of the sentence, which ran concurrently with a state sentence for grand theft.
The mishaps didn't prevent Mr. Anderson from building up Hazar quickly.
Until late last month, the company was owned by Airlite Inc., a Huntington Beach, Calif., company controlled by Mr. Anderson and his attorney, Donald Jorgensen.
(Mr. Jorgensen declines to comment.)
By the time investigators raided Hazar's offices last month, the company had 24 subsidiaries representing 30,000 employees from 1,700 companies nationwide.
Hazar's Mr. Danzig says the operation had revenue of $350 million last year.
According to the FBI's search warrant, however, Hazar's "officers, employees and subsidiaries, and others as yet unknown, unlawfully diverted moneys from client funds and insurance premiums over which Hazar had control."
The search warrant doesn't specify how much money was allegedly stolen, but Mr. Danzig says investigators claim it is "millions."
Mr. Danzig insists that Hazar's alleged problems are nothing more than expense-account abuses and reflections of an overly ambitious acquisition spree by Mr. Anderson, who didn't have an official title at the company.
Mr. Anderson hired Mr. Danzig as Hazar's president a year ago.
Mr. Danzig says he and other company executives weren't aware of Mr. Anderson's past until late last summer.
He says they became eager to buy Mr. Anderson out -- particularly after U.S. Postal Inspection Service agents led him out of Hazar's offices in handcuffs last December -- but were unable to persuade him to leave.
Mr. Danzig says last month's raid finally persuaded Mr. Anderson to go.
At the end of February he sold his 70% stake in Hazar to Mr. Danzig and others for what Mr. Danzig describes as "less than" $7.5 million.
Mr. Danzig says he now owns about 80% of Hazar's stock and that rumors Hazar may collapse are unfounded.
Hazar's alleged improprieties may be just the start.
Operation Goodhands, a federal investigation of insurance fraud begun a year and a half ago, has identified at least 30 companies, primarily in the employee-leasing business, that may have been operating illegally.
"There may be as many as half a million people who don't have the health insurance they believe they have," says Daniel Wozniak, a supervisory investigator with the FBI.
The possibility that so many workers may be unable to get the medical attention they need is causing employee-leasing operators to call for better supervision.
"We have a lot of bad actors out there in this industry," says Timothy Dillon, president of Nations Personnel Inc., a Dallas-based leasing concern.
"We have such a good service to offer the businessman that I would rather be regulated and have a microscope on our business than forgo providing the service."
