A growing sentiment of global cynicism toward politics and politicians has caused some to wonder lately about the strength of democratic systems.
Voters some months back in Japan, and now in Italy, have answered those worries by voting to throw the rascals out.
Silvio Berlusconi and his Freedom Alliance just won big in Italy's parliamentary election.
Mr. Berlusconi and his followers and advisers from the new Forza Italia party earned their win with truly fresh ideas for governing Italy, something voters obviously found appealing.
For Italy, the reform proposals that Mr. Berlusconi ran on are little short of revolutionary.
That is no doubt partly because Mr. Berlusconi had the advice of some first-rate thinkers, such as economist Antonio Martino.
If adopted, they will truly change Italy for the better.
Let's look at some of them.
Mr. Berlusconi promised to overhaul completely what must be one of the world's most grasping and invasive tax systems, so greedy that it makes cheating seem honorable.
Mr. Berlusconi would reduce the number of taxes Italians pay to 20 from 200 and cut the top income tax rate to 33% from 50%, with the explicit goal of reducing tax evasion by the wealthy.
The U.S. experience shows that when top rates are cut, the wealthy provide a larger, not smaller, share of revenues.
The state medical care system -- corrupt, broken down and bureaucracy-ridden -- would undergo privatization.
The poor will get vouchers to cover their medical costs.
The left promised to continue privatizing Italian industry, but voters correctly doubted their sincerity.
Mr. Berlusconi is far more likely to tackle the state's industrial octopi.
To do this is important not just to introduce more competition and efficiency, but also to destroy a major source of political patronage that helped keep the old system entrenched for 45 years.
In short, Mr. Berlusconi has proposed to reduce the all-pervasive power the Italian political class has acquired through the state's control over much of the country's economic life.
This too-large state power fed corruption (another global phenomenon of our time) until Italians finally got disgusted and voted in the new electoral law that produced this outcome.
Mr. Berlusconi's coalition will have a strong majority in the Chamber of Deputies.
It will fall just short of voting control in the Senate, raising concerns that forming a government could be difficult.
The very important question of whether Italians regain some faith in their political system will rest on the shoulders of Mr. Berlusconi and his coalition allies.
One partner, the Northern League's Umberto Bossi, didn't fare much better than the left.
The other, the National Alliance's Gianfranco Fini, did better than expected.
But if both want to preserve some future for themselves in Italian politics they had better take a close look at the policies Mr. Berlusconi is espousing.
Some of Mr. Berlusconi's critics have pointed out that he himself had important political connections while he was building his vast wealth.
Bettino Craxi, the former Socialist premier now under investigation for fraud, was one of them.
But if Italians hold Mr. Berlusconi to his promise to dismantle much of the great apparatus of state, it will become harder for him or any of his successors to construct such a rotten edifice.
Italy's voters have given Mr. Berlusconi a historic opportunity.
We hope he and his partners seize it.
