Motorola Inc. plans to announce next month the first personal communicator with the built-in ability to send data over a digital wireless network.
The company is competing with Apple Computer Inc., American Telephone & Telegraph Co., Sony Corp. and many other computer and consumer-electronics companies for a dominant position in the emerging market for hand-held communicators.
Market researchers assert that market will grow at about the same rate as or faster than cellular phones, which were introduced 10 years ago and now have 15 million users in the U.S.
Robert Growney, chief of Motorola's wireless data division, said in an interview that the new product, called the Envoy, will have a built-in modem to send data both over telephone lines and over the Ardis data network, which is jointly owned by Motorola and International Business Machines Corp.
Ardis provides wireless data messaging in all major metropolitan areas.
Mr. Growney said the product would be announced at a mobile-computing conference on March 7, and shipped early in the second half of the year.
Wireless messaging is considered the most compelling early use to which personal communicators will be put.
"Our device is going to be different" from the much maligned Apple Newton and AT&T's unsuccessful Eo communicator, Mr. Growney said.
"The product is small, lightweight, doesn't use much in the way of batteries and has integrated wireless communications."
He said Motorola, based in Schaumburg, Ill., planned to develop future models with a wireless modem that would work with an Ardis rival, Ram Mobile Data, and with emerging wireless networks, such as cellular digital packet data, which is being pushed by McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., Kirkland, Wash.
Ram Mobile is a joint venture between BellSouth Corp. and Ram Broadcasting Corp.
Mr. Growney said the price of the Envoy hasn't yet been determined, adding that "we are going to have more communications than competitors, but I'm very sensitive to making a market.
The price is going to be attractive."
Sony plans to launch a personal communicator this summer that can communicate over telephone lines, but won't have a built-in wireless modem.
That model is expected to be priced at about $1,000 or so.
