A recent U.S.-Japan cellular-telephone agreement has U.S. officials convinced they've hit on a model for other trade disputes.
But Japanese officials, now that the deal has been struck, are beginning to grouse that the Americans are overstating its significance.
They contend the cellular arrangement is a one-shot agreement that's unlikely to be repeated.
"I don't think the agreement can be a model for other industries" such as autos and auto parts, said one Japanese government official.
In the cellular-phone agreement reached on Saturday, Japan agreed to take measures designed to improve Motorola Inc.'s access to a key Japanese telephone market.
U.S. officials have touted the deal as a prime example of their "results-oriented" trade policy, noting the exceptional detail with which the plan spells out actions Japan must take.
Equally important, in the view of both U.S. and Motorola officials, was the personal involvement of U.S. Ambassador Walter Mondale and high-level Japanese politicians, including Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and Ichiro Ozawa, a powerful legislator in Japan's ruling coalition.
Once the U.S. threatened sanctions in the case on Feb. 15, Mr. Mondale met several times with Japanese politicians in order to jump-start the previously stalled negotiations.
"Given Ambassador Mondale's prestige in Japan, getting him involved was really critical," said Robert Orr, Motorola's Tokyo director of government relations.
"Without his involvement, we wouldn't have gotten what we got, and the process wouldn't have been accelerated as it was."
At a news conference yesterday, Mr. Mondale said the U.S. could apply several lessons from the cellular negotiations in the stalled U.S.-Japan "framework" talks, which fell apart in mid-February.
For instance, he stressed the importance of involving high Japanese officials who could instruct bureaucrats "to get it done."
Mr. Mondale also suggested the U.S. would continue to pursue carefully defined agreements that "can't be finessed."
"We sat down and sought to reach a practical agreement that worked," he said.
"There was a refreshing absence of sterile debating."
Some Japanese officials Monday, however, were insisting that such U.S. tactics won't work again.
The Japanese government was able to settle the cellular case easily because it was simply a matter of correcting government regulations, said Noboru Hatakeyama, a former vice minister at the Ministry of International Trade and Industry.
The resolution of the cellular issue "has no bearing on trade disputes involving autos or auto parts," Mr. Hatakeyama said.
"One is a regulatory matter, while the other is a nonregulatory matter best left to the private sector."
Still, there are signs that Japanese officials might be laying the groundwork for further high-level trade discussions with U.S. officials.
A senior Foreign Ministry bureaucrat is visiting Washington this week, although ostensibly for nontrade-related purposes, and other Japanese officials expect Mr. Ozawa himself to travel to Washington as early as next week.
Although officials said they didn't know if Mr. Ozawa would schedule meetings with U.S. administration or congressional leaders, the Japanese politician has brokered other troublesome bilateral issues, including an earlier incarnation of the cellular dispute.
