The British government has done the world a favor by demonstrating how not to conduct a campaign to promote traditional values.
The disastrous British effort began a few months ago, when John Major and his advisers attempted to respond to popular perceptions of a decline in the nation's moral standards.
With some fanfare they launched a program called "Back to Basics."
At the same time, there is a serious debate in Britain about the explosion of illegitimacy and the growth of the underclass.
The debate has echoes here in America.
But as often happens with projects imagined by politicians, Britain's Back to Basics program was so vague that it could be willfully misunderstood by the opposition.
With the Labor Party moribund, the real opposition in Britain is the media, led by the traditionally Tory organs.
When Junior Minister Tim Yeo admitted to committing adultery and fathering an illegitimate child, media hysteria was almost instantaneous.
The minister was forced to resign amid accusations of government hypocrisy -- traditional in public, libertine in private.
Since then the press has sought ever more cases of Tory philandering.
The imbroglio passed the point of absurdity with the case of a Member of Parliament, David Ashby.
Mr. Ashby and a male friend were touring rural France and at the last moment took a hotel room that had only one large bed, which they shared.
This somehow hit the front pages, amid unsubstantiated tales of gay love.
The common response to this fiasco is that public lives and private lives should be kept separate and that government should get out of the morality business.
Many people have cited Prime Minister Harold Macmillan's answer to a question about moral values.
He told the questioner not to bother the prime minister but to ask a bishop.
There's some wisdom in this view, but the problem is that when a radio interviewer asks a Church of England bishop a question about morality, he or she gets an answer on the evils of this or that government policy.
The Church of England is no longer the moral guidepost for the nation.
One may wonder if churches in the U.S. have similarly frittered away their moral authority.
Instead, the state has legislated on all manner of personal behavior.
The state may be right or wrong to intervene in these matters, but if it is going to take control, it has to bear responsibility.
The state is now the moral tone-setter, and ministers are therefore expected to act with the propriety that was demanded of bishops a century ago.
We doubt this is progress.
So we do think public officials should be held accountable for their conduct.
At the same time a puritanical or radical feminist witch hunt does not appeal.
Nonetheless, Prime Minister Major is drawing the wrong lesson.
His government now seems to have been scared off any talk of moral standards.
But public concerns won't go away, so long as crime increases and children are abandoned.
The evidence showing that family breakdown can be associated with terrible social problems is too strong to ignore.
The better course is either for the state to get out of personal reform and leave this to religious and philanthropic entities, or else to define how the state can encourage people to behave better and to recognize -- and get rid of -- government policies that encourage people to behave worse.
The Major policy, to fudge and retreat at the first whiff of controversy, is the worst way forward.
As the rest of the world's welfare states struggle to return moral responsibility to individual citizens, it can be grateful that Mr. Major has shown which path leads to the quicksand.c
