TWO ARKANSAS STATE AGENCIES rented space in an office building and a renovated service station owned by Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan in 1985 for a total of $7,432 a month.
An article Monday incorrectly reported that the rent on the service station alone totaled $7,432.
(See: "Politics & Policy: Madison Employees Say Executive Promised Reimbursement for Contributions to Clinton" -- WSJ Jan. 31, 1994)
MOUNT MITCHELL in North Carolina is the highest peak in the Southeast.
In a page-one article Jan. 25 about skiing in the region, Beech Mountain was incorrectly identified as the tallest point.
Rather, Beech Mountain is the highest ski area in the Southeast.
(See: "Thrill of Downhill Isn't Lost on Skiers Of the Sunny South -- Grassy Conditions and Rocks Are Perils of Snowlessness; Sparks Fly at Cloudmont" -- WSJ Jan. 25, 1994)
TRIARC Cos.' shares are traded on the New York Stock Exchange.
Yesterday's Abreast of the Market column incorrectly said the company's stock is traded on the American Stock Exchange.
(See: "Abreast of the Market: Stocks Soar as Greenspan Gives Upbeat Assessment of Economy" -- WSJ Feb. 1, 1994)
REP. BOB LIVINGSTON of Louisiana is one of three Republicans seeking data from the Securities and Exchange Commission about Hillary Rodham Clinton's investments.
An article yesterday incorrectly called him Bob Lancaster.
(See: "Politics & Policy: SEC Asked to Seek Data on Fund Used By Hillary Clinton" -- WSJ Feb. 1, 1994)
UPJOHN Co. said world-wide sales of its Halcion sleeping pill rose 1% in the fourth quarter from a year earlier.
An article yesterday incorrectly stated that Halcion sales were off 1% for the period.
(See: "Business Brief -- Upjohn Co.: Fourth-Quarter Earnings Rose 6% to $163.8 Million" -- WSJ Feb. 1, 1994)
THE FIRST TWO CLASSES of a Society National Bank $234.7 million student-loan asset-backed securities issue have 9% subordination.
The bank is a unit of Society Corp.
The subordination is the portion of the issue set aside to protect holders of the first two classes-A-1 and A-2-from loss.
The holders of these two classes have the right to receive principal and interest before the holders of the third class, B-1.
The first two classes are floating-rate notes and the third class is floating-rate certificates.
In Friday's New Securities Issues column, the subordination of the first two classes was misstated as 10% and the third class was misidentified as A-3.
(See: "New Securities Issues" -- WSJ Jan. 28, 1994)
