The U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan is investigating allegations that Prudential Securities Inc. brokers may have misled investors about their legal options involving partnership settlements, people familiar with the case said.
The probe, part of a broader investigation of the big brokerage firm's limited-partnership practices, comes after several Prudential investors have accused their brokers in private lawsuits of improperly forcing them to accept small settlements involving portfolios of Prudential real-estate partnerships, rather than being advised of other legal options.
In the most recent lawsuit, filed in Los Angeles Superior Court last week, an 81-year-old Roman Catholic priest alleged that he was "deprived of his legal rights to seek full recovery for his damages" because his Prudential broker improperly prodded him to accept a small settlement involving a portfolio of VMS Mortgage Investors partnerships.
The priest had unspecified losses in his $100,000 VMS investment.
Many VMS partnership investors accepted a 1991 settlement, in which they received pennies on the dollar, despite huge losses in their partnership accounts.
Meanwhile, some VMS investors who opted out of the settlement had better luck in retrieving more of their original investment, through lawsuits or arbitration.
Those VMS investors who participated in the 1991 settlement are particularly bitter because other Prudential partnership investors subsequently have received far more in separate accords.
Last month, for instance, about 115,000 investors who bought Prudential energy partnerships received a $90 million settlement that brought to $1.24 billion, or an average of 85 cents on the dollar, the amount investors will end up getting for their original $1.45 billion investment.
Criminal prosecutors have been asking brokers and others for information pertaining to the circumstances surrounding client participation in the VMS settlement, the people familiar with the matter said.
"We don't comment on rumors or innuendo as to what might or might not be asked" by criminal prosecutors, said a spokesman for Prudential, the brokerage arm of Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
The U.S. attorney's office doesn't comment on pending investigations.
Last week's suit was particularly nettlesome for Prudential.
The broker named in the case, Jeffery Daggett, had starred in Prudential's new "straight talk" television advertising campaign.
As reported, Prudential has since yanked the Daggett ad, for fear of copycat suits by other investors.
Mr. Daggett has declined to comment on the suit.
But Prudential says the priest, Monsignor Maximos Mardelli, never complained about his account to the broker or the firm, and says that Mr. Daggett's compliance record is "spotless."
