Anyone wondering why U.S. Surgical Corp., the hottest company in the hospital-supply sector only two years ago, is in a precarious financial position might go to Memphis, Tenn.
There, Baptist Memorial Health Care System, a $2 million-a-year-account for U.S. Surgical, recently set new ground rules for their relationship.
Instead of supplying the system's 16 hospitals individually, the company must deal through Baptist's distributor.
"The distributor allows us to drastically reduce in-house inventories and helps us track our purchasing practices," said Robert Jones, assistant administrator for purchasing at Baptist.
It also means all 16 hospitals pay the same price.
The new arrangements mean the hospital system will save $250,000 a year on its U.S. Surgical account alone for the next five years.
This shift is just one of the forces in the marketplace that have come together to shake up U.S. Surgical.
Other forces have been cutthroat competition from archrival Johnson & Johnson, U.S. Surgical's expensive gamble in the sutures market and an unpredicted slowdown in the growth of the market for its minimally invasive surgical gear.
The company's stock fell a further $3, or 14%, to close at $18.50 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday.
On Wednesday, the stock plunged 21% after U.S. Surgical announced it was renegotiating loan agreements with its banks and has enlisted investment bankers to seek equity investors.
The company said it expected to report a loss of 26 cents a share for last year's fourth quarter, on sales of $244 million.
On top of that, the company said it had lost a patent suit it had filed against Johnson & Johnson's Ethicon division.
Leon Hirsch, the company's founder and chairman, was said to be traveling out of the country yesterday and unavailable to comment.
A company spokeswoman clarified its relationship with its lenders.
Contrary to a statement in yesterday's Wall Street Journal, "The company is not and has not been in violation of any loan covenant and is not in default under any loan," said Marianne Scipione, vice president, corporate communications.
Even as the company struggles to stabilize its rocky financial situation, however, it's the battle in the marketplace that will determine its future.
"I'm less concerned about the financial structure issues and more concerned about generating sales," said Kurt Kruger, an analyst at Hambrecht & Quist.
"If they clear those financial matters up, but haven't resumed sales growth, the company won't be fixed."
For its part, the Norwalk, Conn., company acknowledged that changes in hospital-purchasing policies and Ethicon's aggressive pricing have provoked many of its marketing troubles.
But Ms. Scipione said the company believes its market share for endoscopic gear, used in minimally invasive surgery, is higher than the 55% to 60% estimated by Wall Street.
She said that in the third quarter, its share rose to 67.6%, from 66.7% in the second quarter.
"It wasn't a big increase, but it showed us that the trend downward has stopped," she said.
Fourth-quarter market share numbers won't be available for two more months.
Analysts and customers alike agree that U.S. Surgical thrived thanks to innovative products.
Its devices in the late 1980s essentially created the market for so-called laparoscopic gall-bladder surgery, which involves only a tiny incision in the abdomen.
And its sales force became known for its aggressive tactics and for dealing directly with physicians.
But Ethicon has significantly narrowed a quality gap and priced its own products so aggressively that many hospitals have been persuaded to try the Ethicon brands.
At the same time, changing purchasing practices of hospitals, and especially huge hospital-purchasing organizations, have blunted the impact of a sales force skilled at dealing with doctors.
"Within the hospital, the administrator now carries more weight," said Glenn Reicin, an analyst at Morgan Stanley & Co.
He said that while doctors still have some influence over product purchases, "they haven't been willing to come out and fight for Surgical, in part because Ethicon has improved its products."
Individual hospitals increasingly are purchasing endoscopic gear through big purchasing alliances such as Voluntary Hospitals of America of Irving, Texas, and American Health Care Systems, San Diego.
VHA has 950 hospitals as members, American Health Care has about 1,000, and both have five-year contracts with Ethicon, but not with U.S. Surgical.
These contracts don't require members to purchase only Ethicon equipment, but the financial incentives encourage such practices.
"Our business with J&J has grown exponentially, from zero dollars a year and half ago to a very substantial figure," said Monroe Trout, chairman and chief executive officer of American Health Care.
The company's bet that it could make inroads into the market for surgical sutures dominated by J&J has proved an expensive gamble that has yet to pay off, analysts said.
Both the investment in manufacturing facilities and huge inventories necessary to effectively market the sutures have been a big financial strain, said Mr. Kruger.
And sales have been small.
"It was the sutures that got them into financial problems," he maintained.
"It's an inventory game and a distribution-channels game that they were prepared to take on against Ethicon."
The company's market share remains in single digits, he said.
"They're not even in the game yet," Mr. Kruger said.
Ms. Scipione declined to comment on the suture issue except to say: "We're quite pleased with the way our suture business is going."
On top of everything else the company has been hit by a slower-than-expected adoption by doctors of minimally invasive surgical techniques for operations other than gall bladders.
Surgeons embraced the technique for gall bladders at breathtaking speed, because the shorter hospital stay and short recovery period were a boon to both patients and cost-conscious payers.
After about three years on the market, the technique was used on more than 80% of the 550,000 gall bladders taken out each year.
Both U.S. Surgical and analysts expected equally quick adoption of the technique for other high-volume operations, such as hernia repair and hysterectomy.
But physicians' reticence and the reluctance of some insurers to cover the new techniques tempered wide use of the procedures.
Meanwhile, customers are beginning to make new demands on suppliers like U.S. Surgical.
"We want suppliers to help us improve productivity," said Samuel A. Greco, senior vice president, financial operations, at Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp., Louisville, Ky.
That means, among other things, "insuring proper product usage and ultimately driving costs out of the system for both" purchaser and supplier.
That's a big culture change for U.S. Surgical, which has thrived with a sales force trained to sell products, not to help manage health-care costs.
