Just two months ago, the Zobs family lived in a big house on a wooded acre near Ottawa and enjoyed many luxuries of the West: two cars, an electric garage door, baby sitters and eating out in restaurants.
Today, as new residents of Latvia, they rent four rooms in a crumbling house outside Riga, with a littered mud pit for a front yard and not enough hot water for bathing and doing the laundry.
Their year-old son, Lauris, has developed rashes.
Their five-year-old son, Dainis, who doesn't speak Latvian, can't understand his schoolmates and sleeps fitfully.
The Zobses haven't made new friends, and they have crashed their Pontiac.
"We're suffering here," says Karlis Zobs, one of several hundred Westerners of Latvian descent who have recently come to live in this former Soviet republic.
"We're out of our element."
But Mr. Zobs, a 56-year-old construction contractor and a U.S. citizen who left Latvia as a child, feels that his homeland needs him and his building skills.
"If you've talked for 50 years about getting your country back, and you get it back, there's a moment of truth: Either you go there yourself, or all your talk was a lie.
It's a matter of personal integrity."
His wife, Inta, who was born in Canada to Latvian parents, isn't as devoted to the principle.
"Moving here was such a shock," she says.
The Zobses are part of an odd counter-trend in immigration in Eastern Europe -- people drawn to Latvia by patriotism, a sense of obligation and, in some cases, economic opportunity.
Mostly, the newcomers are children of Latvians who escaped in 1944 when the Soviets overran this Baltic nation.
For many, it is a triumphant return.
They are lawyers, businessmen and young college graduates, arriving by jet in a country their parents left on foot as refugees.
But they are finding that Latvia isn't the majestic place of their parents' reveries.
Though the country is moving quickly to raise its living standards, those accustomed to better conditions find it hard to make a home here.
Ilmars Lejins, a 22-year-old Swede born to Latvian immigrants, found that out when he was beaten up on the streets of Riga by a group of Russians who were drunk and annoyed that he couldn't speak Russian.
Peteris and Liene Kalnins, a young couple who hail, respectively, from the U.S. and Canada, discovered the difference when they tried to visit an ancestral home that had been bulldozed to make way for a Soviet communal farm.
When they went to visit a relative in a Riga hospital, they found cats and cockroaches walking the floor.
"When our grandparents lived here before the war, you could honestly say it was part of Europe," says Mrs. Kalnins, who arrived here with her husband in 1990.
"Today, you can't say that.
It's way behind."
Mr. Kalnins runs a computer-graphics business; Mrs. Kalnins works as a translator.
Elmars Tannis, who opened Fredi's bar here last winter with fellow Canadian Peteris Rugelis, knew he wasn't in Toronto anymore when thugs knocked on his door to collect protection money -- 10% of his profits.
He complied, having heard scuttle-butt that it costs only $250 to have someone killed in Latvia, where monthly wages average less than $100.
Compounding their problems, the new arrivals have stirred some resentment among native Latvians.
Even the poorest returnee is rich by Latvian standards.
Some of the newcomers can afford to shop in the fashionable stores opening in Riga, and they may get the best jobs.
With few exceptions, the foreigners haven't given up their other citizenship, a sign that they are reluctant to truly cast their lot with Latvia.
From their standpoint, many are sacrificing a lot.
But that isn't how some Latvians see it: "They don't want to face hard times and change the way they are used to living," says Kaspars Kaulins, the Latvian-born deputy editor of Diena, the country's largest daily.
"Some really want to help us rebuild the state.
But at the same time, it seems some have come only because of their big ambitions."
Latvia, controlled by foreign powers for centuries, was independent between 1918 and 1940, when it was taken over by the Nazis, before the Soviets came.
Some 200,000 Latvians fled to the West before the end of 1944.
After Latvia regained its independence, it offered citizenship to Western Latvians.
The several hundred Westerners who have made good on their parents' intention to return to Latvia someday are statistically negligible in a country of 2.6 million that is actually losing population.
But their presence is felt.
The justice minister, defense minister, welfare minister and head of Latvia's customs department also are Westerners.
Other Westerners are opening businesses, advising the government and serving as Latvian diplomats in other countries.
"It seems like an awesome responsibility," says Valdis V. Pavlovskis, a Latvian-born California city planner turned defense minister.
Growing up in "exile" in the West, children of refugees spoke Latvian at home and went to Latvian Sunday schools, camps and folk dances.
They heard stories about amber shores and large family homes with servants' quarters.
Parents called Riga the "Paris of the North."
They wore silver rope rings to show solidarity.
"I was raised to be here," says Mr. Lejins, who has no doubt about his true nationality.
"I'm not a Swede, I'm a Latvian.
Just because you're born in a barn doesn't mean you're a horse."
Some Western Latvians feel their conscience tugging them back.
Inese Birzniece, a 42-year-old attorney from Los Angeles, is one of 16 Westerners in Latvia's 100-member Parliament.
In 1990, she gave up a $100,000 salary to work here for $700 a year.
But she feels fulfilled by her work as chairwoman of Parliament's human-rights committee, an important position in this emerging democracy.
"I don't have to go to therapists, as many do in California, to ask 'Why am I here?' " she says.
"I know the answer.
I'm doing what I can to improve the world."
Filip Klavins had a six-figure income as a real-estate lawyer in New York, where he lived on the Upper East Side -- and had become jaded.
"I was helping one incredibly rich guy pass money to another incredibly rich guy, and that was it," he says.
He has set up a law office in Riga with Raymond Slaidins, a California lawyer who left behind a $90,000 job and a Saab Turbo.
In Latvia, at least, "we're making a difference," Mr. Klavins says.
He has regular meetings with the prime minister, and has big clients here, too, including Kellogg Co. and Coca-Cola Co.
There are particular psychic rewards.
Back in the West, Latvians are just another ethnic minority.
The newcomers brave hardships because they feel liberated; they hear Latvian spoken on buses and written all over newsstands.
"These are all my people," says Jana Tetere, who arrived from England in 1990.
For some, the sacrifices they make in living standards are outweighed by opportunities here.
Around Fredi's bar, young Westerners who had lackluster job prospects at home talk about how they have become "big fish."
"It's the wild, wild East," says Mr. Tannis, whose bar has profit margins of 30% to 45% on its monthly sales of $5,000.
"There's money to be made," despite the protection money that must be paid to the Russian Mafia.
For Nils Melngailis, from Boston, the choice was easy: By taking a posting in Riga for Coopers & Lybrand, he became a partner at 28, one of the accounting firm's youngest.
But many newcomers are disillusioned.
They have to adjust to just six hours of daylight in the dead of winter, gray skies, and headlights that come on at noon.
The government doesn't make heating fuel available until November, and many cashiers still do their computations on an abacus.
The new arrivals witness mob violence in the streets, get used to eating bacon fat on rye bread and find toilet paper so stiff it can double as stationery.
Ms. Tetere had such a tough time here that she moved back to England.
But she now is giving Riga another try.
"We were brought up to believe this was the land of milk and honey, that every person was good and everything was perfect," she says.
"It wasn't in any way similar to what my parents said."
Nobody had warned her, for instance, that she would have roaches in her office-fax machine at the World Federation of Free Latvians.
She hadn't expected to see children begging all over town.
Nor was she prepared for the new "national pastimes," as she puts it: "pushing, shoving and spitting."
Instead of a warm embrace from her father's relatives in Latvia, they did nothing but ask her for money, she complains.
She also says that for three years she dated a Latvian who eventually dumped her for an 18-year-old native, declaring Western women "too emancipated."
The Zobses did in some ways anticipate when they left Ottawa that it wouldn't be easy for them.
Mr. Zobs hadn't lived in Latvia since he fled as a child with his parents to the U.S. Mrs. Zobs, 36, the daughter of wealthy Latvians who had gone to Canada, grew up in the care of a nanny and enjoyed a "pampered life," she says.
But after Mr. Zobs visited Riga last summer, "he came back with such optimistic dreams of what could be in Latvia," his wife says.
She agreed to give it a try.
They rented out their house in Canada, put their furniture in storage and filled a shipping crate with the family car and a year's supply of diapers, children's clothes, medicine, Christmas gifts, toys, silk underwear, a VCR and 73 videos, maple syrup and Aunt Jemima pancake mix.
The move cost $20,000.
"I needed a little adventure," Mrs. Zobs says.
But she got more than she bargained for.
Soon after they arrived Nov. 6, the temperature dropped to 14 degrees Fahrenheit.
Then the snow came.
Then the mud.
The Zobses can't get their Maytag to work, so Mrs. Zobs does the laundry in the bathtub.
The hot water turns cold once the tub is filled to the depth of an inch and a half.
Mrs. Zobs bathes with the two boys in the puddle.
Dainis, enrolled at the only Montessori school in the area, tells his mother he is afraid of being murdered in his sleep.
To him, the house is a slum.
By Latvian standards, it is average.
Dainis says he misses his friends in Canada.
"They have better toys," he says.
Mr. Zobs has hit a "glass wall" trying to befriend Latvians.
"They think we're here to get something that belongs to them," he says.
The couple pay $300 a month in rent, 10 times the market rate.
When he mentions that to Latvians, he says, "they say that's the way it ought to be."
Mr. Zobs plans to stay despite the problems.
He wants to open a fastener business, making nails, screws and such.
He can also earn about $25 a day in construction.
"The only way I could not stick it out is an absolute divorce threat," he says.
"This is my last hurrah, and I'm having fun."
Mrs. Zobs is settling in, too, slowly.
She joined a choir, signed Dainis up for tennis lessons and is looking for a play group for Lauris.
When it's warm enough, she walks on the white sand along the Gulf of Riga, admiring the birches and evergreens.
"This is the stuff my nanny used to tell me about," she says.
She also hopes to get back a 150-acre family farm that was turned into a park by the Soviets.
But Mrs. Zobs doesn't make any promises.
She gave her tenants in Ottawa only a one-year lease and she bought round-trip tickets to Latvia with an open return.
She wears a maple-leaf pin on her shirt and hangs a Canadian flag in the boys' room.
"I'll always have ties here, but it takes an awful lot to pull you here," she says.
"I consider myself Canadian -- of Latvian heritage, but Canadian first and foremost."
