We've been following Bill Clinton's remarkable tour across the capitals of Europe -- delivering eloquent speeches in Brussels, capturing the frozen hands and hearts of Muscovites, unburdening Ukraine of its nuclear missiles, bonding with Ted Koppel.
However, it wasn't until we awoke yesterday morning to read that Mr. Clinton, in a five-hour talk, convinced Hafez Assad of Syria to give peace a chance that we started to look for signs of Tinkerbell dust.
After talking to Mr. Clinton, President Assad emerged, smiling like the cat who'd swallowed the canary, to declare: "In honor we fought, in honor we negotiate, and in honor we shall make peace."
With this triumph secured and press accounts announcing that the burden now lay upon Israel, Mr. Clinton flew home.
No doubt anything is possible in our surprising world, and we don't want to wholly dismiss the possibility that President Clinton did in fact baptize Hafez Assad into the community of civilized nations.
We could not help but notice, however, that this remarkable breakthrough was something of a piece with similar such remarkable breakthroughs on the President's trip abroad.
For instance, we have in our mind's eye the picture of Ukraine's voluble but canny President Leonid Kravchuk cheerfully allowing himself to be won over to Mr. Clinton's view that Ukraine should ship its nuclear warheads into Russia.
Mr. Clinton described this commitment as a "historic breakthrough," and it made front pages everywhere.
It develops that Mr. Kravchuk could merrily accede to the plan devised by the State Department's Strobe Talbott because the final call isn't Mr. Kravchuk's to make.
Ukraine's cabinet and parliament must ratify the agreement and in the past have balked at exposing the country's security to Russian goodwill.
But, as with Israel, Clinton aides believe the deal shifts the burden onto Ukraine's parliament.
Days later, Mr. Clinton was in Moscow, where President Yeltsin confidently assured his American visitor that the Russian reform movement was on track.
No sooner had Mr. Clinton lifted off for Geneva, when Yegor Gaidar, the architect of Mr. Yeltsin's economic reforms, handed in his resignation.
We can't help but marvel -- and wonder -- at the air of detached calm with which Mr. Clinton passes through such events.
During the years of the Cold War, one could worry that a credulous Western leader would invest too much faith in the assurances of an Assad or someone like him.
A long consensus against naivete in doing dangerous deals guarded against such instincts.
Now in the years after the Cold War, new techniques are evolving.
Mr. Clinton's contribution might be called the power of positive assertion.
Assert peace or some other such "historic breakthrough" and let the leaders of an Israel or Ukraine be seen as standing in the way.
Yesterday, Israeli officials suggested a very contemporary response to this pressure: They said any agreement conveying the Golan Heights to Mr. Assad most likely would have to be submitted to a popular referendum.
Ukrainians will select a new parliament in March, with Mr. Clinton's nuclear-warhead breakthrough no doubt at the center of it.
On balance, it is reassuring.
Mr. Clinton gets his foreign triumphs borne home to a domestic audience living on a 24-hour news schedule, but the people who would live with those triumphs, here the Israelis and Ukrainians, get to vote their own beliefs on national security.
