In its ambitious drive to leapfrog Japan in the development of a home-grown commercial aircraft, South Korea is tapping into a talent pool that its Asian rival lacks: imported Russian engineers.
It is an unlikely collaboration: The country that was bombed by Soviet-built fighter jets during the Korean War is turning to Russian engineers to help it launch a world-class aerospace industry.
But necessity produces strange bedfellows.
The Russians are happy to share their knowledge in return for research funding they can't get at home, while the South Koreans are delighted to get outside expertise they can't find elsewhere.
"With cooperation from the Russians, our aerospace industry, and industry in general, has been significantly accelerated," says Park Kung Woo, general manager of Daewoo Heavy Industries Ltd.'s aerospace division.
"We are acquiring technology from them that the U.S. won't provide."
There is only one problem with South Korea's strategy, some specialists say: It probably won't work.
Russia's own aviation industry, although advanced by Korean standards, has had limited success selling its products abroad.
Analysts say that few Russian-built, commercial aircraft could meet standards set by the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, the industry norm among developed nations.
And Russia's fighters are considered less sophisticated than their U.S. and European counterparts.
Russia's strength in theoretical science won't compensate for Korea's shortfall in applied technology, foreign aerospace executives say.
To accumulate such knowhow, the Koreans need an established partner to teach them how to develop master tools, avionics and composite materials.
They also need training in how to integrate aeronautics systems effectively, a challenge that bedevils even experienced manufacturers.
"Maybe the Koreans can put together something that in the long run will hurt us," says the president of the local subsidiary of a major U.S. aerospace concern.
"But if you're talking about Russian-style engines, we can't get that worried about it."
Despite such doubts, South Korea has jumped into the aerospace race in earnest.
Last week, the Seoul government announced a $344 million plan to develop a 50-to-100-seat turboprop transport aircraft by 1998.
That would be a stunning achievement, even with heavy doses of Russian expertise.
South Korea's aeronautics industry got started only in 1979 and today remains limited to assembling components for big foreign aircraft companies.
Over the last year, however, Korea's three major aerospace companies have entered into high-profile ventures with foreign partners.
Samsung Group's Samsung Aerospace Industries Ltd., for example, formed a partnership with Lockheed Fort Worth Co., a unit of Lockheed Corp., Calabasas, Calif., to build a military trainer aircraft.
In addition, Daewoo Corp.'s Daewoo Heavy Industries and Korea's leading airline Korean Air, last year unveiled a pan-Asian consortium called Asian Air Express, dedicated to developing a 100-seat, turbofan aircraft.
The consortium, originally known as Asian Airbus, has commitments from partners throughout Asia valued at about $1 billion.
But consortium officials acknowledge they lack a partner with a track record.
That's where the Russians come in, Mr. Park says.
Late last year, Hyundai Precision & Industry Co., an affiliate of the Hyundai Group, formed a joint venture with A.S. Yakovlev of Russia to build small and midsize commuter aircraft.
In January, Halla Engineering & Heavy Industries Ltd. announced its intention to build airplanes, in part with Russian assistance.
Daewoo has established a research institute in Moscow that eventually will accommodate about 100 scientists.
A colony of Russian engineers is settling in at Korea's Science Town in Taedok, about a three-hour drive from Seoul, where the country's top conglomerates have research centers.
They are hired by the business groups much as free-lance athletes are recruited by sports teams in the U.S.
Russian officials here say they are pleased by the alliance of Russian brains and Korean manufacturing brawn.
"Our science is in great trouble," says Valeriy Nazarov, president of the Russian Federation Chamber of Commerce and Industry in Seoul.
"If our people can't raise money there, they'll go somewhere else."
