Several Arkansas investors, including a group once headed by White House aide Patsy Thomasson, are being investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission in connection with possible insider trading.
The inquiry involves suspicious trading in Arctic Alaska Fisheries Corp. stock in June 1992 shortly before Arkansas-based Tyson Foods Inc. announced an agreement to acquire the seafood company, according to people familiar with the inquiry.
One of the investors is an uncle of William Kennedy III, White House associate counsel.
Mr. Kennedy has assured White House officials that he isn't under investigation.
"I haven't been contacted by anybody at the SEC," he said in an interview last night.
"As far as I know, I'm not being investigated."
The Tyson acquisition was handled by the Rose Law Firm, where Mr. Kennedy was a partner before coming to Washington.
But he said he wasn't involved in the merger negotiations between the Seattle-based seafood company and Tyson, the world's largest poultry processor.
"I didn't perform legal work on that deal," he said.
Ms. Thomasson, who served as president of Phoenix Group Inc., a Little Rock holding company, said in a statement issued last night, "I never traded the stock.
I never executed an order for the stock.
I was a salaried employee and had no financial interest in the Phoenix Group account."
The Phoenix Group, once called Lasater Inc., was owned by Dan Lasater, a Clinton family friend and one-time major bond trader in Little Rock.
William McLucas, the SEC's enforcement director, would neither confirm nor deny the existence of an investigation, as is the agency's custom.
SEC investigators are looking into a suspicious surge of Arctic Alaska stock-buying in the week before Tyson's June 16, 1992, announcement that it had agreed to acquire Arctic Alaska.
Announcement of the cash and stock transaction, valued at more than $200 million, sent Arctic Alaska's shares soaring $4.75, or 69%, to close that day at $11.625 in composite New York Stock Exchange trading.
The investigators are trying to trace how word of the impending agreement leaked and spread among investors in Arkansas and elsewhere.
Ms. Thomasson was listed as registered agent and executive vice president of Lasater Inc. in an August 1986 filing with the Arkansas secretary of state.
Two months later, it was renamed Phoenix Group.
Ms. Thomasson became Phoenix's president in February 1991, according to an amended filing.
Another filing in November 1992 reports that she was replaced as registered agent, indicating that she had left Phoenix by that time.
Ms. Thomasson is director of the White House Office of Administration.
At one time, she served as chairman of the Arkansas Highway Commission while Bill Clinton was governor.
She was also one of three White House aides who went to deputy counsel Vince Foster's office after he committed suicide.
Mr. Lasater pleaded guilty in 1986 to conspiring to distribute cocaine and was given a 30-month sentence.
The president's brother, Roger, worked for Mr. Lasater.
Court testimony disclosed that Roger Clinton borrowed money from Mr. Lasater to pay drug debts.
And Mr. Clinton came under fire, while serving as the Arkansas governor, for allowing the state to continue bond business with Mr. Lasater's investment firm despite court testimony indicating Mr. Lasater was involved with drugs.
The suspicious trading was brought to the SEC's attention by the stock exchange, which routinely monitors trading in takeover stocks.
There was a sharp increase in trading volume to more than 55,000 shares on Friday, June 12, 1992, from less than 8,000 shares on June 9, according to trading records.
Arctic Alaska stock rose about $1 to $7.125 by week's end.
When Tyson announced the acquisition on June 16, the stock soared to $11.625.
