Shares of Media Vision Technology Inc., a once-highflying maker of video and sound accessories for computers, fell 48.8% after the company said it expects to post a "substantial loss" for the first quarter.
The loss will stem partly from reducing prices on certain of its retail products in response to aggressive price-cutting by the competition.
The Fremont, Calif., company also said shipment of one of its new multimedia products would be delayed into the second quarter, resulting in a significant drop in revenue for the first quarter.
The company would not comment beyond a terse news release, which provided no details on which products were involved in the price cuts or shipment delay.
Paul Jain, president and chief executive officer, was not available for comment.
The slide to $11 a share, down $10.50 Nasdaq Stock Market trading, came after Media Vision shares had already tumbled precipitously in recent weeks, following the release of fourth-quarter results showing a growing backlog of unsold products.
The one-time Wall Street darling had seen its share value rocket to a December high of $43.75 from $20.25 when it first went public in 1992.
From its zenith, Media Vision has lost about $500 million in market capitalization.
As a result, a number of stock analysts are chopping their ratings for Media Vision.
Cowen & Co. downgraded its recommendation to "hold" from "buy," according to a contact at the firm.
Lehman Brothers reduced to "neutral" from "buy" its recommendation for the stock, a market source said.
Analysts at both firms couldn't be reached for comment.
Until this quarter, Media Vision's growth had burgeoned in conjunction with the rapidly growing market for personal computers outfitted with new "multimedia" capabilities for video motion and sound.
A provider of multimedia sound cards as well as multimedia upgrade kits and video games, Media Vision posted 1993 net income of $20 million, or $1.40 a share, on revenue of $241 million, compared with 1992 profit of about $1 million, or six cents a share, on $69 million in revenue.
Despite Media Vision's continued strong performance in the fourth quarter, when profit surged more than fourfold to $9 million from the year-earlier period, analysts expressed alarm last month at a jump in unsold inventory, to $80.9 million from $22.1 million.
The company's stock dropped by $7.625, or 8.2%, to $35.25 on Feb. 18, the day after the results were released.
