It can be hoped that the action of two U.S. F-16s in shooting down four Serb jets will give at least some credibility to U.N. threats of military action in Bosnia.
But considering the previous damage to U.N. credibility, it will take more than that to influence real events in this tangled war zone.
President Clinton didn't help much with his apologetic tone about the shootdowns.
He said "every attempt was made" to avoid them.
The U.S. Commander in Chief also put a rather fine gloss on the frequent past Serb violations of the U.N. no-fly zone, saying there have been helicopter flights but none by fixed-wing aircraft.
His man on the scene, Admiral Jeremy Boorda, had to amend that by admitting there indeed had been "short" fixed-wing flights -- as everyone but the American President seems to have known -- but "we didn't see them."
That no doubt was because there was never any enthusiasm at the U.N. for engaging the Serbs.
The no-fly project was given a fancy title, "Operation Deny Flight," when it was concocted by the U.N. in October 1992.
But it wasn't until April last year that NATO aircraft were deployed to Italy to patrol the skies over Bosnia.
Those helicopter flights President Clinton thinks were so incidental were clearly part of Serb and Croat military operations.
But no one interfered with them.
It's no wonder the Bosnian Serbs thought early Monday that they could conduct air attacks on the Muslims with impunity when their Super-Goleb light attack aircraft bombed a Muslim area not far from Sarajevo.
And no wonder their pilots didn't heed the challenge of the F-16 fliers.
Until then, they could assume that the NATO pilots were operating under rules of engagement that amounted to a ban on combat.
The ability of the Serbs to use helicopters to move troops in support of their heavy weapons gave them a distinct tactical advantage over the mostly Muslim Bosnian government forces.
In the early stages of the war, the Muslim fighters and civilians in the towns they were defending were badly mauled.
The U.N., through its arms embargo shutting off shipments of heavy weapons to the Muslims and through its failure to enforce its own no-fly edict, has kept the deck stacked against the Muslims.
That enabled the Serbs to take over some 70% of Bosnia, forcing the Muslims into a narrow central zone and a few small enclaves.
Having thereby helped the Serbs defeat the Muslims, U.N. negotiators' idea of peace has been to invite the Muslims to accept their defeat.
While the U.S. and NATO may have now improved their credibility, they by no means have improved their ability to bring a just peace to Bosnia.
The Muslim forces have raised their fighting capability sufficiently to feel that they may have a chance to win back some territory, even with their serious disadvantage in heavy weapons.
They have scored some significant victories against the Croats, who are clearly becoming weary of the fighting.
Yesterday, Muslims and Croats exchanged 400 prisoners through the Red Cross, perhaps in advance of a rapprochement.
It is, however, not the intent of the of the U.N. or NATO or the U.S. to enter the war on behalf of Bosnia's government.
We suspect that for awhile now the Serbs will be more careful with their aircraft.
But as it stands, the engagement was an incident, not a decisive battle in the Bosnian war.
