In the multimedia world of the future, which entertainment combine would be in a better position to profit from the acquisition of Paramount Communications Inc.?
As Wall Street traders try to chase the highest offer, rival bidders QVC Network Inc. and Viacom Inc. are trying to win over long-term investors with their respective "vision thing."
And in the process, they are trying to punch holes in each other's strategy, business prospects and management expertise.
Few analysts and money managers will venture to say which company would be the "better" winner for the longer term.
Both QVC and Viacom, they say, could exploit Paramount's assets: a film and TV library, a leading book publishing and information services company, theme parks, TV stations and sports teams.
Wall Street and Hollywood are impressed by QVC Chairman Barry Diller's track record, but equally impressed by the potential combination of assets if Viacom wins.
"For the near term, Viacom gives investors a very solid meat and potatoes approach to improving Paramount," says Ed Hatch, an analyst at UBS Securities.
"For the longer term, four, five or six years down the road, QVC's proposals, such as plans to offer new specialized channels, tantalize investors' imaginations with new revenue streams."
Adds John Tinker, an analyst at Furman Selz Inc., "both sides bring incredibly strong arguments to the table, which is one reason this has been such a long, drawnout battle."
Mr. Diller continued yesterday to promote his record as an entertainment impresario who has run two studios and started a broadcast network.
Buttressed by formidable partners with interests in telecommunications, publishing and cable TV, QVC warns that Viacom's businesses -- notably MTV Networks and the Showtime pay TV channel -- face huge competitive threats in the future.
For its part, Viacom, which has agreed to merge with Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., is hawking the relative merits of its cable TV powerhouse combined with the leading video and music retailer, and strong financial and strategic management from Sumner Redstone and the company's chief executive, Frank Biondi.
Viacom argues that QVC faces far more competitive threats in its basic home shopping business and says Mr. Diller's talents as a manager are being given too much weight.
Analysts and observers agree that for all their opportunities, QVC and Viacom face daunting risks.
Either one would be heavily burdened with debt.
Last week, Paramount said it expects to report a loss of about $35 million to $40 million for the fiscal third quarter ended Jan. 31.
Though Viacom officials are ready to declare victory in the battle, they continued yesterday to try to persuade longerterm investors that Viacom's businesses better complement Paramount's.
Viacom argues that the addition of Blockbuster's video and music retailing operations brings even more potential for synergy, and notes that Blockbuster has its own library of TV programs.
QVC counters that Blockbuster's video retailing business is doomed to go the way of the buggy whip when the information highway provides 500 channels and instant movies-on-demand.
Viacom maintains that Blockbuster's huge cash flow will help pay for other growth businesses and that in any event, video and music retailing still have opportunities in the U.S. and growth potential overseas.
Viacom is also stressing to investors that a combined Viacom-Blockbuster-Paramount will have total assets of more than $24 billion in more than 25 lines of business, and will be the largest buyer in Hollywood, giving it muscle to make good deals with suppliers.
It sees huge cross-promotional opportunities between Blockbuster's music retailing and MTV, and video retailing and Paramount's theater operations.
Though many on Wall Street hail the Blockbuster merger as a strategic coup for Viacom, others are less impressed.
Mario Gabelli, a fund manager who controls more than four million Paramount shares, views Blockbuster as "a big albatross that makes it all too cumbersome."
He adds: "I'd like to see that egg unscrambled."
In attacking each other, both Viacom and QVC say the other faces huge competitive threats.
Recently, for example, the world's largest record companies, led by Time Warner Inc. and Sony Corp., announced the formation of a global venture that will compete with MTV's music video network.
Though Time and Sony say they won't keep music videos produced by their record units away from MTV, QVC argues that the competition could seriously hamper MTV's prospects.
Viacom says it isn't worried about competition.
In a memo to Paramount's investment bankers, QVC also argues that Viacom's Showtime network, which is a distant second to Time Warner's Home Box Office, "is a declining asset under pressure."
QVC warns that Showtime could be crushed by competition from a new pay-TV service, Encore, which is controlled by cable giant Tele-Communications Inc.
And QVC argues that Viacom's huge antitrust suit against TCI and others "leaves the company in a vulnerable position with regard to the distribution of new programming."
Viacom says that in QVC's basic home shopping business, the company faces its own dangerous competition because of the cancellation last year of QVC's merger with rival Home Shopping Network Inc. (also controlled by TCI).
And a number of other home shopping services are in the works.
Some on Wall Street believe that Viacom has not only the best offer but also the best strategic long-term position.
"The Viacom-Paramount-Blockbuster combination is a much stronger combination strategically from any point of view, in terms of growth, cost cutting and management," says Nandita Parker, an analyst at Gerard Klauer Mattison.
"I don't think one man, as in Barry Diller, can create or duplicate shareholder value to the extent Viacom-Blockbuster can."
But Mr. Diller still has his partisans.
Though Messrs. Redstone and Biondi are admired for their strategic and financial skills, neither has ever run a creative business, and there is no one at Viacom experienced in filmed entertainment management.
Mr. Diller, by contrast, ran the ABC network, oversaw both the Paramount and Fox movie studios and started the Fox Network for parent News Corp.
Mr. Gabelli, the fund manager, says he has to tender his shares to Viacom under the current bids to protect his investment.
As for long-term strategy, "I'm comfortable with both Viacom and QVC," Mr. he says.
"But my sense is that Barry can probably run it better."
