Futures prices of natural gas and fuels surged yesterday on expectations of significant reductions in supplies because of this winter's sharply higher demand.
Also, news of weekend fires that disrupted operations at the big Whiting, Ind., refinery of Amoco Corp. contributed to the price rally.
Several major units of the refinery had to be shut down, and Amoco said it is allocating supplies to wholesalers.
The company said it expects the affected units to be put back into operation gradually over the next several weeks.
Much of the U.S. had relatively mild weather yesterday, after last week's record cold.
But there were forecasts that another arctic blast may be on the way.
And there were signs that today's industry report on U.S. oil statistics will show a major shrinking in fuels inventories as a result of last week's frigid weather.
In heavy trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange, the futures price of natural gas for February delivery jumped 16.5 cents to settle at $2.47 a million British thermal units.
Although traders attributed much of the volatility to yesterday's expiration of the February contract, gas for March delivery also was sharply higher, rising 7.7 cents to $2.283 a million BTUs.
Also traded heavily, heating oil for February delivery rose 1.36 cents to settle at 49.39 cents a gallon.
The March heating oil contract was up 0.87 cent to 47.35 cents a gallon.
The jumps in prices of fuels pushed crude oil higher in both New York and London futures markets, erasing the losses in yesterday's early trading.
In New York, the March crude contract settled at $15.17 a barrel, up 23 cents for the day.
Despite yesterday's rally, some traders still remained bearish on the outlook for petroleum prices.
"There has been no major change in the fundamentals," said Shannon Burchett, an energy futures expert with Chase Manhattan Bank.
"Generally, it is still a downtrending market."
PRECIOUS METALS: Gold futures prices fell on heavy selling of gold by Japanese dealers.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for February delivery was down 30 cents to $381.40 an ounce.
The decline was mainly related to Japanese selling, which followed a big drop in Japan's Nikkei stock market.
In another market development, traders and analysts expressed skepticism about recent news reports asserting that 1,240 tons of gold stashed away by former Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos had been found in a Swiss warehouse.
The report was made last week in Britain's Manchester Guardian newspaper and on a British television station.
Analysts said the report exerted some downward pressure on gold futures prices last Thursday, but this week most market professionals are openly dubious about it.
"I think it's a nonevent," said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
"It's a very nebulous story, and I don't see it as being a continuing market factor.
I haven't seen one ounce of gold being sold by any Swiss bank related to this so-called Marcos gold."
Separately, a bullion trader said the quantity of gold supposedly stashed by Marcos would be equal to Philippine production of gold for 40 years.
It is highly unlikely, this trader said, that Mr. Marcos could have secreted away nearly that much gold.
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Grain futures prices settled higher after a topsy-turvy day of trading.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, soybeans for March delivery were up 4.5 cents to $6.98 a bushel, while corn for March delivery climbed 2.75 cents to $3.005 a bushel.
Early yesterday, reports of beneficial rain in soybean-growing regions of Argentina and Brazil depressed futures prices.
Later, however, traders bid prices higher on expectations of strong demand for soybean oil and other soy products, said Daniel W. Basse, market research director for AgResource Co., Chicago.
Also supporting the market was an absence of selling by farmers.
Last week's sharp price decline in the CBOT's grain market has put many farmers on the sidelines, Mr. Basse said, awaiting higher prices before choosing to sell their grain.
