BOSNIAN SERBS PLEDGED for the first time to meet a NATO deadline.
The Serb forces besieging Sarajevo said they would remove their heavy guns or put them under U.N. control by the deadline this Sunday, U.N. commanders said.
They said the outgunned Muslim-led Bosnian army defending Sarajevo also promised to turn in its heavy weapons.
However, there were few outward signs of compliance, and U.N. military officials confirmed that no new weapons had been placed under their control since last weekend.
A worker was killed by sniper fire in downtown Sarajevo, the first civilian to be slain in the capital since a cease-fire began one week ago.
A recommendation again was made by a key U.S. Chamber of Commerce panel that the organization should endorse requiring employers to help pay for their workers' health insurance.
The action came less than two weeks after a chamber official withdrew copies of testimony endorsing the employer mandate.
Clinton sought support for his health-care plan from members of the American Association of Retired Persons, saying, "The time has come to be counted, to stand with us."
Speaking to senior citizens in Edison, N.J., the president said his plan would boost their benefits while some rival plans would cut them.
Insurance companies can be "arbitrary and capricious" when they deny coverage of a costly therapy for breast cancer patients, two medical researchers charged, even though the companies approve 77% of initial requests for coverage.
Several insurers disputed the researchers' claim that the decisions are arbitrary.
Armed Mexican rebels freed a former governor who had been held hostage since Jan. 2.
The release of Absalom Castellanos Dominguez, seized at the start of an uprising in the southern state of Chiapas, was viewed as a possible prelude to peace talks with the government.
The rebels had accused him of rights violations and corruption.
The State Department implored exiled Haitian President Aristide to meet in Washington with parliamentarians who are promoting a plan to end a political impasse and restore him to office.
Aristide already has dismissed the proposal as irresponsible and has declined to meet with the Haitian lawmakers since last Friday.
Two of Zhirinovsky's allies defected from his parliamentary faction, citing "ideological differences" with the ultranationalist Russian leader.
One of the defectors accused Zhirinovsky of extremism and said the Liberal Democratic Party leader was usurping power and alienating other countries.
Greece announced it would stop allowing the landlocked ex-Yugoslav republic of Macedonia to ship goods through the Greek port of Salonika.
Angered by Western recognition of Macedonia, Greece also said it was closing its consulate there.
The Greeks claim Macedonia wants to annex land in a northern province of the same name.
Mandela offered concessions to white and black conservatives who want regional autonomy in South Africa, saying his African National Congress wants to avert civil war.
Although there wasn't any immediate reaction from the conservatives, his gesture didn't meet their demand for independent homelands.
Clinton's crime bill will require large additional federal expenditures that won't begin to be covered by his proposed 21% increase in anticrime expenditures, according to a policy analysis group.
"It's a time bomb in the budget," an official with the Washington-based Urban Institute said.
A Katyusha rocket was fired from Lebanon and hit northern Israel, damaging a factory, the Israeli army said.
There were no reports of injuries.
It was the first time a Katyusha rocket had struck Israel in six months.
Separately, Israeli soldiers shot and killed a Palestinian during a stone-throwing incident in the West Bank.
Doctors in Detroit have used tiny needles and a miniature camera to save a fetus that was endangered by his malformed twin, without cutting open the mother's womb.
Such surgery represents a "new frontier in fetal medicine" and could provide a new weapon against a variety of abnormalities, the doctors announced.
