A Kansas securities dealer's allegations that big, out-of-state securities firms hide political gifts by routing them through lawyers apparently has attracted the attention of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The allegations were described in a comment letter submitted to the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board in connection with its initiative to end "pay to play" contributions that muni dealers make to state and local politicians to win bond business.
The SEC, which must approve the rule before it takes effect, is expected to publish the proposed rule for comment this week.
Ray Reed Jr., president of First Securities Co. of Kansas, told the MSRB in his letter: "In Kansas, and we are a rather rural state, the large Eastern dealers continually employ counsel to make their contributions, and enhance their legal fees by the amount of the contribution."
Mr. Reed, who said this practice "can't be stopped," said that "If I want to make any political contributions, I do it through an attorney, and I defy anyone to ask attorneys to consolidate their client information for your inspection."
He couldn't be reached to comment yesterday.
The type of situation described by Mr. Reed was apparently addressed Monday by SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt.
In a speech in New York, Mr. Levitt indicated that his agency is likely to look into "allegations of sham transactions and reimbursements to conceal the extent of political contributions" in the municipal-bond market.
Mr. Levitt, who said he fully supports the direction the MSRB has taken, stated that "eliminating conflicts inherent in direct checks to campaign `war chests' may be an empty gesture if those same checks are handed over to well-heeled consultants who trade in government influence."
The SEC chief added, "I can assure you that we will not ignore the use of advisers and consultants as we pursue this issue."
In the speech, where he vowed "a strong enforcement presence" to increase investor confidence in the integrity of the muni market, Mr. Levitt also noted "allegations about offerings that lack economic merit or that misrepresent the tax status of the bonds."
Chiefly at issue here are municipal securities that were sold to reap fat fees and arbitrage profits by investing bond proceeds in higher-yielding obligations rather than to finance the projects for which the bond offerings ostensibly were intended.
Securities deemed by the Internal Revenue Service to be arbitrage bonds become taxable, even though they were sold to investors as tax-exempt securities.
The IRS has stepped up its own muni enforcement efforts and has begun to coordinate those efforts with the SEC.
The potential interplay between tax and securities laws in the muni arena has long been recognized, but to date has generated little in the way of coordinated enforcement action.
