When Texas legislators overhauled the workers' compensation system in 1989, the new law was hailed as a model for other states.
A model?
It depends whom you ask.
For many of the state's largest businesses, the reforms, designed to lower costs and improve benefits, have worked well.
But ask small businesses, and it's a different story.
Many remain outside the system, arguing that costs haven't come down nearly as much as promised -- if they have come down at all.
And injured workers are even more upset, complaining that they are cast adrift in a complex hearing process -- outgunned by company lawyers and abandoned by plaintiffs' attorneys who won't work under limits on legal fees.
In fact, a state appeals court in August ruled the law unconstitutionally deprives workers of their right to fair compensation for workplace injuries.
And even if the law is upheld by the state Supreme Court, it has to survive a concerted attack by legislative enemies in the 1995 session.
"The Texas reforms have been touted as a model for other states," says Deece Eckstein, a member of the state Board of Insurance.
"But it hasn't been established yet that the benefits have been improved for injured workers, or that costs have gone down for most businesses, especially small businesses."
That wasn't the way it was supposed to be four years ago, when legislators approved sweeping changes in the 75-year-old system for compensating employees for workplace injuries.
Taking aim at runaway costs that threatened to chase insurers and businesses from the state, legislators set standards based on American Medical Association guidelines for determining disability, tied attorneys' fees to actual time and expenses, and put limits on lump-sum settlements.
Employers in Texas can buy workers' compensation insurance from among some 260 private insurers, or from the Texas Workers' Compensation Insurance Fund, a private fund capitalized by a state bond issue.
Large employers also can self insure, while keeping the law's protection against large legal judgments.
But Texas is also one of three states that allow employers to "go bare" -- not provide any workers' compensation coverage at all.
Many companies instead pay for employees' injuries out of pocket or by purchasing standard health and disability policies, along with an indemnity policy to guard against catastrophic claims.
According to a study by Texas A&M University, 44% of businesses in the state don't provide workers' comp insurance.
That may change.
The Texas Workers' Compensation Commission is considering asking for a legislative review of mandatory coverage; commissioners could decide tomorrow to include the issue in a list of topics for consideration by the Texas Sunset Commission.
By many measures, the reforms, which have the support of most of the state's business associations, helped.
Double-digit increases in premiums paid by businesses to insurance companies have been curbed, and total premiums dropped by 25% in 1992 -- to $2.9 billion from $4 billion.
In a recent survey by the National Federation of Independent Business, nearly a third of Texas small businesses that are in the system saw their rates fall in the past year.
At the same time, compensation for some workers has improved: The average weekly benefit has increased to $250 from $190 under the old law; maximum benefits have nearly doubled to $464 a week.
But look a little closer, and the gains become less impressive.
Nearly half of those surveyed small businesses, for instance, said their workers' comp rates rose in the past year.
Moreover, $1 billion of the $1.1 billion decline in premiums stems from the fact that under the new law insurance companies can offer deductibles; the costs, in other words, have been shifted from the front end to the back.
In addition, critics say, the use of deductibles primarily helps large companies, which can better absorb big losses.
Big enterprises also can use their clout to negotiate rates below the state-established benchmarks.
Little wonder, then, that 88% of businesses with more than 1,000 employees have chosen to remain in the system, compared with 60% of those with two to five employees.
Certainly Tom Weekley, owner of Whalen Furniture Inc. in McAllen, hasn't seen his rates fall.
His rates jumped 8.8% in 1992, leaving his annual premiums at twice their 1990 level -- even though he hasn't had a claim in 14 years.
For their part, insurers insist they need to recoup losses incurred under the old system, while many remain reluctant to lower rates while the reforms still could be reversed by the courts.
Perhaps, but until rates come down significantly, many companies will continue to opt out of the system.
A case in point: Southern Foods Group Inc., a Dallas milk-processing company with 2,200 employees, which decided two years ago to operate without workers' comp insurance.
The big reason, says Pamela Bush, the company's occupational-injury benefits manager, was cost.
Since leaving the system, she says, premiums that were "in the millions" have been eliminated.
Instead, the company pays injured workers' medical expenses and 80% of lost salary for as long as an injured employee is off work (compared with 70% to 75% for no more than two years under workers' compensation), and it buys an indemnity policy to cover catastrophic losses.
And instead of sending permanently disabled workers a check to compensate for the loss of wage-earning capacity, Southern retrains its employees for new jobs.
Southern's annual costs now: less than $1 million.
Nonsubscription also does away with the insurance-company middleman, Ms. Bush says, allowing her to communicate directly with the injured worker and giving her greater control over treatment.
"For those of us who have really good alternative programs, going back would be devastating," she says.
Nonsubscribers, however, face substantial risks.
A company without workers' comp insurance has to be only partly negligent to be fully liable for damages.
And while claims for damages under the workers' comp law are capped, outside the system they are limitless.
Witness a recent case in Houston, in which a truck driver slipped out of his truck, injuring his back and sustaining $17,000 in medical costs.
His jury award: $3.5 million.
Still, if businesses are unhappy with the new law, injured workers are devastated.
For many injured workers, nonsubscription can mean they are at the mercy of not-always-benevolent employers.
Some feel they are rushed back to work too soon, or that hard-to-verify injuries such as back pain are downplayed.
"It's a fiefdom," says Richard Levy, Texas AFL-CIO's staff counsel.
"There isn't a system to insure that the worker's rights are protected."
Moreover, plaintiffs' lawyers, who in the past did very well pressing workers' compensation claims, have all but abandoned the field.
They complain that the new limits on fees and lump-sum settlements have made compensation cases unaffordable.
"This is about the worst law I've ever seen the Texas Legislature pass," says Phil Hardberger, a San Antonio attorney whose workers' compensation case load has plunged to two from 400.
Mary Flores, a cardiac nurse in San Antonio, didn't have a lawyer when she pressed her claim for a chronic foot injury through the Texas Workers' Compensation Commission's new hearing process.
She won her case in an administrative hearing, but a commission appeals panel overturned the decision.
She then scoured page after page in the telephone book looking for a lawyer willing to appeal her case in state court.
No takers.
"When you have an attorney, they know the law, they know when to move fast, and they will fight for you," Ms. Flores says.
"If you don't have an attorney, you can't do anything.
I think the law is very unfair."
So far, state courts have agreed.
Most recently, the Fourth Court of Appeals in San Antonio upheld a state district judge and found the workers' comp reforms unconstitutional.
In a 4-to-3 decision, which has been appealed to the state Supreme Court, the court found it was "arbitrary and irrational" to make it hard for only one side to hire a lawyer.
The appeals court found much in the law to fault.
It concluded the AMA guidelines are irrelevant in determining how much a specific injury is likely to impair job performance, and that the limits on jury trials denies access to the courts.
Backers worry that a less-than-resounding rejection of the lower courts' arguments could cast a pall over the Legislature's sunset review of the workers' comp commission.
And even with a favorable court decision, industry expects a tough lobbying effort by trial lawyers and organized labor to gut the law.
Concedes Dick Brown, an insurance-industry lobbyist: "It's going to take a colossal struggle to get the system through intact."
In his State of the Union address last night, President Clinton took a step in the right direction on crime.
For example, the public wants thrice-convicted violent criminals locked up for good, and last night the president heeded their call.
But who really speaks for this administration on crime, the president or Attorney General Janet Reno?
Ms. Reno has challenged the need for mandatory minimum prison sentences, praised 1960s-style criminal rehabilitation programs that don't work, and mumbled about "prevention" even as violent crimes by juveniles have reached horrifying new heights.
On crime and other issues, last night the president sounded like a born-again New Democrat.
But when political push comes to policy shove, will he choose the centrist majorities of both parties over the liberal elite of his own?
The record of the past year is hardly encouraging, but the crime issue affords him the perfect opportunity to rehabilitate himself.
As the president's pollsters surely know, solid majorities of Americans, including overwhelming majorities of African-Americans, believe that criminals who assault, rape, rob, burglarize, deal drugs or murder should be arrested, prosecuted and punished in a swift and certain fashion.
They believe that violent and repeat criminals should be imprisoned; that a prison sentence of X years should mean a prison sentence of X years (truth-in-sentencing); that criminals with multiple convictions should receive long prison sentences or life without parole (two- or three-time-loser laws); and that capital punishment is warranted on both social and moral grounds.
Among the liberal elite, however, only gun control is politically correct; criminal control isn't.
For a generation now, the sorts of people who have been cheering Ms. Reno's speeches have been speaking condescendingly of the need to educate the public about the virtues of alternatives to incarceration, and lamenting the ostensible failure of policy makers to resist public pressures to lock up street predators.
By every measure, the anti-incarceration elite has been winning its tug-of-war with the public on crime.
The so-called get-tough laws of the 1980s were filled with get-out-of-jail loopholes.
Prison is now the alternative sentence: About three of every four convicted criminals (more than three million people) are on the streets without meaningful probation or parole supervision.
The average time served in confinement fell by several months in the 1980s.
Most convicted criminals spend only about one-third of their sentences in prison.
On average, convicted rapists spend barely five years in prison; robbers spend 3.9 years; assaulters and burglars spend barely two years; and drug traffickers spend less than two years.
Only 42% of reported murders result in a prison sentence; most convicted murderers spend well under 10 years behind bars.
The Swiss cheese of mandatory sentencing laws has left little room behind bars for petty, first-time or nonviolent criminals.
More than 93% of state prisoners are violent criminals, repeat criminals (with two or more felony convictions) or violent repeat criminals.
Most of the "property offenders" behind bars have long criminal histories and a propensity for violence.
Within three years about two-thirds of all probationers get into serious trouble with the law again, and 20% of released property offenders are rearrested for a violent crime.
It's true that, measured in relation to the country's total residential population, the rate of incarceration in the U.S. has been going up.
But so has the rate of cereal consumption, bike-helmet wearing and gasoline consumption.
The relevant measure is the rate of incarceration relative to the number of serious crimes being committed.
Today only some 7% of burglaries in the U.S. ever result in an arrest, and barely 1.2% ever result in imprisonment.
And the probability that a violent criminal, or violent repeat criminal, will go to prison and serve most of his time behind bars in the U.S. is today only about one-fifth what it was in the early 1960s.
Even though crime has long been a leading public concern, barely a half cent of every government dollar (federal, state and local) goes to keeping convicted criminals behind bars, and just over three cents goes to all criminal justice activities (cops, courts and corrections).
Indeed, American taxpayers spend about seven times more on transportation, 12 times more on public welfare programs and 27 times more on education and libraries than they do on prison and jails.
In short, the people know what the Renos deny: America has crime without punishment, and it has got to stop if we are even going to rebuild public confidence in government, let alone our economically crime-ravaged inner cities.
But as years of public frustration with crime have begun to boil over, the people are being subjected to a last-ditch anti-incarceration dodge: Even though public spending on prisons relative to other government activities is a pittance, it would "cost too much" (we are told) to imprison all violent repeat criminals for all or most of their terms; even if crime pays, stiffening sentences, abolishing parole and adding prisons won't help.
The best available evidence, however, suggests that prison pays for most prisoners.
In 1987 a Justice Department study analyzed the social costs and benefits of imprisonment.
That study gave rise to a storm of criticism, most of it purely ideological.
Since then a number of independent studies, including one by Harvard economist Ann Piehl and me (published in The Brookings Review), have been done.
They suggest that, on average, it costs society about twice as much to let a criminal roam the streets as it does to keep him behind bars.
Prisoner self-report surveys conducted in New Jersey, Wisconsin and other jurisdictions reveal that the typical street criminal commits more than a dozen serious crimes a year when free, excluding all drug crimes.
Each crime imposes costs on its victims and on society -- physical pain and suffering, hospital bills, days lost from work, psychological trauma (including the trauma of experiencing a "mere" property crime such as burglary).
According to several studies, it costs society hundreds of billions of dollars each year to heal the economic and human wounds wrought by street crime.
Prison pays for chronic juvenile offenders, too.
For example, in 1983 the federal government began a program for "serious habitual" juvenile criminals.
In 20 cities law enforcement officials identified juveniles who had done three or more major crimes.
These juveniles were targeted for arrest and prosecution, and they received the maximum penalties available under law.
As a result of this program, a number of jurisdictions experienced sharp decreases in both violent and property crimes.
Get-tough politics is good crime policy.
One can only hope that the president who delivered last night's speech will order his attorney general to publish a list of the federal and state prisoners who she believes ought never to have been incarcerated, complete with an objective account of their criminal histories -- or insist that she stop spouting Waco-reasoned cant about mandatory prison terms.
Let him further demand that she support new mandatory minimum sentences for violent and repeat criminals, or detail her fundamental disagreements with presidential policy and resign.
And let him brook no nonsense from Democratic congressmen who demand more money for Great Society retreads as the price of their support for serious anticrime measures.
If the president breaks faith with the public on crime, he will be a three-time loser -- morally, intellectually and politically.
Let us hope that last night's words mean that, when it comes to the government's role in fighting crime, he's decided to go straight.
Mr. DiIulio is professor of politics and public affairs at Princeton University and a fellow in governmental studies at the Brookings Institution.
