`COMPLIANCE is good business.
That's our adage for the '90s."
So says Ted Levine, once the No. 2 enforcer at the Securities and Exchange Commission and now the top lawyer inside PaineWebber Group Inc.
Mr. Levine is one of a new breed of lawyer signing up at Wall Street firms, as continuing scandals and regulatory crackdowns force the industry to recognize that it needs to police itself better.
In the six months since his arrival in PaineWebber's executive offices, Mr. Levine already has implemented a series of measures designed to keep the big brokerage house -- hit somewhat worse than competitors by recent customer lawsuits -- out of further trouble.
Among his biggest changes so far: establishing a dispute-resolution system to settle tough cases early, and placing the legal department in charge of the employee group that handles sales-practice complaints.
In the past, the complaint staff consulted with lawyers only on an ad-hoc basis.
To make the new system work, Mr. Levine has sought, and received, authorization to add as many as 20 lawyers to his staff, which currently numbers about 40.
He also is planning to establish a confidential hot line to the legal department for employees who seek to report suspicious activity.
Securities firms routinely are sued by customers with complaints of varying merit and seriousness.
Mr. Levine's goal is an environment in which any wronged customers are readily compensated.
This approach, he hopes, will cut the number of PaineWebber cases going to arbitration by roughly 30% over the next year and reduce long-term legal costs.
THE MOVES mark a bold departure from the traditional image of a brokerage firm's top legal officer as a mostly passive clerk.
At worst, Wall Street's in-house lawyers have been water-carriers for management rather than defenders of their true client -- the firms themselves.
At best, they have been well-meaning but generally powerless functionaries brought into the loop only after a crisis has developed.
Typically, securities-industry staff lawyers have come up through company ranks, which can give them a provincial outlook.
By contrast, the 49-year-old Mr. Levine has been something of a world citizen, as least as far as securities are concerned.
After departing his post as associate director of the SEC's enforcement division in 1984, he spent nearly a decade as a partner at the elite Washington law firm Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering.
In addition to nearly all of the biggest brokerage houses (but not PaineWebber, as it happens), his clients included Ivan Boesky.
Mr. Levine's arrival at PaineWebber comes as the securities industry is experiencing growth on the bottom line but turmoil in the executive suite -- and especially in the law department.
Just over a year ago, the SEC's report on the Salomon Inc.
Treasury-auction scandal sounded a wake-up call to in-house attorneys.
Among other things, the report singled out Donald M. Feuerstein, Salomon's chief legal counsel, for failing to order an internal investigation into the firm's submission of false Treasury bids.
(Mr. Feuerstein, forced to resign after the 1991 scandal, faced no legal action by the agency.)
And in a sudden shift two weeks ago, Prudential Securities Inc. relieved its general counsel, Loren Schechter, of his legal duties.
Civil and criminal authorities are investigating what role the firm's legal department played in reviewing and approving documents used in selling limited partnerships, people familiar with the situation say.
The SEC is looking into whether Prudential misled investors about the risks and returns on $8 billion of the partnerships in the 1980s.
Both firms have reached outside of Wall Street in their search for new legal officers.
Salomon picked Robert Mundheim, formerly co-chairman of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson and briefly a special counsel to the SEC.
Prudential temporarily filled its vacancy with Lee Spencer, who like Mr. Levine is a former SEC official who has recently practiced in a law firm.
Mr. Levine is known not only for defending his brokerage-firm clients in adversary settings but also for counseling them on how to avoid problems.
Some critics say he can be aggressive and even abrasive, but others see his bulldog tenacity as a virtue.
William McLucas, chief of the SEC's enforcement division, says Mr. Levine is considered "tough competition" by those at the agency.
And Harvey Pitt, a leading member of the securities bar and a partner at Fried Frank, says Mr. Levine has more "practical skills in dealing with the securities industry than any other lawyer."
HE WILL NEED them.
About two years ago, PaineWebber began developing a reputation for having messier sales practices than many other firms.
According to the Securities Arbitration Commentator, a newsletter that tracks cases against broker-dealers, PaineWebber lost 61% of customer-dispute arbitrations in the first half of 1992 -- the worst of any top-10 brokerage house.
A series of high-profile disputes with customers then took a financial and public-relations toll: From July 1992 to July 1993, PaineWebber was ordered to pay a total of $16.4 million in its four largest arbitration awards alone, reportedly more than any other top-10 firm was ordered to pay in total arbitration awards during the same period.
In part, PaineWebber's trouble may have been that it pursued more hard-to-defend cases to arbitration, instead of settling beforehand.
The firm's chairman and chief executive, Donald Marron, was said to hate giving up without a fight.
But Mr. Marron privately has told colleagues he wants to cut the firm's docket of customer arbitrations.
At dinner about a year ago, Mr. Marron's friend, Martin Lipton, the takeover lawyer, suggested the executive call on Mr. Levine.
The mandate was clear, Mr. Levine says: "We want to have the best legal and compliance system on Wall Street."
