When the French Alps were chosen as the site of the 1992 Winter Olympics, organizers promised that the Games would pay for themselves and give a long-term boost to the local economy.
They were only half right.
After two years, most of the resorts in the Savoie area that hosted events -- with one notable exception -- are breathing a sigh of relief.
Tourism, the lifeblood of the region, is rising and is expected to continue to do so, despite bad publicitiy about avalanches, which this past weekend killed six people.
And the higher receipts are helping local authorities to recoup the investments they made to upgrade their resorts to Olympic standards.
The Games themselves defied expectations by losing money, largely because of big cost overruns on a bobsled track at La Plagne and ski jumps at Courchevel.
But local officials say the deficit of 280 million French francs ($47.6 million), out of spending of 4.2 billion francs, is a modest price to pay for the goodwill and international publicity the Olympics generated.
Moreover, by packing 10 to 15 years of capital investment into just four years before the Games, many resorts believe they are now well placed to compete more effectively with rivals in the Austrian and Swiss Alps.
"I don't see anything negative from the Games.
The fact that we are a little indebted isn't bad, given what we were able to do with the money," says Michel Giraudy, the tourism director of Val d'Isere, where the men's downhill races were staged.
Indeed, despite recession in Europe, business in Val d'Isere and nearby resorts rose as much as 20% last year, with a marked increase in visitors from the U.S. and Japan.
Although it's still early, the crucial winter season this year is off to a strong start, too.
A big factor is new roads and a high-speed rail line in the region that the French government funded as part of its contribution to the Games.
They have made access to the sometimes remote mountain villages much easier.
Just as important, bankers and local officials say, was the financial prudence shown by the resorts themselves, most of which were careful not to overreach when adding mountainside equipment and tourist accommodations.
The one exception is the tiny village of Brides-les-Bains, population 606, whose current woes provide a sober lesson to any would-be hosts of Olympic events.
"Only those who had fantastic dreams are now finding that the awakening is brutal," says Sophie Guillaud, an official at the Chamber of Commerce in Chambery, the Savoie's biggest town.
Brides-les-Bains was the site of the Olympic village.
Not content with just sprucing itself up for the occasion, the run-down spa embarked on a 200 million franc investment program that its mayor hoped would propel it into a brave new era of prosperity.
Besides helping to finance a new cable car to Meribel, a resort further up the mountainside where the women's ski races were held, the village built a huge parking facility, rebuilt its casino, tennis courts and town hall and renovated both the spa facilities and the grand hotel next to them.
The number of tourist beds in the village was increased 62% to 4,000.
But less than half the village's expenses were reimbursed by the French Olympic organizers and by Meribel, in its contribution to the cable car.
After paying what it could from its own meager resources, Brides-les-Bains now has debts of about 50 million francs and at least one costly white elephant on its hands, an Olympic-size gymnasium complete with electronic scoreboard.
The gym's main use these days is as a lunch club for the mainly elderly population.
Mayor Jean-Francois Chedal, who is also a ski instructor, insists, "I don't have any regrets."
But contractors that are still owed money for their work are livid, and banks have effectively boycotted the village.
Mr. Chedal made things worse for himself by not seeking loans until after work had started.
All the banks he then approached refused to give credit, saying the renovation program was too ambitious.
"Any community that acts like that ruins its reputation," says Jacques Guerber, a board member of Credit Local de France, a recently privatized French bank that specializes in financing local authorities.
While it helped to fund many other Olympic-related projects in the region, Credit Local has so far steered clear of Brides-les-Bains.
Mr. Guerber says, however, that the bank may be ready to help find "a credible solution" to the problems.
Two other villages, Pralognan and Les Saisies, incurred Olympic-related costs they couldn't handle, but they have managed to reschedule their debts.
And all the resorts have had to dig deep into their pockets to finance the Games, raising local taxes and slowing municipal investment to a trickle for the immediate future.
But bankers and local officials say the increased financial burden was expected and, except for Brides-les-Bain, easily managed.
The Savoie regional authorities had even set aside reserves in case the Games made a loss, and consequently absorbed their share of the deficit without difficulty.
The French government covered 75% of the shortfall.
In the immediate aftermath of the Games, times have grown tougher for some.
The heavy construction that went on before the Games sparked a boom that created 14,000 jobs between 1985 and 1990 and enabled the region to ward off the recession stalking the rest of France.
Once the Games were over, however, the slump came all the harder.
But Michel Barnier, a Savoie politician who played a central role in organizing the Olympics, has soared up the career ladder: he is currently environment minister in the national government.
And for Mr. Giraudy, Val d'Isere's tourism director, the lesson of the Olympics is clear.
"We are richer and happier than we realize," he says.
