This spring the House will consider two complementary bills on the now famous information superhighway: the Antitrust Reform Act and the National Communications Competition and Information Infrastructure Act.
The bills are aimed at lifting most of the limitations on local telephone and cable companies aspiring to compete in multimedia services.
The 1984 consent agreement that broke up AT&T prohibited local telephone operating companies from entering the long-distance market, from marketing their own information services, and from making telephone equipment.
To a dyed-in-the-wool free-marketer such as myself, these restraints appear to suppress competition and be wrongheaded.
Yet the public and Congress should consider the rationale behind the original antitrust agreement carefully before lifting these bans.
The local phone companies, the Baby Bells, are regulated monopolies.
As such, they must justify their rates to a state public utilities commission -- a requirement that the administration plans to maintain.
Law and economics require that these authorities grant tariffs high enough for the firms to earn profits.
If a commission refuses to approve charges that will cover costs and allow a modest profit, the utility eventually will fail and exit the business.
Needless to say, that would not benefit the telephone companies' customers nor would the courts countenance a commission's committing such folly.
Arriving at an appropriate rate is neither easy nor mechanical.
The phone company must earn enough to cover the cost of its investment, including interest and dividends.
Thus, the regulators must start by valuing the regulated utility's investments -- the rate base.
This procedure is complex and subject to imponderables.
Among the problems: All data originate with the regulated firm; what costs are proper to include?
If the firm is buying from a subsidiary, regulators must judge the appropriateness of the transfer price.
In the case of a telephone company purchasing unique and expensive switching equipment from its subsidiary, for example, regulators will be unable to detect whether the daughter company is overcharging its parent and thus providing grounds for the regulated Bell company to justify charging its captive customers higher prices.
Alternatively, if the state commission extends its oversight to manufacturing facilities, the regulated enterprise may find it profitable to lose money in the competitive market, possibly by selling telephones to the public at low cost, thus increasing its share of the market and the size of its manufacturing plant.
Regulators must then grant high enough phone rates to cover the company's swollen investment, including the expanded telephone production facility.
The impossibility of sorting out these schemes lies behind the original prohibition on the Baby Bells from manufacturing, offering services or entering the long-distance market.
The National Communications Competition and Information Infrastructure Act, which is sponsored by Rep. Edward Markey (D., Mass.) and co-sponsored by Reps. Jack Fields (R., Texas) and Rick Boucher (D., Va.), would authorize the local phone companies to offer cable TV service in competition with existing companies.
Although the proposed act bans cross-subsidization, accounting methods are too uncertain to measure inflated or underpriced services.
For example, offering a cable system would require that the telephone company install additional capacity -- probably fiber optics.
Paying generous wages, employing additional labor "in order to speed the installation," and timing street digging for off-hours (at premium rates) to minimize traffic disruption would boost the cost of the new capacity.
Since regulators must permit a "fair" return on investment, these costly but justifiable steps would permit the regulated utility to rationalize higher telephone charges to captive residential users while its TV transmission business met or perhaps undercut the rates of the existing cable company.
As long as the Bell operating companies remain regulated, licensing them to compete with nonregulated firms, to manufacture switching equipment or other telecommunications gear, or to vie in the long-distance market raises significant opportunities for cross-subsidization and manipulation of the rate base, leading to inflated charges to residential customers and/or below-cost rates in competitive sectors.
Faith in regulators' abilities to detect these stratagems is not justified.
Only true deregulation could eliminate these biases.
To be successful, it requires that states and communities allow all comers to enter the telephone business.
Restrictions on licensing, rates or services would be incompatible with open competition.
At least initially, such decontrol would mean higher charges for local users, although rates might fall eventually.
Vice President Al Gore has emphasized, however, that all citizens must have access to this new information highway.
Since many will be unwilling or unable to pay the cost of connecting to this telecommunications network, cross-subsidies, which are incompatible with free markets, are almost certain to be required.
The administration does not intend to provide total freedom from state supervision.
In a December speech, Mr. Gore said that it will eschew "regulation for regulation's sake and the blind adherence to the dead hand of a free-market economist."
Nevertheless, only the live hand of a really free market is compatible with lifting the restrictions placed on the Bell operating companies.
Mr. Moore, a Hoover Institution fellow, was a member of the Council of Economic Advisers from 1985 to 1989.
