Self-reliance is as important as government programs in promoting economic advancement of blacks, the National Urban League said in its annual "State of Black America" report.
John Jacob, the league's president, called self-development "the firmest strategic foundation" for black advancement.
But he said the government plays a critical role in creating an environment in which blacks' efforts could flourish.
He called on President Clinton to make job creation and training for the disadvantaged a top priority, saying blacks need low-skill jobs that will let them raise families and educate their children for the high-skill jobs of the future.
"We want to see the president press as hard for jobs as he did for Nafta," Mr. Jacob said.
He added that Nafta, the North American Free Trade Agreement, endangers low-skilled jobs, making efforts to create such work more critical than ever.
Marcus Alexis, an economist who cowrote one chapter of the report, called the new emphasis on self-reliance "a watershed moment" in the civil rights movement.
Mr. Jacob warned, however, that neither the government nor the private sector has done enough to allow blacks to succeed.
In the annual report, he cited a Wall Street Journal study of companies that showed blacks were the only group to suffer a net job loss during the 1990-1991 recession, an employment pattern that he said at best suggests companies are indifferent to their social and legal obligations.
The explanation by some corporations that they were more concerned about aggregate minority employment than black job losses, he wrote, "raises the troubling possibility that corporate diversity programs could become barely disguised `black removal' programs."
Mr. Jacob said the government should make sure that local unskilled workers get many of the construction jobs that will be created to repair roads damaged by this week's California earthquake.
One-third of blacks lived in poverty in 1992, a much higher portion than the overall 14.7% national poverty rate, the report said.
Still, many of the report's authors refused to dwell on grim statistics.
Instead, they described vacant lots in inner cities as unnoticed resources for economic development, and cited black middle-class families who had improved housing and schools in their neighborhoods.
One small Southern church, where 96% of the congregation was on welfare, combined members' food stamps, bought supplies from a wholesale grocer, and opened a grocery store in the church auditorium, Mr. Jacob said.
Within four months, the members had enough money to buy a supermarket, and eventually, they bought a farm, tractors, meat-processing plants and restaurants.
Now, nobody in the congregation is on welfare, he said.
"Any group that waits for outside forces to come into the community and lift them up is doomed to be sitting there 20 years from now wishing and waiting," Mr. Jacob said.
"We cannot get trapped by the rhetoric of the 1980s, and write these communities off."
