ITT Corp. said it will offer about 20% of its ITT Educational Services Inc. unit to the public later this year.
Analysts view the plan as a likely prelude to selling the unit outright.
The unit, which has about 20,000 fulltime students in 48 schools, is one of ITT's less prominent operations.
While the company declined to provide financial specifics, analysts say the unit had about $125 million in revenue in 1993, with a pretax profit of about $25 million.
The announcement underscored ITT's recent efforts to revamp its collection of businesses.
In the past several months ITT has spun off its lagging Rayonier timber unit, recapitalized its ITT Sheraton Inc. unit and announced more than $1.8 billion in spending and acquisition plans for the hotel unit.
The offering "will enable Educational Services to get some seasoning as a company," said Gary Schneider, an analyst with Bear, Stearns & Co., in a report, "after which, we expect ITT to sell its remaining equity interest."
ITT declined to say whether it would sell the unit outright.
The unit is one of ITT's more diverse businesses.
The $22 billion company that makes top-of-the-line antilock braking systems and night-vision goggles and owns hotels also educates local plumbers and refrigerator repairers.
Degree programs at the Technical Institutes include Heating, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration; Computer-Aided Drafting; and Automated Manufacturing Technology.
"There's a spotlight on for-profit education these days," said Andrew Beja, a schools analyst with Advest.
Mr. Beja cited a growing interest in more narrowly focused, technical post-secondary education and the success the institutes have had in finding graduates work.
"These schools focus themselves on where the jobs will be coming from in the next 10 to 15 years . . . such as management information systems, electronics, computer systems and telecommunications," Mr. Beja said.
But analysts also said growing concern about abuse of the federal loan system may have prompted ITT's move.
Like most schools in the proprietary, or for-profit, educational system, ITT Technical Institutes rely heavily on federal loan programs to cover student expenses.
Some analysts believe that increasing default problems at technical schools could lead to stiffer regulatory requirements, even for those schools without existing problems.
ITT spokesman James Gallagher said the ITT schools had no federal loan problems.
In 1991, federal regulators reported that ITT's default rate was about 15.5%.
Regulations require schools to remain below 30%.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, ITT stock gained 37.5 cents, or 0.4%, to close at $86.50.
