The "ill-gotten gains" that CIA agent Aldrich Ames allegedly received for spying for Moscow are well over $2.5 million, significantly more than originally estimated, prosecutors said.
And according to a prosecution document filed in federal court in Alexandria, Va., Maria del Rosario Casas Ames, Mr. Ames's wife, has admitted their involvement in espionage.
According to the document, she "admitted that knowing of her husband's espionage activities she . . . encouraged him to make meetings with the Russians, and advised him in certain other aspects of his illegal conduct."
William Cummings, Mrs. Ames's lawyer, said she denies that assertion, adding that investigators may have taken wiretapped telephone conversations out of context.
When the Central Intelligence Agency officer was arrested, officials said he was paid $1.5 million over nine years by Moscow.
"Evidence recently uncovered suggests that their `ill-gotten gains' are substantially greater and raise their take to well beyond $2.5 million," said the document, filed to oppose bail for Mrs. Ames.
Mr. Ames's lawyer had no comment.
The government's larger estimate lends support to the argument made by some intelligence insiders that Mr. Ames was more important to the Russians, and more damaging to U.S. intelligence, than was disclosed last week in the Federal Bureau of Investigation's original criminal complaint.
Among other things, people familiar with Mr. Ames's career say he worked with several major Soviet defectors during the 1980s, and more recently traveled extensively in former East bloc countries.
The money received by Mr. Ames was stashed in three accounts in Switzerland, six in the U.S., one in Colombia and a "BNL account in Italy, still believed to be the depository for substantial funds," according to the brief prepared by the U.S. attorney's office for the eastern district of Virginia.
BNL is Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, the Rome-based bank whose Atlanta branch has been embroiled in a scandal involving loans made to Iraq before the Persian Gulf War.
The CIA's inquiry into the BNL-Iraq link has been criticized.
Amid the fallout from the Ames case, the Russian government yesterday expelled a U.S. diplomat and removed the head of its counterintelligence service.
President Boris Yeltsin's firing of Nikolai Galushko was provoked less by the Ames matter than by the recent release from prison of Alexander Rutskoi and other hard-line foes of Mr. Yeltstin, news reports from Moscow said.
But yesterday's expulsion order against James Morris, counselor at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, clearly was in retaliation for the similar U.S. action Friday against Aleksandr Lysenko, Russia's top intelligence officer in the U.S.
Back in the U.S., new information was disclosed about Mr. Ames's CIA career that casts doubt on the government's account of when it became suspicious of him.
People familiar with his work said that during the past year, Mr. Ames traveled on agency business not only to the former Soviet republic of Georgia, but also to Russia and Kazakhstan.
He also visited Turkey and the Balkans, one person said.
Further information about his travels may be disclosed at his arraignment hearing today at the Alexandria federal court.
When Mr. Ames was accused last week of spying for the Russians since 1985, government sources told reporters that Mr. Ames was transferred to narcotics work from counterintelligence in 1991 because he had come under suspicion.
It is highly unlikely that the agency would have sent him to Russian and other former Soviet bloc nations if it had really zeroed in on him.
At the time of the transfer, Mr. Ames, a former chief of the Soviet branch in the CIA's counterintelligence group, told friends that he regarded the move as a promotion from a field that was dying with the end of the Cold War to an area that was likely to be a growth area as the CIA cast about for new missions.
In his new assignment pursuing drug trafficking in the old East bloc, he told them, he would get a chance to visit the countries he spent decades studying.
Over the past 15 years, Mr. Ames worked with several major Soviet defectors, former colleagues said.
It already is known that he debriefed Vitaly Yurchenko, one of the most significant KGB defectors ever, for a brief period in 1985.
In addition, while posted to New York from 1976 to 1981, he was a secondary handler of Arkady Shevchenko, a Soviet official who was undersecretary general of the United Nations.
And while running Soviet operations in the CIA station in Rome in 1986, he received Viktor Gudarev, a Soviet intelligence official who had been based in Athens.
Also, Oleg Gordievsky, a former KGB station chief in Moscow who secretly worked for the British, told the BBC Monday that he now believes he was betrayed to the Soviets by Mr. Ames.
His involvement in those cases is significant because the CIA's old-boy network has worked over the past week to portray Mr. Ames as an inept drunk who never produced any significant work.
