Tenneco Inc. swung to a profit in the fourth quarter from a sizable loss a year ago after restructuring charges, and said it isn't currently planning to sell its largest unit, the Case Corp. farm-equipment maker.
Tenneco reported fourth-quarter net income of $150 million, or 83 cents a share, compared with a year-earlier loss of $826 million, or $5.63 a share.
The most recent quarter's results include a gain of $10 million on the sale of certain assets and a gain of $27 million from the sale of Cummins Engine Co. stock.
The 1992 quarter included a restructuring charge of $843 million and a loss of $12 million from a penalty for early retirement of debt.
Revenue rose 2% to $3.38 billion from $3.31 billion.
Dana Mead, Tenneco's president and chief operating officer, said that Tenneco's Case division, which has struggled financially in recent years, was the biggest contributor to the improved yearly results -- posting operating profit of $82 million, compared with a loss of $260 million before restructuring charges, a year ago.
Nevertheless, Mr. Mead responded to questions about speculation on Wall Street that Tenneco is planning to sell Case by saying, "we have always said we're opportunistic" and want to "improve shareholder value."
But he added, "we haven't put it on the block, we're not out peddling it."
He also said Tenneco hasn't been approached by a prospective buyer.
Some securities analysts say a more likely strategy is to make an initial public offering of Case, or to spin it off to shareholders as a separate company.
Mr. Mead declined to comment on those options.
Ronald Barone, a Kidder Peabody analyst, said, "My guess is that if they're ever going to do anything with it, this will be the year.
Then they can use the proceeds for higher-return businesses."
Separately, Mr. Mead said that Michael Walsh, Tenneco's chairman and chief executive, continues recovering from brain surgery last weekend.
He said that although it's unclear when Mr. Walsh will return to work, "we expect it will be within a reasonable period of time."
For the year, Tenneco reported net income of $426 million, or $2.44 a share, compared with a loss of $1.32 billion, or $9.29 a share, a year ago.
The most recent year's results include a penalty of $25 million from early retirement of debt.
The previous year's results include a restructuring charge of $843 million and a charge of $699 million from a change in accounting methods.
Revenue edged up to $13.26 billion from $13.14 billion.
Tenneco also said it expects to take a first-quarter charge of $39 million, or 22 cents a share, from an accounting change.
For the year-ago first quarter, the company had net income of $74 million, or 46 cents a share, on revenue of $3.25 billion.
