President Clinton's nuclear-disarmament agreement with Russia and Ukraine is a diplomatic success that's about to become a huge business challenge for William Timbers.
He is the head of United States Enrichment Corp., the congressionally chartered company that's in the middle of the $11.9 billion agreement to purchase uranium used in warheads of the former Soviet Union and turn it into fuel for nuclear power plants.
The basic megatons-to-megawatts agreement reached by President Clinton, Russian President Boris Yeltsin and Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk will be followed by the signing today of an implementing contract by Mr. Timbers and Viktor Mikhailov, the Russian atomic energy commissioner.
They'll sign the agreement in a building where the former Soviet Union designed the nuclear arsenal it deployed against the U.S.
Now, Mr. Mikhailov describes the arsenal in economic rather than military terms.
In an interview with NuKem Market Report, a German publication, he calls the highly enriched uranium that powers missiles and bombs "a very important reserve of Russia" because the core of the warheads represents a source of hard currency for the cash-strapped country.
As it reduces its military threat, Russia will use some of the revenue to convert its defense industries to other uses, improve the safety of its nuclear power plants, and clean up polluted areas.
That's where Mr. Timbers comes in.
U.S. Enrichment, the company he has run since March, is in charge of supervising the transformation of the warheads' highly enriched uranium to low enriched uranium for use in power plants.
Russian facilities will do the conversion, and U.S. Enrichment will buy the finished product from the Russians for sale on the world market.
The concept is simple, but execution of the plan will create two problems for Mr. Timbers.
First, the contract requires U.S. Enrichment to pay much more for the fuel than it can be sold for.
Mr. Timbers calls the difference "a national security premium" that he eventually hopes to get back from the U.S. government.
Second, U.S. Enrichment will become both a customer of the Russian nuclear industry and a competitor.
Currently, U.S. Enrichment sells about 46% of the low enriched uranium used on the world market.
The rest is sold by Cogema, a consortium led by the French government; Urenco, a British-led group; and the Russian government.
One part of the agreement makes it easier for Russia to sell low enriched uranium to nuclear power plants in the U.S. Mr. Timbers doesn't seem too worried about the additional competition.
"The Russians have good technology, but they don't know what their pricing is," he says.
Mr. Timbers, a former investment banker, got involved in the program when the U.S. Energy Department hired him to study ways to privatize commercial aspects of its nuclear-processing business.
Based on his analysis, Congress created U.S. Enrichment last year with the idea that it will eventually become privately owned.
Right now, "the Treasury is my only shareholder," says Mr. Timbers, who came to Moscow on Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen's plane for the Clinton-Yeltsin summit.
U.S. Enrichment has assets of about $3 billion, annual revenue of $1.5 billion and a profit of about $400 million, which it turns over to the Treasury.
Under the agreement, the U.S. will pay Russia $11.9 billion over 20 years for 500 metric tons of uranium.
But the contract, which also includes Belarus and Kazakhstan, could turn out to be much larger.
The inclusion of Ukraine will add 50 metric tons, which Russia will purchase in return for debt relief and fuel for power plants.
More significantly, the Russian arsenal currently contains 1,250 metric tons of highly enriched uranium.
The contract could be much larger if Russia takes the option to sell more fuel by dismantling more warheads.
The agreement will flood the market with new fuel at a time when prices already are soft.
The problem U.S. Enrichment faces is that under the contract it must pay Russia $82 for each unit of low enriched uranium it purchases at a time when the world price is $50 and likely to drop once the swords-to-plowshares program starts.
Mr. Timbers hopes that the U.S. government will decide to pay that difference to U.S. Enrichment in uranium, which it can then sell.
"I'd rather have a hard asset on the balance sheet" as the company works to become privately owned, he says.
