BUSINESS OWNERS can soon go online in their search for capital.
Next month, New Jersey entrepreneur Maben Smith intends to start an "electronic highway" that will link small-business owners with potential investors.
The computer database, an apparent first, will list individual and corporate investors and their areas of interest.
It also will list capital seekers, the amount they need and their business and financial track records.
Capital sources can get included for free but capital seekers must pay $15 a month for a listing.
"The idea is to save both investors and business owners time and money," says Mr. Smith, president of Business Opportunities Online Inc., an Atlantic Highlands, N.J., start-up that is compiling the database.
The database also will list small businesses for sale as well as franchise opportunities.
"The database grew out of my search for businesses to invest in or buy," says Mr. Smith, who previously started and sold two other tiny businesses in Canada and Mexico.
"I found it extremely difficult to obtain quality information on businesses that need money and businesses that are for sale.
The material out there was appalling," he recalls.
At first, the frustrated entrepreneur considered compiling his own printed list.
But he quickly saw a business opportunity in providing such information on-line.
He says he already has put about 7,000 names into the database.
Matching investors with potential investments has always been an imperfect task at best.
And the new service won't replace the protracted discussions involved in any financing.
But the service should help both investors and business owners narrow their search and make financing efforts more efficient, Mr. Smith suggests.
A DO-GOODER turns into an environmental venture capitalist.
Since the mid-1970s, the Jessie Smith Noyes Foundation in New York has focused on the environment and social justice by providing more than $3 million a year in grants, mainly to nonprofit groups.
Now, it has created a venture-capital program to directly invest in start-up companies that share its mission.
The move grew out of the belief that some of the foundation's $60 million in assets also could be used to support its grant making through the marketplace, says Stephen Viederman, the group's president.
So, it decided to allocate as much as $6 million for venture-capital investments.
The foundation has made four investments during the past year.
Among them: $208,000 in Lyme Timber Co., a Lyme, N.H., concern that is investing in conservation-oriented real-estate deals; and $43,000 in Natural Chemistry Inc., a New Canaan, Conn., company that is marketing enzyme-based products for spas and swimming pools.
"We are trying to reduce the dissonance between investment management and our mission," explains Woody Tasch, a veteran venture capitalist in charge of the foundation's investment program.
"Through the investment process, we are encouraging entrepreneurial companies to consider the social and environmental impact their businesses have," he adds.
HEAVENLY HELP?
Women business owners aid each other through "angels."
The National Association of Women Business Owners this week will announce the formation of an "angels' network" to connect established women business owners with those needing capital and mentoring help.
The network will attempt to remedy the discrimination faced by many women business owners when they seek financing, says Sandra Adams, chairwoman of financial services for the 5,000-member association.
"We're still being asked by lenders if we have a husband or if there's someone else in the business with us," says Ms. Adams, who runs a small computer-consulting business in Miami.
The angels primarily will consist of women who have owned a business for at least eight years and have accumulated assets that they now want to make available to other female entrepreneurs, Ms. Adams continues.
In particular, she points out, angels want to finance existing businesses that require capital to grow and expand.
Borrowers are expected to consist mostly of businesses whose financing needs are too small for traditional venture capitalists or conventional lenders.
For example, loans will be structured in such a way that borrowers won't have to start paying off the principal for at least two years or so.
For the immediate future, the network will limit its assistance to businesses whose owners already belong to the association.
But once the network gets well established, it may go nationwide, the association says.
AS THE ECONOMY revives, more firms use purchase-order financing.
Small businesses with scarce assets as collateral or with still weak balance sheets receive little help from conventional lenders, explains Anthony Brown, a managing director of MTB Bank in New York.
The problem is exacerbated among firms that deal heavily in imports and exports.
The only way many of these enterprises can finance new business is by using their purchase orders as collateral.
At MTB Bank, such loans have doubled over the past six months.
Bristol Trade Finance Inc. in Dallas says that purchase-order financing deals rose 30% during the first two months of 1994, compared with the first quarter of 1993.
When JSG (NY) Inc., a small but rapidly growing apparel maker, needed money to pay for some large orders it manufactures abroad, it got the capital through purchase-order financing, says Sanford Glazman, chief executive officer of the Boston concern.
During the past month alone, MTB has provided JSG with more than $500,000 in such financing, money that conventional banks wouldn't provide, Mr. Glazman notes.
These deals are too risky and too small for most bankers, says Fred Waldkoetter, a principal with Bristol.
But they also aren't cheap.
A bank typically charges from 1.5% to 2% of a borrower's monthly credit line as an upfront fee.
In addition, a borrower pays interest on the credit used at a rate that currently equals two percentage points above the prime rate of 6%.
Thus, fees and interest on a $150,000 line of credit for four months could well add up to nearly 11% of the total.
You get more than just money, contends Mr. Glazman of JSG.
"You're also getting someone who is more familiar with the nuances of international trade than a small business."
AMERICAN VENTURE CAPITAL EXCHANGE, Portland, Ore., says that it has operated since April 1993 an on-line computer network linking potential investors with businesses.
A Financing Small Business column in the March 1 edition said another network, starting operations in April, was an apparent first in the field.
