At first blush, Roger Sumner and the other 25,000 participants in the Los Angeles School District's "403 (b)" retirement savings plan appear to enjoy a wealth of investment choices.
Their plan allows them to select among 120 different annuities and investment contracts, each with its own menu of mutual funds and other options.
The total choices: more than 1,000 -- hundreds of times the number of alternatives typically offered to members of 401 (k) plans, the corporate equivalent to 403 (b) s.
But instead of riding high on his privileges, Mr. Sumner, for one, is planning to jump ship into no-load mutual funds excluded from the plan.
The problem with 403 (b) s, he says, is "quality," not quantity.
And he should know, since he is the assistant contracts supervisor for the Los Angeles district's 403 (b), dealing with the insurers and brokers who provide the plan's investment services.
Few participants in the Los Angeles district's plan are equipped to make such quality judgments, however.
That is because, unlike Mr. Sumner, they can't even get a list of the names of the 120 contracts they must choose from -- let alone details about those contracts' investment options, costs, terms, exit penalties and performance records.
Unfortunately, when it comes to administrative truancy, the Los Angeles district is far from unique.
Most school districts across the country take the same hands-off attitude toward their 403 (b) plans.
"Teachers' plans tend to have the least supervision" of any retirement plans, says Michael Footer, a principal at benefits consultant William M. Mercer in Richmond, Va.
"In the 401 (k) area, you have a legal obligation to look at the quality of the products offered," he says.
But with teachers' plans, "there's no judgment made about the products."
To be sure, there are some notable exceptions, such as the giant Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association-College Retirement Equity Fund, which get high marks not only for conscientious administration, but also for the low cost and high quality of their investment options.
But in general, experts caution, lax supervision is widespread in the 403 (b) area -- and is especially acute in public-school systems.
Such laxity is permissible because public-school systems are among those exempt from federal laws that govern employers' fiduciary duties toward wouldbe retirees.
Those laws -- known as the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, or Erisa -- dictate certain standards that employers must meet in screening investment providers and educating employees about their retirement plan.
While companies that fail to meet those standards can land in big trouble, similar misdeeds at school districts, churches, government offices, agencies and some nonprofit organizations are perfectly acceptable under the law.
Meanwhile, although 90% of the companies that provide investments to 403 (b) s are insurers, insurance watchdogs usually don't police this area.
Neither do securities regulators, since the mutual funds in 403 (b) s generally are offered through annuities from insurance companies.
Compounding the problem of accountability is the fact that school systems usually lack the resources to staff benefits departments and properly administer their plans.
As a result, the school districts usually are "sold investment programs, rather than being able to identify what is a good product," says Marvin Merrill, executive vice president of the National Education Association's Member Benefits, which oversees such retirement plans.
What's more, school districts and other 403 (b) sponsors often resist taking responsibility for their plans because that is the best way to ensure they won't be held accountable for potential blunders.
"The philosophy of the bureaucracy is: If I don't have the slightest idea of what's going on, no one can say I had anything to do with it," Mr. Sumner says.
In this fiduciary vacuum, "a lot of what's decided is based on politics, not what's the best investment," says Jennifer Strickland, a consultant with Morningstar Inc., a Chicago firm that tracks the performance and fees of variable annuities and mutual funds.
Such laissez-fair regulation means the 403 (b) sponsors rely heavily on the advice of the very brokers and insurance agents who are touting investment programs to the plan.
The upshot is that 403 (b) plans typically "don't buy good investment programs," says Mr. Merrill.
"Many funds in the investment programs have poor performance and higher expenses."
With so little guidance, teachers and other school district employees must produce their own report card on their 403 (b) investments.
Fortunately, since much of the money in teachers' 403 (b) plans is invested in variable annuities, participants can consult outside benchmarks to see how their investments compare on cost and performance.
A resource with such information is the monthly Variable Annuity Performance Report, available for $15 from Morningstar (800-876-5005).
A variable annuity is a group of mutual funds wrapped into an account at an insurance company.
The return is variable; it depends on which funds you choose, and how well they perform.
(By contrast, fixed annuities pay a set rate of return for some period, similar to a certificate of deposit but with a higher rate.)
Because variable annuities are essentially mutual funds, each fund can easily be graded against funds with similar investment objectives.
Fees and other costs can be compared the same way.
The good news for public-school employees with lousy investment choices is that they can transfer their money out of the plan, into no-load funds or insurance company annuities of their choice -- even if these choices aren't on the list that their school district approves, and even if they don't change jobs.
This little-known right is covered by a 1990 IRS revenue ruling (90-24), explains Mercer's Michael Footer.
To make a tax-free transfer, you merely contact the mutual-fund company or brokerage firm that has 403 (b) custodial transfer accounts.
It will send you an application and arrange the transfer.
There are some caveats, however.
You can transfer only accumulated savings and may have to pay surrender penalties to get out of your existing annuities.
And if you move your money into mutual funds, you may not be able to take out loans on the money (something most 403 (b) annuities allow).
You also may get some resistance from your employer or insurance company; many aren't aware that such transfers are legal, not only for teachers but also for a number of employees at nonprofit organizations.
Smita Vasavada, a social worker in Longview, Texas, faced such opposition when she tried to transfer her money from an annuity with Great West Life & Annuity Co.
The insurer told her the move wasn't possible but finally concurred when she persisted.
Mrs. Vasavada plans to move her money to a 403 (b) account with Vanguard Group, a no-load mutual fund company, even though she will pay some surrender penalties.
A TABLE that accompanied the Your Money Matters column yesterday incorrectly reported the three-year average annual return for the balanced fund offered by CREF.
The correct number is 15.03%, not 13.52%.
(WSJ Feb. 11, 1994)
