BASIC research yields an unexpected payoff: a test to detect "faux gras."
The famous French delicacy, foie gras, must by law consist only of livers from fattened geese.
But some less-than-scrupulous producers are illegally spiking their foie gras with chicken or turkey livers to cut costs.
Or they add chicken-egg whites to improve the texture.
To catch the "faux gras" crooks, immunologist Alain Paraf of INRA, the big French research agency, recently approached U.S. immunologist Sandra Smith-Gill of the federal National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., with a novel idea.
Dr. Smith-Gill, who does basic research on how the immune system "recognizes" proteins, is an expert on a well-studied protein called lysozyme found in birds.
The French scientist noted that goose lysozyme is slightly different from chicken, turkey or duck lysozymes.
He wondered if the difference was great enough to be detected by monoclonal antibodies, lab-made versions of the antibodies that the immune system of mammals hurls against invasions of viruses and other "foreign" proteins.
"I really didn't think it would work," says Dr. Smith-Gill.
But, intrigued, she began a collaboration with Dr. Paraf and his graduate student, Fabienne Hemmen.
They now report preliminary success.
Monoclonal antibodies designed to recognize chicken lysozyme did detect chicken and turkey liver mixed in foie gras, they reported in the December issue of the Journal of Food Science.
The researchers are now screening more monoclonal antibodies to make the test more sensitive, Dr. Smith-Gill says.
The test ultimately could be as simple to use as the antibody-based home-pregnancy tests now in use.
WOMEN who were student activists back in the 1960s seem to be doing better in their forties than the men who protested beside them.
Back in 1951, psychologists in Boston interviewed 379 mothers of kindergarten children on their parenting practices and the children's behavior.
Other researchers tracked down many of the children in 1977, when they were 31, and again in 1987, when they were 41, to see how they were faring.
The data, stored at Radcliffe College's Henry A. Murry Research Center, have now been analyzed by two psychologists to see what differences there were between the children who became student activists in the 1960s and those who didn't.
"At age 31, the female activists were less involved in family life, and had better jobs than their nonactivist female peers of equivalent education.
At 41, they showed less strain," reported Carol E. Franz, formerly of the Murry Center and now at Williams College, and David C. McClelland of Boston University in the January Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
But the male activists did less well than the nonactivist men in gaining high-status, well-paying jobs.
The men also "had a lower sense of psychological well-being, and felt a greater sense of strain at age 41" than their nonactivist peers.
The women's better adjustment in midlife might reflect the outcome of their student activism, the researchers speculated.
The women "were protesting for freedom and rights for everyone . . . to develop their fullest potential," goals that were partially fulfilled in the feminist movement.
But the men, in their draft resistance, rebelled "against the traditional male role of being a soldier and provider," a rebellion that failed to produce any organized social movement.
The impact of the conservative Reagan years on these liberal-minded men "may have been particularly negative," the researchers suggested.
RESEARCH into bothersome "noise" in magnetic recordings leads to a new way to foil credit-card counterfeiters.
Electrical engineers Ronald S. Indeck and Marcel W. Muller at Washington University in St. Louis have been analyzing the nature of meaningless, unwanted signals from magnetic recordings.
They discovered that there is a pattern to the noise that is unique to each recording and even to each spot on a recording.
The unwanted signal hidden, say, on a videotape is not only different from that on any other videotape, but the noise on the first inch is different from that on every other inch of the same tape.
Moreover, says Dr. Indeck, this "magnetic fingerprint" is a permanent feature of each recording -- and it can't be copied or duplicated.
This is because the microscopic magnetic particles that produce the signal are scattered randomly on each tape, disk or card.
A credit-card forger would have to take a pair of microscopic tweezers and spend thousands of years trying to position millions of magnetic particles in a pattern that would duplicate the "fingerprint" on the magnetic stripe of a credit card, Dr. Indeck explains.
The researchers are now developing a program for the "chip" in store and restaurant credit-card readers that can recognize each card's unique magnetic fingerprint, Dr. Indeck says.
Failure of the fingerprint to correlate with the card's number would reveal counterfeits.
Magnetic fingerprinting also might be used to detect tampering with tape recordings or to spot pirated music tapes.
IN GEORGIA, a Cherokee burial ground was left undisturbed by a new power line when the line was threaded through a 16-inch-diameter tunnel bored under the site by a new drilling system developed by the Electric Power Research Institute. . . .
Penn State, in urging farmers to raise ostrich-like emus, says the giant birds' beef-like red meat is "low in fat, calories and cholesterol, earning it an endorsement from the American Heart Association."
