Since the Sept. 13 signing of the peace accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, Western nations have been pledging financial support for the new Palestinian self-governing authority.
Now consulting firms are streaming into Jerusalem in the hopes of helping the Palestinians spend their expected windfall.
With $2 billion promised to the PLO over the next five years, it's not surprising there is a gold rush.
Most European Union members have sponsored commercial delegations here, and companies from Canada, Japan and the Arab world have also come calling.
But it is the Americans who are most noticeable, to the point where the Palestinians joke it is no longer possible to sip coffee in the garden of the American Colony Hotel in East Jerusalem without a U.S. consultant pulling up a chair and making a business proposition.
"They are overwhelming the Palestinians' decision-making appartus," says one Western diplomat.
"It's turned into a bit of a free-for-all."
Some firms, such as Chemonics International, a Washington, D.C., subsidiary of Erly Industries of Los Angeles have worked before in the occupied territories.
It has evaluated and monitored programs of the six private organizations that receive funding from the U.S. Agency for International Development, the conduit for U.S. assistance in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Other firms are taking tentative first steps.
A Price Waterhouse partner in the company's Baltimore, Md., office spending a six-month sabbatical with the philanthropic Ryan Family Foundation of Baltimore, flew into Jerusalem in October.
He ran free workshops in Bethelehem, Nablus, Jerusalem and Gaza.
Over the course of a week, the Price Waterhouse representative, the head of the Ryan Family Foundation, and a former Xerox Corp. official gave presentations on organization, planning and communication to 600 Palestinians.
The enthusiastic response led members of Price Waterhouse's international group and the Ryan foundation to meet last month with USAID officials to seek as much as $6 million in funding to cover start-up and initial operating costs to establish a management institute in the West Bank and Gaza designed to train about 17,000 Palestinians in the coming three years.
USAID assistance to the Palestinians has grown from $12 million in fiscal 1992 to $75 million this year, and for the first time the agency has opened its assistance programs to bidding by contractors rather than distributing the money exclusively through private voluntary and nongovernmental organizations.
While each of the slated USAID programs is relatively small-including $25 million for housing, $22 million for health, $11 million for the private sector and $15 million for municipal development -- they are all long-term projects that offer consulting firms sustained revenue over a period of several years.
They also offer consultants a chance to position themselves better to take advantage of the myriad regional development projects expected to take off after Israel and the rest of its Arab neighbors sign peace treaties.
And while U.S. aid money remains the main market for the consulting firms, it is certainly not the only one: Participation in World Bank-funded projects is open to all countries and some U.S. firms either have European affiliates or business arrangements with European companies that will enable them to reap benefits from the $600 million in aid pledged by the European Union, formerly the European Community.
The recent influx of consulting firms has led some Palestinian businessmen to complain that they are being pressured to make hasty decisions.
Some ideas proposed by U.S. consulting firms -- such as one company's suggestion to solve the Palestinians' housing crisis by importing massive numbers of mobile homes -- have bolstered fears that firms are rushing in promoting projects without taking into account Palestinian desires and needs.
Palestinians first of all want to fund projects that will create new jobs and develop their professional skills.
But there are also more mundane considerations, such as the broiling hot summers and wet winters of the Middle East, which make life in a mobile home most unpleasant.
"The consulting firms come to my office and tell me that they have a week to find someone to represent them, set up an office and do a study of the Palestinian markets," says one Palestinian whose office has been a regular stop for many of the firms.
"We have a saying in Arabic, `Hurriedness is from the devil.'"
The Palestinians' biggest complaint is that the consulting firms aren't coordinating their projects with the Palestinian Economic Council for Development and Reconstruction, or Pecdar, which is supposed to direct the bulk of the aid spending.
Pecdar has come under recent criticism from the donor countries for lacking enough members who have the necessary financial expertise to manage huge sums of aid money from the west.
"The amount of aid is limited, so we want to make sure that it is going to be spent on projects that are a priority for us," says Amin Haddad, a director of the technical committees assigned to work on all aspects of Palestinian self-rule.
One consultant says the U.S. companies have gotten a bum rap.
It's understandable, he says, that the Palestinians "don't want outsiders coming in telling them how to develop."
But both sides need each other, he argues, adding: "The donors aren't just going to dump the money into Yasser Arafat's pocket."
