Taking shape in the secluded hills of north central Missouri is a multibillion-dollar food revolution: technopork.
Inside barn No. 5 in a sprawling complex of barracks-like buildings, 1,100 hogs are being bred to a lean uniformity.
Pellets rattle down plastic tubes when their feed gets low.
A far-off computer closes plastic curtains as the night grows chilly, and heaters whir into action.
Just when the barn seems a little ripe, a whoosh of water flushes away manure.
A door cracks open and suddenly the pigs realize they aren't alone.
A chorus of grunts and, in unison, they turn to face two men in spotless blue jumpsuits -- the hogfarmer outfit of the 21st century.
"We're changing the business with these guys," says Don Skadburg, one of the two men and a vice president of Premium Standard Farms Inc.
His sleek hogs have lower body fat than the average American adult.
He gently pokes the ribs of a 235-pounder.
Five days to slaughter, he figures.
Factory-like operations such as this are bringing together technology and finance to change the face of the pork industry.
Long a messy sideline for family farmers, the hog business is attracting companies backed by money from big-city banks and Wall Street.
They are building operations capable of producing hundreds of thousands of hogs a year.
The price of pork products, on which Americans spend $26 billion annually, may decline as a result, and the power structure of the Farm Belt may be upended.
In Utah's high desert, one venture plans to raise and slaughter two million hogs annually.
North Carolina expects to become the second-biggest hog producing state this year, after Iowa, thanks to corporate-owned hogs.
But the long-shrinking ranks of family farmers in traditional hog states like Iowa and Minnesota, which resist the corporate encroachment, may face a shakeout: Some economists see the number of hog producers plunging by half in a decade.
There was a time when pigs were free to be pigs, living outdoors and rooting gleefully through harvested fields.
But farmers have gradually moved most hogs indoors to make raising them more efficient, and for years have bred them leaner and leaner to suit a marketplace of health-conscious consumers.
It seems to be working: Americans are eating two more pounds of pork a year than they did in 1990, and about that much less beef.
Most farmers have stayed small.
Two-thirds of producers own fewer than 100 hogs, even though hog farms surveyed by Iowa State University last year generated a 22% return on capital, on average.
Hogs' vulnerability to disease was one limitation.
But technology is helping to solve that problem.
And companies are jumping in.
About 16% of the 95 million hogs slaughtered last year were controlled by corporations, either grown by them directly or raised by farmers working under contract for what amounts to roughly $6 an hour.
Some economists predict that within 10 years, companies will control between one-third and a majority of the nation's pigs.
"We are on the cusp of a great change in agriculture," says Alan Barkema, a senior economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
It is mostly outsiders seizing the opportunity.
Many giant meatpackers say they are too big to go into farming.
IBP Inc., for example, can kill 60,000 pigs a day.
Building the facilities to grow that many would cost the Dakota City, Neb., company billions.
The newcomers have the advantage of starting from scratch.
Arkansas's Tyson Foods Inc., one of the companies that earlier transformed poultry into an automated conception-to-consumption business, is turning to pork.
It has set the ambitious goal of controlling 10% of the U.S. hog slaughter in five years.
Some just want to raise pigs.
The Bass brothers of Texas are completing a 17,000-sow complex in Dalhart, Texas.
New York-based Continental Grain Co. is starting a 20,000-sow operation in Missouri.
One thing such operations may tend to do is dull the cyclical nature of hog prices.
Farmers trim herds when low hog prices or costly grain drains away their profits; then as hog output ebbs, prices gradually recover, and so does production.
But a factory farm may be less likely to slow its costly production line -- and, in any case, many can still profit on slimmer prices.
Here in Princeton, population 1,021, Premium Standard Farms is the most remarkable thing to emerge since Calamity Jane, the cross-dressing Army scout, who locals say was born here in 1852.
The brains behind the closely held company are Theodore Gordon, a former securities trader, and Dennis W. Harms, a former livestock-feed manager of a soybean processor.
Tooling about in Jeep Grand Cherokees, they are building in the surrounding counties about a dozen hog complexes of several farms each.
Hundreds of their low metal buildings already glitter from distant hillsides, while elsewhere, bulldozers are leveling sites and gouging football-field-size manure ponds for the output of 80,000 sows.
So many gawkers crowded around one construction site -- where rises a towering gray mill that mashes corn, soybean meal and other ingredients into millions of pounds of yellow pellets -- that the company built a lookout park to keep them from harm's way.
At headquarters one day recently, Mark Mason was manning the control room, and investigating why an alarm had gone off during the night at a complex named Badger.
A chart appeared on his screen.
It showed the temperature in one building had fallen five degrees.
"Somebody probably left a door ajar," Mr. Mason said, scanning a weather report.
These barns use the same climate controls found in skyscrapers.
Since bigger pigs like it cooler, a computer lowers the temperature half a degree per day as they age.
Sensors monitor humidity and water consumption, and soon will track oxygen levels.
The company is even stricter on germs.
Trucks are scrubbed daily.
Pigs that die unexpectedly are given autopsies.
Employees and visitors shower before entering barns.
"Wash your hair, too," orders Mr. Skadburg, the vice president.
He hands a visitor a blue jumpsuit and Fruit of the Loom underwear, then pads naked across the cold tile floor to a shower stall.
One thing missing on the pig farm of the future is sex.
The boars don't rendezvous with sows but with scented dummies; the sows are artificially inseminated.
Then the females wait -- 454 of them in four long rows of metal stalls so small they can't turn around -- for an ultrasound test about 40 days later.
From there, the pregnant sow is on a rigid production schedule.
Day 45: Walk 30 yards to a stall in the gestation building.
She gets injections and special rations.
A tag on her ear emits a radio frequency so she can be tracked by a computer, which updates her medical history.
Day 112: Walk 30 yards to the delivery building.
She is swabbed in disinfectant and put in a stall.
Day 115: Give birth to 10 or 11 piglets.
Their canine teeth are cut off, tails are snipped, ears are tattooed, and the males are castrated.
Day 133: The piglets are taken away.
They are weaned about a week quicker than on many family farms.
That gets them away from their mother before they lose their three-week immunity to her germs.
After about a week respite, the sow is back in the breeding room.
She is expected to generate 23 pigs a year for about three years, roughly half more than typical sows.
Then she, too, is slaughtered.
The baby pigs, now 12-pounders, move next door to the nursery.
They are divided by sex, put in groups of 10 and assigned to 5-by-5 metal pens.
At nine weeks, they weigh about 45 pounds and are ready for a truck ride to a "finishing" barn.
Scarfing down a high-potency diet, they grow an average 1.6 pounds a day until they hit slaughter weight of 245 pounds.
The elapsed time since birth, about 5 1/2 months, is shorter than that of pigs raised on traditional farms.
Growing isn't all these swine are good at.
The herd will generate roughly half a billion gallons of waste a year -- about enough to fill the Pentagon.
As they move about, they stamp it through a slatted floor into a pit.
Every two hours, water washes it into a lagoon.
From there it is pumped by underground pipes to surrounding pastures and hayfields.
Animal-welfare advocates say such confinement drives pigs crazy.
Premium Standard replies that its hogs must be comfortable, since only about 1% die before it wants them to.
And it claims they are medicated less than those on typical family farms.
Bigger litters.
Fewer deaths.
Faster growth.
It all adds up.
One Premium Standard sow can yield about 3,000 pounds of lean pork a year.
Some experts suggest that a megafarm can easily make a hog for 10% less than the typical family farm.
Because Premium Standard's hogs are so uniform, a $50 million slaughterhouse it is building will be mechanized like never before.
Loins will be pulled off with robotics.
Disassembling heads, a task requiring a dozen knife-wielding workers, will be automated.
(Tattooed ears are good for pet treats; unmarked ones are a Southern delicacy.)
Consider Tyson Foods' packing plant 100 miles away in Marshall, Mo., which it bought in 1992 and is revamping.
Pigs still die the same way.
A shrieking hog slips splay-legged down a metal chute into a dark room.
It is stunned with an electric prod, its neck is slashed, and then it is hung by the hind legs high in the air to bleed along a line of wiggling hogs.
But Tyson is making changes: A worker holds a ruler to the rib cage of each carcass that swings by, and the fat depth is written in large numbers on the side of the animal.
Eventually, Tyson plans to use bar codes to track the hogs.
Farmers who send leaner ones get more for them.
Tyson contracts with company-trained farmers to raise its hogs, using company blueprints and company rations -- copying a practice common in the broiler industry.
The plant's big innovation is a cavernous room where brilliant light bounces off stainless steel.
Computer-controlled slicing machines are turning neat stacks of loins into five-ounce chops.
They drop on a conveyor belt, ride along to another machine and get sorted into four-pound plastic bags labeled Tyson Trim.
The orange Tyson brand began showing up on fresh pork chops a few months ago in Wal-Mart Stores Inc.'s Sam's Club warehouse stores.
Tyson plans to test it in supermarkets, in Indiana and elsewhere.
Pork's possibilities are only beginning to be explored.
The Tyson plant is being rigged to make precooked, microwavable, breaded, stuffed and spiced pork.
Flavors range from Jamaican jerk to teriyaki.
Scraps are turned into sports-bar appetizers.
Tyson is introducing "the Slugger," carved from the shank of the ham bone to look like a flat drumstick.
Tyson was planning to sell it in ballparks, but feared that fans would throw the bones at the visiting team.
Most big meatpackers have avoided brands, in part because they don't have enough control over their meat.
They buy from thousands of farmers who raise different breeds in different ways.
The hogs vary so much they have to be cut up mostly by hand, which is dangerous work.
Meatpackers generally stop cutting when they get the carcass down to six big pieces.
That has left customers -- and pork's reputation -- at the mercy of the butcher in the back of the local grocer.
Shoppers prize the wide center of the loin.
But stores don't restock their meat cases until the runty pieces are gone.
With Tyson's system, all the packages are the same -- and the food stores save on labor.
There are signs Tyson is putting pressure on the pork industry.
In December, ConAgra Inc. closed a pork plant in St. Joseph, Mo., 130 miles away.
Under a project led by John Tyson, 40-year-old son of Chairman Don Tyson, 63, the company is well on the way to controlling 150,000 sows and is widely seen buying or building more slaughterhouses.
"Pork is where poultry was in the 1970s," says the younger Mr. Tyson.
"Now the train is leaving the station."
