Westinghouse Electric Corp. agreed to sell its Westinghouse Electric Supply Co. unit to Clayton, Dubilier & Rice Inc. for a package totaling $340 million, continuing its effort to shed noncore assets and reduce its hefty debt load.
Under the plan, expected to close March 1, Westinghouse will receive $265 million in cash and $50 million in first-mortgage notes, plus a 10% equity position and future receivables, together valued at $25 million.
In addition, Westinghouse holds an option to acquire an additional 10% of the electric supply unit.
According to Clayton Dubilier, the electric supply unit has about $1.6 billion to $1.7 billion in annual sales.
"The price is a little lower than expected," said Maureen P. Lentz, an analyst with Roulston & Co.
"But they Westinghouse have been going at it pretty fast, in terms of their announced restructuring."
Westinghouse announced plans to sell four major units as part of its November 1992 restructuring plan, which was to raise an estimated $3 billion.
Since then, two units have fetched about $1.45 billion and Knoll Group, a maker of office furniture, has been taken off the market.
Westinghouse Communities, a real estate developer, remains for sale.
Still, the company's divestiture program, forced by a calamitous foray into financial services, has slashed debt in half to just under $4 billion from $8.2 billion in 1992.
Moreover, Westinghouse may sell some environmental systems businesses and part of its industrial products and services line.
Michael H. Jordan, chairman and chief executive officer of Westinghouse, had been a partner with New York-based Clayton Dubilier, and participated in initial discussions with Westinghouse concerning the electric supply unit.
But a Westinghouse spokesman said Mr. Jordan removed himself from the process of selling the electric supply unit after joining Westinghouse in July 1993.
Westinghouse said the company's board appointed fellow directors Gary Clark, president of Westinghouse, and David McLaughlin, president and chief executive officer of the Aspen Institute, to manage the sale of the unit.
"Mr. Jordan didn't play any role at all in the sale," said spokesman James P. Schmitt.
"He didn't see any bids until they were presented to the board, and he abstained from the board's determinations."
Clayton Dubilier, a closely held investment firm, said it would appoint B. Charles Ames, a partner of the firm, as chairman of the acquired company.
Mr. Ames has an extensive background in the electrical products industry, including a stint as chairman and chief executive officer of Reliance Electric Co., Cleveland.
Mr. Ames said he wants to cut costs, but not through job reductions, in order to turn the unprofitable business around.
"We want to put emphasis on revenue-building," Mr. Ames said.
"This is one of the few companies in this business with branches all over North America.
We believe we can build this business into a powerhouse."
The electric supply unit, with more than 3,000 employees, distributes electrical products to utility, government, construction and other markets.
Mr. Ames said the business hasn't been profitable for "two or three years."
Shares of Westinghouse, which has interests in broadcasting, power generation and real estate, fell 37.5 cents to $14.625 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
