CUC International Inc., enjoying strength in its core business, expects to report fiscal 1994 earnings at the higher end of analysts' estimates of 75 cents to 77 cents a share.
Those estimates would mean net income for the year ended Jan. 31 of $85 million to $86 million.
A year earlier, CUC earned a restated 56 cents a share, or $58.8 million.
Per-share profit was restated for a 3-for-2 stock split last April.
In an interview, Walter Forbes, chairman and chief executive of the discount-buying service, also said the company will be at the higher end of analysts' revenue estimates of $850 million to $875 million for the year.
That would be a 15% to 18% increase from the year-before $742.3 million.
The analysts' estimates for the year put fourth-quarter net at 21 cents to 22 cents a share, or a total of about $24 million.
In the year-earlier quarter, CUC had net of 16 cents a share, restated, or a total of $17.8 million.
Analysts are estimating fourth-quarter revenue at $225 million to $230 million.
Year-earlier revenue was $198.4 million.
Mr. Forbes is comfortable with the analysts' estimates for the quarter.
One of CUC's main businesses is a membership discount buying service where consumers pay an annual fee for discounts on shopping, travel, restaurant dining and other items.
Membership in the past fiscal year rose to more than 30 million from 27.6 million, a more than 8.7% gain.
Unit sales for travel and shopping services were up 15% and 25%, respectively, continuing a trend of the past three or four years.
CUC advertises and markets its services through credit-card issuers, fund-raisers, community banks and credit unions.
"People are getting more and more comfortable with basically shopping over the phone, and we think it augurs well for interactive" shopping services, Mr. Forbes said.
CUC is poised to embark on two previously reported test programs this fall for interactive television shopping with Time Warner Inc., as well as an American Telephone & Telegraph Inc./
Viacom Inc. partnership.
CUC already has some experience with interactive shopping with its on-line sales through such services as Compuserve and America Online, Mr. Forbes said.
He said those members already buy more products per member than phone members.
Mr. Forbes said he expects the television members program will grow rapidly and expects to see significant earnings impact from interactive television shopping within two to four years.
