If Alpine skiing is downhill, I've been asked, does that mean that Nordic skiing is uphill?
That's a reasonable question.
The answer is yes, it is uphill, much of the time.
As you might expect, this presents certain difficulties.
Getting uphill on skis requires a good deal of effort, as has been evident in the cross-country (i.e., Nordic) races staged in these Olympic Games.
The men and women who do it wear Spandex outfits, just like their Alpine brethren and sisteren, but unlike those worthies their suits become sweated through fairly early in their races.
Alpine skiers risk breaking their bones careering down their hills, but they do not collapse in panting heaps afterward, nor must they seek warmth and shelter so quickly.
"You can always tell the cross-country skiers by our postrace hacks," says Nina Kemppel of Anchorage, Alaska, a member of the U.S. team.
"They last from November until about mid-April."
Ms. Kemppel finished 28th in the women's five-kilometer "classical" cross-country event yesterday, the best among four Americans; we Yanks typically don't do well in these things.
No American woman has medaled in the sport, and only one man (Bill Koch in 1976) has.
The winner was Lyubov Egorova of Russia, who covered the tree-lined course that involved almost 600 feet of climbing in 14:08.8.
Manuela Di Centa of Italy was second, almost 20 seconds behind, and Marja-Liisa Kirvesniemi of Finland was third.
None of the medalists was Norwegian, which may come as a surprise to Americans who've been told, many times since the Lillehammer Games began, how cross-country skiing is Norway's national sport and passion.
The fact is that while many Norwegians grow up with skis on their feet (as opposed to Poles, who grow up with them on their names), so do others who live in similarly frosty climes.
A contrasting view of Norwegian hardiness was offered to me by a Lillehammer cab driver.
He noted that a ban on resident auto traffic, which became effective 6 p.m. last Saturday to clear the streets for vehicles leaving the Games' Opening Ceremonies, succeeded only in tying up things more than usual.
He explained, "At 5:45 everybody in Lillehammer got in his car and drove 100 meters to the nearest grocery or drug store for last-minute errands.
Here, everybody drives everywhere."
This is not to say that the locals' love for cross-country isn't genuine.
As you may have read on these pages yesterday, some are so nuts about it they've been camping out in the snow to get good vantage points for the races in and around Birkenbeineren Ski Stadium.
I don't go in for such blatant hardiness, but I did stand outdoors for more than an hour watching the 5K.
Taking notes wearing heavy gloves with the thermometer at two degrees Fahrenheit is about as much winter hardship as I'm up for.
The Norwegian women's cross-country struggles have been a topic of discussion hereabouts this week.
Vegard Ulvang, Bjorn Dahlie and Thomas Alsgaard may rule the men's trails, but their female counterparts haven't been as successful early or late, winning just two gold medals in all of Olympia, and none since 1984.
This has been partly due to historical accident: Norwegian women have shone in non-Olympic years, dominating the world championships of 1982 and '85.
It also might be traceable to the nation's slowness in adopting the faster, skatinglike "freestyle" technique which became a separate racing category beginning with the 1988 Games.
In classical cross-country, the skis stay parallel.
"We Norwegians think there's something wrong with anything new," notes Rolf Nordberg, Norway's press attache for the sport.
Mostly, though, people here seem to take sporting, and other, vicissitudes as the normal way of the world.
"When our women will get good, our men will get bad," grumped a Norwegian next to me in the press room.
Readers of "Lake Woebegon Days" will recognize that sentiment.
The crowd for yesterday's race reportedly numbered about 30,000, which is enormous for the rest of the world but about half the figure of the day before, when Messrs. Alsgaard and Dahlie finished 1-2 in the men's 30-kilometer freestyle.
One likely cause for the downturn was that the 5K distance amounts to a sprint in cross-country and, thus, wasn't worth the trip for many.
Men skiers don't bother with anything shorter than 10K.
Long or short doesn't matter for winner Egorova, though.
The 27-year-old schoolteacher-to-be from Tomsk won five medals at the Albertville Games in 1992 -- three golds and two silvers -- at distances from five to 30 kilometers.
"Today was my usual race -- nothing special," she said, and nobody disagreed.
Third-place finisher Kirvesniemi also has an illustrious history: She is 38 years old and this is her sixth Olympic Games.
In 1984 at Sarajevo she won three individual golds.
Her pleasant and smiling postrace demeanor yesterday contrasted markedly with her behavior after her last victory in those Games.
Back then, she jumped a fence and ran across a snowy field to avoid a pack of journalists from her home country, some of whom had written things she disliked.
She submitted to interviews and photographs only after being chased and cornered.
If she'd have kept on her skis, and the field had been uphill, they never woulda caught her.
