A federal appeals court has cleared the way for an unusual approach to speeding up litigation: allowing trial judges to act as arbitrators in the cases before them.
The ruling by the Seventh U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Chicago reflects the growing popularity of arbitration and other alternatives to going to trial.
Turning judges into arbitrators eliminates many of the time-consuming aspects of litigation -- such as pretrial fact-gathering and the trial itself.
More importantly, it forecloses the possibility of appeal.
As the appeals court noted in its ruling, ADR, or "`alternative dispute resolution' is all the rage these days."
The court said judges essentially can act as arbitrators for the cases before them if the parties involved agree to such a narrow role for the judge and if they give up their right to appeal.
"Parties are free within broad limits to agree on simplified procedures for the decision of their case," the court said.
In the case before the appeals court, the parties had agreed that the federal magistrate judge assigned to the case would "act as the arbitrator if any impasse arises."
Some lawyers say the decision, which received little attention when it was handed down earlier in the year, is likely to encourage other parties to seek such arrangements as a way to bring lengthy legal proceedings to an end.
The decision was reported in Lawyers Weekly USA, a trade journal.
"Judges already function as mediators in encouraging settlement talks," said Angelo J. Genova, a labor lawyer with the firm Genova Burns Trimboli & Vernoia in Livingston, N.J.
"It is a natural next step.
If the parties consent, the judiciary could function in an ADR capacity."
David Copus, an attorney in the Washington office of law firm Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue, said, "If active federal judges were available to participate in arbitration, that would be great. . . .
There's a general trend toward more use of alternative dispute resolution techniques, and I think this is a step in the right direction."
In the case before the appeals court, DDI Seamless Cylinder International Inc. had sued General Fire Extinguisher Corp. in 1989 for backing out of an agreement to buy a large quantity of cylinders to be used in fire extinguishers.
General Fire Extinguisher claimed that the cylinders from the Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario, company were defective and that the market for fire extinguishers had shrunk.
The lower court encouraged the parties to settle the case, and two mediators attempted to resolve the dispute before it was assigned to the magistrate judge.
After an auditor recommended damages of $38,000 be paid to DDI, the magistrate judge recalculated the amount to include interest on a related line of credit and ordered General Fire Extinguisher to pay $124,860.
General Fire Extinguisher, Northbrook, Ill., asked the appeals court to throw out the order, claiming that the magistrate judge's calculations were incorrect.
But the appellate court said that in agreeing that the magistrate judge would act as an arbitrator, the parties had waived their right to appeal, except on egregious grounds such as fraud or conflict of interest.
The court said the parties could have specified in the agreement that, unlike a typical arbitration, they were reserving broader rights to challenge the decision on appeal.
The opinion was written by Chief Judge Richard A. Posner, known for innovative decisions based on economic theory.
Although the Seventh Circuit's rulings apply only in Illinois, Indiana and Wisconsin, the influential court's opinions often are cited in cases throughout the country.
Bernard Kaplan, an attorney for General Fire Extinguisher at the Skokie, Ill., law firm Ruben Kaplan & Rosen, said the appeals court allowed magistrate judges a role that isn't authorized in federal law.
"It is a very tortured decision," he said.
"The court was seeking to do by indirect means what the statute on magistrate judges didn't allow it to do."
The court turned down Mr. Kaplan's request for a rehearing.
Because of a related, $150-a-day penalty, also upheld by the court, Mr. Kaplan said his client couldn't afford to appeal the case any further.
Mr. Kaplan, who wasn't involved in the lawsuit when the arbitration agreement was reached, also argued that the appeals court had misinterpreted the scope of that agreement.
"The innocent use of the word arbitrator came back to haunt the parties," he said.
"There is nothing here in the original order . . . that says we give up our right to appeal."
Lyle Peck, a Sault Ste. Marie, Mich., attorney for DDI, said the ruling has generated dozens of calls from lawyers and clients interested in asking trial judges to arbitrate their cases.
"This decision is going to provide a free mechanism for arbitration," he said.
(DDI Seamless Cylinder International Inc. vs. General Fire Extinguisher Corp., Seventh U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, No. 93-2024)
Prospective jurors in child sexual-abuse cases should be asked privately whether they ever were abused, Massachusetts's highest court ruled.
Under usual Massachusetts court procedures, judges are encouraged to question jurors quickly and in open court during the so-called voir dire, or jury-selection, proceeding.
Only in cases involving interracial violence do judges routinely draw jurors aside for private questioning.
In most other states, judges do privately question jurors when sensitive issues arise, said Thomas Munsterman, who studies juries at the National Center for State Courts, Williamsburg, Va.
"Nobody wants to embarrass a juror," he said, adding that courts are striving to give jurors as much privacy as possible.
In the Massachusetts case, a trial judge had asked jurors a general question about whether they could serve without bias in the case.
But the judge declined to specifically ask whether jurors were abused or knew abuse victims.
During the trial, it turned out that one juror was a sexual-offense victim and had to be excused.
"As the present case well illustrates, adult victims of childhood sexual offenses may be reluctant to come forward . . . and discuss such a private and highly emotional event with a judge," the Supreme Judicial Court said.
"They may be embarrassed about it, they may feel it would not affect their objectivity, or they may just not want to discuss it."
If either party wants jurors to be privately questioned about sexual abuse, the judge must comply, the court said.
Supreme Judicial Court, Boston, SJC-06404)
What's a life worth in Europe?
According to a British law firm's survey of personal-injury awards, it depends a lot on which country's courts are involved.
The study by Davies Arnold Cooper found, in the most extreme example, that the award for the instant death of an unmarried 20-year-old female secretary is likely to be 200 times higher in Italy than in England -- #249,000 ($371,383.50) compared with #1,250.
Other estimated awards include #76,000 in Spain, #28,500 in France and #2,500 in the Netherlands.
The study, which covers the European Union and countries of the European Free Trade Association, looked at estimated compensation for 14 types of injury, ranging from keyboard strain to death.
The survey found that Italy tends to have the highest awards for bereavement, while Ireland heads the list for the size of pain-and-suffering awards.
Not surprisingly, the study found a lower propensity to sue in countries with low awards for noneconomic losses (such as bereavement or pain and suffering).
In Denmark, for example, where bereavement losses aren't expected, only 3% of accident victims admitted to a hospital consult a lawyer about the possibility of filing a case.
Junda Woo in New York and Charles Goldsmith in Brussels contributed to this report.
