Borden Inc. reported a large fourth-quarter net loss that reflects a previously announced restructuring charge and losses in several of its food businesses.
Borden posted a loss of $635.9 million, or $4.50 a share, compared with year-earlier net income of $28.4 million, or 20 cents a share.
The quarter includes a $632 million charge for business divestments, organizational restructuring, asset write-downs and changes in accounting estimates.
Excluding the charge, Borden's fourth-quarter loss totaled $3.9 million, or 2.7 cents a share.
Sales from continuing operations dropped 2.2% to $1.47 billion.
As expected, Borden also halved its quarterly dividend to 7.5 cents a share.
The dividend is payable March 1 to shareholders of record Feb. 11.
Borden's performance largely fell within Wall Street's expectations.
"Everyone knew bad news was coming," says John McMillin, analyst at Prudential Securities Inc.
"The upside is probably limited until their earnings improve."
Borden's stock rose 75 cents, or 5%, to $15.25 a share in composite New York Stock Exchange trading.
Earlier this month, Borden announced the charge and unveiled a restructuring plan that calls for the sale of its sagging snack business, which is made up largely of smaller regional brands such as Wise potato chips.
Borden also is putting on the block its two smaller seafood and jams and jellies businesses that, together with snacks, generated $1.25 billion, or nearly 20%, of the company's annual sales.
Borden said the fourth-quarter charge includes $490 million to cover a loss on its divestitures, $77.4 million for restructuring and $64.6 million for asset write-downs and changes in accounting estimates.
Borden's food businesses continued to demonstrate weakness.
"Some of the areas were weaker than I expected," said Nomi Ghez of Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Borden said the North American Foods unit posted a loss in the quarter vs. a profit in the comparable year-ago period while sales declined 7.7% to $732 million.
Gains in pasta sauce and several niche grocery items were more than offset by losses in dairy and pasta.
International foods reported improved operating income, while packaging and industrial products had "modestly lower" income.
Borden's president and chief executive, Ervin R. Shames, reiterated his earlier statement that per-share earnings in 1994 should be "at the upper end" of the 75 cents to $1 range.
Quarterly earnings are expected to strengthen after a marginally profitable first quarter, he said, as momentum and cost savings build.
