Digital Equipment Corp., stunned by an unexpectedly large loss and revenue decline in the latest quarter, is planning its second major reorganization in less than a year, company insiders said.
Under the reorganization, Digital is reducing the influence of four top executives who run groups organized around major customer industries such as banking and finance, and is reassigning five executives to run new units organized around Digital products.
The new "strategic business units" will report directly to Digital's sales and marketing chief, Edward E. Lucente.
The moves widen Mr. Lucente's influence, consolidate his role as the No. 2 executive, and diminish the central role of the industry groups, which were created only last year by the chief executive officer, Robert B. Palmer.
Although Mr. Lucente's influence grows as a result of the move, Digital insiders say the reorganization is being done with the full support and approval of Mr. Palmer.
The data-storage and personal-computer groups, among the few bright spot in Digital's results, and the huge computer-services unit, appear unaffected by the moves.
Barry F. Willman, an analyst with Goldman Sachs & Co., said Digital "is still searching for a more effective structure."
He said that the industry business units "were supposed to streamline the organization and increase customer focus, but what seems to have evolved instead was a level of structure that actually impeded some of the responsiveness they had intended to create."
He also said that some key relationships within the company "weren't working smoothly."
Before the expected changes were announced, shares of the big Maynard, Mass., computer maker slumped again yesterday, hitting a new 52-week low.
The stock closed at $30.75, down 75 cents in New York Stock Exchange composite trading, and was the second most active issue with 2.7 million shares changing hands.
Analysts said investors were reacting in part to Digital's announcement after the close of trading Friday that it filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for as much as $1 billion in debt, preferred stock or new shares.
A spokesman said the company had no immediate plans to issue the debt or stock.
But Jay P. Stevens, an analyst with Dean Witter, said Digital is likely to issue more debt soon.
"Their rating is slipping -- they're just hanging in with an investment-grade rating, and it looks like they are going to have to take another restructuring reserve" to cover yet another round of work force reductions.
Digital has already said it will cut its work force by 7,000 by June 30, to about 85,000 people.
The latest moves are an abrubt change of course for Mr. Palmer, who is under pressure from Digital's board to turn the company around.
He has been successful in cutting costs but hasn't been able to ignite new growth, despite Digital's strong products.
For its second quarter ended Jan. 1, Digital last week reported a loss of $72.1 million, or 53 cents a share, on a 12% revenue decline to $3.25 billion.
Under the existing customer business-unit structure, devised by Mr. Palmer last year, most sales efforts were focused on specific businesses.
They included defense and manufacturing, under Frank McCabe; financial, professional and public services, under Bruce J. Ryan; consumer and process industries, under John E. Klein; and education, communications and media, headed by Paul G. Kozlowski.
A fifth unit, which focused on health-care industries, is being dismantled, and its industries -- pharmaceuticals, hospitals and so forth -- are being distributed to the other units.
As reported, the head of that unit, Willow Shire, will resign at the end of this month.
No other resignations are expected, and none of the other four executives were available to comment, a spokesman said.
Five other men will get substantial new responsibilities in the latest changes.
Jesse Lipcon, one of Digital's top engineers, will run the huge but aging VAX computer line.
Larry Walker, networking chief, will run an expanded unit with the same focus; Peter Smith, vice president for European sales and marketing, takes over a printer and supplies business; Bud Enright, product marketing vice president, is expected to run a new software unit; and Willi Shih, who now oversees the Alpha PC program, will expand his role to oversee sales efforts based around Unix and Windows NT software operating systems.
The Digital spokesman declined last night to discuss the changes in detail, except to say they're "still evolving, and the strong industry focus will continue even though the structure may change."
He insisted the moves were undertaken "to balance the separate product and industry marketing efforts," not to boost one at the expense of another.
"It's all still being worked out," he said.
