The Clinton administration releases its budget today, basking in the glow of favorable news coverage.
The economy is growing, the budget deficit is falling, the stock market is rising, and interest rates remain at near-record lows.
While many pundits are swallowing this story hook, line and sinker, a more objective analysis indicates that Mr. Clinton's policies have hindered the economy's performance.
Economic growth and job creation, despite recent upticks, are both lagging far behind historical trends.
Projected budget deficits of less than $200 billion, meanwhile, turn out to be nothing more than rosy estimates for future years.
The administration measures success by comparing how the economy performs today with how it did under Mr. Bush.
While this is doubtlessly an astute political strategy and is almost sure to yield a favorable comparison, it is irrelevant, since the economic policies of both Mr. Clinton and his predecessor are almost identical.
The real question is whether Mr. Clinton's record $262 billion tax increase is causing the economy to grow faster or slower than it would have grown if the tax bill was rejected.
Are more jobs being created as a result?
If the budget deficit is really falling, should last year's budget bill get the credit?
The White House justifies last year's tax increase by trumpeting projections showing that the budget deficit may shrink to under $200 billion in 1995.
More sober analysis suggests the outlook may not be so rosy.
The 1995 fiscal year does not even begin until Oct. 1 of this year, and history clearly indicates that promises of future deficit reduction are nebulous at best.
Supporters of the 1990 budget deal, for instance, falsely alleged that the budget would have a surplus of more than $16 billion this year if Mr. Bush's tax increase were enacted.
Congress dutifully approved the tax bill, yet the budget deficit is projected to easily exceed $200 billion this year.
Similarly, the deficit rose after tax increases were approved in 1982, 1984 and 1987.
With any luck, history will not repeat itself this time and the deficit will come down.
Considering that the budget deficit was $150 billion and falling when President Reagan left office more than five years ago, any progress will be welcome news to long-suffering taxpayers.
It may be too soon, however, to break out the champagne.
Even if the deficit does fall in 1995 and 1996 as the administration and the Congressional Budget Office estimate, the good news is only temporary.
According to the CBO, the deficit begins to climb rapidly after 1996.
By the year 2003, the budget deficit more than doubles, climbing to a record $324 billion.
And with unpublished administration figures showing that health care could boost annual budget deficits by nearly $200 billion by the turn of the century, the fiscal situation could deteriorate even more rapidly.
The major reason deficits are expected to explode is the unconstrained growth of domestic spending.
According to the CBO, total government spending will increase by $328 billion in five years under President Clinton's budget.
An astounding 97.3% of that increase is due to higher domestic spending.
Indeed, the CBO projects that domestic spending will grow more than 91% faster than needed to keep pace with inflation.
This veritable orgy of new spending exposes the failure to impose any spending discipline in last year's budget deal.
Washington-based interest groups often persuade reporters to write about tight spending caps, but the caps do not apply to entitlement programs, and so-called domestic discretionary programs are growing thanks to unprecedented raids on the defense budget.
In addition to painting a rosy picture of the budget deficit, the administration also talks as if the economy were booming.
Unfortunately, the numbers do not add up.
The economy did grow at an annual rate of 5.9% in the last three months of 1993.
But even with this late surge, growth for the year was just 2.8%.
Republicans and Democrats are arguing whether this means Mr. Clinton's first year was better than Mr. Bush's last year, but both are missing the point -- the level of growth in both 1992 and 1993 was far from robust.
Indeed, only when compared with the economy's performance in 1990 and 1991 do the recent numbers look good.
Mr. Bush's last year and Mr. Clinton's first year do not look impressive, however, when compared with historical averages.
Annual economic growth since World War II -- including recession years -- has averaged more than 3%.
The economy's performance today is particularly discouraging, since economic growth following a recession is normally well above the historical average, averaging more than 5% a year.
Yet growth in Mr. Bush's last year and Mr. Clinton's first year has failed to even reach the long-term average of 3%.
Indeed, an analysis of economic growth rates 11 quarters into a recovery (which is how long the current "expansion" has lasted) shows that growth has been barely half the level experienced during past expansions.
The same analysis applies to the job market.
At this stage in an economic expansion, 33 months after the nadir of the recession, total employment traditionally has increased by an average of 9.2%.
Even including the 1.6 million jobs created last year, total employment has climbed by just 2.5% since the bottom of the recession, far below the average.
The administration also is trying to take credit for low interest rates.
According to the White House, last year's record tax increase convinced financial markets that Washington was finally serious about deficit reduction.
While the administration's political strategy is sound, its economic analysis is not.
Interest rates have been falling steadily since 1989.
Moreover, interest rates during that time fell even though the budget deficit was nearly doubling.
The Federal Reserve Board's anti-inflation policy, under Alan Greenspan's leadership, is the real reason interest rates are at near-record lows.
The economic and budget outlook after the president's first year in office leaves much to be desired.
Mr. Clinton campaigned as the candidate of change, but he has failed to reverse Mr. Bush's disastrous tax-and-spend policies.
Instead, he compounded the damage by imposing a record tax increase of his own.
The economy's continued slow growth and anemic levels of job creation are a direct result.
Mr. Mitchell is a fellow at the Heritage Foundation in Washington.
