Taoshan, China -- I am standing at the top of a frozen hillside in northern Manchuria, my ski tips pointing straight down.
Wind chafes my face.
Standing on my bindings in her tennis shoes is Chen Meiying, a 22-year-old waitress from subtropical Guangdong province.
She has never seen snow.
This is her first time on skis -- mine or anyone else's.
As we start to slide over the crusty snow, she emits a piercing scream.
Ten seconds later the run is over and we are in a heap.
Again!" she yells, an instant convert to skiing.
I have become a ski missionary by accident.
Many people in China are getting rich, and -- to judge by the plutocrats of Aspen and Gstaad -- the rich like to ski.
So I set out in search of the slopes of the Sino-nouveau riche, which are in Heilongjiang province, the Great Northern Wilderness, China's little patch of Siberia.
I did not expect St. Moritz.
I had been forewarned by John Crossman, a Shanghai stockbroker.
He went once to Heilongjiang's Yabuli, a one-lift, one-run area, where China hopes to host the 1996 Winter Asian Games.
"The city of Yabuli, if we can call it that, is 20,000 people burning as much coal as fast as they can to escape the bitter cold," Mr. Crossman said.
"The dormitory at the ski-area base is not totally unlike a prison camp.
"I don't see why anyone would go skiing in China," he added.
"You'd be a fool."
I decide to avoid Yabuli and head to a hill about an hour's taxi ride from Harbin, the provincial capital.
The skiing, I'm assured by a hotel porter in knit hat with a picture of a skier worked into it, is the best around.
It may be.
But it's nothing more than a clear-cut 165-foot hillside that busloads of Harbin tourists walk up, then schuss down on battered skis.
Most stop by colliding with trees or with one of three concrete picnic tables at the base.
The only experienced skier is 35-year-old Wang Che, a tour-bus driver.
His form isn't bad, though he has a habit of collapsing in panic every few minutes when the beeper he wears on his belt goes off.
"He is a man and he is very brave," says 21-year-old Li Rong, a student.
She tries one run and concludes, "the shoes are too heavy and the danger is too much."
So is the boredom.
I decide to try the slopes here at Taoshan, a four-hour train journey away.
The hotel porter describes it as "our most famous ski mountain."
There are seven in my tour group: six from Guangdong and me.
Aboard the train, the southerners are easy to distinguish from their northern countrymen, who sit sullenly in padded army greatcoats: The southerners speak raucous Cantonese, eat peeled tangerines and wear 24-karat gold jewelry, Nike shoes and bright down-filled clothing.
My companions are Chinese yuppies.
Many work for foreign firms and hold more than one job; Kuang Yu, a 23-year-old guide from Guangdong, also works as a photographer and plays in a band.
While the 4,700-yuan ($540) cost of a trip here equals nine months' salary for a Harbin worker, the southerners say it's only a couple months' savings.
"We have more money," says Mr. Kuang.
They also seem to have more fun.
A 26-year-old container-truck driver from the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone has brought his 22-year-old girlfriend.
What interests him, he says, isn't the skiing.
"Enjoy yourself tonight," he says in English.
It is dusk by the time we arrive at Taoshan, an industrial town where the snow is gray from coal dust.
We stay at Taoshan Villa, a designated one-star abode modeled on a factory village -- with big buildings and black-spewing smokestacks surrounded by smaller outlying buildings.
But I'm encouraged.
The logo on my Taoshan Villa toothbrush: a skier.
The hotel's dinner buffet features bear's paw and a brace of strangled pheasants.
A delighted roar goes up from the tourists, who demand braised bear paw -- at about $20 a portion -- and steaming pheasant hot pot.
"This will make us ski better," promises Yuen Lizhen, a 26-year-old Guangdong telephone technician.
The next morning, we pile into a bus, then set out through a birch forest.
The sun is out when we draw into a clearing.
The mountainside glitters with fresh snow.
Somebody has cleared the trees and carved deep vertical ruts to prevent skiers from turning when they should go straight down.
There is even a lift: a large blue-and-white boat labeled "The Ski Boat," attached to a diesel motor that pulls it to the top of the 330-foot hill.
"Skiing!" announces Xu Xuebin, a guide.
She points at me: "You show us."
Obediently, I buckle my boots, then climb to the top of the hill without waiting for the Ski Boat.
I step into my bindings and start my 20-second run.
As I thud over one rut and into the next, I flash a confident smile at would-be skiers who seem to be jealously admiring my form.
To my surprise, I see they are pointing pistols my way.
As soon as I pass by, I hear several reports.
Shooting pistols, it turns out, is one way to kill time between runs.
Others also ski.
A young woman barrels by, while her boyfriend, a member of the Economic Police, yells at her, "Bend your knees!"
After she disappears in a cloud of snow, he grumbles, "Too dangerous," and sets out after her on a sled.
Several young men have borrowed skis from the Ski Boat operator and are speed-racing down the ruts.
I join in, and at the bottom meet 25-year-old Leon Lee, resplendent in a blue Spyder ski outfit and Scott goggles.
"You are a skier," he observes.
"Do I look like a skier?
I am also a skier."
"Then why are you here?"
"I am a tour guide," he explains.
"I am introducing southern people to the cold north.
They want to try the cold and skiing."
Indeed, one of Leon's charges, an eight-year-old boy, has his eye on my skis.
Would I give him a ride on my skis?
I oblige.
When I hike back to the halfway point, a young woman asks for a ride.
I oblige again.
Suddenly, I am giving ski rides to everybody, including Ms. Chen, the waitress.
For the remainder of the day, I do nothing but give rides, like a pony at a carnival.
It is not the skiing I had hoped for.
Mr. Brauchli covers Asia for The Wall Street Journal.
