New York -- Everyone knows Degas: his ballerinas, jockeys, women at their toilette; taut psychological portraits of friends, family and louche cafe society.
When we think of his work, we think of an inhabited world, a world of populated interiors.
Unlike the other impressionists, Edgar Degas (1834-1917) was first of all a studio painter: He rarely worked outdoors, and his forte was the portrait.
This picture of Degas is not inaccurate.
But it is incomplete.
Just how incomplete is shown by the remarkable exhibition of Degas's landscapes on view here at the Metropolitan Museum of Art through April 3.
Culled from several public and private collections, these 75 paintings, drawings and monotypes mark the first exhibition in a century to be devoted to this little-known side of Degas's work.
For most people, the show will be a revelation.
There were a few examples of Degas's landscapes in the huge retrospective that made the rounds in 1988.
But placed among the 400-odd other works in that exhibition, they seemed more like bagatelles or afterthoughts than fully realized works of art.
In the present context, we can see that landscapes played an important if sporadic role in Degas's career from his apprentice days in the 1850s through the mature years of the 1890s.
They are little-known today primarily because they are not the sort of thing we have come to associate with the name "Degas."
Not that Degas ever thought of himself as a landscape painter.
In 1858, he went so far as to confess that "Boredom overcomes me when I am contemplating nature."
Yet perhaps because he considered himself primarily a figurative painter -- his artistic hero was the severe, classicizing Ingres -- Degas felt more free to experiment when he turned to landscape.
Whatever the reason, this exhibition shows that landscapes -- especially the colored monotypes from the 1890s -- are among the most aesthetically and technically adventuresome works in Degas's oeuvre.
The exhibition opens with a handful of pictures that Degas made when on an extended grand tour of Italy from 1856 through 1859.
The best of these works, including "Italian Landscape Seen Through an Arch" (1856), are highly accomplished exercises done in thinned oil on paper.
One is impressed especially with Degas's easy mastery of the sun-baked Neapolitan colors.
The difference in mood and handling from the early portraits (the "Self Portrait" of 1855, for example, or his early masterpiece "Portrait of the Bellelli Family," begun in 1858) could not be more striking.
In their relaxed painterliness and warm palette, these pictures are world's away from the astringent example of Ingres that Degas otherwise sought to emulate.
It's difficult to believe that the works were produced by the same artist.
The exhibition continues with some pencil drawings, equestrian scenes and a fetching, translucent Cezanne-esque watercolor done in the 1860s after Degas returned to France.
But the most memorable work by far from these early years is a suite of pastels that Degas did when he visited the Channel coast on holiday in the summer of 1869.
As Richard Kendall notes in his excellent catalog for the show, these pictures present "a world without anecdote."
Consisting of horizontal bands of scumbled browns and misty blue-grays, these small-scale works are not just different from Degas's figure paintings: They are the antithesis of them.
One can perhaps cite late Turner or the Romantic landscapes of Caspar David Friedrich as a precedent if not exactly an inspiration for these works.
Degas himself spoke of "the mysterious mingling of land and water."
But there is something notably un-Romantic -- if not, indeed, anti-Romantic -- about his curiously depopulated and ascetic pastels.
As Mr. Kendall observes, Degas's seascapes are "conspicuously lacking in gilded sunsets and meaningfully isolated barques. . . .
His skies are generally blank or untroubled, and such boats and figures as appear in his compositions seem haphazard rather than poignant."
If there is a presence in these works, it is the brooding presence of absence.
And of abstractness.
We all knew that Degas was without equal among the impressionists as a painter of figures.
The chief revelation of this exhibition is how accomplished he was as an abstract painter.
This is hinted at in the pastel seascapes.
It bowls you over when you see the colored monotypes from the 1890s.
Degas had started producing small black-and-white monotypes -- "drawings made in oily ink and then printed," as he preferred to describe them -- in the late 1870s.
It was a simple and rapid process, and Degas squeezed a number of arresting images from the medium.
But it was not until October of 1890, when he visited his friend Pierre-Georges Jeanniot in Burgundy, that his experiments really bore fruit.
Traveling by open carriage from Paris, Degas registered the landscape whizzing by.
Within an hour of reaching Jeanniot's house he was in his friend's studio, drawing furiously on metal plates.
In a memoir published in the 1930s, Jeanniot recalls the afternoon: "We gradually saw emerging on the surface of the metal a valley, a sky, white houses, fruit trees with black branches, birches and oaks, ruts filled with water from a recent downpour, orange-colored clouds scudding across a turbulent sky above the red-and-green earth . . .
All these things amerged without apparent effort, as if he had the model in front of him."
Degas printed one or two impressions (the second was always much lighter and less distinct than the first) from the inked plate.
He then finished most of them with pastel.
Altogether, he made about 50 landscapes in the succeeding months.
Several were exhibited in 1892 at the Galerie Durand-Ruel, Degas's first solo exhibition.
It was, one critic wrote, "the most extraordinary event of the season."
Even today, the works in that exhibition seem extraordinary.
Degas referred to these monotypes as "imaginary landscapes."
Stepping into the room where they are on view is like stepping from the 19th century into the mid-20th century.
Are these not early color-field abstractions?
"A Wooded Landscape" was executed in 1890, but it could be a trial run for Robert Motherwell's "Spanish Elegy" series.
Yes, some of these colored monotypes are muddy and uncertain.
But a large handful are hauntingly beautiful abstractions.
We owe Mr. Kendall and the organizers of this exhibition a large debt.
We thought we knew Degas, but we only knew the half of it.
"Degas Landscapes" travels to the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston, where it will be on view from April 24 to July 3.
