Partners at Hillary Rodham Clinton's former law firm in Arkansas say they fully disclosed to federal regulators their work for the thrift at the center of the Whitewater affair.
A lawyer for the Rose Law Firm also said Mrs. Clinton played a much smaller role than has been reported in representing the thrift, Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan, in a matter that came before a state regulator appointed by then-Gov.
Bill Clinton.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. has been looking into whether the Rose Law Firm fully disclosed its prior relationship with Madison when the firm was hired by regulators to handle a lawsuit the thrift had filed against its auditor.
The FDIC took over Madison in 1989.
The Clintons' partnership with Madison's owner in Whitewater Development Co. is being investigated by an independent counsel appointed by U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno.
Among the questions the prosecutor, Robert Fiske Jr., is likely to look at is whether money from the now-defunct thrift was improperly used to pay off Mr. Clinton's campaign debt when he ran for governor.
Friday, it was also disclosed that a federal grand jury had subpoenaed records from current Arkansas Gov. Jim Guy Tucker and others involving the Clintons' role in Whitewater.
In interviews last week, Rose partners said that on several occasions, two partners at the firm alerted thrift officials to potential conflicts because of their relationship with Madison.
Each time, regulators decided that the potential conflicts weren't of consequence, the lawyers said.
Typically, under legal-ethics rules, conflicts of interest are mitigated by full disclosure and clients' approval of the firm's continued representation.
There were three areas of concern over conflicts, according to Rose partners.
In the mid-1980s, Mrs. Clinton and another lawyer in the firm represented Madison in two matters before the state securities commissioner.
According to Rose partners Ronald M. Clark and Gary N. Speed, that prior representation was disclosed to the FDIC by then-partner Webster L. Hubbell.
Mr. Hubbell is now associate attorney general.
Mr. Speed, who did most of the work for the FDIC in the suit against the auditor, Frost & Co., recalls that when he became involved in the case, he was "concerned" that the firm's prior representation of Madison might create an appearance of a conflict of interest.
He said he raised the question with Mr. Hubbell.
"He assured me later that it was fully disclosed to the FDIC and that there was no problem," Mr. Speed said.
Mr. Hubbell couldn't be reached for comment.
Carl Stern, a Justice Department spokesman, said that Mr. Hubbell has said he "orally" disclosed the prior relationship to the FDIC.
Mr. Speed also noted that the law firm's position in the suit against Frost over audits conducted in the mid-1980s "was not inconsistent" with any work the law firm had previously done for Madison, a key factor in any conflict-of-interest analysis.
"We hadn't done any review of . . . the financial statements of Madison," he said.
Charles W. Wolfram, a legal-ethics specialist at Cornell Law School, said he sees "no problem at all" in Rose's representation of the FDIC because, once the agency had taken over Madison, it was "not an adversary of the S&L. . . .
They're just like a trustee in bankruptcy."
Mr. Speed said he continued to worry about potential conflicts and to make further disclosures.
Particularly worrisome, he said, was the relationship of Mr. Hubbell's father-in-law, Seth Ward, with Madison.
Mr. Ward, a former Madison employee, had settled a tangled court dispute over sales commissions and a loan he had received from the thrift.
His settlement reduced the amount that Rose was able to demand from Frost for losses sustained by the thrift.
Mr. Speed said that to allay the firm's conflict concerns, Mr. Hubbell's relationship with Mr. Ward was disclosed by Rose lawyers to Resolution Trust Corp. attorney April Breslaw and other thrift regulators during "numerous conversations."
Mr. Speed said he and Mr. Hubbell had another conversation with Ms. Breslaw on the subject of conflicts after Rose hired an attorney who had once worked at Madison.
"She concluded that it was not a problem," he said.
Ms. Breslaw declined to comment.
Peter Kumpe, a Little Rock lawyer for the auditor, Frost, said that the Rose Law firm's connection with Madison was "no secret at all."
He said that Ms. Breslaw was actively involved in the litigation and that he assumed she knew of Rose's relationship with Madison.
The FDIC has said that it knew about the relationship between Madison and Mr. Hubbell's father-in-law but that its lawyers didn't recall being told about Rose's previous representation of the thrift.
In a statement, the FDIC said it was investigating, although it had "no reason to believe we were misled."
Rose partners also said they don't believe Mrs. Clinton's role in the firm's representation of Madison before the state's securities commissioner was improper.
"We don't see that Hillary's done anything unethical in this situation," Mr. Clark said.
Mrs. Clinton was involved in representing the thrift before securities commissioner Beverly Bassett Schaffer, who was appointed by then-Gov.
At issue was the thrift's effort to gain state regulatory permission to issue preferred stock.
But people familiar with the matter said that Richard Massey, another Rose attorney, did almost all of the work.
One Rose lawyer said he doesn't know of "one instance" in which Mrs. Clinton appeared before a state regulator "and I don't know anyone that does."
The fact that Ms. Schaffer had communicated with the Rose firm in a letter addressed "Dear Hillary" had raised suspicions that Mrs. Clinton had been directly involved in pressing the matter before Ms. Schaffer.
In an interview, Ms. Schaffer said that Mrs. Clinton "never came to any meetings."
Charles Handley, an aide to Ms. Schaffer who worked on the Madison matters, also recalls no instance when Mrs. Clinton dealt with the state securities department.
Ms. Schaffer said that neither she nor her staff knew of the Clintons' business dealings with James McDougal, Madison's owner.
She said she merely "concurred" with the Rose firm's opinion that the stock plan wasn't inconsistent with state law.
No final plan was filed with the department, "much less approved by me, as securities commissioner," Ms. Schaffer said.
As evidence that Ms. Schaffer wasn't simply doing Madison's -- or Mrs. Clinton's bidding -- Mr. Clark points out that the securities commissioner made it difficult for the thrift to pursue a separate plan involving the operation of a brokeragefirm subsidiary.
Madison's broker/dealer application was approved by Ms. Schaffer in the fall of 1985 but only on the condition that it met the federal net capital requirement by the end of that year.
That deadline passed unmet.
The Rose firm has also come under scrutiny because Madison put the firm on retainer for the work supervised by Mrs. Clinton.
The firm collected $2,000 a month for a 15-month period.
Mr. Clark noted, however, that the firm eventually "determined our work was so sporadic that we couldn't justify the retainer."
In July 1986, he said, the firm returned $6,400 to Madison.
Former Merrill Lynch & Co. junk-bond analyst Edward L. Scherer was sentenced to a six-month prison term and two years of probation for defrauding the firm of as much as $1 million in potential profit.
Mr. Scherer, 33 years old, was convicted by a federal jury in Manhattan in August on conspiracy, wire fraud and bribery charges.
The same jury acquitted Ellis J. Strelitz, a Merrill client and friend of Mr. Scherer's, of participation in the scheme.
Prosecutors had alleged that Mr. Scherer sold junk bonds owned by Merrill at cut-rate prices to Mr. Strelitz, who then agreed to kick back two-thirds of the profits on subsequent trades.
A third Merrill trader, Richard Kursman, allegedly rigged the prices on the bonds; he pleaded guilty to a single count of wire fraud and testified against the other two.
Mr. Scherer had faced more than two years in prison and a $1 million fine under federal sentencing guidelines.
But Judge Kevin T. Duffy, who is also presiding over the World Trade Center bombing trial, derided the "silliness" of the guidelines in imposing a sentence below the suggested range.
Vanna White won a jury verdict of $403,000 against Samsung Electronics Co. and its advertising agency in a case that expands celebrities' protection from unauthorized uses of their likenesses.
The federal court jury in Los Angeles said the South Korean company and the advertising agency Deutsch/Dworin Inc. violated Ms. White's "right of publicity" with an advertisement depicting a letter-turning robot in a Vanna-like wig and gown.
Ms. White, who is a star of the television show "Wheel of Fortune," didn't give permission for the ad, which bore the caption "Longest Running Game Show, 2012 A.D." and which was intended to suggest the long life of Samsung products.
Ms. White won compensatory damages of $205,000 from Samsung and $198,000 from Deutsch/Dworin, New York.
The companies declined to comment on the jury's findings.
Deutsch/Dworin said it probably won't appeal.
In a notable decision in the case last year, the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals expanded on earlier rulings that stopped advertisers from using celebrity faces and names without permission.
The court said celebrities also have the right to control likenesses of themselves such as the letter-turning robot.
Philip M. Cowan, head of the New York state bar section on entertainment law, said advertisers have since become more cautious about appropriating celebrity images.
A federal judge in Houston overturned two new Texas laws that were designed to keep lawyers and doctors from rushing to solicit business from accident victims.
One of the measures would bar lawyers, health professionals and private investigators from writing to accident victims to solicit their business within 30 days of the accident.
The provision also would bar written solicitations of criminal defendants within 30 days of their arrest.
The second measure would keep lawyers and health professionals from obtaining access to an accident report within 180 days of an accident.
But insurance agents and news reporters would have immediate access.
The laws were challenged by lawyers, chiropractors and organizations that research public records for a fee.
U.S. District Judge David Hittner, who in August temporarily enjoined enforcement of the measures, this week ruled that they violated the First Amendment's protection of commercial speech.
A spokeswoman for the Texas attorney general's office said she expected the state to appeal the ruling.
(Mary Moore et al. vs. Dan Morales et al., U.S. District Court, Houston, Civ.
