Unlike other industries, pharmaceuticals and biotechnology pursue a utopian goal: freeing humanity from disease.
Yet few among the American public understand the drug development process.
As a result, the healthy profits needed to finance private research are tempting targets for demagoguery.
Tempted, the Clinton administration is bashing "high drug prices" to scare up support for its new regulatory onslaught.
President Clinton has proposed an elaborate system of price reviews, blacklists and mandated rebates that establish price controls in effect, if not in name.
At stake is privately financed research on all new drugs and biotechnology.
At stake also are the cost of health care and the lives of countless Americans with AIDS, cancer and other killers.
Reducing costs and saving lives both depend on treatment breakthroughs.
What can the private companies do to make the public understand the real stakes of drug price regulation?
1. First, they should send a clear message: "Our product is innovation."
When we Americans purchase new software, we don't gripe, "How dare they charge $300 for $8 worth of paper and plastic!"
We appreciate the value of the innovation.
Biotech and pharmaceutical profits pay for research for better "software for the human body."
But the average American filling a prescription doesn't realize he's paying for innovation.
He is ignorant of the simple, but essential, truth that biotech and pharmaceutical innovation is the only way to make health care more effective and less expensive.
Taxes targeting drug research -- that's what Mr. Clinton's rebates are -- and price controls on breakthroughs will cut research and cripple innovation.
The bottom line: Less innovation means lives lost and higher expenditures.
2. Form partnerships with patient groups.
Support from patients gives the pharmaceutical and biotech industries moral credibility and political clout.
Too little is being done to win patient support.
All companies need power-sharing partnerships with patients.
If companies can share power with researchers and FDA regulators, why not with patients?
Minorities, gays and lesbians could also become helpful allies.
Because of AIDS and breast cancer, gays and lesbians have a heavy stake in drug research.
The same is true for minorities: AIDS, hypertension, sickle cell anemia and other diseases affect them disproportionately.
3. Take off the gloves.
The Clinton administration stands united behind its crusade to regulate drug prices.
Its generals, Hillary Rodham Clinton, Sen. David Pryor (D., Ark.), Rep. Henry Waxman (D., Calif.), FDA Commissioner David Kessler and Donna Shalala, secretary of health and human services, are regulatory zealots.
Only if the private companies fight hard to defend free markets can they halt the advance of the Clintons' regulatory imperialism.
4. Seize the moral high ground.
Drug and biotech companies have a duty to their stockholders to oppose price controls.
They also have a moral obligation to fight policies that hinder research on better treatments for disease.
Disease inflicts greater suffering than war, crime or poverty; and no one is ever safe from disease.
By taking a moral stand, the companies will gain powerful new arguments and allies.
Americans want no delays in research on better treatments for AIDS, cancer and other killers.
They are fed up with the high cost of regulation for regulation's stake.
Economics, morality and common sense all support a free market for the drug and biotech companies.
But to defeat price regulation, the companies must fight to make sure America knows the stakes.
Mr. Driscoll, an AIDS activist, is vice president for policy of the San Francisco-based Direct Action for Treatment Access.
