Law school may be losing its luster.
In just three years, the number of students vying to get into law schools has dropped roughly 11%, according to preliminary figures from the Law School Admission Services.
The drop-off mirrors a decline in M.B.A. program applications in recent years.
Meanwhile, more people are elbowing their way into health- and government-related programs, according to the Council of Graduate Students, in Washington, D.C.
The law-school downturn, representing three years of continuously declining applications, could represent just a leveling-off after a streak of record highs in the 1980s and early 1990s.
The number of applicants is, in fact, still above the historical average, and law schools say they're unconcerned about the downturn.
But George L. Dawson, president of the policy-making arm of the Admission Services, predicts the descent will continue.
The Admission Services, based in Newtown, Pa., administers law-school entrance exams.
Mr. Dawson says a hostile job market for new lawyers, which he expects to continue, is the primary reason for the decrease from a 1991 peak of 94,000 applicants to a projected total of about 83,000 this year.
Final numbers for this year won't be in until the fall.
Prospects for law-school graduates in 1992, the most recent year for which figures were available, were the bleakest in a decade.
Six months after graduation, one out of six new attorneys remained unemployed, according to the National Association for Law Placement, Washington.
At the same time, the American Bar Association calculated that tuition costs at private law schools averaged $13,700 a semester.
"I think students are thinking hard about whether they want to make this commitment at this time," said Cheryl A. Ficarra, assistant dean of admissions and financial aid at Syracuse University College of Law.
Syracuse actually is receiving more applicants than last year, perhaps because of forceful recruiting, but most Northeast schools are in a deep slump.
West Coast law schools, especially those in the Pacific Northwest, have not experienced a decline.
The national drop-off of approximately 11% breaks down into decreases of 1.6% in 1992, 5.9% in 1993 and 4% this year, based on figures to date.
The unpopularity of lawyers -- who repeatedly rank near politicians in public-opinion polls -- may be a secondary factor in the slide, to the same extent that the popularity of "L.A. Law" helped propel a surge in applications in the 1980s.
But law-school hopefuls say it's largely the job market that is deterring some of their peers.
"I have a friend who's a first-year law student," said Craig Ackermann, a University of Texas senior who did apply to law school.
"He mailed out 50 letters and he got 50 rejections, and stories like this trickle down."
Walter K. Olson, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute research organization, and author of "The Litigation Explosion," takes no comfort in the trend.
He notes that the drop-off won't necessarily affect the nation's explosion of attorneys, who are expected to number one million by the year 2000.
Indeed, while the number of applicants is down, there are still more than enough to fill all the available law-school places, which have held steady for many years at about 41,000.
So, for now, the net effect of the drop-off in applicants is only that it is becoming a bit easier for those who do apply to get admitted.
"We can expect to see the stock of people with legal training to increase," said Mr. Olson, who says he believes that more people are entering the legal profession than retiring from it.
A spokeswoman for the ABA in Chicago said the group doesn't track the number of retiring lawyers.
"There may be ups and downs in this," said Mr. Olson, "but the net increase in the profession is going to increase strongly and into the indefinite future."
Shareholder activists who succeed in litigation to place social-issue proposals in proxy materials may be entitled to legal fees even if the proposal fails with shareholders, a federal judge ruled.
The ruling by U.S. District Judge Kimba L. Wood in New York is expected to aid an increasing number of groups backing proxy proposals on plant closings, cigarette advertising, executive compensation and other issues.
With the annual meeting season about to begin, the Washington-based Investor Responsibility Research Center said there are 134 social-issue resolutions before the 1,500 corporations that it follows nationwide, compared with 128 resolutions last year.
The latest ruling stems from a decision last year in which Judge Wood found that the Securities and Exchange Commission had misapplied its own rules in telling Wal-Mart Stores Inc. that it could omit from its proxy materials a shareholders' proposal on employment issues.
In asking Judge Wood to deny the shareholder activists' legal fees, Wal-Mart said the proposal received support from only 7% of shareholders, and therefore the litigation didn't benefit the shareholders as a group.
But Judge Wood rejected that argument, finding that the successful lawsuit conferred a "common benefit" on all the shareholders.
She awarded the plaintiffs $54,680 in legal fees.
"The fact that the proposal commanded more than twice the votes deemed necessary by the SEC to keep it in next year's proxy materials suggests that the communication was valuable," the judge wrote.
Cornish F. Hitchcock, an attorney with Public Citizen Litigation Group in Washington, which represented the plaintiffs, said the case was the first in which attorneys fees had been awarded in such a context.
"This will give shareholders another tool to use and provide incentives for companies to place these proposals on their ballots," he said.
A spokesman for the SEC declined to comment, saying the agency wasn't a party to the litigation.
Attorneys for Wal-Mart, based in Bentonville, Ark., didn't return telephone calls seeking comment.
(Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union et al. vs. Wal-Mart Stores Inc., U.S. District Court, New York, 92 Civ. 5517)
Margaret A. Jacobs contributed to this article.
