Bulletin to Atlanta residents: Pull out your reporter's notebooks.
Prodigy Services Co. is adding its first newspaper to the on-line computer service -- and is encouraging Atlanta area residents to submit their own stories.
The White Plains, N.Y., company and Cox Newspapers Inc. are offering news from the Atlanta Journal-Constitution and a slew of local information such as Little League scores, crime news by neighborhood, and school-lunch menus.
The service, called Access Atlanta, will launch on Sunday.
And it will include features other on-line newspapers don't offer: photographs and very localized reports from local users.
That may well entail all the news that can't fit into print but can fit into the infinite pipeline of on-line services.
"Whether it's about the PTA group or neighborhood associations, users will be encouraged to write articles," said Brian Ek, a spokesman for Prodigy, which is a joint venture of International Business Machines Corp. and Sears, Roebuck & Co.
Increasingly, local newspapers are going on-line to give their readers more specialized services and to get the increased exposure a national on-line service can afford.
But some experts question whether computerized newspapers will really catch on.
"I don't think people want to read a newspaper on a screen," says Denise Caruso, director of Technology & Media Group Inc., a San Francisco publisher.
"One of the biggest mistakes that people make in new media is thinking that you can take one medium and just transform it into another one."
Still, the rush to the computer screen is on.
Last month, News Corp.'s Delphi Internet Services teamed up with Pulitzer Publishing Co. to offer news from the St. Louis Post-Dispatch along with local restaurant reviews and movie timetables.
CompuServe Information Services, a unit of H&R Block Co., offers the newspaper Florida Today, which holds on-line "chats" with local figures such as Jeb Bush, the gubernatorial hopeful.
America Online Inc. offers, for example, local Bulls tickets through its Chicago Tribune Online service.
And Prodigy plans to offer the Tampa Tribune this summer, with papers from Dayton, Ohio, and Austin, Texas, to follow.
Like other services, Access Atlanta will include uncut versions of newspaper stories and will offer users a chance to give editors a piece of their minds.
It will also have classified ads, information from local government agencies and tourist bureaus.
Unlike others, however, the on-line Journal-Constitution will also display local advertising and classified ads that can be searched.
David Scott, publisher of the Journal-Constitution's on-line service, says users can search auto listings for a specific model.
The service will start at a flat fee of $6.95 a month for non-Prodigy members and $4.95 for members.
Users must then pay an extra 25 cents per e-mail message and $3.60 an hour to cruise the bulletin boards.
Mr. Scott says local advertising and the bulletin board service will be the main sources of revenue.
After three years, he hopes the service will have 35,000 to 40,000 subscribers, which would be "a nice business for us."
But he adds: "We don't think this is going to substitute for the paper."
