The talk in the bond market is that last week's big bond sell-off went too far and that bonds now are cheap.
Too bad it's just talk.
Very few people are "backing up those words with actions and buying," says John Lonski, chief economist of Moody's Investors Service Inc.
"It's like putting your economic analysis in one place and your pocketbook in another."
On Friday, bond prices did recover a bit, with the long-term Treasury yield ending at 6.71%.
But things are likely to worsen this week.
One reason is that the bond market is dreading tomorrow's release of revised figures on the fourth-quarter gross domestic product.
Earlier estimates put the jump at 5.9%.
Many economists look for a revision closer to 7%, and that kind of number is likely to be greeted with boos by the bond investors of America, says Moody's Mr. Lonski.
Bond yields, which move in the opposite direction of prices, are already hovering near 10-month highs.
One major culprit here: rising inflation expectations.
Climbing prices mean that the fixed-coupon payment from a 30-year bond buys less and less each week.
This trend inexorably pushes the value of the bond lower.
The Federal Reserve may be able to do something about inflation, but it has had little effect on inflationary expectations so far this year.
The Fed raised short-term interest rates three weeks ago Friday, aiming to keep the U.S. economy from overheating and feeding inflation.
But that reversal of the Fed's longtime pattern of rate cutting sent bond investors fleeing.
Since the Fed's rate boost, the price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond has dropped nearly 4 1/2 points, or nearly $45 for a bond with $1,000 face value.
Since the yield of the 30-year bond bottomed at 5.79% in mid-October, inflationary expectations have risen sharply.
The nearby chart shows that even though price gains measured by the consumer price index have remained low, investors believe that price inflation will accelerate in the future.
See related illustration.
Robert Ariel, finance professor at City University of New York, who constructed the chart, says the recent jump in inflationary expectations was a shock.
"I found it surprising that they moved that much this fast," he says.
The kind of shift that "used to happen in couple of weeks is now happening in a day."
An investor who bought a 30-year Treasury bond the day the Fed raised rates and sold it on Friday would have lost 4.56% in principal.
That's a bigger loss in three weeks than most people make in a money-market fund over a whole year.
In its first skirmish in the psychological battle against inflationary expectations, the Fed has been routed.
Investors who formerly looked for the good news for bonds in any economic report now are focusing almost exclusively on the bad news.
(According to bond logic, good news for the economy is bad for bonds because a growing economy means greater danger of rising inflation.)
So even though an upward revision to the fourth-quarter gross domestic product tomorrow wouldn't be a surprise, bond investors have become so anxious about inflation that they might take it on the chin.
"If fourth-quarter GDP is far above its long-term trend," says Mr. Lonski, "investors are likely to read it as evidence of a higher underlying rate of economic growth for 1994."
The gross domestic product report is followed this week by the employment report for February, the first official look at the state of the nation's economy for the month.
It is to be released Friday.
Short-term Treasury securities now are priced as if the federal funds rate, which the Fed boosted in early February, were 4.25% to 4.5% instead of its current 3.25% rate, says Robert Andres, head of fixed-income investing at Martindale Andres & Co. of West Conshohocken, Pa.
(The fed funds rate is the rate at which banks lend each other money overnight.)
"We're way ahead of ourselves here," he says.
Mr. Andres says he doesn't envision inflationary pressures building much at all this year.
Still, "until there is some stabilization in the bond markets, nobody wants to rush out and be the intrepid one and buy" bonds, says Mr. Lonski of Moody's.
He thinks the 30-year bond yield will hit 6.9% by year's end.
"How much longer can you continue to sell off bonds without some hard evidence of either significantly faster economic growth or a higher rate of inflation?" he says.
Last year the consumer price index increased 2.7% from the previous year.
Mr. Lonski is predicting an increase of 3.4% by the end of this year.
That wouldn't be enough to cause a panic, though bond investors seem perilously close to one already.
The problem is that investors are reading the Fed's move to raise rates as a reaction to existing inflationary pressures rather than a pre-emptive strike, says Prof. Ariel.
If investors were sure that the Fed was ahead of the ball, long-term interest rates would have dropped, he says.
The most obvious result of this turnabout in sentiment has been the decision by many investors to move money from foreign and long-term bonds into the conservative realm of shorter-term domestic securities.
Thursday and Friday, for example, there was a major sell-off in the government bonds of developing nations such as Mexico and Argentina, where prices dropped as much as five points in some cases.
According to Neal Litvack, executive vice president of marketing at Fidelity Investments in Boston, the nation's largest mutual-fund company, there has been a big shift into shorter-term securities over the past month.
So far in February, more than 90% of bond-fund sales have been in short-term funds, while in January two-thirds of bond-fund sales were of short-term funds, says Mr. Litvack.
"There are no net redemptions in any bond-fund categories, only a slowdown in net sales," he says.
In February, Vanguard Group of Valley Forge, Pa., the second-largest mutual fund company, has seen slight net outflows of investor dollars in both taxable and taxfree bond funds.
But short-term money-market funds had substantial inflows, a spokesman said.
Overall, flow into taxable-bond mutual funds is at half the level of mid-January, according to AMG Data Services, an Arcata, Calif., research firm.
For the week through Wednesday, about $900 million flowed into these funds, down from a weekly average of $1.8 billion at the beginning of January.
If withdrawals by investors worried about rising rates were to accelerate sharply, however, the bond market could be pushed down even further as portfolio managers sell holdings to raise cash.
Also pushing yields higher has been selling by so-called hedge funds, says James Calmas, a portfolio manager at Massachusetts Financial Services.
"We're hearing that a lot of overleveraged players are exiting the bond market," he says.
Some analysts believe that hedge funds with losing positions in some European bond markets have been quick to raise cash by unloading their U.S. Treasury holdings, which are easier to sell in a down market than many European bonds.
The indecision on interest rates is likely to slow the flood of new investment-grade and junk-bond offerings sharply in coming weeks.
"There's very little trading taking place" in the junk-bond market, says Kingman Penniman, director of fixed-income research at Duff & Phelps Corp.
"It's certainly causing people to have second thoughts about the pricing calendar."
The result is that the junk-bond market is becoming a place where buyers can be choosier.
"We're probably locked into an upward path for interest rates that will continue until Fed tightening significantly diminishes the pace of economic activity," says Mr. Lonski of Moody's.
For bond yields to head back down to 6.25% again, he says, "what you need is a return of protracted economic weakness"-which doesn't seem likely.
Treasurys mustered a little strength early Friday but quickly lost their vigor, spending most of the day little changed to slightly higher.
The 10-year note, for example, rose 1/8 point, to 97 20/32 to yield 6.18% compared with 6.2% Thursday.
Treasurys opened higher as traders and investors tried to stake out a new bottom for the market.
But gains in this kind of trading say hardly anything about the market's long-term chances, traders point out.
"Call it backing and filling," says William Brachfeld, head of government securities trading at Daiwa Securities America Inc.
"A lot of it is technically oriented."
At the heart of this technical orientation is a need by Treasury market players to feel ready for any more changes in monetary policy by the Federal Reserve.
But even if Friday's nearly unchanged market was a sign that bond buyers and traders have established a comfortable rate base from which to operate, there isn't much chance they'll be taking on big, new positions while they're still anticipating that the Fed will act, market watchers say.
During such a wait, "it takes a brave person to step up and battle," says Dana Johnson, head of market analysis at First Chicago Capital Markets.
"I think there are few people who are willing to do that with the kind of reports coming up that we've got."
Sara Calian contributed to this article.
