The most eagerly sought invitation in town these days is to join the U.S. delegation to South Africa's coming presidential inauguration.
While South Africa's first all-race elections are still a month away -- and the inauguration two weeks after that -- "we've been deluged with requests," says a U.S. official.
The official adds that at least half of the members of Congress, every major African-American leader and numerous businessmen and politicians have said they want to be included in the group, which will likely be led by Vice President Al Gore.
Despite continuing political violence in South Africa and the refusal of Zulu leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi to participate in the elections, the Clinton administration is optimistic about South Africa's political prospects.
Even last week's disclosure that senior officials of the South African police have been inciting black-on-black violence -- by arming, training and even directing death squad attacks by Mr. Buthelezi's backers on rival supporters of the African National Congress -- hasn't dimmed their enthusiasm.
The administration, which sees South Africa as one of the very few bright spots on the foreign-policy scene, as well as an issue with strong domestic payback, is working to smooth the country's transition.
The U.S. has provided $35 million to finance voter-education programs, train election monitors and help prepare "previously disadvantaged" political parties.
There also has been some serious behind-the-scenes maneuvering.
In the past several months, the U.S. has quietly tried to persuade Mr. Buthelezi to put aside his talk of war and agree to join the elections.
That effort has failed so far: Mr. Buthelezi's Inkatha Freedom Party failed to submit a candidate list by last week's deadline.
Inkatha leaders dismissed as "propaganda" charges that it had colluded with the South African security forces.
Mr. Buthelezi's refusal to participate "could mean more violence," says Pauline Baker, an Africa expert at the Aspen Institute, a think tank.
But, she says, the Zulu leader has "marginalized himself" in the last year by not taking part in the negotiated transfer of power.
"There was a time when you couldn't have held meaningful elections without Buthelezi, but not anymore," she says.
Perhaps the best news for the elections, say Ms. Baker and U.S. officials, is the outcome of the recent blowup in Bophuthatswana.
When civil servants in the apartheid-created "black homeland" turned on their rightist despot and demanded the right to join in the elections, the uprising could have spiraled out of control, especially with armed white racists pouring over the border to defend the rightist leader.
Instead, South African President F.W. de Klerk and African National Congress head Nelson Mandela responded swiftly, agreeing to send in troops to depose the despot and re-establish order.
Perhaps the best news for the elections, say Ms. Baker and U.S. officials, is the outcome of the recent blowup in Bophuthatswana.
When residents of the "black homeland" that was created under apartheid turned on their rightist despot and demanded the right to vote, the uprising could have spiraled out of control, especially with armed white racists pouring over the border to defend the rightist leader.
Instead, South African President F.W. de Klerk and African National Congress head Nelson Mandela responded swiftly, agreeing to send in troops to depose the despot and re-establish order.
The episode, despite 60 deaths, means that 1.5 million more black South Africans will be voting next month.
The South African right was split by the violence and the humiliation of its defeat, with one key rightist leader signing up for the elections immediately afterwards.
"Best of all," says Ms. Baker, Bophuthatswana "proved the loyalty of the white-led security forces."
U.S. officials say that the real challenges for both South Africa and the U.S. will come after the elections.
The new government will have to act quickly to meet the rising expectations of newly liberated black South Africans.
The Clinton administration probably will increase its current fiscal 1994 aid commitment of $90 million to around $165 million, officials say.
While that would represent 20% of U.S. development aid for the entire continent of Africa, it is provoking some grousing among South Africans hoping for a bailout on a scale closer to Russia's.
With foreign-aid money tight, the U.S. is hoping to make up some of the difference by lending the expertise of a wide array of U.S. agencies to the new government.
The Energy Department is exploring ways to support a mass-electrification program.
The Commerce Department is setting up a U.S.-South Africa Business Development Committee to encourage the return of U.S. investors; it also is pressing state and local governments to lift remaining sanctions.
With time, the Defense Department also may get into the act, encouraging South Africa to turn its "excess military capacity" into humanitarian relief and peacekeeping missions.
Despite the current satisfaction on Capitol Hill, Ms. Baker says that some critics may end up accusing the administration of favoring South Africa at the expense of its far more needy neighbors.
U.S. officials will likely offer a defense familiar to the current Russia-policy debate.
A democratic, economically flourishing South Africa, they say, is the best hope for a stable, economically sound Africa.
