Two House committees passed sweeping telecommunications bills that would encourage competition in the local phone business and eventually lift restrictions on the seven regional Bell companies.
The bills remain on a fast track through the House and are expected to come up for a vote on the House floor this spring.
The House Energy and Commerce Committee passed two bills.
The first, a compromise worked out by Committee Chairman John Dingell (D., Mich.) and Judiciary Committee Chairman Jack Brooks (D., Texas), would replace the consent decree that broke up the Bell System.
It would establish guidelines for the Bell companies to enter the long-distance and telecommunications-equipmentmanufacturing businesses.
The regional phone companies currently are barred from both businesses under the consent decree.
The second bill-co-authored by Edward Markey (D., Mass.), chairman of the Commerce Committee's telecommunications subcommittee, and the panel's ranking Republican, Rep. Jack Fields of Texas -- would open local telephone networks to competition and let phone companies and cable-television companies compete head-to-head.
Phone companies currently are restricted from providing cable-TV service within their telephone-service territories.
Meanwhile, the House Judiciary Committee approved the Brooks-Dingell bill, but with different amendments than those approved by the Commerce Committee.
The biggest differences surround two provisions of the compromise: One would let the Bells provide intrastate long-distance service so long as state regulators approve; the other would let the Bells buy long-distance service from American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and other long-distance carriers and resell it to their local phone customers.
The Commerce Committee version, which passed unanimously on a voice vote, didn't change those provisions substantially, but stipulated that Bell companies would have to charge their own long-distance units the same fees for completing calls over the local phone network that nonaffiliated carriers must pay.
Lawmakers also passed an amendment that would restrict Bell companies' use of sensitive data they obtain about their competitors' customers; this has been a big concern of privacy advocates and potential Bell competitors, who worry that the phone companies could use calling data to "cherry-pick" their best customers.
The Judiciary Committee adopted amendments that would make it tougher for the Bell companies to enter the intrastate and resale niches of the long-distance market.
Its version still would leave it up to state regulators to decide when a Bell company should be allowed to enter the intrastate market, but the Justice Department could file suit to stop the activity within 120 days if it believes the phone company could impede long-distance competition.
The panel also said the Justice Department would have to conclude that a Bell company would pose "no substantial possibility" it would harm long-distance competition before being allowed to resell long-distance service.
Both the Judiciary Committee and Commerce Committee versions of the Brooks-Dingell bill would let the regional Bell companies provide long-distance service in connection with any cable-TV offerings.
But the two panels differed on letting the Bells offer long-distance service in connection with information services, wireless communications and signaling systems that route calls through the phone network.
Differences between the two bills are likely to be worked out over the next few weeks by Reps. Brooks and Dingell.
At yesterday's session, Mr. Dingell signaled the long-distance issues could be resolved.
"These are questions we will continue to address as the legislation goes forward," he said.
Meantime, the Commerce Committee passed several amendments to the Markey-Fields bill, including one that would give television broadcasters flexibility to decide how they will use the new spectrum they will be assigned for high-definition television.
Broadcasters have been balking at the idea of converting to high-definition transmission because of the cost.
The legislation would require the Federal Communications Commission to set a minimum number of hours that broadcasters would have to transmit high-definition signals.
But it also would let TV stations develop new sources of revenue by transmitting data and other nontraditional services.
Broadcasters that offer services for a fee would be required to pay the government a royalty.
The Markey-Fields bill would overhaul the way local phone companies are regulated, largely abandoning rate-of-return regulation in favor of controlling prices.
Among other things, it would establish a joint board of federal and state officials to oversee a fund that would collect and distribute funds to keep phone service affordable for residential customers.
