The Federal Aviation Administration authorized airlines to start using military satellite signals for navigation, but several obstacles could prevent quick use of the technology.
The action follows recent assurances by the Defense Department that the military won't turn off or greatly degrade the satellite signals without two days' notice.
The president still could turn off the system without warning in a "national emergency," though.
The military's collection of 24 orbiting satellites, known as the Global Positioning System, can pinpoint an object's position within a few feet.
Airlines have said using GPS could save them hundreds of millions of dollars by allowing them to fly more efficient routes.
Indeed, FAA officials made their strongest predictions yet that GPS eventually will be able to operate without a backup system, and will replace ground-based devices used to locate airplanes in flight and guide them onto runways.
"I see no reason why GPS will not become the only navigation system," FAA administrator David Hinson said.
For now, though, the FAA won't let airlines use GPS devices without other navigation equipment.
The agency this week approved use of an on-board satellite receiver made by closely held Garmin International Inc. of Lenexa, Kan.
The device also includes a data chip that replaces stacks of manuals showing pilots how to land at various airports.
Other companies developing GPS technology include Trimble Navigation of Sunnyvale, Calif., and Honeywell Inc. of Minneapolis.
Continental Airlines has been using a Honeywell GPS system for several months to make poor-weather landings in Aspen, Colo., under a special testing program.
Roger Fleming, who tracks technological issues for the airline industry's Air Transport Association, said airlines may start making "major commitments" to GPS within six months.
But Mr. Fleming said the airlines first will seek more information from the FAA on the advantages of using the GPS, including how close to one another airplanes using it will be able to fly.
FAA officials said they still are studying how to change air-traffic-control procedures for GPS-equipped planes; if the system enables airplanes to fly closer together, it could reduce flight delays.
Another tough issue to resolve before GPS can become widely used in aviation is how to compensate for inaccuracy the military deliberately adds to civilian GPS signals.
The Defense Department guarantees accuracy to within 100 meters (330 feet) -- close enough for air-traffic controllers to track a plane in flight but not accurate enough for pilots to land in bad weather.
The FAA is studying the possibility of sending correcting signals by satellite, but that could meet opposition from the Defense Department.
Some military experts have warned that other countries, including North Korea and Iraq, are developing missiles that can home in on targets using the U.S. military's satellite signals.
FAA officials played down that risk yesterday, along with the danger that hostile forces would jam the GPS signals to disrupt aviation.
"It's theoretically possible," said Anthony Broderick, the agency's associate administrator for regulation and certification.
But he said pilots will know if their systems are getting adulterated signals.
"It's not a safety hazard if it happens.
It's an economic concern," he said.
Another option for correcting civilian GPS signals would be to use radio towers to beam correcting signals a short distance.
But that would be more expensive for airports.
Also unclear is what the FAA will do with existing microwave-landing systems.
Until GPS came along, microwave systems were considered state of the art.
The FAA already has spent hundreds of millions of dollars building them.
The agency said it is decreasing its spending on microwave, but can't abandon the technology until GPS is proven adequate for landings that occur in low visibility or require steep angles of descent.
European countries have favored microwave because their home airports are often fogged in or near mountains, and require tricky, curved approaches.
U.S. officials say GPS will allow such landings, too, but the Europeans are loathe to rely upon a system that the U.S. could shut down at any time.
Persuading other countries to adopt GPS is important because airlines flying abroad don't want to have to purchase several different types of avionic equipment.
Susan Carey in Chicago contributed to this article.
