Gold futures prices fell after Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan described gold as "a very good indicator" of inflation and said the Fed is likely to continue to boost short-term interest rates to combat inflation when it occurs.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery was down $2.40 to $379.20 an ounce, while the May silver futures contract price rose 3.8 cents to $5.252 an ounce.
At the New York Mercantile Exchange, meanwhile, platinum for April delivery fell $3.40 to $397.10 an ounce.
Analysts and traders said Mr. Greenspan's comments unnerved precious-metals markets because tightening of interest rates is perceived as something that could diminish industrial demand for gold.
"Gold doesn't cause inflation," said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
"It may be an indicator, a reflection of inflation perceptions.
But comments from the Fed historically have made the market nervous and caused some weakness.
The thinking is that if gold starts to move up, that could increase the potential for a Fed tightening and possibly lead to central bank selling."
Many traders assert that gold's recent behavior has little to do with prospects for a pickup in inflation, and thus argue that linking interest-rate boosts to the performance of gold is inherently flawed.
"Most of us in the market don't see gold's recent rally as an inflation rally, but as a fundamental rally," said Ian MacDonald, chief of precious metals trading for CreditSuisse.
"Supply and demand and not inflation concerns have been driving the market.
What if there are mine interruptions in South Africa and the price of gold goes up.
Is that inflation?
Or is he Mr. Greenspan just using gold as an excuse to raise interest rates?"
Yesterday's gold market was also pressured lower by other factors, including a report that Russia's internal budgetary problems are worse than expected and that the country may have to sell gold to make ends meet.
Russian central bank chief Viktor Gerashchenko said Russia may be "compelled" to sell gold to close a budget gap now estimated at $40 billion to $45 billion.
In recent years, heavy sales of precious metals such as platinum and gold by Russia have been a consistent drag on prices, analysts say.
It had been hoped that these sales would taper off this year.
A final piece of negative news for precious-metals markets was the World Gold Council's report that Asian demand for gold fell sharply last year -- including a 27% drop in the fourth quarter from a year earlier; a 23% drop in the third quarter; and an 8% decline during 1993 overall.
China's purchases of gold in the fourth quarter of 1993 were only about 46 metric tons, the council said, down 46% from the previous year's purchases.
The gloomy news about Asian demand for gold overshadowed a brighter portrait of global gold demand, which showed that overall world demand fell by only about 1% last year, to 2,459 metric tons, despite a 20% surge in price.
A metric ton is equivalent to 2,204.62 pounds.
ENERGY: Oil futures prices rose yesterday in light trading, prompted higher by a rally in the heating oil market.
The main focus of the market was strong purchasing of heating oil for March delivery.
The March heating oil contract settled more than one cent higher to 46.83 cents a gallon.
"Heating oil has been having something of a corrective bounce over the last few sessions" after heavy losses early last week, said John Saucer, energy analyst with Smith Barney Shearson.
Mr. Saucer and other analysts also noted that heating oil benefited from forecasts of colder weather for the U.S. Midwest and Northeast in coming days.
The Northeast is the world's largest heating oil market.
"Winter isn't over yet," warned Tom Bentz, director of the energy division at Quantum Financial Services.
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Futures prices fell after winter wheat growers in the Plains states received much-needed precipitation.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, wheat for July delivery fell 3.25 cents to $3.40 a bushel.
Fields are parched in many areas of the western Corn Belt and Plains states, raising concerns about lower-than-expected production of soft and hard red winter wheat.
Over the past weekend, however, "the moisture received was more than expected and deemed beneficial," said Daniel W. Basse, market research director for AgResource Co., Chicago.
"They got an inch to an inch-and-a-half, all but alleviating dryness concerns for winter wheat."
Neil Behrmann contributed to this article.
