China said it would refund any increases in foreign-funded companies' tax payments under a national tax system that took effect Jan. 1.
Seeking to allay concerns about the changes among foreign companies, the government said the tax burden for most of them won't change much.
Preferential business-income taxes for foreign-funded companies remain on the books.
But sales levies have been replaced by a 17% value-added tax, an excise tax and a business tax on services that apply to foreign and domestic firms alike.
The promised refunds will apply only to companies that received investment approvals before the end of last year.
Relief will apply for ventures' first five years, after which foreign firms must compete on equal terms with Chinese companies.
The new tax system, aimed at strengthening efforts to adopt aspects of a market economy, is designed to channel 60% of tax revenue to the central government, up from 40% now, to finance national development projects and control the deficit.
The number of people without jobs in Russia is expected to grow sharply to seven million by the end of next year if economic reforms continue and insolvent enterprises are forced to shed idle workers.
After opponents of reform did unexpectedly well in parliamentary elections last month, many officials and economists have urged softening the financial-stabilization program to prevent widespread unemployment.
Officially, only one million people, or 1% of the work force, are unemployed, but officials said four million people don't have work, for a rate of 5%.
Thailand approved an $82.3 million plan for a traffic-control system in Chiang Mai, the country's second-largest city, to be completed for the 1995 Southeast Asian Games there.
The plan also calls for construction of a ring road and studies for a light-rail commuter line in the city, 360 miles north of Bangkok.
The government wants to make Chiang Mai a hub of trade, tourism, industry and education without traffic problems.
Chiang Mai's population has soared from 30,000 five decades ago to 400,000, swelled by arrivals from the crowded capital since Thailand's economic boom began in the 1980s.
Romania plans to accelerate its privatization program this year, concentrating on the industrial sector, which remains largely state-owned.
Sell-offs last year totaled 239, mostly building and trading companies.
This year, Romania intends to put 2,368 enterprises into private hands: 1,930 small businesses, 403 midsize enterprises and 35 large companies.
In a bid to end four decades of battles, the Karen National Union of ethnic-minority rebels decided to hold peace talks with the military junta.
The Karen commander, Gen. Bo Mya, also leads the opposition umbrella group, the Democratic Alliance of Burma.
The government last month rejected a Karen proposal for DAB peace talks on behalf of all alliance members.
Smaller factions have since struck cease-fire deals.
The Karen is the strongest of a dozen ethnic forces that have sought autonomy since Burma gained independence from Britain in 1948.
The Swiss government proposed tightening the money-laundering law by requiring banks, financial institutions and others to disclose more information on customers and transactions.
The expanded disclosure rules, to be introduced in Parliament in the spring, would apply to cash transactions of at least 25,000 Swiss francs ($16,925).
Violators could be jailed for six months or fined $67,700.
Parliament last month rejected proposals to loosen bank secrecy laws to aid in international criminal inquiries.
A St. Petersburg optical company will be the first Russian defense contractor to be freed completely from state control.
In turning enterprises over to private ownership since late 1992, the government has hung on to military suppliers.
Investors may bid for shares in Leningrad Optical-Mechanical Amalgamation, called Lomo, which makes most of the optical and laser products used by Russia's military and space programs.
Privatization vouchers will be accepted for at least 30% of Lomo's shares in an auction through Feb. 7.
The state will retain a 20% stake that will be legally entrusted to Lomo directors.
The remainder of the company will be owned by its workers.
Lomo in the past year has slashed its payroll 35% to 15,000 employees from 23,000.
State-owned companies typically were hugely overstaffed as the government sought to maintain full employment.
About 20% of Lomo's production is defense work, down from 60% three years ago.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
The Lebanese government-backed Solidere redevelopment company said about 20,000 Arab investors bought shares for a total of $926 million to rebuild Beirut.
It marks the biggest injection of private capital for reconstruction since the 15-year civil war ended in 1990. . . .
Britain's Water Research Association issued a binding policy to eliminate sexist terms in plumbing.
For example, ballcocks must be called float-operated valves, and violators may be fined.
In response, the 20,000-member National Plumbers Association said, "This is political correctness gone mad."
