Renaissance Capital isn't investing in art and literature from the 14th through 16th centuries, as its name might suggest.
Instead, the small financial firm is reclaiming the seemingly lost art of investing for the long haul.
The new closed-end fund the company plans to launch within 90 days will use a relatively obscure section of the Clinton tax plan that promises a 50% capital gains tax break for buy-and-hold investors.
Section 1202 of the plan, which is aimed at spurring economic expansion through entrepreneurial effort, promises to cut taxes for those who invest directly in small manufacturers and allow those dollars to steep for five years or longer.
In effect, this fund, to be called Renaissance Capital Growth and Income Fund III, aims to be the Warren Buffett of the fund world.
It plans a portfolio with scant turnover and an eye peering long into the future, unlike the typical fund.
To benefit from the tax cut, investors must subscribe to the fund during its initial offering and hold on for the minimum five years.
What also sets this fund apart is the fact that it will invest solely in privately placed convertible preferred stock.
This is a key to the tax leniency, because Section 1202 also mandates that an equity investment be made directly in a company.
This means either the purchase of risky, volatile and often hard-to-come-by initial public offerings, or investment in secondary or privately placed offerings.
Renaissance has focused in particular on companies that are already publicly traded and that typically have a track record of profitability.
The private placement gives Renaissance a voice on the company's board, while the conversion feature, usually priced in line with a stock's current market value, means exceptional gains should the company and its stock take off.
Being already profitable "cuts about 80% of the risk," says Russell Cleveland, Renaissance president.
Not only does the private placement fulfill the requirement for direct investment in a company, the stock's quarterly dividend stream "pays investors to wait for the growth," says Joseph A. Marshall, a senior vice president at Rauscher Pierce Refsnes in Dallas.
The fund will invest in small, undervalued but growing manufacturing concerns in need of capital to expand.
Another caveat of Section 1202 requires that the companies have less than $50 million in assets.
Such tiny companies are nothing new to Renaissance, although the convertible preferred stock focus is a new wrinkle.
Renaissance's usual investment vehicle has been privately placed convertible debentures, which act much the same as convertible preferred stock, except that, as debt, they offer more security should a company go belly up, since they are higher up on the bankruptcy-court food chain.
In 1990, the firm introduced Renaissance Capital Partners Ltd., a business-development company that has purchased privately placed convertible debt in seven small companies in industries as diverse as biopharmaceuticals, communications and environmental engineering.
Launched in mid-1990 with $12.89 million, the investments today are valued at more than $23.3 million.
In addition, those investments have returned $3.54 million to investors in quarterly cash distributions, a 27.5% cumulative return from interest income.
The profile of a standard Renaissance investment is a manufacturing or service firm with $20 million to $30 million in assets, already profitable, and which is either out of favor with, or unknown to, Wall Street.
In true value-investor style, it looks for companies trading near or below their book value and trading for less than five times cash flow.
Because of the risky nature of such diminutive companies, brokers familiar with Renaissance say that, past successes aside, investing in the new fund boils down to faith in Mr. Cleveland, his investment philosophy and his ability to choose companies.
Mr. Cleveland believes the best companies are those with the simplest products meeting a clearly defined need, and that investing is a long-term partnership with a company.
To that end, he doesn't even own a stock-quote machine.
Of the roughly 150 companies he's invested in over two decades, only four have gone bankrupt.
Of course, the risk of picking bad companies is compounded by Renaissance's focus on privately placed securities, which, because they are acquired privately, aren't registered as tradable issues with the Securities and Exchange Commission, meaning they are illiquid and all but impossible to purge should a company stumble badly.
Mr. Marshall notes, though, that because Renaissance traditionally gains a voice on a company's board of directors, it holds some sway in adjusting management or injecting new ideas.
The Growth and Income Fund III will demand a minimum $5,000 investment and carries a 1.75% management fee.
In addition, Renaissance also keeps 20% of any realized gains, after cash distributions, as an incentive fee.
Mr. Cleveland estimates the dividends will yield roughly 7% annually.
Because the fund will trade publicly, investors can get out before their five-year hitch is up, but they'll forfeit the favorable tax treatment.
Powell Industries jumped nearly 23% to $6.75 as a Robert W. Baird analyst upgraded the stock to "strong buy" from "hold."
The analyst cited an increased order backlog and the likelihood of earnings growth in the second half.
For its fiscal first quarter ended Jan. 31, the Houston maker of electrical distribution and control equipment posted net of $628,000, or six cents a share, compared with a loss of $275,000, or three cents a share, in the year-earlier period, which included a charge of 15 cents a share to account for postretirement benefits.
Coda Energy, Dallas, dropped more than 15% to $4.75, although its 1993 revenue increased more than threefold.
For the year, Coda earned $840,000, or seven cents a share, compared with $183,000, or two cents a share, the year before.
In the fourth quarter the company's net jumped to $619,000, or four cents a share, from $224,000, or three cents a share.
Smith Barney Shearson raised its rating for Austin's Dell Computer to "outperform" from "neutral."
That boosted the stock 15% to $24.125.
Earlier in the week, the company reported that it's re-entering the notebook computer business.
Maxxim Medical traded 15.6 times its average volume and gained 25 cents, largely on a secondary offering of two million shares priced at $17.50.
Maxxim posted net of $2 million, or 33 cents a share, including a $380,000 gain, or six cents a share, for its fiscal first quarter ended Jan. 30.
In the year-ago period, it earned $1.3 million, or 22 cents a share.
