Good news for the bond market has become a rare commodity lately, but traders finally had reason to push prices higher yesterday.
Traders said that modestly soothing news on inflation prompted a modest round of buying.
After the heavy selling of recent sessions, the market was ripe for some kind of rebound anyway, traders said.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond rose 5/8 point yesterday, or $6.25 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 94 22/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of price, fell to 6.65% from Friday's 6.71%.
Other Treasury maturities posted smaller gains.
Also bouncing back after nasty sell-offs late last week were the bonds of many developing nations, especially those in Latin America.
Sparking the buying in the U.S. was news from the Purchasing Management Association suggesting that concerns about inflation may have been a bit overdone.
Bond investors fear inflation because it reduces the value of investments that have fixed rates of return.
The Chicago association's index of prices paid, based on a survey of Chicago-area purchasers, slipped to 56.7 from last month's 59.3.
A reading above 50 on the index reflects rising prices -- the higher the index level, the faster the increase.
"How do you spell relief?" said Alan Levenson, money-market economist at UBS Securities, of the report.
"People are now bracing for the worst every time data come out," Mr. Levenson said.
"There was so much relief that the price index went down that it allowed the market to drift up."
Also lending support to the market was a comment from Federal Reserve Governor Lawrence Lindsey, traders said.
Mr. Lindsey told a Washington audience that he hoped the Fed's increase in interest rates on Feb. 4 "will be enough."
But analysts downplayed the significance of the remark.
They noted that Mr. Lindsey also warned that there are signs of future inflation pressures lurking in recent increases in commodity prices.
"The Fed is still going to have to raise rates some more,"said Marilyn Schaja, money-market economist at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp.
The bulk of the buying yesterday was by traders closing out short positions, players said.
A short sale is a bet that prices will go lower; a trader sells a borrowed security in hopes of being able to replace it at a lower price, pocketing the difference.
"There was not much customer business going on," said Daniel Callahan, manager of government securities trading at PaineWebber Inc.
"It was mostly professional trading."
Market participants warned against reading too much into yesterday's increase in prices.
"I wouldn't take this to mean people are finding good reasons to buy the market on a longer or medium term," said Mr. Levenson of UBS.
Mr. Callahan of PaineWebber said he believed the bond market still faces some tough going.
"The market is going to go lower," he said.
"There are still too many arguments for customers to shorten their exposure to the market instead of taking advantage of the higher yields," he said.
Traders and investors will have several significant pieces of information to help them make up their minds over the next few days.
This morning, for example, the Commerce Department is to report its revisions to fourth-quarter gross domestic product growth.
Analysts are calling for the originally reported 5.9% rate of growth to be bumped up to a 6.7% pace.
A number of forecasters believe it could be revised up to a frothy 7% rate.
Then at mid-morning, the National Association of Purchasing Management is slated to release its February report.
Most economists expect the NAPM index, which tracks prices paid by purchasing managers nationwide, to rise to 57.3 from 57.7 in January.
The biggest news of the week is due Friday, when the February employment report is to be released.
Expectations center on a rise in nonfarm payroll employment of about 150,000.
Payrolls rose by 62,000 in January.
Meanwhile yesterday the U.S. Treasury sold $25.49 billion of three-month and six-month bills at its regular weekly auction.
The three-month bill was sold at an average discount rate of 3.4% for a couponequivalent yield of 3.48%.
The six-month bill was sold at an average discount rate of 3.61% for a coupon-equivalent yield of 3.73%.
Yesterday the market for developing-nation debt caught its breath after a few days of heavy selling sparked, in part, by rising interest rates in the U.S.
J.P. Morgan's Emerging Markets Bond Index had jumped 3.38 points by late yesterday, to 196.41, a gain of 1.75%.
The index, which includes the government debt of Argentina, Mexico, Brazil and Venezuela, among other nations, dropped more than 4.5% last week during the sell-off.
With the exception of Venezuelan government bonds, most other Latin American government bonds and loans rallied yesterday, according to J.P. Morgan Securities Inc.
The so-called par Brady bonds from Argentina had risen about 2.5 points by late yesterday, or $25 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 62 1/4.
Brady bonds are made from defaulted loans restructured under guidelines set in place by former U.S. Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady.
Par bonds are defaulted loans that have been converted into bonds at face value.
Mexico's par Brady bonds rose about two points, to 75, while Venezuela's par Brady bonds dropped about 1/2 point, thanks in part to a weekend decision by the government to remove economic guarantees and permit official price fixing.
Some of Peru's defaulted debt prices jumped sharply after falling last week.
Some of Peru's commercial debt jumped nearly six points, to 64.5, after the winning privatization bid for the state phone company turned out to be four times what was expected, according to Dow Jones Emerging Markets Report.
Last week, Peruvian debt lost 10 points after political fears and bearish analyst predictions slammed into the paper.
Yesterday afternoon, shares in two state phone companies were sold to a consortium headed by Telefonica de Espana for more than $2 billion -- more than four times the base price of $535 million.
The second- and third-highest bids were far behind, in the $800 million range.
Traders said the winning bid would provide a strong flow of funds into Peru and improve the country's ability to pay its debts.
Here are the details from yesterday's U.S. Treasury auction:
Here are the details of yesterday's auction by the Treasury of 13-week and 26-week bills.
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year.
Both issues are dated March 3.
The 13-week bills mature June 2 and the 26-week bills mature Sept. 1.
The bonds of Nextel Communications Inc. rose sharply yesterday on news that MCI Communications Corp. will make a large investment in the wireless services provider.
MCI, Nextel and Comcast Corp. formed a strategic alliance to begin offering MCI wireless personal communications services this year, with the technology platform provided by Motorola Inc.
Nextel's zero-coupon bonds maturing in 2004 traded up six points on the news, or $60 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 66.
The yield dropped to 9.13% from 10.2%.
Zero-coupon bonds pay no interest and are sold at a deep discount to face value.
Traders pointed out that the bonds of CenCall Communications Corp. traded up on speculation that it too would find itself in Nextel's position.
The wireless-commumications company's zero-coupon bonds maturing in 2004 traded up by four points, or $40 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 64.
The yield dropped to 9.73% from 10.5%.
Otherwise, more than $1 billion of debt was priced during yesterday's session.
All of it was sold by federal agencies except for a $100 million offering from CIT Group Holdings Inc.
Today Ontario Hydro is expected to launch a C$1 billion ($740 million) floating-rate global bond offering.
It will mark the first Canadian-dollar-denominated, floating-rate note sold by a Canadian issuer.
The lead managers for the deal are Merrill Lynch & Co. and Wood Gundy Corp.
Also, the Bank of China is in the market with a Yankee bond that is expected to be sold Thursday.
The $500 million, two-part offering will be sold through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley & Co.
One part will mature in seven or 10 years and the other will mature in 20 to 30 years.
Trading in the investment-grade market was extremely light, with prices following Treasurys up.
Yield spreads over comparable Treasury securities were only slightly wider by the end of the day.
In the junk-bond market, trading was quiet outside the cable industry.
Junk bonds in general were down about 1/8 point -- except for cable bonds, which were up about 1/2 point in sympathy with Nextel's bonds.
Municipal bonds were mixed as the market tried to stabilize after recent declines.
Among actively traded issues, the Virginia Housing Development Authority's 5.9% of 2021 bonds were little changed at 97 1/4 to 97 3/4 in late dealings, yielding about 6.07%, traders say.
Even though sales have faded, some muni specialists say the market's firm tone seems tentative.
With concerns lingering about further Fed tightening, traders will be on the lookout for signs of unexpected strength in economic reports released this week.
The latest wave of muni issues will also be in focus.
In today's session, bids are to be taken for offerings including New York State's $224.1 million improvement bonds, which may give an indication of the level of demand in the market.
Mortgage-securities prices ended firm, but gains lagged behind intermediate Treasurys and appeared to result from a selling respite rather than the start of another strong rally.
In secondary trading of 7% mortgage securities for March delivery, Ginnie Maes were 8/32 higher at 100 8/32.
Freddie Mac Golds and Fannie Maes were up 7/32, at 100 12/32 and 100 6/32 respectively.
Ten-year Treasury notes, meanwhile, were 12/32 stronger.
The economy's vitality isn't the only factor mortgage-market players are scrutinizing.
The next wave of prepayment data starts rolling out today.
Mid-January to mid-February Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. prepayment figures are to be reported, followed on Monday by Government National Mortgage Association and Federal National Mortgage Association prepayment data for the full month of February.
A February slowdown is expected, followed by a brief upturn in early spring and then a considerable prepayment slide in late spring as a result of current mortgage-rate hikes.
