Investors looking for high-action markets in Asia have discovered Sri Lanka, an island nation with a tiny economy and a civil war.
The once sleepy stock exchange here, where dealers once could count on being home for dinner, is now kept going until midnight as brokers struggle to cope with more than 3,000 orders a day from local and foreign investors.
In a country where per-capita annual income is just $540, private radio stations have begun broadcasting regular market news and one television station does daily roundups.
Some small investors have doubled, even quadrupled their savings in a few months.
Sri Lanka is the latest nation to benefit from a surfeit of investment funds migrating from the mature, low-interest markets of the U.S. and Europe to the explosive big-growth exchanges of Asia, South America and North Africa.
"A huge wave of money is being poured into emerging markets.
By definition, that's where the growth is," said Robert Sherbin, of Hong Kong's Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank.
By the beginning of this year, at least six financial firms based in Hong Kong and Singapore had invested in the Sri Lanka stock exchange, causing it to soar.
The daily volume of trade went up fourfold in the past two months, from $2 million to $8 million.
From May to February, the market more than doubled, the fastest growth in Asia.
"Some investors see it as a mini-Singapore," said B.N. Manjunath, of the Hong Kong-based Lloyd George Management Fund.
"The growth in the stock market is a reflection of the confidence people have in the country's economy," said Saman Kelegama, an economist at the Institute of Policy Studies in Colombo.
Foreign investment took off in November 1993, six months after President Ranasinghe Premadasa was assassinated by a suicide bomber in the 11-year-old war against Tamil separatists.
To everyone's surprise, the transition of power to President Dingiri Banda Wijetunge went smoothly, with no backlash against the Tamil minority.
The rebellion for an independent homeland for the Tamils, which has claimed 19,000 lives, has been confined to the north and east of Sri Lanka, and is not a hindrance to investors.
Despite a defense allocation of $44 million, or one-fifth of the budget, the economy is surpassing last year's growth of 5.8%, fueled by direct foreign investment of $870 million.
Industrial exports grew by 21%, overtaking tea and spices as the main engine of a gross domestic product of only $9 billion.
Tourism, interrupted by the war, is again flourishing on this verdant Indian Ocean island with palm-lined beaches and forested mountains.
Even the monsoon rains have been good for the farmers.
Sri Lanka was the first of the socialist-leaning countries in the Indian subcontinent to open its economy.
After a hesitant start in 1977, liberalization picked up five years ago.
Thirty unprofitable corporations that were privatized are now among the 202 companies in the stock exchange.
The surge in the Colombo market last year was initiated by the Regent Sri Lankan Fund Ltd., floated in Hong Kong by the huge international firm Regent Fund Management.
More investment companies followed, prompting frenzied buying.
By March, six foreign investors had tied up with some of the 15 registered stock brokers in Colombo.
Their investments totaled 62% of the market's $3.6 billion in capital.
While exchange officials are buried under paper, brokers estimate the turnover will triple when the exchange is fully automated.
"There is foreign investment in excess of $100 million waiting to come into the market.
The manual system of trading cannot take it," said Thilan Wijesinghe, of Asia Stock Brokers.
