THE WHITEWATER AFFAIR BEGAN to have a wider impact on the administration.
Treasury Secretary Bentsen requested an ethics investigation into three meetings between Treasury and White House aides on possible lawsuits related to a failed Arkansas thrift.
Meanwhile, Senate Republicans vowed to block confirmation of the nominee for FDIC chairman until Democrats agree to hold Whitewater hearings.
The first major victim of the Whitewater fallout could be White House Counsel Nussbaum, blamed by some for mishandling the controversy.
Though Nussbaum hasn't been accused of anything illegal, some White House officials believe his actions have left the impression that the administration is stonewalling.
ISRAEL FREED more prisoners as Jewish settlers grew increasingly defiant.
The government released 400 Palestinians in a further effort to curb violence over the Hebron mosque massacre.
Though 1,000 prisoners were freed this week, there was no sign that Palestinians would resume peace talks or halt protests.
Meanwhile, Jewish settler leaders called on radical settlers to resist efforts to disarm them.
In Jerusalem, Rabin invited the right-wing Tsomet Party to join his coalition.
Israeli authorities are considering barring Jewish worshipers from Judaism's holiest site, the Wailing Wall, during Muslim prayers today at the adjacent al-Aqsa mosque.
Gephardt signaled that Democrats in Congress will significantly alter the mechanics of the Clinton health plan, and could accept a more gradual approach toward achieving universal coverage.
The House majority leader said modifications must be made to move the legislation through committees this spring.
The ANC and its right-wing foes agreed to seek international mediation to settle their differences in South Africa, raising hopes that all parties will take part in April's election.
The African National Congress accepted the mediation proposal made by black and white conservatives.
The U.S. military lacks the airlift capability to wage one large-scale foreign war, let alone two, as called for in the president's defense plan, the chief of the U.S. Central Command told a Senate panel.
Two Supreme Court justices voiced doubts over the wisdom of making federal offenses out of most crimes committed with a gun.
"We're very, very concerned" about the possible effect of some proposals, Kennedy said as he and Souter presented the court's budget request to a Senate panel.
Moscow leveled another charge in its spy squabble with the West, saying an American diplomat urged two Russians to get secret plans for a sophisticated Russian battle tank.
Western arms experts expressed surprise that the T-82 tank even exists.
Bosnian Serb forces have removed or surrendered nearly all of their 600 heavy weapons as ordered by NATO, the commander of U.S. forces in Europe told a Senate panel.
In the Bosnian capital, meanwhile, a U.N. official said that cease-fires generally were holding, but he expressed concern about increasing violations.
The House Budget Committee approved the outline of President Clinton's $1.5 trillion fiscal 1995 budget and deferred an internal Democratic dispute over defense spending.
Key Aristide supporters have joined Washington in backing a plan aimed at resolving Haiti's political troubles without specifically ensuring the ousted president's return.
The plan also would keep in place much of the current military government.
The U.S. said it would resume high-level talks with North Korea on March 21 in Geneva.
The announcement came after international experts arrived in Pyongyang to begin inspecting seven nuclear sites.
China detained a longtime dissident, Zhou Guoqiang, and accused him of planning to disrupt a parliamentary meeting that starts next week by distributing T-shirts printed with provocative slogans.
The FAA again boosted its cost estimate for an overhaul of the agency's air-traffic control system.
Officials also are suspending funding for part of the project, which is expected to be delayed further.
