A top strategist in International Business Machines Corp.'s multimedia effort resigned to join the corporate partner he had recruited to work with IBM-Blockbuster Entertainment Corp.
Robert L. Carberry, who sought out new ventures as president of IBM's Fireworks Partners multimedia unit, quit after 30 years at IBM to join the video-rental chain as vice president of technology, a new post.
Blockbuster has agreed to be acquired by Viacom Inc., and there has been speculation the company will push Viacom to sweeten the terms.
Mr. Carberry, who will work his last day at IBM today, said he is unconcerned about the uncertainties surrounding the Viacom deal.
Blockbuster, he said, will need his skills regardless of whether the merger goes through, as the company contends with video-on-demand systems planned by cable-TV and phone companies.
At Blockbuster, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., Mr. Carberry, age 51, will oversee an effort he helped establish while at IBM.
The joint venture with Blockbuster would allow the company to create music compact disks in its stores, on customer demand, rather than keeping all titles in stock.
"They certainly have a strong need to determine how to apply technology to their marketplace," Mr. Carberry said.
But Mr. Carberry's resignation at IBM also follows what some observers said has been an uncomfortable division of multimedia oversight between Mr. Carberry and Paul M. Loftus.
Mr. Loftus had been promoted to another top post last year, and their separate operations at times overlapped.
With Mr. Carberry moving on, his job won't be filled -- and Mr. Loftus will assume oversight of Firework Partners, which is being combined with the unit Mr. Loftus already runs, the Multimedia Systems group.
At Fireworks Partners, Mr. Carberry's main duties entailed identifying small companies and joint ventures that would make promising multimedia investments for IBM.
But some executives close to IBM said he wasn't as good at producing firm deals, and that he sometimes veered into interactive television -- Mr. Loftus's area.
An IBM spokesman, however, emphasized that Mr. Carberry's choice to leave was his own and said the consolidation of Fireworks into the other multimedia group had already been planned.
Another factor entered into Mr. Carberry's departure, according to industry executives.
Jerome B. York, named IBM's chief financial officer last year, placed stringent restrictions on Mr. Carberry's ability to invest in outside ventures.
Blockbuster, in contrast, is cash rich.
James A. Cannavino, IBM's top strategy executive, will serve as acting president of the newly combined group.
In an address to employees announcing the changes yesterday, Mr. Cannavino said he would take a more active role in overseeing multimedia strategy because he believes the area is crucial for IBM, according to employees who heard the talk.
Mr. Carberry is the second high-level multimedia executive to depart IBM in a year.
Lucie Fjeldstad resigned last year to run her own consulting firm, frustrated by IBM's muddled efforts in multimedia, with different product groups promoting different strategies.
Overcoming that conflict is a key challenge that Mr. Carberry leaves behind.
