Yields on U.S. Treasurys rose sharply yesterday as weak demand at the government's auction of two-year notes sent prices into a renewed tailspin.
The price declines were the sixth in the last seven trading sessions, and wiped out Tuesday's gains.
With the market turned bearish in recent weeks, many investors have proven unwilling to buy bonds when they believe they can fetch them more cheaply later.
At the auction, the Treasury Department awarded its $17 billion of new two-year notes at a yield of 4.66%.
Just hours before the 1 p.m. EST auction, traders predicted the issue would yield 4.64% or 4.65%, and on Tuesday the two-year notes yielded 4.58% in when-issued trading.
By late yesterday, the issue took another hit; it yielded 4.68% in whenissued trading.
The yield was the highest since the 4.71% demanded by investors at the two-year note auction on Dec. 22, 1992.
In the wake of Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan's hints Tuesday that short-term interest rates will rise further in pre-emptive strikes against inflation, there was little reason for investors to step into the market, traders and analysts said.
"We're having a hard time identifying buyers," said Peter Hirsch, manager of government-securities trading at Salomon Brothers Inc.
The Fed's first tightening came Feb. 4, when it raised the federal-funds rate -- the rate for overnight loans between banks -- to 3.25% from 3%.
Donald Fine, chief market analyst at Chase Securities Inc., said, "Everybody is waiting for the second shoe to drop.
The market's got the jitters."
William Sullivan Jr., senior vice president at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., said a higher yield isn't unexpected, given that "we are bidding for paper with the notice that a tightening can occur at any point in time.
Investors are demanding a higher yield premium for this uncertainty.
There's a great deal of anxiety."
Prices of longer-term issues were dragged down in sympathy with the losses on shorter-term ones, which are the ones most directly affected by Fed tightening.
The price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury fell 5/8 point, or $6.25 for each $1,000 in face value, to 94 25/32.
At that price, it yielded 6.65%, the highest since July.
The next hardest hit was the 10-year note.
Its price tumbled nearly 9/16, to 98 2/32, for a yield of 6.12%.
Reflecting the lack of aggressive bidding at the two-year note auction, the bid-to-cover ratio was 2.52-to-1 and noncompetitive bids were $796 million.
The bid-to-cover ratio is a measure of demand, comparing the number of bids tendered to those accepted.
Noncompetitive bids typically reflect interest from outside the Wall Street dealer community.
At the last two-year note auction in January, the $17 billion offering was sold at a yield of 4.11%.
The issue drew a bid-to-cover ratio of 2.85-to-1 and noncompetitive bids of $822 million.
Over the last 12 two-year note auctions, the average bid-to-cover ratio has been 2.71-to-1, and noncompetitive bids have averaged $810 million.
To make matters worse, the market faces a Commerce Department report on January durable-goods orders today, which could add to inflation fears.
Most economists are calling for an increase of 1%.
If that proves accurate, it would be the first time since 1987 that durable-goods orders have risen six months in a row.
Also unnerving the market is the fact that more issuance is on the way.
The Treasury Department is slated to sell $11 billion of five-year notes today and tomorrow will announce next week's sale of one-year bills.
In when-issued trading late yesterday, the five-year note yielded 5.60%, up from 5.51% late Tuesday.
Some analysts said the yield on the two-year note was now high enough that a second Fed tightening is priced in.
But others disagree.
They contend that the big drop in prices and accompanying rise in yields still may not be enough to persuade investors to put extra cash to work.
"There's such a fear on the part of investors: They know the yield levels are a lot better, but the longer they've waited the better they've gotten, so why invest today?" said David Ader, an analyst for Technical Data Corp., in Boston.
"It's been five years since the Fed was in a tightening mode and the market is reacclimating itself to this environment," said Doug Schindewolf, a money-market economist at Smith Barney Shearson Inc.
All bids are awarded at a single price at the market-clearing yield.
Rates are determined by the difference between that price and the face value.
The notes are dated Feb. 28, and mature Feb. 29, 1996.
After several sessions on the sidelines, issuers jumped back into the corporate bond market yesterday.
They were led by the Asian Development Bank, which sold $750 million of debt in its first global offering.
Also selling debt were National City Corp., selling $250 million; Household International BV, a unit of Household International Inc., selling $175 million; and Arizona Public Service Co., a unit of Pinnacle West Capital Corp., selling $100 million.
Trading in the investment-grade market was extremely light as prices declined, with spreads over similar-maturity Treasurys widening by about 0.05 percentage point.
Trading also was light in the junk bond market, where prices fell more than 1/4 point.
The Asian Development Bank is a multigovernmental agency based in the Philippines.
The bank, whose outstanding senior debt is rated triple-A, yesterday sold 10-year, 6.125% global notes at 99.117 to yield 6.245%.
The issue, sold through joint lead managers Salomon Brothers Inc. and IBJ International PLC, was priced 0.18 percentage point above yields of U.S. Treasurys, a tight spread favoring the bank, according to several market players.
Global notes are sold simultaneously in the world's major markets and are intended to be more liquid than other types of securities.
About 50% of the Asian Development Bank deal was snapped up by Asian investors, with interest split equally between Japan and Southeast Asia, said Moctar Fall, director of capital markets at Salomon Brothers.
European investors bought 30% to 35% of the offering.
But many U.S. investors -- who jumped at other recent global offerings -- passed on this one.
Only 15% to 20% was sold to investors in the U.S.
Other global deals, such as the People's Republic of China's recent offering, attracted more U.S. investors because they offered higher yields.
U.S. investors can find higher yields with 10-year U.S. agency paper, which trades with a yield around 0.25 percentage point above Treasurys, one syndicate official said.
But Asian investors are comfortable with the Asian Development Bank's name and less familiar with U.S. agencies, Mr. Fall said.
The bank's global bond offers less yield than Yankee notes it sold in 1992.
A Yankee bond is debt sold by a foreign entity in the U.S. market.
The 10-year, $300 million Yankee issue was sold at 99.988 to yield 6.33%, or 0.33 percentage point above Treasurys.
The notes currently trade with a yield spread about 0.31 point above Treasurys.
Mr. Fall said that the new issue traded with a 0.17 point yield spread above Treasurys late yesterday.
However, other traders said they saw the paper trading at a 0.19 to 0.20 point yield spread above Treasurys.
Prices of municipal bonds were dragged down by another round of selling yesterday, and they finished the day's light trading with losses of as much as a point.
In late trading, the Reedy Creek Improvement District of Florida's 5.00% bonds of 2019 were about a point lower at 91, yielding 5.59%.
The muni market's fortunes so far this year are far different from anticipated.
With federal income-tax increases in place and issuance finally cooling, tax-exempt bonds were expected to kick off 1994 with an impressive performance.
Market participants say the level of bearish sentiment about munis is clearly evidenced by numerous lists of bonds that are for sale, which continued to appear yesterday.
Among muni offerings priced yesterday was the Hawaii Housing Finance & Development Corp.'s $270.5 million of single-family mortgage purchase revenue bonds.
A Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. group gave the issue yields that range from 4.00% in 1997 to 5.95% in 2026.
Included in the issue are $183.3 million of 1994 Series A bonds, which are subject to the federal alternative-minimum tax.
There are also $87.3 million of non-AMT 1994 Series B bonds.
Prices of mortgage securities slid along with those of Treasurys.
Mortgage players, both traders and investors, haven't been taking on big positions.
Either precipitous price drops or the wait for a better understanding of economic underpinnings -- specifically, rates -- have kept them on hold.
In secondary trading, the 7% coupons for March delivery were off 12/32.
Government National Mortgage Association issues ended at 100 10/32.
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold issues finished at 100 13/32, and Federal National Mortgage Association issues closed at 100 8/32.
The 8% mortgages, however, were off only 3/32 to 6/32 at the end of the day, and 9% securities were only off 1/32 to 3/32.
If the Treasury market continues to experience more selling, more institutional investors are likely to turn to mortgages in the days ahead, traders say.
But with the long-term direction of rates still unclear, most portfolio chiefs are slow to shift allocations, they say.
Leslie Scism contributed to this article.
