Wet T-shirt contests.
Acres of scantily clad sunbathers.
Drinking and carousing and bungee-jumping until dawn.
Spring Break, that libidinous rite that delivers roughly 15% of this South Texas resort's annual revenues in just one month, is nearing its climax, and this looks to be the biggest turnout in years.
Local officials predict 125,000 college students will make their way to the beach by the end of March, a whopping 25% jump over last year.
But never mind all that.
What really has South Padre's tourism operators excited is the abnormally large number of older visitors, Mexican nationals and Texas families who have been flocking here recently.
Not only have they driven up hotel occupancy rates during months that are typically all but dead, but they're fueling the best real-estate market since the early '80s.
"It's just been unbelievable," says Troy Giles, a real-estate broker and city alderman, who watched a prime beachfront lot change hands for $280,000 last year after selling for $106,000 in 1991.
"As long as we don't have a storm or something affect us in June, July and August, we're going to have a tremendous increase" in tourists, adds Harold Wheeler, director of the South Padre Island Convention and Visitors Bureau.
In the first quarter of fiscal 1994, ended Dec. 31, hotel occupancy-tax receipts rose 13%, on top of a 6% jump a year earlier.
And January and February were, if anything, even stronger, people in the industry say.
"We're up big time," says Paul Y. Cunningham, who is not only the city attorney but also the co-owner of the Radisson Resort here.
He notes that Radisson's January occupancy rose to 52%, from a little more than 20% in January 1993.
The latest round of prosperity has been a long time coming.
Business came to a halt in 1982, as plunging oil prices and a massive peso devaluation decimated high rollers from Mexico and Texas at the same time.
Several major hotels went under, and condominium projects withered.
But thanks to some savvy marketing, as well as an improving regional economy, South Padre has been on the mend for the past three years, locals say.
And recently, a number of factors have accelerated the trend.
For one thing, this has been a big season for "winter Texans," typically retirees from the Midwest who spend the cold months in the Rio Grande Valley.
Though they tend to live in trailer parks some distance from here, day visits and overnight stays have boosted revenues.
The city is also starting to book more events in its new convention center, focusing on creating draws during the off-season (which includes every month except March, June, July and August).
One big hit: The island hosted the Miss U.S.A. pageant in January.
More important, Mexicans are returning in a big way.
An improved economy and optimism generated by the North American Free Trade Agreement get part of the credit, but the Convention and Visitors Bureau has helped things along by advertising in the Mexican media and hiring a staffer to devote full time to Mexican business development.
Last year, some 30,000 Mexicans stayed on the island during Easter week, traditionally the peak vacation period, up 50% from 1991.
And those numbers would be even higher this year -- if there were any more rooms available.
There soon will be.
Local developers Richard and Dennis Franke recently broke ground for a 51-unit condominium tower.
All but 12 of the three-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath apartments have already been sold -- for $300,000 to $350,000 each, including a 30% cash down payment.
Roughly 60% of the buyers are Mexican, says Richard Franke, who adds: "We couldn't have done this a few years ago."
For the rest of this month, though, all else takes a back seat to the Spring Break crowd, and South Padre also has had some good luck here.
This year, Galveston, fed up with drunk, rowdy youngsters, joined several other traditional Spring Break getaways in deciding not to encourage students to come.
South Padre, on the other hand, was already in the midst of its biggest college marketing campaign in years: Officials set up booths on at least 30 campuses to recruit students.
And they played up their laissez-faire attitude by bringing back an old advertising theme, "Let's Padre."
The campaign hooked Bill Gieselman, a 21-year-old junior from Michigan State University, who looks bleary-eyed one morning after completing a 30-hour drive here with friends.
"It's more laid-back here" than other destinations, he notes.
"They let you drink on the beach."
Bigger Falls: Texas no longer has bragging rights to the biggest economic collapse of recent years.
Merrill Lynch & Co. reports that the current California recession is half again more serious, while Massachusetts' situation is even worse than that.
According to the investment-banking house, Texas employment fell about 3% a year after the 1986 oil bust, but recovered all its lost ground within about 30 months.
California's employment, meanwhile, is down 5% from its peak 40 months ago, and continues to fall.
As for Massachusetts: Employment is down 12% from the peak in December 1988.
