Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. said its drug to treat Lou Gehrig's disease failed to show efficacy in clinical trials, sending its shares plummeting 33%.
The setback was another blow to the biotechnology industry, which has had a string of product failures in recent years.
Investors dumped Regeneron's stock, which fell $4.375, to $8.75 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
The news contributed to an overall decline in the biotechnology sector, said Edmund Debler, an analyst at Mehta & Isaly, New York.
"Anytime you have a problem or success with a clinical trial with one company, it affects the whole sector," he said.
Regeneron, Tarrytown, N.Y., blamed the results on temporary side effects of the drug and said it has asked the FDA for approval to redesign and extend the trial.
The much touted drug, known as ciliary neurotrophic factor, is in a nine-month clinical trial for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease, a fatal disorder characterized by the progressive weakening of muscles.
An initial analysis of six months' data indicated the drug failed to slow significantly the rate of muscle weakening in patients, said Leonard Schleifer, Regeneron's chairman.
Researchers determined that side effects, such as coughing and weight loss, appeared to account for the poor performance of a large percentage of patients on muscle strength tests, Dr. Schleifer said.
Once the side effects eased after a few months, treated patients performed substantially better on muscle strength tests than patients receiving a placebo.
Moreover, patients who didn't suffer severe side effects did better than placebo patients, according to the company.
But the initial problems with side effects prevented the drug from passing statistical significance tests in the clinical trial, Dr. Schleifer said.
The current trial involves 720 patients, two-thirds of whom are being treated with the drug and the rest with a placebo.
Dr. Schleifer said he hopes the trial's extension will be less than six months, with final results available this year.
A spokesman for Amgen Inc., a biotechnology company based in Thousand Oaks, Calif., said Regeneron's latest results won't affect the companies' joint research on two other molecules, Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor and Neurotrophin-3, under development for treatment of neurodegenerative diseases and nerve injuries.
Amgen owns nearly 5% of Regeneron's stock.
In Nasdaq trading yesterday, Amgen shares fell 75 cents, to $39.25.
