Like two runaway trains, the U.S. and China appear headed for a crackup.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher came here to underscore that Beijing must improve its human-rights record or face a major trade penalty.
But China doesn't seem to take the threat seriously.
Upset by what it considers U.S. meddling in its affairs, China has cracked down on dissidents, surprising and angering Mr. Christopher and chilling talks here.
The dissidents also miscalculated, precipitating the U.S.-China tensions by thinking that the environment here had become more relaxed.
And U.S. businessmen are making it clear that they dread a collision with China.
Mr. Christopher received a broadside Sunday.
The Clinton administration's policy toward China may be "well intentioned," but "in the view of American business interests, is ill-conceived," William Warwick, chairman of AT&T China Inc., told the secretary of state.
As a result, many people who recently predicted that President Clinton would avoid a showdown by renewing China's Most Favored Nation trading status in June, now are bracing for the worst.
"People hear a big rumbling, they see this light and they just hope that they're not standing on the tracks," said John Kamm, a U.S. businessman based in Hong Kong.
U.S. officials stressed that disaster still is avoidable.
Old China hands like Winston Lord, assistant secretary of state for Asian and Pacific Affairs and a former U.S. ambassador to China, noted that Beijing often acts belligerently when it is challenged and later makes concessions quietly.
And at a news conference Monday, Mr. Christopher is expected to announce some marginal progress.
The two sides have worked out language for a 1992 agreement that would aid U.S. efforts to ensure that Chinese goods made by prison labor aren't shipped to America.
The latest tensions between Washington and Beijing began to flare more than a week ago, when John Shattuck, assistant secretary of state for human rights, met here with Wei Jingsheng, a leading Chinese dissident.
The session angered Beijing.
The Chinese government detained Mr. Wei and then others.
Mr. Christopher insisted that U.S. diplomats had the right to meet with Chinese citizens.
But some diplomats here said the incident showed a misunderstanding of China's sensitivity after a long history of meddling by the West.
China's domestic situation also contributed to the chain of events leading to the deterioration in U.S.-China talks.
A flurry of dissident activities and police crackdowns customarily occurs each year before national meetings such as the National People's Congress, which is being held during Mr. Christopher's visit.
Many dissidents, such as Mr. Wei, jailed for their involvement in the 1989 democracy movement, or for other political "crimes," have been recently released.
Their release has led to more dissident activism at a time when high inflation and worries about political succession are concerning China's leadership.
But the fundamental problem for U.S. policy is that MFN -- which gives China the same trading status as most U.S. trading partners -- has become an unwieldy weapon for threatening Beijing.
In view of the huge growth in bilateral trade, no one believes that Washington is prepared to revoke the favored status, and this is complicating the talks with China.
"We do want MFN extended," said Mr. Lord.
"The president has made that clear from the beginning, and we do not wish to see it revoked."
For its part, China publicly shows no signs of flinching.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman, saying that two countries view human rights differently, predicted that if trading is revoked, "the U.S. will suffer no less than China."
The potential damage to U.S. interests was brought home to Mr. Christopher Sunday at his breakfast meeting with the American Chamber of Commerce in Beijing.
Phillip Carmichael, the group's president, said that high-technology exports alone to China are responsible for 170,000 jobs in the U.S.
And Jeffrey Gannon, a General Electric Co. executive, said his company's sales to China climbed to $1.1 billion last year from $200 million in 1990.
Mr. Christopher responded that the U.S. is asking China only to make "very limited progress in carefully defined discreet fields" in order to meet the conditions under President Clinton's executive order of last year.
Mr. Christopher also said that if China complies with this year's conditions, the administration will try to remove the annual MFN debate from the central point in U.S.-China relations.
He said that "one could envision an executive order that is not as detailed as this one, and perhaps human rights could be a generic condition, rather than one filled with specific conditions."
But first, the U.S. must pursuade China within the next few months that it will revoke its trading status if Beijing doesn't make "overall significant progress" in human rights.
Ironically, even the dissidents in whose cause the trade weapon has been unsheathed are skeptical.
Said a source close to China's human rights community: "We don't think Clinton will revoke MFN just because of a few people.
If he had to choose between the U.S. making a few billion dollars or China treating a few of our friends badly, what would he choose?
I think he'd choose the few billion dollars."
