Morgan Stanley Group Inc. yanked a planned $185 million junk-bond offering for Sullivan Communications Inc. and instead arranged a sale of Sullivan's insert-coupon business to a News Corp. unit.
The planned Sullivan offering led to a firestorm of controversy.
As previously reported, some analysts said that Sullivan had virtually no cash flow to pay the debt's interest and that losses from its freestanding insert-coupon business were mounting.
"All the noise could have made the bond offering uneconomical," James T. Sullivan, chairman and chief executive of Sullivan Communications, said in an interview.
The surprise sale, to News America FSI Inc., boosted the shares of Sullivan rivals, particularly Valassis Communications Inc.
Valassis, a Livonia, Mich., printing concern, jumped $5.75 a share, or 49%, to close at $17.50 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading -- the biggest gainer on the Big Board yesterday.
More broadly, Sullivan's sale of its unit to a competitor promises to end a severe pricing war that has depressed the insert-coupon business since the unit, Sullivan Marketing Inc., entered the the field in 1992.
Sullivan Marketing and others print the coupon booklets that are tucked into newspapers.
About 85% of this year's business is already nailed down in long-term agreements, analysts said.
"But you can be certain that the 1995 contracts will be rolled over at much higher prices," said C. Clive Munro of Montecito Research, who follows Valassis.
He predicts that Valassis shares will jump to $30 within 15 months.
The move by Sullivan, a closely held Brentwood, Tenn., printing concern, is an embarrassment for Morgan.
The investment bank's Morgan Stanley Leveraged Equity Fund II leveraged-buyout unit holds the majority of Sullivan's equity.
Morgan had peddled the offering to institutional investors on a road show during the past week without much luck, traders said.
Indeed, some big mutual-fund groups, including giant Fidelity Investments, snubbed the offering, people familiar with the matter said.
Fidelity declined to comment.
"There were many large mutual funds that ultimately would have bought this transaction had we taken it to that point," a Morgan official said.
He added: "These securities could have been priced, but the impact on our ability to assess the proper risk-return for our investors was diminished.
The issue had become so clouded that we were not at all comfortable pricing the transaction."
Terms of the sale to the News Corp. unit weren't disclosed.
But people familiar with the transaction say it was valued at about $15 million.
News Corp. declined to comment.
News Corp.'s American depositary receipts rose 87.5 cents a share, or 1.5%, closing at $59 yesterday in Big Board composite trading.
"We had an offer, and accepted it -- it's as simple as that," said Mr. Sullivan, who declined to discuss terms.
Some analysts suggested that the Sullivan bond deal was scotched because the firm's insert-coupon business was bleeding.
Mr. Munro estimated that Sullivan's coupon business was losing about $1 million on each booklet.
"The deal was equivalent to paying off your mortgage with a MasterCard -- but even worse, paying it off when you're unemployed," he said.
Nonsense, replied Mr. Sullivan.
"We might lose $1.5 million on some books; we might make a couple of hundred thousand on others," Mr. Sullivan said.
He said Sullivan expected the coupon business to have a loss of about $21 million in fiscal 1995.
"That's about $750,000 on average" per booklet, Mr. Sullivan said.
Also putting pressure on the offering was an unfavorable review of Sullivan's debt by Standard & Poor's Corp.
Selling the coupon-insert business "does take away a major risk or uncertainty," says Nicholas Riccio, an S&P analyst.
Sullivan's other businesses, including printing and prepress services, won't be affected by the sale.
But the sale means that Sullivan Marketing will lay off as many as 60 people in its insert-coupon business.
Morgan stood to make about $6.5 million in underwriting fees for placing Sullivan's junk-bond issue.
Its fee for arranging the sale?
