It would be hard to imagine a more readily accessible evening at the opera for American audiences than was found at the new production of Kurt Weill's "Street Scene" recently unveiled by Houston Grand Opera.
From the second the curtain went up, you knew where you were, visually, dramatically, musically.
Adrianne Lobel's re-creation of the 1930s Manhattan tenement vibrantly evoked an Edward Hopper painting.
Francesca Zambello's direction of a particularly convincing young American cast unfailingly captured the smallest personal tics of real people, here an Upper West Side melting-pot community.
And Weill's music -- written for the Broadway stage in 1947 but with a sophisticated sense of opera underlying it -- is in the American vernacular everybody knows.
A few weeks earlier the New York Philharmonic paid tribute to Weill, with a performance of "The Seven Deadly Sins" that also, right from the start, engaged the audience in the kind of direct way that is rare in the concert hall.
This is German Weill, written in Paris in 1933, just after the composer fled the Nazis.
Set to an acerbic text by Bertolt Brecht, it concerns two sisters who travel throughout the U.S. experiencing a different biblical sin in each city.
Commissioned by George Balanchine as a ballet, it features a solo singer and a dancer, as the two sisters, along with a male quartet that represents their family back home.
But what set the mood of this concert performance, even before it began, was the appearance of one of the members of the male vocal quartet.
Dressed in standard anonymous concert dress, white tie and tails, he also wore a barrette in his ponytail and was carrying a lady's purse.
He sang the mother.
Then, at the beginning of the performance, as the quartet complained about the first sin, sloth, the soprano, Angelina Reaux, donned dark glasses and lounged provocatively in her chair.
Ironically, both of these occasions, eminently dramatic though they were, came with a lot more explanatory baggage than is usual.
At Avery Fisher Hall, the New York Philharmonic offered a display about Weill and his Berlin years, and the orchestra sponsored a cabaret evening with Ms. Reaux in conjunction with the symphony concert.
Likewise, Houston Grand Opera documented Weill's American career in the lobby of the Wortham Theater Center, and it hosted a Weill symposium, in conjunction with the Kurt Weill Foundation and the Goethe Institute.
The need for such explanation reveals the curious role Weill has long played and continues to play in the world of serious American music.
On one hand, Weill, who died in 1950 at age 50, was so successful that he hardly should need any introduction to audiences at all.
He wrote "Mack the Knife," "September Song" and many other pop standards.
Yet he is best remembered as a music theater composer (his concert works never have really caught on) who adapted so completely to each of his radically different "homes" -- whether prewar Berlin or postwar Broadway -- that it does make sense to try to place his works in their specific time and place.
It is, moreover, no coincidence that Houston Grand Opera, which is one of the more venturesome American companies, succeeded with a wholly traditional production of "Street Scene," while the New York Philharmonic, which is hardly a place for any stage business at all, also succeeded with its unlikely bit of capering.
Not only were both approaches suitable for the works at hand -- the Berlin Weill is opera/cabaret, while the New York Weill is opera/Broadway -- but they succeeded partly because both organizations bothered to consider the proper historical contexts in which to present the works.
In the case of "Street Scene," the most important point made at the symposium was just how far-reaching the work was for the Broadway stage at the time of its opening (sentimental, uncomplicated, banally tuneful "Finian's Rainbow" opened the next day).
Weill employed every formula of his age, from opera aria to Rodgers and Hammerstein fluff to soft shoe, in order to convey the multicultural neighborhood in the Elmer Rice play of 1931 he was adapting.
But for all the talk in Houston of its prescient multiculturalism (there are also wonderful lyrics by the Harlem poet Langston Hughes), the greatness of "Street Scene" lies in its masterful integration of all its stylistic sources into a single musical voice and an astute musical structure.
And nothing like that typified the Broadway musical stage, to say the least.
The Houston production thus seems all the more revolutionary for insisting on re-creating the very period Weill transcended.
The more flamboyant approach to "The Seven Deadly Sins" taken by the New York Philharmonic proved just as appropriate.
This was striking music for its time, with its decadent intonings of jazz and cabaret.
That came across strikingly in Ms. Reaux's sassy and dramatically enacted performance that was directed for the occasion by Christopher Alden.
But also dramatically effective was the discernible tension between the orchestra's music director, Kurt Masur, and Ms. Reaux.
Mr. Masur drove roughshod over Ms. Reaux, urging the orchestra on with loud, fast, sharply virtuosic playing.
Ms. Reaux couldn't always vocalize loudly enough to be heard above the band without forcing, and she didn't always have the time to let her interpretation unfold.
But she is a compelling stage presence and singer, and even her discomfort at being bullied by a German authority figure carried with it a strong whiff of the world Weill had just fled when he wrote the piece she was trying so hard to make heard.
The performance was recorded for release by Teldec, and it will face some interesting competition, since "The Seven Deadly Sins" is so peculiar that it thrives on constant reinvention.
Brigitte Fassbaender's recording of it, lately released on Harmonia Mundi, is a lusciously overripe performance, only slightly undercut by Cord Garben's coarse conducting.
And Teresa Stratas stars in a new video of the work, directed by Peter Sellars, supported by the forces of the Lyon Opera conducted by Kent Nagano.
It is altogether a musically superior performance, but most remarkable is the way Ms. Stratas becomes a touchingly waif-like victim.
The setting, intercutting a bare stage with video clips, is the seamier side of Los Angeles.
A hit in Europe, the disturbing video has yet to find anyone interested in showing it in America.
Like Houston's "Street Scene," you know exactly where you are from the moment the performance begins, but, of course, that may be just what U.S. broadcasters think Americans don't want to see.
