The Agriculture Department proposed legislation that would cut the government's disaster-aid costs by forcing more farmers into the federal crop-insurance program.
The department estimated that the new approach would save taxpayers $750 million over five years.
The program would cost $8.1 billion over the period, but that's less than the projected cost of the current crop-insurance program, combined with the cost of emergency relief programs that Congress enacts when there is widespread crop loss from floods or other disasters.
The goal is to replace these "ad hoc" assistance bills, Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy said.
Instead, farmers who got government commodity-price-support payments or Farmers Home Administration loans would have to buy crop insurance -- at least a new "catastrophic-coverage" policy.
Farmers who wanted more coverage could buy it.
"Right off the bat, we expect participation to jump from the current 33% to over 80%," Mr. Espy said.
Unlike current federal crop insurance, the new program would include coverage for plantings delayed or prevented by severe weather.
The proposal also would set up legislative hurdles to make it more difficult for future Congresses to enact emergency disaster aid for crop losses.
The impetus for the new plan came from last spring's and summer's Midwest floods, which sent the government's tab soaring for crop and flood-insurance programs, while spurring Congress to add emergency disaster-assistance money.
As a result, federal crop-insurance outlays will climb from $461 million in the fiscal year that ended last Sept. 30 to $1.04 billion in fiscal 1994.
Additional disaster payments to farmers will rise from $1.23 billion to $2.35 billion over the period, the government estimates.
While there has been considerable agitation among dissatisfied farmers and members of Congress to beef up crop insurance and move away from "ad hoc" disaster aid, the administration proposal could run into some serious legislative snags.
Many farmers who will be forced to pay the insurance fees or premiums to stay in the crop-subsidy program are likely to complain, a House Agriculture Committee aide said.
Also, the proposal would seek to make emergency disaster assistance unpalatable to Congress by putting it on the budget; it typically has been treated as an off-budget expense.
This could force Congress to cut other programs if it wanted to provide the aid.
