The Securities and Exchange Commission, looking to crack down on class-action abuses, is reviewing the legal fees requested in a big Prudential Securities Inc. partnership case.
The SEC is examining the circumstances surrounding the fee request by plaintiffs' lawyers in a $90.7 million settlement reached last month between 115,000 investors who bought energy limited-partnerships from the Prudential Insurance Co. of America unit, according to people familiar with the matter.
Plaintiffs' lawyers stand to receive as much as $27 million in fees in the case.
The review follows closely SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt's recent speech, in which he told securities lawyers he was concerned about class-action abuses.
Critics say class-action lawyers sometimes pocket fat fees for relatively little work.
Some recent class-action settlements involving big brokerage firms have been assailed as sellouts, reaping only pennies on the dollar for claimants.
The SEC declined to comment.
But the people familiar with the matter said its interest was triggered by criticism of the Prudential settlement by California securities regulators.
In a letter sent last week to the federal judge overseeing the Prudential case, California Securities Director Gary Mendoza said the class-action lawyers didn't deserve to base their fees on the $90 million settlement in the case because they didn't play a big role in crafting the accord.
Indeed, Mr. Mendoza said, the lawyers battled with state regulators over an earlier settlement proposal by Prudential.
The earlier offer -- for just $37 million in cash -- sparked criticism by state regulators, but was backed by many class-action lawyers.
Marcel Livaudais Jr., a federal judge in New Orleans overseeing the case, had said he had "serious reservations" about the initial settlement proposal in the case.
The lawsuit accused Prudential of misleading investors on the risk and returns of $1.45 billion in energy partnerships, whose value had since slumped in half.
"It is fundamentally unfair to the injured investors to allow the class-action lawyers who supported the $37 million settlement to benefit in any way from the efforts of state securities regulators," Mr. Mendoza's letter said.
"Their efforts made little, if any, real contribution to the substantial increase in the settlement."
Mr. Mendoza urged Judge Livaudais to base the legal fees on the $37 million settlement proposal, which would "send a strong signal to the class-action bar that if they are to earn their fees it is critical that the only interest they serve during a class-action litigation is their clients'."
Edward Grossman, lead class-action lawyer in the Prudential case, couldn't be reached to comment.
For their part, some plaintiffs' lawyers say they were pivotal in helping to trigger a sale of the Prudential energy partnerships in June to Parker & Parsley Petroleum Co.
Investors received $491 million from the Parker & Parsley transaction.
The sale, coupled with the $90 million settlement and distributions already paid out, boosted to $1.24 billion -- or an average of 85 cents on the dollar -- the amount investors will end up getting for their original $1.45 billion outlay.
"This was a case with great risk, and could have resulted in no recovery at all," says Clinton Krislov, a plaintiffs' lawyer in Chicago who had objected to the initial Prudential settlement offer, but backed the recent accord.
"All the plaintiffs' attorneys agreed the fees would be no more than 30%" of the settlement.
Lawyers typically receive between 25% and onethird of recoveries.
Meanwhile, another pending class-action settlement is sure to attract the SEC's attention, the people said.
That's a $6 million cash-settlement proposal in a class-action case filed in a Chicago federal court by 16,500 Merrill Lynch & Co. investors in Arvida/JMB Partners L.P.-II, a $234 million partnership that bought raw land to develop homes.
Merrill investors have received just $20 in distributions for each $1,000 unit since the Arvida partnership was launched in 1989.
And an April notice to investors said it "appears unlikely that the limited partners will recover much, if any," of their capital investment in the partnership.
Under the Arvida accord, investors would receive about $4 million after legal fees -- or just pennies on the dollar.
Both Merrill and Beigel & Sandler, a Chicago law firm that filed the class-action case, say they believe the Arvida settlement is fair.
A federal judge is expected to soon rule on the proposal.
Investors had less than a month to decide whether or not to opt out of the settlement accord, including time during the Thanksgiving holiday.
