The Securities and Exchange Commission is suspicious that there may be more to corporate-restructuring charges than meets the eye of the average shareholder.
As a result, 84 companies that have announced their plans to book losses for restructuring recently received mail from the SEC, reminding them to explain, explain, explain.
"This was a very unusual move for us to be sending out a letter of this sort," said Terry Iannaconi, associate director for accounting operations in the SEC's corporation-finance division.
"So often we respond to what we see in filings."
By warning companies before they file earnings reports, she said, "we hope we can have an impact."
She declined to identify any of the companies.
Restructuring charges have become increasingly common as companies shed workers and unprofitable business lines.
Among the companies reporting such losses this year are Adolph Coors Co., Rally's Hamburgers Inc. and Huffy Corp.
Announcements of such moves, and the resulting financial losses, have often caused companies' stock prices to jump as stock buyers anticipate leaner, more profitable companies.
Earlier this month, Aetna Life & Casualty Co. saw its stock rise after announcing a restructuring that includes reducing its work force by 4,000 and getting out of certain businesses.
The seeming benefits of restructuring have caught the SEC's attention.
"The fact that market reactions have been generally positive to these charges may account for the popularity of this item," Robert Bayless, chief accountant of the SEC's corporation-finance division, recently told a gathering of accountants.
But Mr. Bayless, who didn't identify any companies, warned the accountants that the SEC staff has seen explanations of restructuring charges that are "rather sparse and rather vague."
The explanations can be made in quarterly or annual financial reports.
The agency expects more in those instances, he said, including "a more thorough discussion of the individual elements of the charges and the circumstances leading to their recognition."
At the same time, Mr. Bayless said, the SEC has seen some companies claim losses as restructuring charges when they're not.
"The staff is aware of some cases where the restructuring charge was run through the income statement to the cheers of Wall Street, but deep within the belly of that Trojan Horse were charges for ordinary operating items such as environmental liabilities, inventory impairments and write-offs of long-obsolete intangible assets," Mr. Bayless said.
"Perhaps management deserved the accolades for recognizing the losses," he added, "but investors deserve a fair and complete characterization of each material charge so that they can evaluate the results of management's prior decisions."
In case the auditors didn't get the message, the SEC sent the letters to the companies planning to book restructuring losses in coming financial statements.
The agency identified the companies through news stories in the financial press, including The Wall Street Journal, Ms. Iannaconi said.
"Starting in late December, and through January and February, it seemed there were three and four companies a day that announced that they would be taking restructuring charges," Ms. Iannaconi said.
"We had decided that this letter is a way to focus attention on our concerns."
