The Harvard Business Review is fast becoming a case study in management turmoil.
Much of the problem appears to be the new structure governing the bible of management theory.
There has been disenchantment among the business-school faculty with the review's new holding company, which was set up in 1993 to expand the reach -- and revenue -- of the school.
The company, called Harvard Business School Publishing Corp., has its own top executives and a board made up of businessmen, Harvard administrators and faculty.
In the past, the review was more closely tied to the business school.
The top editorial position at the review has changed hands three times in the past 22 months, and a number of other editors and staffers have left in a series of internal clashes.
But the resignation earlier this week of Ruth M. McMullin, the chief executive of the review's holding company, signifies deeper problems.
According to a top Harvard administrator, Ms. McMullin's resignation resulted from the board's dissatisfaction with the holding company's progress during her tenure.
Ms. McMullin has been president and chief executive since the company was started a year ago.
"This whole thing strikes me as a culture clash between a profit center and the academy," says David Vogel, editor of the California Management Review, which competes with the Harvard Business Review at the University of California, Berkeley.
The board's immediate worry is that the Business Review, whose circulation has been dropping, is attracting fewer big-name business writers and ground-breaking articles.
In addition, the publishing company's video division, despite some recent successes, has issued a number of duds.
In a statement issued yesterday, Ms. McMullin says she resigned because her views on running "a professional publishing organization . . . began to diverge" and couldn't be reconciled with those of William A. Sahlman, a Harvard professor who is the holding company's chairman.
She added that she took an "understaffed, resource-starved" enterprise and added "talent and supporting infrastructure to achieve greatness."
Under Ms. McMullin, the Business Review didn't print as many articles by Harvard professors as the university's administration wanted, and the salaries of top review staffers exceeded those of many professors, causing friction.
Ms. McMullin's pay, about $400,000, was particularly rankling.
"The relationship with the faculty has not been what we would have liked," says a director of the publishing company.
In addition to the Business Review, the publishing company sells case studies, publishes books, markets videotapes and conducts teleconferences in which Harvard professors such as trade expert Michael Porter field questions from businessmen via satellite.
Under the new structure, these operations were moved off campus to create a more entrepreneurial business environment that would increase revenue for the school, even though the company is nonprofit.
Mr. Vogel of the University of California says he admires Harvard's ambition in creating the new company but adds, "we've benefited from the problems in that Harvard faculty are submitting more and more stories to us."
Mr. Vogel says he has articles by two Harvard professors, David Upton and Philip Rosenzweig, scheduled for his next two issues.
The staff turmoil over the last two years has hurt both the quality and efficiency of the Business Review, according to some contributors.
"A number of the best people have left over the last few years," says Charles Ferguson, a Cambridge, Mass., author who has written several articles for the Business Review.
Len Schlesinger, a Harvard business professor, insists that the review remains the best place to publish on management.
"There's no way to access as broad a management audience as you can get through the Harvard Business Review," he says.
But his article on maximizing profitability in the service industry, which appears in the latest issue, took more than a year to edit, he says, because it was shifted to three separate editors because of staff changes.
The staff turnover "has clearly had an impact," he says.
Harvard was disappointed by the new company's growth last year, largely because of poor results in the video area.
People familiar with the figures say revenue for the year ended June 30, 1993, was $41.3 million, up about 9% from $38 million the prior year.
Business plans had called for growth of closer to 20%, former review staffers say.
In the current fiscal year, revenue for the eight months through Feb. 28 was $30.8 million, up about 13% from a year earlier, according to one person who has reviewed it.
This year's projected annual revenue calls for a 16% increase to $48 million.
One problem last year: some video offerings were overpriced and sold poorly.
Sales of a seven-tape set, "Achieving Breakthrough Service," which was priced at $10,000, just covered the production costs.
The company has released a number of lower-priced videos this year that are selling well, a spokeswoman says.
