The U.S. auto industry, which only recently emerged from a punishing recession, is adding more than a million units of North American car and truck production capacity and roughly 9,500 new jobs.
Leading the way is Chrysler Corp., which yesterday announced plans to sharply beef up its previous plan to expand capacity.
Now the No. 3 U.S. auto maker plans to spend about $1.8 billion on additional capacity, up from a previous $1 billion plan.
The new plan would give Chrysler the ability to crank out as many as 3.5 million cars and trucks a year and would add some 6,000 jobs to its payrolls.
Detroit's Big Three are riding a surge in the vehicle market that is expected to expand car and truck sales by at least two million units a year by 1996 or 1997, from last year's 14 million.
February vehicle sales soared 19.9% from a year earlier.
A huge market shift toward trucks and sport-utility vehicles accounts for much of the planned capacity expansion, and plans to boost exports -- particulary in Chrysler's case -- figure prominently in the equation.
But managing the expansion poses its own problems.
Chrysler is so short of certain four-cylinder engines that it is weighing whether to delay the introduction of its highly touted new Dodge Stratus compact until next year.
The car currently is slated to go on sale this fall.
Now Chrysler is talking with dealers about launching only a low-volume sister model, the Chrysler Cirrus, this fall.
The Cirrus will be powered by a Mitsubishi-built V-6.
Such a delay would be likely to hurt Chrysler's earnings potential, but not significantly, analysts said.
In the early part of last year, when the economic recovery seemed unusually slow, the auto industry was reluctant to spend heavily on capacity increases.
But sharp fourth-quarter growth and robust sales early this year have made Detroit more confident.
"Nobody's talking about a slow recovery any more" said Joseph Phillippi, an analyst at Lehman Bros.
But even though the industry is heating up, it still has overcapacity problems, particularly in midsized car lines and auto makers are trying to shift their plants and their people out of car lines and into trucks.
In adding production capacity, the Big Three are assiduously avoiding any talk of building new plants.
Instead, they are focusing on adding third work shifts at certain factories and keeping open plants that had been slated to close, including a Chrysler plant in St. Louis and a General Motors Corp. unit in Pontiac, Mich.
Today, Ford Motor Co. is expected to announce plans to expand capacity at a plant in Dearborn, Mich., that makes engines and fuel tanks, adding 100 jobs.
It said a new product will be added to the plant, and new, more efficient machinery will be installed.
Ford had previously announced plans to boost pickup truck capacity by 100,000 units, employing 1,400 new workers.
And the company is responding to booming demand by slating heavy overtime schedules and looking for output-enhancing efficiencies, according to Ross Roberts, the general manager of the No. 2 auto maker's Ford marketing division.
"The truck business is growing so fast that none of us knows how high it'll go," he said.
"There's been such a major shift in buying patterns in this country -- it's a phenomenon that's never been surpassed."
Chrysler said yesterday that it will add a third work shift to boost output of Grand Cherokee sport-utility vehicles at a plant in Detroit and will add production of its new Dodge Ram pickup in St. Louis.
The company also is expanding Ram production in Mexico.
"We have to strike when the iron is hot," said Robert.
J. Eaton, Chrysler's chairman, "and nowhere is the demand hotter than in Jeep and Dodge Ram pickup sales."
GM previously announced that it is adding third shifts in January 1995 to a Pontiac, Mich., plant that builds pickups, and canceling plans to close a plant in Pontiac that builds S-10 sport-utility vehicles.
Also, the company will add a third shift this spring to a Flint, Mich., plant that assembles big vans.
Chrysler's plans are by far the most ambitious, involving a 500,000-unit expansion from a current level that Chrysler puts at about three million vehicles a year.
That total includes the production of some Chrysler-badged products at Mitsubishi Motor Co.'s Diamond-Star plant.
But analysts say Chrysler's own current capacity is about 2.6 million vehicles a year.
The bottom line is that the auto maker's world-wide factory sales last year totaled 2.475 million vehicles, and Chrysler expects them to increase by nearly a million units in 1996.
Most of the increase will come from pickups.
Chrysler will have the capacity to build 130,000 Dodge Rams at the St. Louis plant, which had been scheduled to close next January.
In Mexico, Chrysler expects to add 40,000 units of truck capacity when it moves assembly operations from Lago Alberto, near Mexico City, to Saltillo.
Chrysler is also adding capacity for about 46,000 engines to its Saltillo engine plant.
Chrysler said that when it introduces a redesigned Dakota pickup in 1996, it will be able to build 200,000 of them a year, up from a planned 185,000.
The addition of the third shift in Detroit will increase Grand Cherokee output by 66,000 a year and add 800 jobs this year.
It also requires an increase in engine production in Kenosha, Wis.
And Chrysler said it will increase Neon output in Belvidere, Ill., by 14,000 units a year and boost capacity for 3.3-liter minivan engines by 100,000 a year.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading, Chrysler shares rose 62.5 cents to $58, Ford fell 25 cents to $63.625 and GM closed unchanged at $60.50.
Separately, Chrysler made a preemptive legal strike against Cirrus System Inc., which owns the rights to the Cirrus name for automated teller machines.
Chrysler filed suit in U.S. District Court in Detroit, seeking a declaratory judgment giving it the right to the Cirrus name for its new compact car.
