CAE Inc., the largest supplier of simulators and training systems to the U.S. military, wrote down the value of its CAE-Link military-simulation business by 396.5 million Canadian dollars (US$298.1 million), or 60%.
CAE said the write-down comes amid the company's disappointment that U.S. defense officials haven't embraced training simulators as a cheaper substitute for training pilots in real aircraft.
The Toronto company had long espoused the notion that cutbacks in defense spending would lead to greater use of simulation devices as a more cost-effective means of training for military conflicts.
CAE said it also set aside from its earnings a C$33 million provision to cover the costs of further reductions in operations and staff at CAE-Link, which is based in Binghamton, N.Y.
"The speed with which the military has shifted to training simulators has been a lot slower than we expected.
Pilots like to fly airplanes.
They don't like to fly simulators," said John Caldwell, CAE's president and chief executive officer.
The simulation market's weakness is a direct casualty of defense cutbacks.
As appropriations for new equipment are delayed or canceled, the need for new training devices, traditionally the bread and butter of simulator builders, also is curtailed.
Mr. Caldwell said he expects CAE-Link's order book for the rest of the decade to comprise mainly lower-value contracts to upgrade or modify existing simulators.
CAE's order backlog was C$1 billion at the end of last year, down from C$1.4 billion a year earlier.
Mr. Caldwell declined to detail what additional cutbacks in operations are proposed at CAE-Link, saying plans are still being worked out.
CAE in recent years has cut the subsidiary's work force by more than half and consolidated most of the unit's operations at the Binghamton headquarters.
Analysts said the write-down at CAELink was to be expected, because of weakness in the industry.
Declining volumes in both CAE's military and commercial aircraft simulation business have resulted in lower revenues to the company for several years.
CAE shares closed yesterday down 37.5 Canadian cents at C$6.50 on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Mr. Caldwell said the slowdown at CAE-Link adds greater urgency to the company's drive to develop new businesses to bolster revenues.
CAE is actively marketing simulation devices in the medical field and expects to roll out new products in coming months, he said.
The write-down and provisions related to CAE-Link were recorded against CAE's earnings for its fiscal third quarter, ended Dec. 31.
As a result, the company had a loss for the quarter of C$418.7 million, or C$3.86 a share, compared with a profit of C$10.9 million, or 10 Canadian cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenues were up 4% to C$263.9 million in the quarter.
