Chiapas peace envoy Manuel Camacho Solis announced that he had ruled out a run for the presidency this year, removing one of the concerns that has sent Mexico into convulsions.
Stocks soared on the news, rising 128.92 points, or 5.4%, to close at 2511.93 on the Mexican stock exchange.
The market has tumbled in recent weeks as speculation swelled that Mr. Camacho might mount a maverick presidential bid.
Such a bid could have divided the ruling party, known as the PRI, and endangered the continuity of economic policy that investors value.
A run for the presidency by Mr. Camacho could have increased the vote count for the leftist opposition, many of whom believe the 1988 presidency was stolen from them by fraud.
"Between searching for a candidacy for the presidency of the republic and contributing what I can to the process of peace, I would choose peace," Mr. Camacho said in his announcement.
The statement by Mr. Camacho doesn't, however, mean that calm has returned to all of Mexico.
For one thing, Mr. Camacho made clear he intends to remain on the national scene stirring things up.
"I will continue pushing for the construction of positions in a democratic center," Mr. Camacho said.
Even financial analysts who greeted his announcement with glee, and who remain optimistic about Mexico's political future, cautioned that his presence on the political scene will probably prove unsettling.
"We are going to see an opening of the political system like we have never seen before," said Robert Citrone, manager of Fidelity Investments' New Markets Income Fund.
Concerns over the Jan. 1 rebellion in Chiapas also will probably keep Mexicans nervous.
Mr. Camacho, the former mayor of Mexico City, negotiated a tentative, 32-point accord in response to 34 demands from the rebel leadership in early March.
But recent communiques from the insurgents indicate that the rank and file in their jungle strongholds aren't happy with the tentative peace pact's regional rather than national scope, and that they will "dress for war" once again if their demands aren't met.
Mr. Camacho, a 47-year-old Princeton graduate, has openly conceded that he expected to be the PRI's presidential candidate, but he was apparently edged out by Luis Donaldo Colosio when President Carlos Salinas de Gortari made his selection.
Mr. Camacho immediately resigned his mayoral post but in a political reconciliation with President Salinas accepted a post as Mexico's foreign minister, then became the government's negotiator in Chiapas in early January.
With the national recognition that post gave him, Mr. Camacho has tried, with some success, to use the rebels' demands to push for electoral reform.
The Mexican Congress yesterday began a special session that may finally lead to agreements that could clean up the presidential elections to be held this August.
The ever-expanding package of proposed reforms includes making Mexico's election authorities more independent of the PRI, appointing a special prosecutor for electoral crimes and allowing foreigners to monitor elections.
