A much-heralded joint venture between the pop singer and composer formerly called Prince and Warner Bros.
Records Inc., a unit of Time Warner Inc., has been disbanded.
The venture, Paisley Park Records, was created in 1992 by Warner Bros.
Records and Paisley Park Enterprises Inc., an entertainment company based in Chanhassen, Minn., that is fully owned by the pop star.
Although Warner Bros.
Records declined to comment, those familiar with the venture say it was disbanded because of losses.
Mo Ostin, chairman of Warner Bros.
Records, issued a statement that described the relationship simply as "exciting and creatively rewarding."
When the venture was announced in September 1992, the pop star's publicity team called it the biggest such contract in recording-industry history, with values ranging from $60 million to $100 million.
Warner Bros.
Records, however, never confirmed the value of the pact, and those familiar with the accord suggested yesterday that such figures were highly speculative.
"If the joint venture had taken flight, it could have been very big, but Warner didn't invest anything close to $60 million," said one executive.
It is estimated that Warner Bros.
Records may have invested $10 million in Paisley Park Records since signing the venture agreement on Jan. 1, 1992.
At the time, Warner Bros.
Records was so optimistic that it made the pop star a vice president.
The performer, who was born Prince Rogers Nelson, changed his name last June 7, his birthday, to a symbol whose pronunciation isn't clear.
A publicist for the performer said yesterday that he hasn't given any explanation for that decision.
This isn't the first time a heavily publicized venture between an entertainment company and a major recording star has proved disappointing.
In the spring of 1991, Sony Corp. signed an agreement with Michael Jackson that called for him to produce movies and records.
At the time, Sony said it expected the pact to generate in excess of $1 billion in retail sales.
Several projects in which Mr. Jackson was expected to participate never materialized, however, and the performer's career is under a cloud now that he has settled a civil suit against him for a sum said to be about $20 million.
Last year, Paisley Park Records issued new albums by Eric Leeds, Mavis Staples and George Clinton, as well as a greatest hits package from Prince entitled "The Hits/The B Sides."
It is possible that Warner.
Records may sign contracts with Mr. Leeds, Mr. Clinton and Ms. Staples at a later date, but nothing has been decided yet.
Bob Merlis, senior vice president and director of media information for Warner Bros.
Records, said the pop star will continue to make and produce records for the company.
