Precious-metals prices tumbled on anti-inflationary sentiment left over from the Federal Reserve's tightening of shortterm interest rates last week.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery fell $7.60 to $380.70 an ounce, while the March silver futures contract was down 18.7 cents to $5.24 an ounce.
At the New York Mercantile Exchange, the price of the actively traded April platinum futures contract declined $6.10 to $391.40 an ounce.
"This was a continuation of last Friday's news," said Ian MacDonald, chief of precious metals trading at Credit Suisse.
"The Fed's raising of interest rates is being interpreted as a warning shot across the bows of anybody expecting inflation to return."
Because of the tightening, commodity funds, which are managed pools of investors' money, aggressively liquidated their "long" positions in precious-metals futures contracts, or wagers that prices would increase, analysts said.
The heavy selling by these influential investors helped to push prices lower throughout the trading day.
Also pressuring the market lower was strong overnight selling in Far East metals markets by Middle Eastern investor syndicates, said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
Buying by these syndicates has helped to support metals prices for months, but as their demand for metals wanes, prices tend to trickle lower as well.
Although most analysts still expect gold and other precious-metals prices to rise over the long term, the prices are having trouble breaking out of their longstanding trading range of $380 to $390 an ounce.
The gold price level of $400 an ounce "has proven to be a tremendous psychological barrier" because each time the metal nears that level, major industrial users such as the jewelry industry stop buying, Mr. MacDonald said.
Conversely, analysts expect the current downdraft of gold-futures prices to stop when and if the metal reaches $375 an ounce, because at that level industrial users have tended to come back to the market as buyers.
COTTON: Futures prices plunged on nervousness about the performance of the U.S. stock market.
At New York's Cotton Exchange, cotton for March delivery fell 1.63 cents to 75.60 cents a pound.
Friday's 96-point decline in the Dow Jones Industrial Average "touched off a heavier than normal round of profit-taking," said Sandra Kaul, senior analyst for Smith Barney Shearson.
The correlation between stock prices and cotton prices is often quite strong, Ms. Kaul said, "because the textile industry is so reliant on the general business mood here in the U.S."
She nevertheless believes that supply-and-demand fundamentals for cotton remain strong.
For instance, many in the industry now expect U.S. exports to rise to as much as seven million bales from current projections of 6.2 million bales, because of global shortages of high-quality cotton.
ENERGY: Oil futures prices settled lower as a break in prolonged cold weather in the U.S. Northeast triggered a decline in heating-oil prices.
Over the past two weeks, the American Petroleum Institute had reported steep drops in distillate stocks, comprising heating oil and diesel fuel, causing heating-oil prices to spike.
But as temperatures moderated across much of the U.S., including the Northeast, the world's largest heating-oil market, prices have slipped.
March heating-oil futures declined by 3.6 cents a gallon over the past three sessions.
And the decline in product prices has caused crude-oil prices to fall as well.
"Heating oil took us up and heating oil is taking us down," one trader said, adding that market fundamentals, apart from the weather, look weak.
Crude oil for March delivery fell by 38 cents a barrel to $15.25 a barrel, after trading in a range of $15.15 to $15.63.
