The House overwhelmingly passed a centerpiece of its reform agenda, a bill tightening lobbyists' disclosure requirements and curtailing gifts, meals, entertainment and trips that they provide to lawmakers.
The 315-110 vote for the bill surprised some supporters, who had braced for defeat.
A two-thirds margin was needed, because Democratic leaders, anxious to pass the bill before lawmakers depart for a two-week recess, brought the bill to the House under expedited procedures.
Proponents feared that the measure would fall to a combination of foes who said the measure went too far and others who groused it didn't go far enough.
But the political appeal of the measure -- given antilobbying rhetoric of 1992 candidates from Bill Clinton on down and recent television exposes of lobbyist-paid trips for lawmakers -- proved too great for many would-be opponents.
The measure now goes to a conference with the Senate, which passed its own bill last year.
House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.) made a rare floor speech to press for approval, saying the bill was necessary to counter "a wrong belief" that lawmakers can be bought.
Other proponents also stressed that the bill was aimed not at actual ethics or legal problems, but at the public perception that "high-paid lobbyists wine and dine members of Congress into supporting" their causes, as Rep. John Bryant (D., Texas), the chief sponsor, said.
"No one, no one, came here for a free lunch," he said.
Under current law, roughly 7,000 individuals and firms register as lobbyists, though the actual number who commonly would be considered lobbyists is thought to be several times higher.
The bill would change the legal definition of lobbying so that many more people have to register.
Also, it would require them to provide more details in semiannual reports about contacts with lawmakers and staff, the issues discussed and any lobbying expenses.
The chief controversy surrounding the bill involved provisions to ban, with significant exceptions, any meals, entertainment, travel and gifts for lawmakers and staff.
Those who argued the bill wasn't sufficient reform, including the self-styled citizens' group Common Cause, cited two exceptions as loopholes.
One would allow corporate foundations to bankroll charity events, such as golf tournaments, to which lawmakers are invited.
Another would permit lobbyists to buy lawmakers dinner if the lobbyists' clients -- corporate executives, for example -- are present.
Behind the scenes, according to lawmakers in both parties, the chief opposition wasn't from those who wanted more reform, but from what came to be dubbed as "the golf and tennis caucus" -- members who frequently accept lobbyists' invitations to sunny resorts or hunting grounds, want to continue to do so, and resent what they consider to be the bill's implication of guilt.
"You are setting up new criteria, new restrictions, new rules by which we can be caught in a very innocent moment and be charged and dragged through the mud," said Rep. Thomas DeLay (R., Texas).
Most freshmen House members voted for the bill, as was expected, given the emphasis many of them put on reform in their campaigns.
Rep. Karen Shepherd (D., Utah), a leader in the bill's drafting, said she has been shocked since she arrived last year by how hard members of Congress work.
But, she said, "that hard work does not entitle me to extraordinary privileges.
