Prudential Securities Inc. didn't inflate payouts on its energy limited partnerships by borrowing funds to distribute to investors, an expert witness for the brokerage firm testified.
The testimony of Kenneth Burke, an audit director at Ernst & Young, came in a fairness hearing in a federal court here over a proposed settlement by Prudential.
About 130,000 investors have accused the brokerage firm in a class-action suit of misleading them on the risks and rewards of $1.45 billion in 35 oil and gas partnerships, which have sunk to about half of their original value.
Prudential "borrowed when they viewed the business need dictated it," Mr. Burke testified.
When asked if the firm borrowed funds to inflate investor distributions, he said: "I just don't see it."
Mr. Burke's testimony is the strongest to date for Prudential on one of the most significant allegations in the class-action case.
But Mr. Burke made his statements even as internal Prudential documents uncovered in the case suggest Prudential knew in the mid-1980s that there were problems in paying out distributions to investors from energy partnerships.
In a 1985 memo summarizing a meeting of Prudential partnership investors, William Pittman, a former senior partnership executive, said he was concerned that because some of the firm's partnerships "were borrowing money for current needs, the returns being paid to investors did not reflect the true returns but were inflated."
Prudential previously has said that it borrowed $5.7 million for a handful of partnerships in 1985 and 1986.
In only two instances did its partnership distributions fall short of cash flow, and those instances involved borrowing less than $1 million and were later disclosed to investors, the brokerage firm has said.
Prudential said the borrowing was appropriate because it was for capital items.
The fairness hearing, held before federal Judge Marcel Livaudais Jr., is like a mini-trial for the Prudential Insurance Co. of America unit.
Though Judge Livaudais is expected to approve Prudential's settlement offer after the hearing ends today, the accusations raised here represent a microcosm of the criticism dogging Prudential over sales of $8 billion of partnerships.
Prudential had proposed paying investors a total of $120 million in cash to settle the case; that's now about $90 million because nearly 16,000 of the 130,000 investors have decided to opt out.
But the settlement offer still is far higher than an earlier offer of $37 million in cash and interests in the partnerships in a reorganized form.
The earlier settlement was withdrawn last year amid heavy criticism from plaintiffs' attorneys.
The current settlement offer, which is backed by most plaintiff lawyers, would bring to about $1.27 billion, or an average of 87 cents on the dollar, the amount investors will end up getting for their original $1.45 billion investment.
The investors already have received distributions of more than $650 million, and will get an additional $491 million from the sale of the partnerships to Parker & Parsley Co., a Texas oil and gas company.
Prudential was one of Wall Street's biggest sellers of limited-partnership investments, many of which have soured and triggered lawsuits.
The Prudential class-action case is believed to be the largest involving partnerships; it also represents the biggest single chunk of disputed deals in Prudential's massive partnership mess.
Investors who opt out of the class-action case have several options.
They can pursue private actions against Prudential in court or through arbitration, or they can try to tap into a $330 million reparations fund set up by the firm in a broader settlement with federal and state regulators in October.
Separately, another Prudential witness testified at the hearing that huge losses suffered by energy-partnership investors stemmed solely from an unexpected plunge in oil prices, not any systematic fraud.
"The out-of-pocket losses are fully accounted for by the failure of oil prices to attain the levels" anticipated by oil experts, testified Ben C. Ball Jr., an energy consultant and former Gulf Oil Co. vice president.
"That's the whole story -- there are no villains to look for, there are no culprits," Mr. Ball said.
But Mr. Ball's testimony was attacked by Stuart Goldberg, a plaintiffs' attorney who is objecting to the settlement.
"Why, when oil prices went from $13 to $18 a barrel, did the limited partnership formed when prices were at $13 a barrel lose over 23% of its value?"
Mr. Goldberg asked.
Mr. Ball responded that some partnerships, particularly the later deals, invested more in gas than oil properties.
"In general, gas prices do not track oil prices," Mr. Ball said.
