Hewlett-Packard Co. said profit rose 41% for its fiscal first quarter, topping most analysts' expectations.
The Palo Alto, Calif., company, seeing strong demand for printers and other computer-related products, said net income for the quarter ended Jan. 31 rose to $368 million, or $1.42 a share, from $261 million, or $1.03 a share, a year earlier.
Revenue rose 24% to $5.68 billion from $4.57 billion.
Though company executives and analysts noted some sour notes, Hewlett's recent string of solid quarters is the envy of other big computer makers.
"H-P is really kind of breaking away from the rest of the computer pack," argued Steven Milunovich, an analyst at Morgan Stanley.
The company's stock jumped $3.625, or 4%, to $89.125 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.
Analysts had expected earnings per share of $1.10 to $1.43.
"The year is off to a good start," said Lewis Platt, Hewlett's chief executive officer.
In prepared remarks, he said the company was pleased with its cost-cutting efforts, profitability and growth, but said economic conditions remain cloudy.
"We remain cautious in light of uneven growth across our businesses and an uncertain economic environment in Europe and Japan," he said.
Hewlett said its orders grew 18% to $6.1 billion from $5.2 billion.
Orders were particularly strong in the company's computer business, which grew 23%.
The company cited demand for its inkjet printers, local-area networking hardware, multiuser computers and computer workstations.
Some analysts were cautious about assuming that Hewlett's growth can continue at this pace.
David Wu, who follows the company for S.G. Warburg, noted that the company's first quarter has been especially strong in recent years.
"People underestimate the seasonality of the company," he argued.
Barry Willman, an analyst with Goldman Sachs, said gross profit margins declined to 38.9% from 39.1% in the fourth quarter, excluding one-time items.
He noted that the company's inventories have risen for seven consecutive quarters and stood at $4 billion in the first quarter, up from $3.7 billion in the previous quarter.
"Inventories are a big problem," Mr. Willman said.
Printers contributed to the inventory growth.
Mr. Willman expects the company to ship new inkjet printers on March 1 that will include models with enhanced color.
Inventories may reflect some units already shipped to Hewlett's dealers to prepare for that launch, he said.
