You can buy almost anything on the streets of Riga these days.
Chivas Regal whiskey.
Mercedes-Benz sedans.
Electrolux microwave ovens.
Down the block from the old KGB office the pricey clothier Hugo Boss just opened shop.
So who's buying it all?
Certainly not Voldamar Miesnieks, an 80-year-old pensioner who is hawking newspapers in the cold outside a department store.
His pension is about $35 a month, not enough for bread and sausage, let alone luxury appliances.
"The stores are full, the shelves are full, there's a lot of stuff to buy," he says.
"There's nothing lacking but the money to buy it."
Business is booming in Riga, reclaiming Latvia's centuries-old status as gateway between Russia and Europe.
But the former Soviet republic is having trouble translating this flurry of trading activity into prosperity for its people.
The result is a gilded age in Latvia, with a handful of newly made millionaire bankers, traders and mobsters running about while the bulk of Latvians struggle.
By many measures, Latvia's progress in the past 18 months is dramatic.
Back in 1992, gross domestic product declined at a rate of 37% amid hyperinflation of more than 1,000% and shortages of food and oil.
But the government says the economy has stopped contracting and now forecasts 5% economic growth in 1994.
Inflation has dropped to an annual rate of 12% and is forecast to slow to 6% this year.
Latvia's six-month old currency, the lat, is fully convertible and has strengthened against major currencies.
A survey of 35 economists in Euromoney, a financial magazine, concluded that Latvia would have the most improved economy in Eastern Europe in 1994.
Some 80 banks have sprung up here, with deposits soaring to $500 million from $100 million at the beginning of 1993.
Two four-star hotels have opened in Riga, and a 380-bed Radisson is on the way.
The airport is expanding to accommodate Boeing 747s.
"It's coming alive all over the place," says Jonathan Bemis, commercial officer at the U.S. Embassy.
He figures the country's geography -- it's located in the middle of the three Baltic states and has the biggest port between St. Petersburg, Russia, and Gdansk, Poland -- and its relatively stable and friendly government, will make Latvia the region's Hong Kong.
"Latvia is becoming a financial center for the Baltics and the former Soviet Union," agrees Jerry Ralowski, a Pole who coordinates Coopers & Lybrand's Eastern European and Baltic operations.
"Many things are going in the right direction."
But not everything.
Latvia still relies on the former Soviet states for 55% of its exports, and it remains closely tied to the precarious Russian economy.
It has no reliable legal system and, as the recent elections in Russia underscore, political stability isn't assured.
The Russian mafia has a strong foothold here.
The government has privatized only 20 businesses of any size and has some 1,000 -- representing nearly 75% of all industry -- to go.
John Hinde, who operates the Global Trade Group commodity brokerage firm in Riga, says the Latvian progress so far is just a "paint job."
One problem: New businesses are storefronts rather than factories.
"At the first sign of trouble they can be gone in a few days," he says.
What wealth has come to Latvia so far has been very concentrated, creating a class division between rich and poor, with no middle class in sight.
Prices of even ordinary goods, such as bread and salami, put them beyond the reach of many, as the average salary is less than $100 a month.
And the government acknowledges that unemployment, officially 5.5%, could really be 30% or so.
The result is a tense mixture between haves and have-nots.
These things worry Valerijs Kargins, president of Parex Bank, one of Latvia's largest, with assets of $196 million.
The 32-year-old Russian mogul, a former journalist, has made himself "many millions" already.
His 18-month-old bank has a comfortable 4,400% return on investment.
The bank, which charges interest of 80% and pays interest of 60%, has offices all over Russia and Swiss-style numbered accounts, both in dollars and lats.
Parex's slogan: "We are nearer than Switzerland."
But the bank business is booming because of Western capital moving into Russia to pay for commodities being shipped out.
"We see no investment into the economy of Latvia," says Mr. Kargins, his bodyguard nearby.
"In principle," he says, banking "must positively influence other branches of the economy."
But in practice, Mr. Kargins fears "an economic drop-off of a chaotic nature."
Still, there are hopeful signs.
The government has formed new agencies to streamline foreign investment and privatization.
It has already spun off almost all state farms to 54,000 farmers.
Western companies are bidding some $1 billion for a half stake in Latvia's telephone system, and the state should be able to sell its healthy shipping, oil refinery, textile and timber businesses.
Kellogg Co. built a $22 million cereal plant to supply the Baltics and Russia beginning in January.
"The investment is being made, very cautiously," says Sol N. Bukingolts, a Latvian-American doing business here.
"It will take off.
There's no doubt."
His company, Chicago-based InterSource International Inc., has opened six American Fried Chicken and Little Johnny's American Pizza restaurants since 1991 (the chains don't exist in the U.S.), as well as a pharmaceutical business.
On a clearing beside a lake 15 minutes outside of town, Multibau, a Latvian-owned construction business, is building 27 new houses, a sign of the new -- and yet extremely targeted -- investment.
The homes, with marble walls, whirlpools, saunas, arched ceilings and tennis courts, sell for $350,000 to $600,000.
"We can't build cheap houses for poor people because they have no money," says Edgars Vigants, Multibau's vice president and owner of one of the homes.
But by building for Latvia's rich, the three-year-old company is starting to spread the wealth.
It now has a $12 million book value and employs 600 Latvians.
It exports local construction materials to Sweden, Germany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom.
When Latvia's middle class arrives, Multibau plans to build $80,000 homes.
"After some years this new Latvian economy will grow," Mr. Vigants says.
"We have no way to go but up."
