Bank regulators agreed to end their strict supervision of Citicorp's operations, signaling the banking giant's recovery from the real-estate slump of the early 1990s.
The move, which had been expected, allows Citicorp to manage its capital without prior approval from regulators.
Analysts predicted that the bank will soon reinstate its dividend, which was suspended in October 1991 when Citicorp was burdened with billions of dollars of bad loans.
The regulatory controls were imposed in February 1992 in a sign that Citicorp's loan problems were worse than most banks'.
Since then, the bank has slashed costs and sold assets.
Low interest rates also have helped.
Last year, Citicorp had record earnings of $2.2 billion, up from $722 million in 1992.
The lifting of regulatory controls was announced yesterday after a Citicorp board meeting.
Citicorp said the move by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was taken in conjunction with recently completed examinations.
Citicorp now will be subject to the normal regulatory rules that apply to all banks.
"It's a signal that they're regaining control of their own destiny," said Judah Kraushaar, banking analyst at Merrill Lynch & Co.
He expects the company to reinstate a 20-cent-a-share quarterly dividend at the annual meeting on April 19, the day after the company's next directors' meeting.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Citicorp's shares closed unchanged at $40.75.
Analysts said that the regulators' move was expected and that bank stocks in general have been weak since interest rates began creeping up recently.
Although Citicorp's financial recovery is nearly complete, the company still faces a tough banking environment.
Revenue is scarce and competition is fierce in credit cards, a market that Citicorp once dominated.
The bank is also making another big attempt to cut costs.
It has already begun laying off executives in its wholesale banking operations, and it is looking at its U.S. retail operations for ways to reduce expenses under its new senior executive vice president, Christopher Steffen.
Mr. Steffen, who met with analysts for the first time Thursday, is also attempting to measure Citicorp's operations against other banks'.
So-called benchmarking is common now in the business world.
But for Citicorp to look at others as a model is a major departure for the bank, which traditionally has considered itself superior to its rivals.
