Television broadcasters are expected to ask Congress today to let them use some of their spectrum for other purposes, including sending data to laptop computers, facsimile machines and pagers.
TV-station owners say they need Congress's help in order to provide competition to cable operators and telephone companies for advanced telecommunications services.
But the bid for flexibility is already raising hackles among opponents, who say the public should get a chance to acquire any spectrum broadcasters don't need for their television signals.
In particular, police and fire departments "definitely need it, desperately," says John Lane, a Washington lawyer representing local governments in a fight for additional spectrum.
He said public-safety officials could use the spectrum for communications services that could move fingerprints, mug shots, and X-rays to workers in the field.
Two years ago, those groups lost out when the Federal Communications Commission decided to award additional chunks of spectrum to broadcasters so that they could make the transition to digital high-definition television broadcasting.
But HDTV is facing increasing skepticism within the industry, especially because of uncertainty over how TV stations would pay for the huge costs.
While broadcasters insist they aren't giving up on HDTV, they're increasingly pressing for the right to mix other services on either their existing channels or their new, digital channels.
In testimony prepared for a House telecommunications subcommittee today, the National Association of Broadcasters says television stations could send data to pagers, facsimile machines, or laptop computers, or could provide detailed information about a car's price or dealers along with a car commercial.
But the trade group says it needs "a new regulatory framework."
The broadcasters are seeking congressional help because the FCC appears unlikely to allow broadcasters such flexibility, especially on the new HDTV channel.
"What we don't want to happen is any step that would prolong the introduction of HDTV," said Thomas Stanley, the FCC's chief engineer.
Broadcasters have been lobbying members of Congress to amend a House bill that would allow cable and telephone companies to compete more easily.
Representatives of the broadcasters association met several weeks ago with the staff of the House telecommunications subcommittee, which is considering the bill, sponsored by subcommittee Chairman Edward Markey (D., Mass.).
Preston Padden, executive vice president of News Corp.'s Fox Broadcasting Co., said he got a favorable reception yesterday from the staff of Rep. Jack Fields (R., Texas), a co-sponsor of the House bill.
Fox is seeking the right to provide several new channels along with HDTV on its new spectrum.
Mr. Fields's staff couldn't be reached for comment.
Even if the broadcasters do win support in Congress, they still face obstacles.
Andrew Schwartzman, executive director of the Media Access Project, which opposed the grant of spectrum to existing broadcasters, said the Supreme Court has guaranteed the public the right to compete for spectrum when it becomes available.
Also, Mr. Schwartzman said that if TV stations cram new channels into their signals, viewers will almost certainly need a special set-top box to decode the signals.
"You're looking at making the service unavailable to people who don't subscribe," he said.
Separately, witnesses from cable and technology concerns told a House subcommittee that the converter box will be a main link to the future "information superhighway" and should be required to handle a large variety of sources.
They urged members of the House panel to avoid mandating specific technological standards and to prohibit telephone, cable, satellite or broadcast companies from requiring consumers to buy or rent set-top boxes that carry only information from limited sources.
"It will be like driving down the information highway with five steering wheels and no map," said Andrew Lippman, associate director of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Media Lab.
As envisioned by Vice President Al Gore and others, the national information infrastructure would be a network of networks, including telephone, cable, satellite and broadcasting and other wireless links.
As part of that, the converter-box business could go the way of the telephone industry.
Since American Telephone & Telegraph Co. lost its battle to plug only equipment made by its Western Electric unit into the Bell System network, the choice of telephone equipment has mushroomed and prices have plunged.
