An influential group that inspired numerous health-care reform bills, including President Clinton's, is considering revising its proposal in favor of a more conservative and gradual path to achieving medical coverage for all Americans.
The Jackson Hole Group, named for this craggy mountain resort where it came up with the idea of "managed competition," is leaning toward advocating a cautious, "pay-as-you-go" approach.
Unlike the president's plan, it wouldn't require employers to buy health insurance for their workers unless other reforms fail.
And it would seek to avoid the risk of overspending by moving more slowly toward extending coverage to the uninsured.
The group, which met here for four days ended Sunday, also is moving toward embracing the idea, pushed by moderate Republicans in Congress, of allowing competing health-insurance purchasing pools in a single region.
The new recommendations are likely to boost arguments of moderates in both parties who have been urging a smaller government role in the health system and a more gradual phase-in period for universal coverage than the Clinton administration advocates.
Meanwhile, the board of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce said it now opposes requiring employers to help pay for their workers' health insurance.
And a House Ways and Means subcommittee postponed action on health-care overhaul until next week; the delay was designed partly to give time for budget analysts to calculate the cost of various alternatives, but it also reflected the still uncertain consensus on what route to follow.
Chief among the plans the panel is considering is one authored by the health panel's chairman, Rep. Fortney "Pete" Stark (D., Calif.), who proposes achieving universal coverage through an expanded Medicare-type program for the uninsured and the poor.
A loose-knit gathering of physicians, health-industry executives and academics, the Jackson Hole Group has had a farreaching effect on the health-care debate in Washington by suggesting that there are ways to achieve health coverage for everyone without adopting a government-run medical system.
President Clinton, for one, embraced its idea of "managed competition," which seeks to bring purchasers of health services together to increase their clout.
But Jackson Hole members are critical of the president's plan because it would impose more government regulation than they advocate, and the mood of its latest meeting couldn't have been encouraging to the White House.
"There exists a real danger that health-care reform may stall over a number of issues, with the result that ineffectual or even no legislation will pass," the group says in a new paper being circulated among its members.
The document proposes modifications to its original plan in an attempt to "craft a reasonable, affordable compromise out of the thoughtful proposals that face Congress in 1994."
Originally, the group proposed requiring all employers with fewer than 100 workers to join "health plan purchasing pools."
All employers would be required to pay at least part of their workers' health insurance premiums, and the workers would select from an array of private health-insurance plans offered through the regional purchasing pool.
To increase consumer price sensitivity, income-tax breaks would be allowed to employers and employees for only the cost of the lowest-price plan in a region.
The new draft, dubbed "Managed Competition II," cites political opposition to the employer mandate, and the likelihood that savings from the newly structured health system will take time to accrue.
"It is not inappropriate to help people first who need it most (i.e., the poorest of poor individuals through subsidies, plus small employers through purchasing cooperatives) and set a not-too-distant future target for universal coverage," the group concludes.
The modified plan would retain the limit on health-care tax deductions and the requirement that small businesses join purchasing pools.
But it shuns the employer mandate, and it would allow more than one pool to be established for a region.
It suggests various insurance reforms, and recommends subsidies to help lowincome people buy health insurance.
If universal coverage hasn't been achieved after four years, it says, Congress should either increase the subsidies or enact a scheme in which businesses with more than 100 workers would be required to contribute to their employees' health coverage, while workers for companies with fewer than 100 workers would be required to obtain health insurance on their own.
Democrats in Congress have been discussing such a hybrid plan.
The lack of consensus on health care is reflected by Mr. Stark's subcommittee.
The chairman can count on none of the panel's four Republicans, and will likely lose a fellow Democrat, Rep. Mike Andrews, who is running for the Senate in Texas.
That means he must hold all of the remaining six Democratic votes.
But if he moves too far toward the center, he risks losing such lawmakers as Rep. Jim McDermott of Washington state, a strong advocate of a government-run, or single-payer, health system.
Mr. Stark urges a much greater government role than does the president's plan.
He seeks price controls similar to those now used under Medicare.
Medicaid care for the poor wouldn't be privatized, as proposed by Mr. Clinton, but instead would be wrapped into the same new Medicare program, dubbed Medicare C.
The Stark proposal preserves the president's proposed employer mandate but offers some concessions to business.
For example, some insurance reforms would be phased in gradually, according to a 24-page summary.
And while regional health alliances would be established as co-operative buying pools for insurance, employer participation would be voluntary.
The Chamber of Commerce vote came after hundreds of chamber members, representing mostly small and medium-sized companies, called the organization to say they're against the employer mandate.
"A year ago, the U.S. Chamber tried to take a leadership position supporting shared responsibility in paying for health care," said Robert Patricelli, chairman of the organization's health-policy committee.
"But it's now clear the business community won't support that despite our efforts to educate them on the issue."
Richard Lesher, the chamber's president, said the chamber also has suspended its support for achieving universal healthinsurance coverage because that goal is difficult to reach without an employer mandate.
Oregon Sen. Robert Packwood, noting that fellow Republicans are split on the question of mandates, made a similar assessment.
"If you don't accept the concept of mandates, you don't get universal coverage," he said.
Jeanne Saddler contributed to this article.
