Keen observers of the Olympic biathlon, a contest the Scandinavians thought up in a fit of hypothermic delirium, have never -- until now -- asked: What does this have to do with American competitiveness in a changing global economy?
Wake up, keen observers!
Ask yourself why a silver-haired, 74-year-old Russian named Mikhail T. Kalashnikov got a reception that can only be described as Elvisian when he popped in on America's biggest annual guns and ammo trade show last month in Dallas.
The answer, as every gun nut knows, is that he is a living legend: the designer of history's most popular military rifle, the AK-47 assault rifle -- acclaimed from the Mekong Delta to the Khyber Pass and beyond.
GI-envied, Viet Cong-endorsed, no boonie rat this side of World War II would be caught without one.
Upward of 50 million copies sold!
Now ask yourselves why Dieter Anschutz gets equally reverential receptions wherever straight shooters gather.
The rifles he designs at the fourth-generation, family-owned firm, J.G. Anschutz GmbH in Ulm, Germany, sell one at a time and don't win wars.
They win medals.
He is the Kalashnikov of accuracy.
No self-respecting Olympic rifle shooter leaves home without an Anschutz.
No Olympic biathlete, including every one of the four-man and six-woman American biathlon team and roughly 155 others from 40-odd competing nations, will venture out into the Lillehammer snow without an Anschutz Model 1827BT (Fortner System straight pull .22 caliber long rifle) slung over a shoulder.
Cost: $3,689.50 retail in the U.S., including carrying harness and sling.
Since neither Mr. Kalashnikov nor Mr. Anschutz come from America -- indeed, they come from nations that don't even have a Second Amendment, one more modest question needs asking: WHAT IN THE HELL IS GOING ON HERE!!!???
How in the world could America allow this to be?
How could the land of the free and home of the exceptionally well-armed brave, a nation that shot its way to independence and tamed the Wild West, a place where people and guns are as close as lips and teeth -- how can the United States of KaBLOOEY! not make the world's best guns?
Has it lost all self-respect?
America is to guns what Holland is to tulips, Switzerland is to watches, and France is to wine.
The U.S. has 221,267,268 guns, and counting.
Fifty million gun owners, an average of 4.4 guns per owner.
Americans give cuddly little .22s and .410s to their children at Christmas.
Listen to President Clinton: "I can still remember the first day when I was a little boy putting a can on top of a fence post and shooting a .22 at it.
I can still remember the first time I pulled a trigger on a .410 shotgun."
Notice that Wild Bill didn't say whether he actually hit that can on the fence post.
No matter.
The problem is that Olympic shooters don't shoot at tin cans.
In the Summer Games, they shoot at a bull's-eye the size of a dime (10.4 millimeters) 50 meters away.
In the biathlon, they race on cross-country skis until their hearts are beating like Thumper on speed, then stop suddenly, try to pump five bullets into a target 50 meters away, often through howling wind and blowing snow; then race off and do it again.
Rabbits to rocks to rabbits, over and over.
They shoot from a prone position at a target the size of a silver dollar (45 mm) and standing up at a saucer-sized target (115 mm).
"I'd love to use an American rifle, but we just don't have one," says R. Duncan Douglas, a 28-year-old member of the U.S. biathlon team.
Indeed, American gun makers surrendered the accuracy business long ago.
Fat, lazy and resting on their laurels, they threw up their hands at the first challenge, as if to say, "Don't shoot, Dieter!
Don't shoot!"
But it's worse than that.
It's Detroit all over again.
The American firearms industry can't hack it even in a nation of happy firearms consumers.
Gun nuts or not, the industry is in what they call "structural decline," with outdated technology, aging production lines, bad quality control.
American gun production slumped to 2.4 million last year from three million the year before.
Meanwhile, imports climbed to an estimated 3.2 million last year.
Even in Detroit's darkest days, auto makers had enough pride and self-respect to maintain prestigious high-tech racers.
Not America's 1,256 gun manufacturers.
Famous names like Remington, Winchester, Marlin, Mossberg and Savage gave up without a fight.
The last rifles many of them made that could shoot Olympic straight are '60s vintage.
"Remington and Winchester pulled out of the target market after World War II, opting for mass marketing," says E. Alan Johnson, president of Precision Sales International Inc., U.S. importer of Anschutz rifles.
"You just can't mass market target rifles."
"I'm confident a good gunsmith or arms maker could make a good competition rifle in America, but they have a record of not sticking with such projects," says Gary Anderson, two-time Olympic gold medalist and director of the U.S. Shooting Team Foundation.
It was the same sad story with Olympic ammunition: Eley of Britain, Fiocchi of Italy, Olymp of Russia.
World demand for Fiocchi low-temperature biathlon ammo is so high that shooters must make reservations, or "book" cases of it well in advance of competition.
On the other hand, putting most American .22 caliber ammo into an Anschutz is the moral equivalent of putting ketchup on truffles.
But America's oldest, biggest ammo makers -- namely Remington and Winchester -- just didn't care, even when Henry Cross, chairman of the U.S. Shooting Team, told sad stories about how foreign ammo makers gave their best stuff to their own shooters "while U.S. athletes got the leftovers."
By 1990, Dr. Cross convinced Ron Mason, president of Federal Cartridge Co. of Anoka, Minn., that this situation had to be rectified.
In a skunk works painted red, white and blue, a Federal team of two dozen technicians went to work.
Out came Federal Gold Medal .22 Ultra Match.
Using it at the 1992 Summer Games in Barcelona, Launi Meili and Bob Foth won gold and silver medals, respectively -- the first medals using U.S. ammo in three decades.
Federal invited these winners to a big party in September, and all the skunk works workers got to touch the gold medal, says Mr. Mason.
Federal is now the "primary official supplier" for the U.S. biathlon team, which is keeping some Fiocchi in reserve just in case.
This doesn't mean Americans will clean up in the biathlon, even though it's the closest thing to a red-blooded, All-American, guns-and-ammo event in the Winter Olympics.
Indeed, since it became an Olympic sport in 1960, Americans have never come close to winning a medal in the biathlon, Anschutzes or no Anschutzes.
We don't like to leak state secrets, but the reason is obvious: Americans can't shoot straight in the cold when they get excited.
Keen observers who don't believe this might want to ask themselves why it is that even though a zillion hunters take to the woods each fall, America's deer population keeps exploding.
