The word cram is taking on new meaning at some college campuses.
When Middlebury College in Vermont announced last week it will offer a three-year undergraduate degree for students majoring in international studies, it joined a small but growing movement of colleges and universities to reduce costs to students by offering accelerated, three-year undergraduate degrees.
Another small liberal arts college, Albertus Magnus College in New Haven, Conn., introduced a three-year degree program last September.
Although the program is only an option, 80% of the freshman class signed up.
The State University of New York plans to introduce accelerated-degree pilot programs this summer at seven of its 64 campuses.
Several small colleges in the Midwest have implemented three-year programs.
The presidents of other institutions, including Stanford University and Oberlin College, in Ohio, have been talking about it.
And a recent nationwide survey of 2,000 high school students by George Dehne & Associates found that 77% expressed a desire to attend a college offering a three-year degree.
"I think what we're going to see in the future is a steady increase in student demand for this option, and a steady increase in the number of institutions meeting it in educationally responsible ways," says S. Frederick Starr, president of Oberlin College.
"The automatic four-year degree is a thing of the past."
Three-year degree programs are hardly new.
Many schools already allow students to graduate early if they complete the required course work in less than four years.
And more formal three-year programs have emerged periodically.
Harvard University offered three-year degrees in the 17th and 19th centuries at a time when fewer courses were available.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, many schools, including the University of Chicago, Columbia University and Johns Hopkins University, experimented with accelerated degree programs.
In the 1970s, rising tuition costs prompted another round of accelerated degree programs at state universities in California, New York, Wisconsin and elsewhere.
But, as in the past, most programs died due to waning interest, with colleges once again reverting to the traditional, British-style four-year degree.
The current appeal is due to economics.
Robert J. Buccino, vice president for advancement at Albertus Magnus, says he came up with the idea after the 650-student private college lost 70 students over three years to less expensive state schools.
He says the college couldn't afford to increase financial aid.
Instead it compressed its four-year program into three, reducing the cost of a degree by $11,150.
The college added 10 minutes to every class period and went from two 15-week semesters to three 13-week semesters each year.
Faculty members were offered extra money for teaching in the new third semester.
The changes have generated a lot of interest -- inquiries at the admissions office are up 30%, with applications up more than 5%, Mr. Buccino says.
And at least 70 other colleges and universities have requested information about the program.
Jocelyn Mosher, an 18-year-old freshman from Livermore Falls, Maine, says the opportunity to earn a bachelor of arts degree in three years persuaded her to choose Albertus Magnus.
She says her parents, who had to take out a loan to finance her education, are "excited because I'll be starting my career sooner."
In addition to allowing students to enter the work force sooner and pay off their college loans faster, proponents of three-year programs say they open up spaces for more students and save tax dollars by reducing state and federal subsidies.
Proponents also argue that such programs force colleges to re-examine their mission and streamline degree programs to essential courses.
But critics say that students typically need more than three years at college, especially since high schools are doing a poorer job of providing them with basic skills.
In fact, at Stanford, which is studying a three-year proposal, some faculty members have argued that even four years isn't enough.
"Some would like five," says spokesman Terry Shepard.
Others worry that many colleges will be hard-pressed to recruit enough students if turnover increases sharply.
And some express concern that students will miss out on the complete college experience, including social and extracurricular activities and community service.
Arthur Levine, chairman of the Institute for Educational Management at Harvard, says three-year programs are also impractical for students who work their way through college and have to struggle to earn a degree in four years.
He adds that colleges should re-evaluate what students are learning, not how much time they sit in classrooms.
Even proponents agree that three-year programs are most appropriate for extremely motivated students.
Middlebury expects only 12 to 15 students -- out of 1,950 -- to enroll in its new three-year program, which will include two summer sessions and save students up to $20,000.
"We expect a limited number of highly qualified, highly motivated, highly focused and mature students to come into the program," says Middlebury's president, John McCardell.
Rather than extend the school year, other colleges and universities are offering accelerated degrees by granting credits for advanced-placement courses taken at high school by top students.
In fact, some colleges allow students to enter as sophomores if they passed enough advanced-placement exams.
Gerhard Casper, president of Stanford, last year suggested offering "a clearly designed threeyear alternative that would rely on a mix of advanced-placement credits and a reduction in requirements" for some students.
"It's not for everyone," says Oberlin's Mr. Starr.
"We are flexible in allowing the person who needs to take five years.
Let's be equally flexible for the person who can do it in three."
