These are sweet times for Japan's giant securities companies.
After four years of sagging earnings and bruised share prices, profits are up and business is growing.
The Big Four brokerage firms are among the best performers in Tokyo, outpacing a market that is off to a strong 1994.
Don't bet on the luck lasting.
The brokerage firms still are hamstrung by excessive costs and vulnerable to a new market downturn, analysts say.
In the midst of this year's mini-bull run, Standard & Poor's Asia delivered another blow, lowering its ratings of Japan's four brokerage-firm giants: Nomura Securities Co., Daiwa Securities Co., Nikko Securities Co. and Yamaichi Securities Co.
"The securities industry in Japan will continue to be negatively affected by low market turnover and limited new equity offerings," S&P said.
"In this kind of environment, it will be difficult for them to recover much of their past earnings power."
S&P last downgraded Nomura in 1991, and the other three in 1992.
The Tokyo market has been unusually buoyant lately.
Even with a second straight day of losses Tuesday, the Nikkei 225-stock index closed at 18514.55, up 6.3% in the past two weeks.
The brokers have done even better: Nikko is up 8.3%, Nomura is up 9.7%, Daiwa has gained 12.7%, and Yamaichi has advanced a whopping 22.7%.
The Nihon Keizai Shimbun newspaper this week sharply boosted its projections for the Big Four's profits in the fiscal year ending in March.
The brokerage firms' sunnier outlook reflects a surge in trading volume as well as the price rally -- turnover was more than 450 million shares a day last week, compared with about 200 million shares a day at the end of 1993.
That makes an enormous difference to the profits of these commission-dependent firms.
But it isn't sustainable, the bears say.
Volume already has been lower this week.
Over the longer term, the government's artificial support for the market will continue to damp trading, says Yoshio Shima, assistant director of S&P Asia.
The market "is being kept at quite high valuations," he says, "and that will restrict market activity."
Another demon: corporate bloat.
"The biggest problem is that their expenses are way too high," says Betsy Daniels, an analyst at Morgan Stanley in Tokyo.
"Nomura, one of the strongest, has a return-on-equity target of 5%; the average target of a U.S. investment bank is 20%."
For the year ended March 31, 1993, she notes, Nomura's return on equity was just 0.15%.
Of course, Tokyo has its bulls these days, particularly among the foreign investors who have led the recent buying.
They see a market overdue for a rise after four bad years.
They think the Japanese government's multi-trillion yen public works splurge will spark a broader economic recovery.
"Corporate profits will double over two years," predicts Chris Mitchinson , a longtime Japan strategist for Salomon Brothers Asia Ltd., who is now a private Japanese investment consultant in London.
"We think the Nikkei will be between 25,000 and 30,000 by the end of the year."
He says Japanese investors will join the foreign stock buyers later this year and recommends loading up on shares of Nomura and Daiwa.
Even such a rally, however, may not benefit the brokerage firms.
Financial-market deregulation, Mr. Shima notes, already has Japan's beleaguered banks encroaching on the brokers' turf.
"Corporate-bond underwriting fees have fallen by two-thirds in the past year" because of competition, he says.
"We expect the negative impact of deregulation to continue -- if it's in bond underwriting now, why not equity-linked underwriting in the future?"
The brokers themselves, of course, are more optimistic.
"Our consolidated earnings have started to improve," a Nomura spokesman says.
"We don't think financial liberalization and increased competition will affect our earnings."
Says a Nikko official: "We have no negative forecasts."
Besides, even after the bad years, Japan's brokerage firms are still rich.
"Nomura still has a ton of cash," Ms. Daniels says, adding that the companies can continue to weather a bear market.
The capital they built up in the late 1980s rally means that, even with yesterday's downgrades, the Japanese brokerage firms still have higher ratings than many of their more profitable U.S. counterparts.
S&P lowered its ratings of debt issued by guaranteed subsidiaries of Daiwa to single-A1 from single-A1-plus.
Nikko was lowered to single-A from single-A-plus.
Nomura's rating was dropped to double-A from double-A-plus.
Yamaichi fell to single-A-minus from single-A.
