Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. said President Peter T. Caserta has temporarily stepped aside to "clear his name," one day after federal investigators raided his former financial services firm.
Spectrum's new chairman, Edward Maskaly, said the arrest Tuesday of five employees of Paradigm Group Inc., including the firm's president, on wire and mail fraud charges left Mr. Caserta with little choice but to take a leave of absence to "rebut allegations" about Paradigm and his role in it.
Meanwhile, Mr. Caserta's children will no longer be working for the small wireless company.
Diana Bohrman, Mr. Caserta's daughter, will soon "tender her resignation" as Spectrum's vice president of technology, and Peter Caserta II, who had been a vice president, left recently to attend graduate school, Mr. Maskaly said.
Mr. Maskaly appeared to distance himself and Spectrum from Mr. Caserta, asserting that federal postal inspectors didn't seize any Spectrum records and that, contrary to a statement in the related federal complaint, he isn't a relative of Mr. Caserta.
But Messrs. Maskaly and Caserta have had close business ties for years.
Mr. Maskaly, a former chief financial officer of shoe and handbag company Jasmine Ltd., was named chairman of Spectrum earlier this week; Mr. Caserta had taken that post after former Apple Computer Inc.
Chairman John Sculley left in a dispute last month.
Mr. Maskaly has been a Spectrum board member for two years, joining at Mr. Caserta's invitation.
In the mid-1980s, while president of a lending unit of National Westminster Bank, Mr. Maskaly arranged a $5 million loan for Mr. Caserta's former company, InterGlobal Technical Resources, a rentan-engineer firm.
As federal investigators continue their investigation of Mr. Caserta, Mr. Maskaly could find himself spending an increasing amount of time answering for his involvement in a financial scheme that federal prosecutors say defrauded numerous small businesses.
The complaint accuses the five employees and Paradigm of running a boiler room operation that enticed small businesses into paying fat upfront fees for financial help that never materialized.
Mr. Maskaly was mentioned as one investor who was allegedly poised to lend one of the "victim" companies capital.
Mr. Maskaly is listed among the "distinguished Board of Advisers" of Caserta Group -- the forerunner of Paradigm.
The advisory board was set up to help Caserta Group/Paradigm decide whether certain small-business clients of the company should get investment banking help, including expansion capital.
Today, many of these small-business customers are witnesses for the prosecution of the federal complaint against Caserta Group/Paradigm and the five people who were arrested.
The advisory board also included former astronaut Thomas Stafford; A.C. Dalton, a former Young & Rubicam executive; and former McGraw-Hill Inc.
Group President Joseph H. Allen.
Mr. Maskaly said his involvement with Caserta Group never went beyond one meeting with the company.
"There was no financial compensation to me," he said.
Still, he may have a hard time extricating Spectrum from Caserta Group/Paradigm's problems.
Spectrum and Paradigm have close ties.
The companies share the same headquarters building and some of the same personnel.
Paradigm had done business as Caserta Group until January, when Mr. Caserta transferred the company to his son-in-law, John Bohrman, a former Spectrum director, and Diana's husband.
Mr. Bohrman was one of those arrested on Tuesday, along with Howard Schor, a Paradigm executive and Spectrum vice president.
