Profile of a consumer craze: America falls in love with a new way of communicating, chatting electronically with strangers on topics from politics to soap-opera stars.
That describes the on-line computer business this year -- and the citizen's band radio fad of two decades ago.
Will history repeat itself?
For America Online Inc., whose "chat" and other communications services are its most popular offering, the answer could mean the difference between continued stratospheric growth or a descent to the basement alongside the CB radio and fondue pot.
In America Online, the hottest of a handful of commercial on-line services, some investors and Wall Street analysts think they have found the second coming of Microsoft Corp., which made millionaires of some investors and billionaires of two insiders.
Since going public in March 1992, America Online's subscriber base has quadrupled -- and its stock has risen almost eightfold.
It was recently valued at more than 100 times earnings -- compared with a multiple of less than 21 times reported earnings for the stocks in the Standard & Poor's 500.
Even Microsoft has never traded at a multiple of more than 48.
The lofty valuation for America Online stuns even industry insiders.
On-line services are "a fundamentally great business, but this is nuts," says Mark Goldstein, president of a financial-news on-line service, Reality Technologies Inc.
Even America Online's largest shareholder -- Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen -- may have some doubts.
He seemed to ratify America Online's future when he began buying shares two years ago.
Now he is considering selling his 18% stake, industry insiders say.
America Online's stock price declined $3.125 to $81.50 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading yesterday on the news of Mr. Allen's ambivalence.
America Online has struck a chord among many PC users.
It has 700,000 subscribers among the four million consumers who use on-line services.
The high-flier of cyberspace, however, will have to overcome daunting obstacles to reach out to the rest of the 30 million American homes with PCs.
In the next year will come a slew of new services backed by bigger names and deeper pockets, including Microsoft, Apple Computer Inc. and Ziff Communications Co.
Current rivals are embracing easy-to-use features, which had been America Online's edge.
Local "chat-only" services are springing up, and a spate of new wireless networks could undercut America Online's electronic mail.
Some observers say America Online will lose subscribers to the growing popularity of the Internet, the noncommercial international web of computer networks.
"The Internet is an ocean, and these on-line services are isolated ponds," says author James Gleick, who is president of Pipeline, a New York-based service for accessing the Internet.
Pipeline has attracted refugees from commercial on-line services like America Online, he says, and the Internet's global access and lower prices will leave services like America Online in trouble.
"Their days are numbered," he says.
America Online's president and chief executive, Stephen Case, says he isn't worried.
"We'll probably have millions of subscribers before most of the new competitors hit their stride," says Mr. Case, 35 years old, who founded the service nine years ago in Vienna, Va.
America Online's chat circuit, with electronic bulletin boards and electronic mail, lets users anonymously flit and flirt and "flame," nerd-speak for giving enemies a very public verbal flogging.
But the infatuation with typing messages to strangers could fade like the three-video-a-night habit of new VCR owners in the 1980s.
"There's a burst of enthusiasm born of novelty that will drop off," predicts Richard Shaffer, publisher of ComputerLetter, an industry newsletter.
Bob Crutchfield of Arlington, Va., has pulled the plug on America Online as well as rival services Prodigy and CompuServe.
The chat services weren't that enticing.
"I had enough trouble seeing why ham radio and citizen's band operators like their hobbies," he says.
"And they actually talk to people."
Even if chat remains popular, lower-cost chat-only services could steal some America Online customers, says Michael Murphy, who publishes the California Technology Stock Letter.
Craig Koller of Long Beach, Calif., has all but given up on America Online in favor of local bulletin boards.
"You're dealing with people who are close to you.
You can buy things from them, or even meet them," he says.
While America Online touts its high growth, some experts say that is the wrong goal.
Users complained when they had trouble gaining access to America Online's crowded system.
Other members tell of misdirected e-mail messages.
(Yesterday, the company said it has beefed up its system to let 50% more people tap in at peak hours, although analysts say just 12,000 to 15,000 will be able to get on-line at once.
It also announced an Internet access service.)
America Online should push customers to spend more time on line, says Mr. Shaffer of the ComputerLetter.
It loses 40% of its subscriber base each year and spends $40 a head to recruit new members.
Most users never exceed their minimum monthly charge of $9.95 for five hours.
But Mr. Case says average monthly revenue per subscriber has grown to about $14.
Two years ago, customers stayed with America Online for about 25 months on average; now they stay for 30 months, the company says.
While the customer trend may be promising, America Online could face a tougher time signing up new "content."
Time magazine is offered via America Online but is exploring newer rivals that would give it more control over the on-screen "look and feel," says Walter Isaacson, editor of Time Inc.'s New Media group.
The Washington Post has chosen to go with Ziff's new service for similar reasons.
"It allows us to have a branded product that is clearly ours and not someone else's," says Donald K. Brazeal, editor of Digital Ink Co., the Post's on-line subsidiary.
Other big media companies may decide to form their own services.
Reuters Holdings PLC provides news to America Online, but it has just acquired 75% of Reality Technologies Inc., an on-line financial service.
Mr. Case counters that on-line customers want a variety of services "bundled" together, a la America Online.
And he says the uniform look and feel that bothers some is what makes America Online easier to use.
