"Do you think Joe Queenan could NOT review my book?"
We hear that request now and again at the Journal.
But we do our best to keep Joe busy, though that still leaves him plenty of time to write for other publications, on any number of subjects from the guitar to the slow death of the Democratic Party.
(I'm told he once totted up the largest number of articles written by a human in one year.
I don't doubt it.
Writer's block doesn't afflict him.)
"If You're Talking to Me, Your Career Must Be in Trouble: Movies, Mayhem, and Malice" (Hyperion, 267 pages, $22.95) pulls together his free-lance Hollywood pieces, mostly from that raffish upstart magazine Movieline, in which he, among other things, identifies "an obsession with head trauma as a principal theme in the work of Oliver Stone" and endures an agonizing algebra lesson with an aging child star.
Please describe yourself: "Basically, I was a journalist who only dealt in troubled merchandise, who only got to meet movie stars when they themselves had a gun cocked to their heads by their studios and were literally forced to go out and do interviews with unpleasant people.
They were forced to do interviews with people like me because they had megaduds in the can."
Name One: Beastmaster III.
"Not until we pass through the Pearly Gates and meet our Maker will any of us ever know why God created Ryan O'Neal, what pivotal role Mariel Hemingway is playing in the Almighty's master plan, and to what extent Satan himself was involved in the final editing of Beastmaster III."
Why do you often repeat unkind remarks about people who never harmed you?
Say the casting of Charlotte Rampling as an intellectual marine biologist or Kathleen Turner's weight (problem)?: "This is not the result of an editing oversight.
Rather, this repetition of certain pejorative remarks stems from my personal belief that it is impossible to remind the public too often that Diane Keaton is a really awful actress, just as it is impossible to make too many nasty remarks about short, bad actors related to Martin Sheen."
Inspired by Woody Allen and his love for a nymph, you assembled the "Home Nymphet Video Collection," containing "Sunset," "Sabrina," "Lolita" and "Voyager" -- which starred Sam Shepherd as a hydroelectrical engineer.
Who should buy this collection?: "Despite their absurd plots, their horrible scripts, their eighth-rate acting, and Vincent Spano, these films, viewed as a unit, provide an indispensable moral compass that horny, middle-aged men everywhere can use when reaching a decision about preying on women who are old enough to be their children, grandchildren, great-grandchildren, or nieces once removed by marriage.
Had Woody Allen looked at these films, or looked at them more carefully, he would have been less reckless in making the decision to abandon Ms. Farrow and take up with one of her numerous United Colors of Benetton daughters."
What can you tell us about Susan Sarandon's beliefs?: ". . . like many people who have villas in Italy, apartments in New York, and good jobs in Hollywood, Sarandon espouses innumerable political causes.
These include women, homeless women, homeless people in general, victims of Central American political repression, AIDS victims, Nicaraguan mothers, the poor, and various combinations thereof.
Environmentally sensitive readers, or manatee buffs ired by the immense amount of press coverage more colorful aquatic species seem to get, will be heartened to know that at no point during the interview did Sarandon express any concern about the whales."
Is Tom Cruise growing, as they say, as an actor?: "Cruise started out as a generic heartthrob in All the Right Moves, Risky Business, and Top Gun, but has since profited from the widely held notion that appearing in Rain Man and Born on the Fourth of July demonstrated a willingness to stretch.
It is a measure of how spectacularly infantile the movie industry has become to suggest that making a film with either Oliver Stone or Barry Levinson constitutes a stretch, since all we are talking about is Of Mice and Men Goes to Vegas and a wheelchair Platoon.
Still, it's a start."
For one of your articles you tried to re-create famous scenes from movies, including the Julia Roberts character in "Pretty Woman" getting picked up by Richard Gere as a business companion.
What happened?: ". . . none of the women I saw on Eighth Avenue bore even a remote physical resemblance to Julia Roberts.
Or, for that matter, to Eric Roberts.
If anyone had made a movie about any of these tragic individuals, it would have been called Pretty Ugly Woman.
Moreover, it wasn't always easy to establish whether the woman I was talking to was actually a woman.
Or a human."
Is there anything we can learn from the movies?: "Music Box is a brutal, disturbing film about an unendurable truth: that some of us are the parents of fiends, that some of us are the children of monsters."
Ms. Hoelterhoff is the Journal's books editor.
