Steve Dworin has become the Diane Sawyer of Madison Avenue.
Major advertising agencies are scrambling to lure Mr. Dworin, much as the broadcast networks competed last month to sign Ms. Sawyer to a contract.
Nearly all of the largest ad agency holding companies have been in touch with Mr. Dworin about high-level executive positions, though his salary would probably be only in the six-figure range, nowhere near the $5 million to $7 million annual paycheck Ms. Sawyer reportedly will receive from Capital Cities/ABC.
The wooing started right after Mr. Dworin resigned last month as president of Deutsch/Dworin, one of the hottest midsize ad agencies.
He resigned over what amounted to an erosion of his personal relationship with Donny Deutsch, executive vice president and creative director.
Mr. Dworin, 40 years old, declined to comment specifically on which agencies have contacted him.
But according to an industry official who didn't want to be identified, Mr. Dworin has met with or held informal conversations with three of the large ad agency holding groups: Interpublic Group, WPP Group and Saatchi & Saatchi.
Omnicom Group hasn't stepped forward -- at least not yet.
In addition, Mr. Dworin is expected to meet with Richard Humphreys, one of four individuals who invested in Ayer last March and who is on the agency's executive committee, about a high-level position at the nation's oldest independent agency.
Interpublic is said to be offering Mr. Dworin the position of chief executive officer of Lintas:New York, which lost several major accounts recently.
He would succeed Anthony J. (Tony) Miller, who would return to Lintas' operation in Canada, according to one individual, who didn't want to be identified.
In addition, Burt Manning, chairman and chief executive at WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson, is said to be interested in Mr. Dworin to supervise a group of the agency's multinational accounts.
Also in the WPP Group, Charlotte Beers, chairman and chief executive at Ogilvy & Mather, is interested in bringing Mr. Dworin aboard for an unspecified role.
Mr. Dworin previously worked at Thompson as senior vice president and director of account management and at Ogilvy as an assistant account executive.
Mr. Dworin recently met with executives from Saatchi's Campbell Mithun Esty as well.
A spokesman for Ayer said: "Whether we're talking to Steve Dworin or any other executive is not something we would comment on."
Similarly, Thompson, Ogilvy and Campbell Mithun declined comment.
Both Mr. Miller at Lintas and Philip Geier, chairman of Interpublic Group, were traveling and couldn't be reached for comment.
"I have a lot of respect for all these agencies," Mr. Dworin said.
"And the agency that provides the support for me to make the biggest impact and the biggest difference is the one I would like to go to work for.
I would like a challenge."
Madison Avenue hasn't seen such a rush on talent since Gordon Bowen was lured to Interpublic's McCann-Erickson from Ogilvy & Mather three years ago.
Mr. Bowen quickly bombed on McCann's prestigious Coca-Cola account and left the agency after less than 18 months.
Mr. Bowen has yet to land at another agency.
But unlike Mr. Bowen, Mr. Dworin isn't coming from the creative side of advertising.
Instead, Mr. Dworin's strengths, according to corporate executives who were Deutsch/Dworin clients, are strategic planning, marketing and no-nonsense dealings with clients.
Those may not sound unusual, but on Madison Avenue, where style sometimes triumphs over substance, Mr. Dworin's attributes are apparently highly valued.
"He is upfront and, more important, not political at all," said Steen Kanter, former president of Ikea U.S. East, the home furnishings chain and a Deutsch/Dworin client.
"Most of the advertising executives I met in 22 years of merchandising only thought of the short-term revenues.
Steve wants a long-term relationship.
Short-term revenues are the reward."
David Richards, vice president of marketing at Lenscrafters, a division of U.S. Shoe, called Mr. Dworin a "great account man.
He is very much more a partner as opposed to an agency advocate.
He gets inside your business and understands exactly what the client needs."
The straight-laced, serious executive hasn't received any formal offers yet, but Mr. Dworin can afford to take his time mulling over potential proposals.
When he left Deutsch/Dworin, he owned about 25% of the agency, which is being repurchased.
At the time of his sudden resignation, Mr. Dworin said he would take a vacation and lounge on a beach.
But the sunshine has eluded him so far.
Instead, he has visited Martin Sorrell, WPP's chief executive, at the company's London headquarters to discuss the possibility of a position at Ogilvy.
Mr. Dworin said he is "flattered" by all the attention, which he isn't used to.
In the flashy world of advertising, Mr. Dworin didn't stand out.
Recently, however, he inadvertently drew a lot of attention to himself.
Mr. Dworin traveled to the headquarters of Hardee's Food Systems, the last client snared by Deutsch/Dworin, to sign contracts.
Mr. Dworin didn't want to drive himself from Raleigh, N.C., to Hardee's headquarters an hour away in Rocky Mount, N.C., so he hired a limousine.
It turned out to be a conspicuous white stretch limo, a vehicle that the town is still talking about, said Jerry Gramaglia, executive vice president of marketing at Hardee's.
"We told him," said Mr. Gramaglia, "to rent a Chevrolet like everyone else."
Three out of five companies most associated with the Lillehammer Games weren't official Olympic sponsors, according to a consumer survey conducted earlier this week.
Consumers mentioned Coca-Cola Co., Reebok International, Campbell Soup, Wendy's International, and Chrysler Corp. most often when asked to name "five or six companies or products that are associated with the Olympics in any way."
Reebok, Campbell and Wendy's advertised heavily during the CBS network's broadcast, but didn't fork over as much as $40 million to be official sponsors.
Performance Research, a Newport, R.I., sports marketing research firm, surveyed 268 randomly selected U.S. households that viewed at least three nights of CBS's Olympics coverage.
The telephone survey was conducted Sunday and Monday, after the televised closing ceremonies.
Wendy's got a considerable amount of mileage from its Olympics ad campaign, according to the study.
The fast-food chain's spots, featuring founder Dave Thomas and a cameo by 1992 figure skating champion Kristi Yamaguchi, went head-to-head against commercials from McDonald's, an official Olympics sponsor.
But when asked to choose "which one was the official sponsor of the 1994 Olympic Winter Games," 57% of consumers polled named Wendy's, compared with just 37% who correctly chose McDonald's.
Visa, another official Olympic sponsor, did better in its showdown with nonsponsor American Express Co., despite sniping by both parties in their Olympics ads.
Sixty-three percent of respondents correctly named Visa as the official Olympics sponsor; 35% thought the answer was American Express.
Coca-Cola's ads were the "favorite" of 33% of consumers surveyed.
Campbell Soup came in second, picked by 8% of respondents.
Consumers were asked to name the U.S. athletes they "would most like to see as a product endorser."
Speed skaters Dan Jansen and Bonnie Blair came out on top, with 31% and 25% of the vote, respectively.
Figure skater Nancy Kerrigan came in third, with 16%, followed by skiers Tommy Moe and Picabo Street, with 14% and 8%, respectively.
Ad Notes. . . .
WARNER-LAMBERT: Executives at Young & Rubicam, New York, are bracing for the loss of about $55 million in billings from Warner-Lambert Co., which has been quietly reviewing agencies including Y&R, WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson and Saatchi & Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates in anticipation of a previously announced joint marketing venture with Wellcome PLC.
At risk are the Certs, Rolaids, Dentyne and Cinnaburst accounts.
An agency spokesman declined to comment.
Executives said an official decision is expected next week.
TBWA: Omnicom Group's TBWA said it has acquired London agency Hoare Wilkins and merged it with its London operations, TBWA Holmes Knight Ritchie.
TBWA said the new agency, known as TBWA UK, would bill more than $160 million from clients.
ACCOUNT: Chanel Inc. said it has awarded several new creative assignments for Chanel fragrance to the Arnell Group, New York.
Billings couldn't be determined.
REGAL: Infomercial producer Regal Communications, of Fort Washington, Pa., said a previously announced acquisition of Inphomation Inc., Baltimore, would be terminated by mutual agreement.
Regal had acquired Inphomation in September for cash and stock in a deal valued at $35 million at the time.
Inphomation officials couldn't be reached for comment; a Regal spokeswoman declined to elaborate.
