Of the many responses to retired Adm. Bobby Ray Inman's announced reason for declining the nomination for the post of defense secretary -- namely the existence of a McCarthyite conspiracy against him -- Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole's stands out for its succinctness.
"I think," the senator mused, "he ought to go home and get a good night's sleep."
A prime target of Adm. Inman's accusations (along with columnist William Safire), Sen. Dole had some reason for dispensing this waspish -- if also sage -- bit of advice.
Unfortunately, the propensity -- now rampant -- for representing oneself as a victim of a new McCarthyism isn't likely to be cured by anything as simple as a good night's sleep.
If Adm. Inman thinks he is the victim of a modern day McCarthyism because of some press criticism, it might be instructive to know what he thinks happened to Robert Bork and Clarence Thomas.
Still, one remedy does exist -- namely, a willingness to remember what the real McCarthyism was.
Adm. Inman is, as he notes himself, old enough to remember.
It only required being old enough to read a paper during the McCarthy era to remember what McCarthyism was -- forever.
And those who have this memory aren't inclined to throw accusations of McCarthyism around lightly.
Nor is it easy for many of them to choose which event best recalls the era -- and the "ism."
The attack on George C. Marshall?
Adm. Inman might want to study that one for a refresher on what McCarthyism actually was -- and was not.
It was not about, for example, criticism by columnists or suggestions that nominees for high office might face some grilling before being confirmed.
McCarthyism's focus was the exploitation of public fears in a dangerous postwar world in which the Soviet threat, and atomic warfare, loomed large.
On June 14, 1951, the senator from Wisconsin went before the Senate to deliver word that Secretary of State Marshall had, as a military leader in World War II, stubbornly and skillfully "always and invariably served the world policy of the Kremlin," and had (along with Dean Acheson) later "brought about step by step, by will and intention . . . a conspiracy on a scale so immense as to dwarf any previous such venture in the history of man."
The object of Marshall's conspiracy, the senator went on to explain, was that the U.S. would "finally fall victim to Soviet intrigue from within and Russian military might from without."
Sen. McCarthy's devoted adherent, candy manufacturer and John Birchite Robert H. Welch Jr., would some years later add Dwight Eisenhower to the mix of soldier-statesman traitors.
In Mr. Welch's view, proclaimed in "The Politician," Gen. Eisenhower was, throughout the war and during his presidency, "a dedicated, conscious agency of the Communist conspiracy."
He had come to this conclusion, Mr. Welch assured his audience, through "an accumulation of detailed evidence so extensive and so palpable that it seems to put this conviction beyond any reasonable doubt."
It's hardly necessary to add that McCarthyism and its adherents on the congressional committees investigating loyalty took their greatest toll on careers -- and, in some cases, lives -- of less renowned citizens than those cited above.
The stories of what happened to the hapless performers whose names appeared in, say, "Red Channels," or the teacher who had once gone to a meeting of some organization later revealed as a communist front, are too well known to require repeating.
Still, they have a way of rising up in memory whenever somebody invokes frivolous claims of McCarthyism today.
There is such a thing as a modern day McCarthyism, of course, and those of us who remember the real thing know the new kind when we see it.
McCarthyism's reincarnation is, for instance, alive and well on American college campuses -- places where, for instance, violation of the prevailing political religions can mean, for an academic, the end of any hope of professional advancement.
In the era of the blacklist, in the 1950s, loyalty specialists examined Hollywood scripts for words and ideas that constituted proof of subversion.
On campuses today, words and ideas uttered in classrooms undergo similar scrutiny for signs of sexual or racial insult.
The great difference between the campuses during the 1950s and today is that during the McCarthy period the colleges were centers of resistance to the know-nothings.
Today, they are the vital centers of a cultural police state more primitive even than the old McCarthyism.
Perhaps Adm. Inman has taken away the wrong lessons from his own experience of the McCarthy era.
There is, indeed, a slight touch of the old McCarthy flair itself in the way the admiral characterizes his critics, in the facility with which thoughts of conspiracy rear their heads, in the way witnesses to the plots against him go unnamed.
It isn't too late for the admiral and those similarly disposed to go back and get a grip on the facts of McCarthyism -- the real thing.
Ms. Rabinowitz is a Wall Street Journal editorial writer.
