Base-metal prices are booming, energized by a flood of buying by U.S. commodity funds and other speculators.
Since their low point in the autumn, price increases have been nothing short of spectacular, although metals dropped off slightly from their peaks last week.
Nickel and lead are up 42%, aluminum and tin 20%, zinc 17%, while copper gained 16%.
All of these base metals outpaced the performance of gold, which has risen 11% from its September low of $342.
"Fund managers spotted the bottom of the market late last year and in the main boosted prices," says Ted Arnold, London-based metals analyst at Merrill Lynch.
Manufacturers and other metals consumers were so conditioned by depressed prices last year that they maintained low inventories and were living "hand to mouth," Mr. Arnold says.
Thus they were taken by surprise by sudden price spurts and were obliged to pay higher prices for the metals they needed, he says.
After such impressive gains, the market is likely to be volatile in the weeks ahead, cautions William Adams, metals analyst at Rudolf Wolff & Co., a London commodity brokerage firm.
Metal prices are already meeting resistance to additional gains at current levels, he says.
Many analysts agree that the worst is over for metal producers, who weathered a stultifying funk in prices from 1990 through 1992.
Yet they doubt that there will be a quick return to the buoyant times of the past decade.
"When metal prices soared in the '80s, the rebound was prompted by sharp increases in world-wide physical demand," says Angus MacMillan, head of research at Billiton-Enthoven Metals Ltd.
"During that period the major industrialized economies recovered virtually in tandem."
Now, however, economies aren't moving at the same pace.
The U.S. economic recovery, for instance, is far ahead of the economies of Europe and the Asian-Pacific region.
Thus, "demand for metals is uneven," Mr. MacMillan says.
Metals purchases are only surging in the U.S., dealers say, while demand remains depressed in Japan and Europe.
Metal imports by China, strong in recent years, are slowing, dealers say.
That's because copper and nickel stocks have risen in China after the country's substantial purchases in the first half of last year.
Since then, economic austerity, import restrictions and currency devaluation also have crimped China's orders for base metals, dealers say.
Meanwhile, dealers are nervous about the export intentions of Russian mines, which account for much of the world's supply of industrial metals.
As a result of Russia's hyperinflation, recession and currency devaluation, Russian and other Commonwealth of Independent States metal producers must sell as much of their commodities as possible to raise money.
On the other hand, Russia's production of key metals such as nickel and copper is sliding.
So some metals merchants expect a consequent decline in exports.
Some Nervousness Metal dealers also wait nervously to see whether Russian producers and Eastern European nations will agree to stem aluminum exports this year.
An unusually high total of about 1.4 million metric tons of aluminum, or about 10% of global supplies, was exported by these countries in 1993.
Even though the price of aluminum -- which is traded as a futures contract at the London Metal Exchange -- touched a six-month high last week, metal merchants and dealers are skeptical about recent industry talks in Brussels aimed at slashing aluminum output world-wide.
Even if there were to be global output cuts, there would still be more than enough inventories to satisfy the demand for aluminum and other base metals, analysts say.
"Metals inventories are higher than at any time during the '80s and in some instances they are considerably larger," says Mr. MacMillan of Billiton-Enthoven.
He estimates that nickel's world-wide inventories amount to 22 weeks' worth of consumption, aluminum 15 weeks' and zinc and tin about 14 weeks'.
Supply-and-demand fundamentals of copper and lead are more positive, Mr. MacMillan says.
It would only take about eight weeks to consume existing stocks of these two metals, he says.
Not Magic "Regardless of speculative fervor, metals inventories cannot simply disappear like magic," Mr. MacMillan says.
Moreover, artificially high prices are discouraging many producers from cutting production, he says.
Although, as Mr. Arnold says, "the psychology of the market changed dramatically in the past two months," prices could still see periodic price tumbles, he says.
For base metals to remain in a sustained upward trend, orders must improve worldwide and be accompanied by falling output, analysts say.
Yet genuine metals consumers that see an improvement in business will buy whenever prices fall, he says.
