One morning in May 1992, Canadian journalist Walter Stewart was on his way to a court hearing in downtown Toronto when he ran across a beggar clutching a sign saying, "No job, three children."
Mr. Stewart, no Mother Teresa, just told the beggar that if he wanted to see people who had real money problems, he should follow him over to Courtroom C-1 of the Court of Ontario, General Division.
That's where the Reichmann brothers, at one time the largest private-property developers in the world, No. 4 on Fortune's list of the world's wealthiest families, with a net worth of $12.8 billion, were seeing their humongous real-estate empire carved into tiny pieces.
What could turn out to be the largest bankruptcy in the history of mankind was triggered by the collapse of the Reichmann's Canary Wharf project, a daring attempt to lift a futuristic commercial center out of the slime on an outcrop of land in the grotty East End of London.
Today, tourists can hop on a dainty little electric train in downtown London and make the 23-minute trundle over to this Ottawa-on-the-Thames.
There they can sip a cappuccino in complete privacythere are very few tenants in the skyscrapers to come out and bother them.
The rise and fall of the Reichmanns is the subject of Mr. Stewart's intelligent, and unexpectedly compassionate book "Too Big to Fail" (McClelland & Stewart, 335 pages, $23.95).
Unlike most other journalists writing about humbled tycoons, Mr. Stewart resists the impulse to gloat.
Whereas the misfortunes of such snake-oil salesmen as Donald Trump, Robert Campeau and Ross Johnson have generally been greeted with cheering by the press, Mr. Stewart does not think the fall of the Reichmanns justifies an outburst of schadenfreude.
"This is the story of how decent men, remarkable builders, outstanding citizens, screwed up," he writes.
Although Paul and Albert Reichmann, and to a lesser extent Ralph Reichmann, achieved their greatest success in North America by building such complexes as the World Financial Center in New York, their empire was founded in Europe.
The saga that would culminate in the debacle of Canary Wharf in the East End of London began in the west end of Hungary, where the three were born to Samuel Reichmann, a Jewish egg merchant who fled to France, then Morocco, as the Nazis seized control of Europe.
In 1954, Samuel dispatched his oldest son, Edward, to North America, telling him to write back when he'd found the land of milk and honey.
Edward arrived in New York in the middle of the xenophobic McCarthy era and quickly headed north for Canada.
Setting up an import-export business in Toronto, he soon sent for the rest of the family.
Edward then passes out of the story, as the three younger brothers drift into the construction business, developing a reputation for erecting attractive, well-maintained office buildings in a timely and economical fashion.
Yet, because of their orthodox religious practices, their disdain for the media, their refusal to take their companies public, and their general lack of chumminess, the Reichmanns remained a somewhat shadowy force operating outside the Canadian financial establishment for roughly a quarter-century.
Of course, there was gold in them there shadows.
Buying up real estate at bargain-basement prices during Gotham's dark recession in the mid-1970s, the Reichmanns built a war chest that enabled them to erect the awe-inspiring, yet appealing World Financial Center, along with many other complexes in North America.
They imbued these edifices with a prestige and allure far beyond their architectural merits by luring high-profile tenants such as American Express and Merrill Lynch, sweetening the pot by buying the existing headquarters of their new tenants.
They also set out on a major acquisition spree outside the real estate business, purchasing such redoubtable enterprises as Gulf Canada.
In their heyday, the Reichmanns had all the right moves: hiring away civil servants who had previously been their foes; donating vast amounts of money to worthy causes; and in the case of Canary Wharf, defusing much of the local opposition by hiring people who lived in the neighborhood to erect this cockney version of the Tower of Babel.
What brought them down?
Mr. Stewart blames ambition; others will cite greed; still others will mention the dread word "stupidity."
Canary Wharf never had any hope of succeeding unless the British government agreed to shoulder most of the cost of building a subway link connecting it with the City, but that hope vanished once the Reichmanns' champion, Margaret Thatcher, was dethroned by treasonous subordinates.
And even though the Reichmanns were given to free market blather about the rugged individualism of the entrepreneur, they depended upon huge government subsidies, and, like the debt-bloated governments they criticized, were brought low purely and simply because they borrowed too much money during a recession.
Ultimately, like everyone else, the Reichmanns blamed the media for scaring banks into thinking they could not pay their bills.
"Who steals my purse steals trash," writes Mr. Stewart.
"But he that filches from me my good name plays hell with my bond ratings and may make it impossible for me to borrow at all."
Their good name was filched.
