Multimedia technology won't just entertain; it will also sell.
But the electronic sales pitch is in its infancy.
Television home-shopping shows and late-night infomercials push shoppers' buttons with formulas that rely on hoary show-business pizazz.
QVC Inc. and Home Shopping Network Inc. have combined sales of about $3 billion, but their formats for selling cubic zirconium jewelry resemble 1950s-era TV more than the future many technologists and marketers foresee for interactive retailing: electronic malls where shoppers will be able to tap in through their televisions or personal computers to "virtual" stores, roaming the aisles and stopping to find out more about products as they wish.
Electronic retailers are bringing that future a bit closer by experimenting with new formats and technologies.
They are introducing services with some interactive capabilities.
They are trying to put video shoppers into stores, even if for now that just means moving away from static close-ups of products on pedestals in favor of boutique-like sets.
And to hold viewers' attention amid all the video clutter, they are trying to make their programming more entertaining.
Much of what's being tried is still a shot in the dark.
"No one's ever produced interactive creative work before," says Gordon Cooke, president of Time Warner Interactive Merchandising, a new unit of Time Warner Inc.
"So there is no answer yet about what works best."
But the old forms leave plenty of room for improvement in turning passive viewers into credit-card-flashing buyers.
While infomercials rang up close to $1 billion in sales last year, only one in eight succeeds in generating a steady stream of orders.
Time Warner's interactive Full Service Network will give test subscribers in Orlando, Fla., a new twist on home shopping.
By late fall, viewers will be able to browse through a menu of 20,000 products from a supermarket and 7,500 items from a drugstore.
Using hand-held remote controls, they will also be able to rotate displayed products to read directions or identify ingredients.
New hybrid formats are appearing as well.
Talk-show diva Joan Rivers weaves product pitches and gossipy gab into the most extensive home-shopping show yet to air on broadcast TV.
Other new entries are stretching the boundaries of what can be sold on the tube: Adam & Eve Shopping Channel, based in Northridge, Calif., peddles adult erotic products with soft-porn flourishes.
Some of the newest techniques will be found starting in May on Q2, the new "lifestyle" shopping channel from QVC, West Chester, Pa.
"Our look will be different from any shopping channel today," says Candice Carpenter, president of Q2.
"We won't do something that looks like a sitcom or talk show, but we will interview experts and high-profile users of products."
Q2 will try a storytelling approach, Ms. Carpenter says.
"We want to tell a story tied to the end purpose, which is the products and how people will use them."
To sell Nike sneakers, Q2 might talk about the three years of research it takes to develop an athletic shoe.
When presenting a designer's leather jacket, it might show how such garments have fit into fashion in past decades.
It will also offer multiple products within a single shopping program: five brands of mountain bikes, say, at various prices and capabilities.
When Q2 features a designer dress, it will be part of an overall look, with accessories from a variety of suppliers and sources.
One of Q2's test shows has hot New York restaurateur Pino Luongo cooking an Italian dinner, talking about the romance of Tuscan cooking and why he likes using a certain brand of cookware, which callers can order by phone.
He also makes a pitch for his own line of precooked pasta sauces.
"It isn't hawking," Ms. Carpenter says.
"It's all about having dinner."
Some of the new electronic retailers see nothing wrong with a hard sell.
Larry Ferber, executive producer of "Can We Shop Starring Joan Rivers," says that on ordinary talk shows an author might plug a book but can't urge viewers to order it on an 800 number.
"On our show, they will be able to," he says.
The Rivers show's amalgam of gossipy entertainment and pure sales is also a breakthrough of sorts.
But "selling is something Joan won't do," says Mr. Ferber.
Instead, when it's time for the pitch, Ms. Rivers pitches the show over to an assistant who handles the on-camera sell.
That leave Ms. Rivers to concentrate on drawing out the personal anecdotes and advice that daytime viewers gobble up.
"We want personal stories and information," Mr. Ferber says.
"Like what are the five easy steps for hair care."
"Can We Shop," produced by QVC, the entertainment unit of Chicago-based Tribune Co., and Regal Communications Corp., a Fort Washington, Pa., infomercial maker, does borrow subtly from store retailers.
The show's logo, the initials "CWS" in flowing script, is intended to resemble that of a high-end department store like Lord & Taylor.
The theme music evokes the pianists who greet shoppers at Nordstrom stores.
Guests enter the show's set by walking through what looks like a boutique's front door.
Through a window behind the couch where Ms. Rivers talks with guests, viewers see a shot of an upscale mall's interior.
"It's subliminal, we hope," Mr. Ferber says.
"It should say to viewers, `You are in a store with Joan.'"
As more electronic shopping services flood the airwaves and vie for viewers, the trick will be grabbing the attention of channel surfers.
For that, TV marketers are borrowing more heavily from entertainment media.
John Ripper, president and a partner in Tyee Productions Inc. of Portland, Ore., calls some of his most successful infomercials "storymercials," which he says are structured "like a three-act play" to entertain as well as sell.
As Mr. Ripper describes the formula: "Boy meets girl; boy and girl find they have to work together; and then a little twist in the third part.
It's controlled drama."
Tyee's program on the Gravity Edge fitness machine is one of this year's most frequently aired infomercials.
In it, a young motorcyclist encounters a fetching personal trainer who recommends the Gravity Edge, made by SLM International Inc. of New York.
In a clash of egos, he resists, but is eventually won over.
And the twist?
A strong hint that the two are starting a romance.
Celebrity endorsers are another staple of electronic retailing, though a risky one.
Last fall, Tyee created Revlon Inc.'s first infomercial, featuring country singer Dolly Parton and her "Dolly's Beauty Confidence" cosmetics.
The story line follows Ms. Parton as she travels on her tour bus to her Dollywood theme park.
Along the way, she composes a song, titled "Beauty Confidence."
With each verse, she reminisces about her past and how she got interested in cosmetics.
(As a child, she confides, her family was so poor that she made lipstick out of crushed berries.)
Tyee's Mr. Ripper shot the half-hour infomercial with high-grade 35-millimeter film used in movies and expensive commercials, and even added original music.
But when focus groups watched the infomercial last fall, Tyee and New York-based Revlon found they had focused too much on Ms. Parton and not enough on the cosmetics.
Mr. Ripper says he tinkered with the infomercial before its release last month, keeping the story line while also "showing more information on the product" by adding the cosmetics expert Ms. Parton worked with to develop the line.
When New York-based Time Warner introduces its interactive Full Service Network this year in Orlando, it too will rely on celebrities of a sort.
It plans to use such Warner Bros. cartoon characters as Bugs Bunny and the Tasmanian Devil to guide subscribers through various functions in an on-line Warner Bros.
Studio Store.
"We don't want the system to be flat like a catalog," says Mr. Cooke, the Time Warner Interactive Merchandising president.
"So we could dress it up and use Bugs as a sort of concierge who leads subscribers through the ordering steps."
Mr. Reilly is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.
