Prudential Securities Inc., reeling from the investigation of questionable sales practices of limited partnerships, has launched a contest that rewards brokers for accumulating assets.
Prudential's second firm-wide asset-gathering contest, A Tribute to Excellence, began Dec. 1 and ends April 29.
Through a complex points system, the 75 top-selling brokers are eligible to win a "luxurious" six-day, five-night, first-class trip for two to London and Paris.
The next 150 top brokers, can claim a four-day trip to a Colorado Springs, Colo., resort.
Points are accumulated by brokers who sell retirement plans and Command accounts, which are money-market accounts that pay fluctuating interest rates and provide check-writing privileges.
No one is suggesting Prudential is peddling questionable products, such as limited partnerships, for higher commission rates.
In fact, because the products carry less risk, some analysts see no harm in the contest.
And there is nothing improper about rewarding producers, who routinely receive trips and beefed-up commissions for pushing the product of the month.
However, with Prudential entrenched in the partnership controversy, the campaign calls into question the propriety of a contest based more on financial incentives for brokers than on suitability for clients.
"Given the adverse publicity the firm is getting, it is somewhat inappropriate to hold a contest to reward brokers for gathering assets," said First of Michigan analyst Perrin Long.
A Prudential spokesman said that, despite the timing, the firm sees nothing wrong with a campaign that encourages asset gathering.
"This is a highly favorable thing for clients," said the spokesman, William Ahearn.
"It's not a transaction-oriented contest."
As is the case in most sales contests on Wall Street, clients aren't told about the broker-incentive program.
Should Prudential have scrapped the contest given the current climate?
"If they wanted to, they could've called it off," First of Michigan's Mr. Long said.
"But obviously they didn't want to."
The Prudential Insurance Co. of America unit is the nation's fourth-largest securities firm with about 6,000 brokers.
But, with developments in the partnership scandal cropping up regularly, there is concern about its ability to retain brokers, especially if the firm cuts out financial incentives, analysts say.
Perhaps mindful of its present partnership troubles, however, the pamphlet also carries a blunt warning to brokers: "All sales efforts in the program must be in accordance and consistent with Prudential Securities' high professional standards and must be in the best interest of the client."
