Nova TV, the first commercial network in Eastern Europe, began broadcasting in the Czech republic, ending four decades of state-dominated television.
While private broadcasters operate in some former communist states in the region, including Poland and Romania, Nova is the first to win government-held rights to a nationwide frequency.
Most of the $45 million in capital for Nova, a unit of CET 21 with five owners, came from Central European Development Corp., run by a former U.S. envoy to Hungary, Mark Palmer.
The station, challenging state-subsidized Czech Television, offers a mix of Czech public-affairs shows and Western entertainment.
A Nova talk show, "Civic Judo," joins the public and journalists in questioning government figures, still an unfamiliar scenario for many Czechs four years after hard-line rule collapsed.
Nova launched its prime time with "Elementary School," a 1992 Oscar-nominated Czech hit, and "Ghostbusters."
State TV countered with "The Godfather," forbidden under Communist rule.
British Coal plans to close four more mines with 3,000 total employees.
Financial losses at each of these colleries -- one in Northumberland, three in Nottinghamshire -- have grown to as much as $1.5 million a month because of declining demand for coal.
The closures would leave British Coal with 16 operating pits.
British Coal has closed more than 30 mines over the past year in efforts to make the state-owned industry more efficient and prepare it for privatization in early 1995.
The Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia agreed to form the Central European Free Trade Zone by 1997, three years earlier than planned.
In 1992, they signed an accord to create the zone within eight years.
The four nations, with a market of 65 million people, are among the most economically advanced of the former Soviet satellites.
Creation of the trade zone also is viewed as a preliminary step to apply to join the European Union of Western industrialized countries.
Swedish opposition to membership in the European Union is decreasing, a survey published in the Dagens Industri business daily found.
Sweden's application was favored by 39% of the respondents and opposed by 30%, while 31% were uncertain.
In a coming referendum on EU membership, 53% plan to vote against it and 47% for joining; this gap of 6 percentage points shrank from 23 points in a poll two months ago and 25 points in September.
As another round of talks ended, representatives of China and Taiwan cited progress in narrowing differences.
In the Beijing talks, the two sides essentially agreed on repatriating airplane hijackers, returning illegal immigrants and resolving fishing disputes, but said details remained unsettled.
The meeting amounted to the highest-level contact since two semiofficial groups held a ground-breaking summit last April.
Taiwan has banned official contact with China since 1949, though it eased up for civilian links and indirect economic ties in the late 1980s.
The European Union's average unemployment in 1993 rose to a preliminary rate of 10.5% from 9.9% in 1992.
Eurostat, the 12-country bloc's statistics agency, estimated the number of jobless people totaled 15.8 million, an increase of 1.9 million.
Unemployment increased across the board, led by Spain, where it was up 659,000, or 24%, to 3.5 million; western Germany, up 355,000, or 26%, to 1.73 million; Italy, up 235,000, or 9.5%, to 2.7 million, and France, up 210,000, or 8.5%, to 2.7 million.
The smallest increases were in Britain, up 102,000, or 3%, to 3.1 million, and Ireland, up 9,000, also 3%, to 255,000.
A public-interest lobby in the European Union is campaigning for residents to refuse to show their passports when traveling from one member state to another.
Euro Citizen Action Service said this wouldn't amount to civil disobedience.
Rather, it blamed the EU countries that failed to honor their pledge to eliminate border controls.
The call to withhold passports followed the fourth delay under a pact to abolish controls at internal borders of nine of the 12 EU states.
Last week, when the latest deadline was missed, the citizens lobby reopened a Brussels hotline and fielded more than 100 calls in 12 hours from EU residents.
Some of the biggest gripes came from non-EU nationals who reside legally in an EU member state.
The Afghan-born wife of a German citizen complained about having to go to Stuttgart to get a visa to visit Strasbourg, even though the couple lives just a half-hour away from the French city.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Japan launched its H-II rocket, the first with all-domestic technology, putting an unmanned prototype shuttle and a satellite into orbit. . . .
The European Union set minimum prices on white fish and salmon imports through March 15 at France's request to protect fishermen who have protested low-priced supplies from abroad. . . .
The Bible or parts of it have been translated into 2,062 of the world's estimated 6,000 languages, with 44 languages added to the list last year, the United Bible Societies in London said.
