President Clinton wants crime-fighting to take a bigger bite out of the federal budget than in the past, but even his proposed 21% increase won't begin to cover the costs of the tough "three strikes and you're out" crime bill.
"It's a time bomb in the budget," said Adele Harrell, director of the program on law and behavior of the Urban Institute, a Washington-based think tank.
With public concern about crime high, Democrats and Republicans are trying to outdo the opposition with tough proposals.
The Senate already has passed a multibillion-dollar crime bill that includes a provision that would put third-time violent offenders behind bars for life.
But no one has gotten a handle on the long-term costs of incarcerations resulting from such mandatory sentences, and in fact, the federal prison system is already struggling to deal with drug offenders facing mandatory sentences that have been imposed since the mid-1980s.
Mandatory life sentences are likely to be costly and ineffective in reducing crime, Ms. Harrell said in an interview, because most violent crime is committed by the young.
According to Justice Department statistics, a study of 32 counties showed that 67% of the probationers who repeat violent crimes were under age 30.
Young prisoners, who would be behind bars long past the time when they are likely to continue, say, armed robbery, could cost some $25,000 a year for probably another 50 years.
That doesn't even consider the health-care costs that would arise for aging inmates.
"It's going to rise up like Social Security in the budget," she said, "and you'll have this enormous liability hanging out there."
Others have raised concerns about mandatory sentences.
Philip Heymann, who stepped down from his job as deputy attorney general last week, told Cable News Network yesterday that it's "politically suicidal" to oppose quick-fix anticrime measures.
The three-strikes provision would "cost vastly more than it is worth in terms of law enforcement," he added.
Asked about Mr. Heymann's criticisms, White House spokeswoman Dee Dee Myers said yesterday, "he's a private citizen; he can say what he wants."
But she added that President Clinton hopes to keep the three-strikes provision as narrow as possible "to target only repeat violent offenders."
The budget and the federal prison system are still trying to catch up with the mandatory sentencing of drug offenders.
Even before the new crime bill, the budget projects that spending on building and maintaining federal prisons will rise 68% from fiscal 1994 to $3.7 billion in fiscal 1999.
Much of that will be to house the nonviolent, first-time drug offenders who receive mandatory sentences.
Last week, the Justice Department released a study that showed that 16,316, or 21% of all federal prisoners, were doing time for "low-level" drug offenses.
This category consists of first-time offenders whose drug crime wasn't violent, or didn't involve a large quantity of illegal drugs.
Paul McNulty, head of policy at the Justice Department under President Bush, said the costs aren't as important as the crime.
Currently, there are 92 federal prisons, which may rise to 128 by the end of the decade.
"Even if it means 150 federal prisons, I don't think that's particularly frightening or troubling.
We have to have what it takes to deal with violent criminals we have."
Overall, the Clinton budget proposes anticrime spending of $18.5 billion for fiscal 1995, which will begin Oct. 1, a 21% increase from the current year.
One widely applauded part of the budget would increase state and local crime assistance to $2.8 billion from $700 million.
In the budget that put strict caps on spending, $2.4 billion of that was to come from the Crime Control Trust Fund.
The source of the trust fund money is to be savings from the cutting of federal employment.
"The big question is whether that is going to happen," Ms. Harrell said.
The 1995 budget also creates $100 million in discretionary grants for towns to finance youth projects or hire more police or take other actions to prevent crime.
But Ms. Harrell fears that distressed inner cities won't be able to write the best grants to snare the federal funds, while more-affluent areas will pursue the funds more successfully.
