The Clinton administration is proposing to give unemployed workers a cash bonus for finding new jobs, and it wants to let part-time workers collect unemployment benefits to discourage corporate layoffs.
The proposals are part of the White House's showcase job-retraining program for workers permanently cut from their jobs.
Under the plan, administration officials said yesterday, as many as 400,000 unemployed workers each year would receive two full years of federal job training and income support.
An additional 1.6 million unemployed people are expected to use some part of the system, which will include job-search assistance and career counseling.
The Clinton plan, which would be aimed largely at middle-class workers, would combine six current federal training programs, as well as the federal emergency unemployment insurance system.
The new "re-employment system" also would be available to part-time employees who have lost their jobs and to homemakers trying to return to the work force.
It isn't clear how the administration will propose to pay for the program.
Currently, the six programs receive about $1.5 billion of federal funds for job training.
In addition, Congress appropriates about $12 billion a year in emergency unemployment benefits.
Administration officials are expected to seek about $3 billion for the revamped training program.
It isn't clear whether they will request any funds to further extend emergency unemployment benefits.
Under the proposal, unemployed people would go to federal "one-stop shopping centers" no matter why they lost their jobs.
Permanently fired people would receive counseling and advice on careers that are growing, and they might be admitted to training programs.
They would receive income support while attending the training.
The Labor Department, which is developing the proposal, is adding several features drawn from state programs.
For example, entrepreneurial-minded workers would be allowed to use unemployment benefits to start businesses.
Another such wrinkle would be "reemployment bonuses," cash payouts for people who find work quickly.
In its draft report on the re-employment system, the Labor Department says that 3% to 5% of eligible unemployment-compensation recipients would get such cash bonuses.
In pilot projects, four states have paid individuals from $500 to more than $1,000 each for finding jobs before their unemployment benefits are exhausted.
As in those programs, a federal payout would be made only after a worker stays in a new job for a minimum period.
Moreover, payouts probably would be handed out at the discretion of employment counselors, agency officials said.
The administration also would pay partial unemployment benefits to individuals whose employers reduce their work hours in lieu of layoffs.
Currently, 17 states, as well as Canada and western European countries have such programs.
In Canada, for example, the program avoided 43,000 full-time layoffs in 1992, the Labor Department said.
