To underscore the horror of the Nazi era, filmmaker Steven Spielberg shot "Schindler's List" mostly in black and white and used a stark documentary style.
In Washington's new Holocaust Museum, designer Ralph Appelbaum relied on a different weapon: spectator involvement.
Mr. Appelbaum constructed a scale model of the Auschwitz death camp, replete with cross-section views of the gas chambers.
Overlooking the barracks at Auschwitz, visitors can listen to survivors describing what it was like to live there.
A bank of computer terminals allows visitors to call up stories and articles that depict the American response to the Holocaust.
At the end of the exhibit, visitors can tap into a giant database and retrieve information that isn't accessible elsewhere.
Visitors also receive the name of specific Holocaust victims and can follow their experiences in various places on display.
Allowing visitors to interact with displays through various media, these projects aim to help the spectator identify with historical events and people.
They also represent a big step for their creators.
While big companies experiment with multimedia as a new source of earnings years from now, smaller firms such as Ralph Appelbaum Associates are already earning profits in the field.
Tackling multimedia techniques has made management more complex.
But it also has helped firms win far bigger contracts than they ever enjoyed before.
Moreover, experience with the new technology gives firms a major competitive advantage against other design concerns.
Museums and profit-making corporations alike call on design boutiques such as Appelbaum Associates and Edwin Schlossberg Inc. to draw upon multimedia technology and engage audiences in futuristic ways.
The finished works meld conventional designs with complex high-tech constructions.
A few years ago, the Schlossberg and Appelbaum concerns mainly relied on routine jobs for five- and six-digit sums.
Now that the possibilities of multimedia technology have expanded rapidly, the jobs can run into several million dollars.
Mr. Schlossberg's company recently designed the public space, including a museum, for Sony Corp.'s Madison Avenue headquarters, a sprawling plaza with an estimated price tag of more than $20 million.
The concern is now working on a multimillion-dollar high-tech children's museum in Omaha, Neb.
Only two or three years ago, "we had to take on six to 10 projects a year," Mr. Schlossberg says.
Now, three to six projects bring in the same revenue, if not more, he adds.
Mr. Appelbaum's new commissions include a large Detroit exhibit that will celebrate black entrepreneurship and the achievements of Motown Records and its founder Barry Gordy.
The firm says its fee for redesigning six exhibits at New York's American Museum of Natural History, including the museum's famed dinosaurs, will be about $20 million.
"Multimedia technology has given new impetus to interactivity," says Michael Spock, vice president of public programs at Chicago's Field Museum.
With more than 8,000 museums searching for ways to attract audiences and corporations looking to get close to their customers, "there's a real market for those who are experienced in such designs," adds the official, who pioneered some of the first interactive exhibits as a curator of Boston's Children's Museum.
Creating these new exhibits means managing diversity.
Mr. Schlossberg, for example, works with a group of 45 that includes architects, industrial designers, scenic painters, historians, psychologists -- even poets.
Mr. Appelbaum's group has 55 members, with equally varied backgrounds.
"You need people from a very wide mix of training and background," Mr. Schlossberg says.
"I need people who are not like me to present five or six or even 10 ways to approach a subject," he says.
Giant multimedia design also takes research.
At the Sony project, focus groups as well as role-playing by the design teams yielded many of the questions that people wanted to have answered.
The museum project at Sony Plaza, which will open next month, aims to show how audio and visual technology has evolved over the past 50 years.
When visitors enter, a computer using digital technology will capture their faces and voices on small cards.
As they walk through the exhibit, they can use the cards to hear their voices and see their pictures as they would have been duplicated at various stages of technological development.
A black-and-white picture on a 1945 television screen comes across as grainy and blurred.
On a modern day high-definition TV screen, it is remarkably sharp and lifelike.
At the Holocaust Museum, Mr. Appelbaum faced different problems.
There already was an enormous amount of knowledge about the events surrounding the Holocaust, he explains.
And he didn't want to inundate visitors with excessive visual material.
Psychologists also warned against using graphic visuals that could disturb children.
The final design is a melange of simple objects and high-technology.
Personal items such as shoes and suitcases become remembrances of victims; an old IBM Hollerith computer, a railroad car are reminders of simple objects that become tools of oppression.
Interactive audio and video materials put visitors in close contact with the events.
"We didn't want to confront audiences with the horrible experience of murder and genocide.
That's already been done.
We needed to use the technology to make them understand why and how," says Mr. Appelbaum.
Messrs. Schlossberg and Appelbaum are winning the big multimedia contracts partly because they have honed their skills on smaller projects.
Mr. Schlossberg started his design firm in 1977, mainly concentrating on educational projects.
In 1981, he designed a farm in Massachusetts to teach humane treatment of animals.
Visitors have to wear an optical mask that enables them to see objects as sheep see them.
At Busch Gardens in Williamsburg, Va., Mr. Schlossberg rigged chairs to simulate the motion of different travel modes such as space shuttles, sea planes and dog sleds.
At the Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Mich., Mr. Schlossberg designed a 3,200 square-foot maze of tubes, pulleys, levers, wheels, ropes, cranks, pedals, valves and 5,000 balls of various colors to help visitors understand the role of teamwork in innovation.
Visitors devise strategies to sort all those balls and channel them through the maze.
The moral of the game: If they don't work together, they can't solve the problem.
