Most businesses only dream about being in a market with no competitors.
But for the biggest product line of the generic-drug maker Ivax, the dream came true for more than a year.
Now comes the rude awakening.
The shares have dived in recent days, sinking from a recent peak above 38 to yesterday's close of 25 3/4, off 5.9%, or 1 5/8, on the American Stock Exchange.
What's clobbering the stock is the same thing that used to support it, namely the prospect of price wars.
For years, generic-drug companies thrived on their fierce undercutting of brand-name drug prices -- and now the strategy is coming back to bite them.
Other generic competitors are poised to invade Ivax's previously exclusive domain of making verapamil, the generic version of the drug brand-named Calan SR, which is used to treat hypertension and angina.
First to enter Ivax's turf is Zenith Labs, a well-thought-of generic company that this month agreed to start distributing generic verapamil for Monsanto's G.D. Searle unit, the U.S. supplier of the brand-name product.
In the short run, analysts don't expect Zenith to be a fierce competitor, pricing its verapamil at about the same discount to the brand name as Ivax does.
But other, more formidable competitors are in the wings, analysts say.
And bearish investors say a price war is bound to develop.
Of course, other generic-drug makers face similar pressures as price wars have broken out throughout the industry.
But Ivax is unusually dependent on the one product; verapamil accounted for 50% to 60% of earnings in the fourth quarter, according to Jerry Treppel, an analyst with Kidder Peapody.
Price competition here will hurt its profitability and longterm growth prospects, skeptical analysts say.
Ivax's verapamil sales this year could fall $30 million or $40 million below expectations to between $160 million and $170 million, says David Saks, an analyst with Gruntal & Co.
Last year, he says, sales of verapamil totaled $146 million.
Mr. Saks has lowered his estimate of 1995 per-share earnings to $1.85 from $2.
For the current year, he is looking for $1.40 to $1.45, down from his earlier estimate of $1.55.
One competitor can obviously do a lot of damage when it comes to the price-sensitive generic drug market.
Two or three competitors can wreak havoc.
Sidmak, a closely held New Jersey generic-drug maker, is expected to receive approval from the Food and Drug Administration to make verapamil within the next six months or so, says Kidder's Mr. Treppel.
Mr. Treppel lowered his rating on a number of generic companies last week, amidst big price cuts by makers of brandname drugs.
The Kidder analyst still likes the Nasdaq Stock Market's Watson Pharmaceuticals and Zenith Labs.
He didn't downgrade Ivax and still rates it "outperform," though it isn't a "strong buy" because of its dependence on verapamil, he says.
Ivax says it's working hard to diversify.
Verapamil does account for a significant part of earnings, but "there's a little too much focus on this product and not enough on our research and development pipeline, says Andrew Zinzi, acting chief financial officer.
Other investors predict that Lederle, a unit of American Cyanamid, will receive approval within the next three months on its application to the FDA to make verapamil.
Many analysts say they haven't yet taken such possibilities into account when considering their recommendations on Ivax stock.
"We know more competition is coming, it's just a question of when," says Mr. Treppel.
Such calculations haven't escaped some big investors, however; some of them are betting against the stock in so-called short sales.
Other factors are helping to push the stock down, says Mr. Treppel, including the possible sale of Ivax stock by McGaw Inc. shareholders, who received 14 million shares of Ivax as part of Ivax's recent acquisition of McGaw, a medical supply company.
It doesn't help either when a rating agency decides your debt is junk.
Standard & Poor's recently rated Ivax's senior debt double-B-plus.
Previously, Ivax's senior debt was unrated.
No one is writing off Ivax completely.
Far from it.
Even Mr. Saks, who lowered his estimates, says the company has a "substantially bright future."
McGaw's business will be a plus to Ivax, he says.
And Ivax is one of a handful of companies to make albuterol, a generic asthma drug.
Developing a more-diversified product line will take awhile.
In the meantime, the shares of this heart-drug maker aren't for the fainthearted.
Year ended Dec. 31, 1993:
Revenue: $645.3 million
Net income: $84.7 million; $1.17 a share
Fourth quarter, Dec. 31, 1993:
Per-share earnings: 34 cents vs. 21 cents
