Since its opening a year ago, the Museum of Tolerance in West Los Angeles has attracted nearly 300,000 visitors, at $7.50 per adult head.
It has also attracted, along with predictable praise for its good intentions and ingenious technology, criticism for what some see as a trivializing "Disneyland" approach to its three central themes: racial prejudice generally; anti-Semitism specifically; and the Nazis' attempt to exterminate all the Jews of Europe.
The museum experience is designed so that one graduates from the first theme to the second to the third.
But it is clearly the third -- the Holocaust -- that dominates the visitor's time and attention, as it did the intentions of the museum's creators at the Simon Wiesenthal Center next door.
(The museum's Hebrew name is Beit Hashoah, or "House of the Holocaust.")
The carping judgments have come from critics who find the Los Angeles museum's approach vulgar and kitschy -- "bigotry souped up for the MTV generation" it was called by U.S. News and World Report.
Despite some dubious audiovisual techniques, the museum's mission should not be dismissed by such simple insults.
In the dark, stark concrete final bunker -- which inevitably suggests a gas chamber -- visitors stand, or sit on a hard slab, to see and hear individual horror stories told on eight wall-mounted monitors.
As the stories end, doors open into a welcome, wanly hopeful light.
This grim chamber has room for about 25 people, and tours of the museum are organized in groups of this size.
Rabbi Marvin Hier, the founding director of both the Simon Wiesenthal Center and its museum, believes that "forced tours" are essential if the institution is to succeed in its educational mission.
"This museum is not designed for the knowledgeable," he says, "nor for the converted."
Left to themselves, Rabbi Hier fears, visitors might wander about at will, and miss essential lessons.
As part of this inculcation, Rabbi Hier and his designers (Karl Katz and James Gardner) created displays stressing Jewish resistance to Hitler to counter the degrading image of "lambs to the slaughter" and made use of frequent citations from Nazi documents to crush the ignorant or malicious claims of the Holocaust deniers.
After each group of 25 has gathered, an attendant leads it down a spiral ramp to the bottom of the 90-foot-high central light well, which is filled with an abstract sculpture suggesting fences and gates, and studded with photographs of Auschwitz victims.
At the bottom of the ramp, visitors are led into the flashy multimedia "Tolerancenter," where the guide leaves them.
From here on, they are led by recorded voices and automatically opening doors on a timed tour organized by synchronized computers.
Each group moves peristaltically along, looking at the same displays, listening to the same recorded dialogue, the way boatloads of tourists in Disneyland are led past regularly repeating animated tableaux.
A few attempts have been made to conjure up architecturally the stages that led to the gas ovens: shabby brick walls, like those of the Warsaw ghetto; a replica of the gates of Auschwitz leading to dark tunnels marked "Able Bodied" and "Children and Others."
However unsettling, these strike me as somewhat stagey, like the entry doors labeled "Prejudiced" and "Unprejudiced" (the latter is always locked); or the mockup of a 1930s Berlin street tour groups pass through in order to see "Mein Kampf" in a bookstore window and Nazi posters on the wall, to overhear the bigoted conversations of gray mannequins who represent "typical" Berliners at a coffee house.
One way to judge the museum is to compare it with its immensely popular Washington counterpart, which opened two months later, and cost three times as much.
The visitor's primary experience of the new U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington is likely to be that of architect James I. Freed's awesome building itself, which intentionally evokes the materials, forms, and emotional weight of Nazi concentration camps.
Within its expressive spaces is an overwhelming collection of artifacts -- documents and photographs, the clothing and possessions of victims; gates, cobblestones, reconstructed barracks, a boxcar; an oven.
The Los Angeles museum depends on neither architecture nor artifacts for its impact.
From the moment you descend into the underground parking levels, you scarcely notice that there is any architecture, until you enter the ominous final room.
A small sampling of the museum's collection of Holocaust-related objects is currently on display, and will eventually be enlarged.
But more important than either the building or its collections is a series of clever refinements in "infotainment" technology, which seems quite at home in Los Angeles.
Rabbi Hier's goal was to create a permanent, persuasive, and "living" replacement for the last generation of Hitler-era survivors, now rapidly dying out.
In particular, he wanted to find a way to pass the word along to TV-trained children (who enter at a greatly reduced rate), for whom the Nazi era may seem as remote as the Jurassic.
In their eagerness to reach children with talking puppets, flashy videos, and pop icons, however, the L.A. museum designers may be undershooting some adults.
Most of the examine-your-conscience games in the "Tolerancenter," a sort of politically correct video arcade, seem to me more heavy-handed than usefully provocative.
Like many Californian visitors, I spent considerable time reliving the 1992 riots by means of videotaped footage one is permitted (at individual stations) to select, cut, mix, freeze, and judge.
A short, split-screen film on the 1960s civil rights struggle (by Orlando Bagwell, co-creator of "Eyes on the Prize") is the strongest single element of the pre-Holocaust section displays.
After that, I found myself resisting many of the oversimplified history lectures and fictional restagings of events, sometimes presented through talking shop-window dioramas.
Yet I responded with undiminished horror to eyewitness accounts and photos or films from the 1930s and '40s.
But then, as Rabbi Hier points out, his museum was not intended for over-educated, middle-aged critics like me.
The sequencing of exhibits implies a direct link between the kind of casual, offhand stereotyping ironically dramatized in the pop Tolerancenter, and the Nazis' willful slaughter of six million Jews.
I get the point.
But on the whole this seems to me a pretty wide rhetorical stretch.
I doubt that many people leave the museum vowing to avoid making offensive assumptions or generalizations about people unlike themselves, because they have been persuaded by a series of audiovisual displays that such ideas and remarks are likely to lead to mass extermination.
On the second floor of the Museum of Tolerance, after the timed tour, you are invited -- as you are in Washington -- to sit and communicate with one of 30 "interactive" computer monitors; to ask them set questions about the Nazis and the Jews, and receive in reply samples from a huge array of data stored on CD-ROM disks in the form of still and moving pictures, maps, music, texts, and statistics.
The recent earthquake left the museum unharmed, making it still possible that up to a thousand or more people a day in Los Angeles are becoming, if not necessarily less intolerant of their fellow citizens, at least less ignorant about the Holocaust than they were before.
If it takes Hollywood glitz to accomplish that, hooray for Hollywood.
Mr. Littlejohn is a novelist, critic and professor of journalism at the University of California, Berkeley.
