I want to thank Michael Totty for the considerable time and effort he spent reviewing documents, gathering information and writing the Feb. 23 article about my participation in Texas' Informant Recovery Program ("Revenge: A Whistle-Blower's Crusade").
I'd like to clarify several points.
First, the article did not mention that I am a CPA, and that I worked as a tax professional from March 1975 until my termination from Allianz of America in April 1988.
During this time, I was employed by a "Big Six" CPA firm for five years, and by an insurance holding company for 6 1/2 years.
Second, my efforts enabled the state of Texas to recover at least $7,706,929 from Allianz -- an amount the Comptroller's department said it never would have collected without my help.
Third, an Allianz spokesman said that the charges in my wrongful-termination action against the company lacked merit, and that I was fired for "nonperformance."
{Mr. Tollack alleged in state district court in Dallas that he was fired for refusing to prepare a federal income tax report he says was fraudulent.}
But that was not the reason that the trial court judge dismissed my case in 1991.
In the judge's opinion, I was not asked to sign a fraudulent return at that time.
Rather, he said, I had said in advance that I wouldn't sign such a return.
And that, the judge said, would not fit within the exception to the doctrine that allows employers to fire at will.
My appeal is now pending before the Texas Supreme Court.
Fourth, the article indicated that I was disappointed by the size of the reward check, but that is because I was disappointed with the amount recovered by the Comptroller.
I believe that the Comptroller collected far less from Allianz than Allianz would have paid if it had complied with the franchise-tax law during years it maintained its headquarters in Dallas.
Finally, I would like to complete my quote that appears toward the end of the article.
When asked about my future career aspirations, I stated that I would prefer to work to provide more affordable housing, thereby helping to improve the lives of other people, rather than save money for some big corporate taxpayer.
Hugh L. Tollack II
