The company that brought you the breakfast of champions has turned into the stock of wimps.
But now some bargain-hunters are starting to nibble at General Mills, the Minneapolis food and restaurant company that makes Wheaties, Cheerios and Hamburger Helper.
"It's a case of one of those great consumer companies that have had a slight drop in earnings momentum, and they're under the gun," says John Evans, co-manager of the Baird Blue Chip Fund.
"I think the valuation is now starting to look extremely attractive."
General Mills plunged to a new 52-week low of 53 5/8 on Wednesday, and it briefly traded at that level again Friday.
The stock closed out the week at 53 3/4, or 29% below its record high of 75 7/8 in 1992.
Like other food companies, General Mills has been bludgeoned by investors fearful that consumers will no longer pay premium prices for brand-name food products.
In addition, these food companies, with their steady earnings growth, look lackluster compared with economy-sensitive cyclical stocks, which lately have been posting explosive earnings gains.
"I think General Mills is cheaper, and that's why we bought it as opposed to other companies," says Donald Yacktman, manager of the Yacktman Fund.
Mr. Yacktman looks for high-quality companies that are cheap compared with their operating income.
"This company is No. 1 or No. 2 in everything it does, so it really is a very good company," he says.
General Mills is the country's second-largest maker of cereals, including Wheat Total, Golden Grahams, Kix and Cocoa Puffs.
It also sells Betty Crocker dessert mixes, Gold Medal flour, Yoplait yogurt and Gorton's frozen seafood products.
In addition, General Mills operates three restaurant chains -- Red Lobster, the Olive Garden and China Coast -- and it's involved in two joint ventures to sell cereals and snack foods abroad.
The company aims to use that treasure trove of assets to generate an average 12% annual growth in per-share earnings.
But recently, General Mills has fallen far short of that target.
It earned $1.92 a share in the six months ended Nov. 28, a gain of just 5% from the year-earlier period.
A big reason was a slowdown in the company's cereal business, which suffered as stores cut inventories and competing cereal companies mounted aggressive promotions.
Most large cereal makers have been boosting prices, but then turning around and rebating much of the increases through coupons and in-store promotions.
General Mills, by contrast, has decided to hold the line on its cereal prices.
So far, that strategy has allowed the company to maintain market share.
Investors in General Mills are bracing for more bad news this week, when the company releases its third-quarter earnings for the period ended Feb. 28.
The quarter's results are expected to be weak, partly because of the competition among cereal makers and partly because of the severe winter weather, which has cut down on diners at General Mills' restaurants.
"The stock looks reasonably cheap," says PaineWebber analyst Roger Spencer.
"But I'd want to wait a little here, and that's why I have it rated neutral."
Yet James Russo, an analyst with Dreyfus Corp., says he likes General Mills a lot.
He believes much of the bad news is already in the stock, including the prospect of a weak earnings report this week.
"I think the market has discounted the negatives," he says.
Mr. Russo figures that per-share earnings will grow 10% to 12% annually in the years ahead, as productivity improves and the company starts reaping profits from its new China Coast restaurant chain and from its venture to sell cereals abroad.
Mr. Russo notes that volume sales of cereal typically grow 3% to 4% a year in the U.S., and faster than that abroad.
He thinks the company's sit-down restaurants will appeal to aging, health-conscious baby boomers, who are turning away from fast food.
Today's buyer doesn't have to pay too much for General Mills' potential earnings growth.
The stock trades at less than 17 times trailing 12-month earnings, with a yield of 3.5%.
Analysts are looking for the company to earn $4.11 a share in the fiscal year ending May 1995, which puts General Mills' stock at 13 times estimated earnings.
"I believe this fiscal year, which ends in May, is pretty much shot," says Brooks O'Neil, an analyst with Piper Jaffray.
"But I think that's pretty much in the stock.
I have it rated as a buy."
