Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., hoping to end the embarrassing controversy over its questionable sales tactics, agreed to a precedent-setting $20 million settlement with more than 40 states.
Met Life, which last week hinted it would fight such a large settlement, said it reached the agreement yesterday at a meeting here of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners.
People close to the situation said the company decided to accept the settlement rather than fight the individual states in court and risk further damage to its public image.
The settlement, one of biggest ever involving an insurance company, is believed to be the first time that state insurance commissioners have agreed jointly on disclipinary action.
Formerly, states handled such matters individually.
The insurance commissioners, gathered for their quarterly meeting here, said they liked the idea of joint investigations and settlements, but were reluctant to embrace the concept for anything but illegal activity that occurred nationally.
"Problems should first be handled by regulators in the states," said Pennsylvania's commissioner, Cynthia Maleski.
The settlement resolves accusations that Met Life agents around the country misled people into buying life insurance by telling them it was a retirement account.
But insurance commissioners are concerned that deceptive marketing is widespread in the industry.
"The whole way in which life insurance is sold makes it reasonable to assume other companies have similar problems," said New York Insurance Superintendent Salvatore Curiale.
New York is already looking into the sales practices of every life insurance company in the state.
Pennsylvania announced a similar program yesterday.
Both states have asked companies to examine their customer complaints and internal audits, and come forward with any information about fradulent activities within their organizations.
New York requires that company chief executive officers sign a statement attesting to the veracity of any information they provide by the state's March 31 deadline.
Companies that are later found to have committed practices beyond what they admitted will be treated more harshly than the others.
Chief executives who fail to admit to problems "do so at their peril," Mr. Curiale said.
In addition to the $20 million fine, Met Life must also pay as much as $76 million in refunds to the 60,000 alledgedly defrauded policyholders.
The states agreed to a formula that Met Life devised as a way to determine which policyholders may have been cheated.
Met Life is responsible for contacting the policyholders and explaining the refund program.
The settlement, while large, is hardly a financial burden for Met Life.
The company, the country's second-largest life insurance company, has $8.1 billion of capital and earned $2 billion last year, up 5% from the prior year.
Still, the $20 million fine is enormous by state insurance department standards.
The biggest fine that Met Life ever paid prior to this was $225,000.
Commissioners differed on the size of the fine, but compromised in order to hasten refunds to policyholders.
Mr. Curiale noted that in 1991, the insurance industry paid total fines of only $14 million.
He worried that the Met Life fine could have a "chilling effect" on companies coming forward to admit illegal conduct, and thus spoil his investigation.
