The foundation hasn't even been laid for the much ballyhooed information superhighway, but already giant communications companies are peppering their advertising with promises of new-fangled technology.
Commercials for companies such as American Telephone & Telegraph, MCI Communications and Nynex are flooded with the overused term "information superhighway."
MCI trots out a beguiling 11-year-old to tease the audience with dazzling technological possibilities, while Nynex has hired former network anchor and correspondent Mary Alice Williams to guide its customers and "keep them posted on developments."
Next week, Bell Atlantic will weigh in with a new campaign that's more grounded in reality.
In new ads scheduled to begin airing Monday, Bell Atlantic will discuss what services it can provide to its 14 million customers in seven states now.
It is the first corporate ad campaign from Bell Atlantic in four years.
In one spot, a Bell Atlantic employee says, "We're networking business computers to home computers, so people can tele-commute."
Another says: "We've already set up distance teaming networks -- where one teacher can teach students in different locations at the same time.
It's an amazing thing."
"One of the intents of this campaign is not to deal with applications that aren't real and aren't happening right now," says Rich O'Leary, senior vice president at Omnicom Group's J. Walter Thompson, Bell Atlantic's ad agency.
"We're not selling the future.
That's not right.
We want to communicate the type of change the company is currently going through."
That is why the ads don't mention, or hint at, the planned alliance with Tele-Communications, announced in October, in which the companies said they would spend $15 billion in the next five years toward construction of the information superhighway.
"That would be premature," says Mr. O'Leary.
The commercials are part of an aggressive campaign with several objectives, including informing customers that Bell Atlantic's seven companies will all be known as Bell Atlantic as of Monday.
In one commercial, an employee painting a new sign says, "I heard we were changing our name, but I didn't realize I'd be the one to actually do it."
"We can break through the clutter with a single brand name," says Lisa Sherman, assistant vice president of advertising and promotion at Bell Atlantic.
"A single brand name makes our customers understand the vision and range of our services."
The Bell Atlantic spots are in sharp contrast to the much talked-about ads from rival MCI, which are, at best, arresting and beautifully filmed.
At worst, they are confusing.
Then again, the MCI commercials aren't selling specific products, but rather, the future.
The four spots from Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer feature Anna Paquin, the 11-year-old New Zealand actress who co-starred in the film, "The Piano."
Wearing a floppy hat and Laura Ashley-type clothes, Ms. Paquin says: "There will be a road.
It will not connect two points.
It will connect all points.
Its speed limit will be the speed of light.
It will not go from here to there.
There will be no there there.
We will all only be here."
Then, a slide pops up against a black background with the logo: "networkMCI."
"This is an introduction to the strategic vision of MCI," says Angela Dunlap, president of MCI consumer markets.
"We're talking about shaping the future and not having the future shape us."
Ms. Dunlap says the ads don't include an 800-telephone number, "which is a departure from our other advertising.
As the campaign unfolds, you will see how you will be able to take advantage of the services and vision from MCI.
We're branding the vision."
To be sure, the ads break through the clutter.
It is unusual for a young girl to address the audience on a complex subject.
Moreover, the New Zealand accent sets her apart, as do the settings, which include a seashore and a Utah salt flat.
Ms. Dunlap says the commercials received an "overwhelming response from consumers and business customers," virtually all favorable.
She likens the spots to the information superhighway itself: "The more you see it, the more you understand it."
Some marketing experts don't like what they see, however.
John Lister, chief executive officer of Lister Bulter, a New York brand identity consulting firm, says that when he first saw the MCI commercials, he thought the series was an "aberration, because MCI ads are so focused.
The connection to the brand in these commercials is highly ambiguous.
The execution is puzzling, even though it breaks through the clutter."
Mr. Lister says the ads "miss the mark" because, "It is somewhat difficult to make a meaningful connection between what is said and what the brand is."
Hal Ross, president of Mapes & Ross, a communications research company in Princeton, N.J., says that although the MCI ads are different, people don't remember them.
People in the ad business pay a lot of attention to ads like these, but the poor consumer isn't sure what they're for."
Mr. Ross hasn't conducted research on the MCI ads.
Nynex is using advertising to inform its customers in six states (as well as two towns in Connecticut) that it is changing its name from New York Telephone and New England Telephone to Nynex.
Other ads, featuring Ms. Williams at the wheel of a freshly painted white Nynex van, show the former reporter expounding on what is yet to come.
Sometimes it is done humorously.
One ad has Ms. Williams speaking over footage showing a chaotic house: "The TV is on, the kids are playing a computer game, the phone is ringing, and someone is beeping.
There's likely enough noise in your household right now to make the prospect of an information superhighway put you on overload."
The ad's objective is to inform consumers that Nynex will make their lives simpler.
Bell Atlantic's ads go farther, showing how the improved technology will benefit customers.
"We're being attacked on all fronts," says Ms. Sherman from Bell Atlantic.
"We need to get across that we're the leader in terms of advancing the information superhighway."
DHL Corp., the express air-freight company, fired the San Francisco office of Ketchum Advertising and moved its account to Omnicom Group's Goodby, Berlin & Silverstein after a quiet review of at least three other agencies, industry executives said.
Officials at DHL, based in Redwood City, Calif., didn't return calls seeking comment.
DHL spent $13 million on advertising in 1992, according to Competitive Media Reporting, and $6 million in the first 10 months of 1993.
Other Bay Area agencies believed to have pitched the account include Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley, Hoffman/Lewis and Katsin/Loeb.
J. WALTER THOMPSON, an advertising agency based in New York, is owned by WPP Group.
Yesterday's advertising column incorrectly said it is owned by Omnicom Group.
(WSJ Jan. 21, 1994)
KETCHUM ADVERTISING's San Francisco office resigned in November from DHL Corp.'s advertising account.
Thursday's Advertising column incorrectly stated that Ketchum had been fired from the business.
(WSJ Jan. 26, 1994)
