Hong Kong billionaire Li Ka-shing agreed to acquire the 51% interest he doesn't already own in a troubled New York office tower from Olympia & York Developments Ltd.'s U.S. subsidiary.
The move advances the $5 billion financial restructuring of Olympia & York Cos.
(U.S.A.). It also strengthens Mr. Li's position in what some observers expect will eventually become a battle for ownership control of the real-estate company.
Various parties, including investor Leon Black and some big international banks, also have stakes in the restructuring.
But the maneuvering is somewhat preliminary and there haven't been any overt moves to gain control of the company.
The sale of the building at 60 Broad Street in lower Manhattan, for an estimated $20 million, doesn't bring any cash to O&Y (U.S.A.).
Instead, the transaction cancels part of the $55 million mortgage on the building, which is held by Mr. Li.
The deal also removes what had been a cash drain on O&Y (U.S.A.)'s limited financial resources as it attempts to restructure its $5 billion of debt without resorting to a bankruptcy-law filing.
O&Y (U.S.A.) is "continuing to do business and move the restructuring forward by shedding unprofitable buildings," a person familiar with the reorganization plan said.
The balance of Mr. Li's loan, about $35 million, will remain as an unsecured claim against O&Y (U.S.A.), people knowledgeable about the transaction said.
In a debt workout situation, unsecured creditors typically are given the option to exchange their holdings for equity positions in the company.
The people familiar with the deal said Mr. Li has signed a standstill agreement that prevents him from forcing the company into a Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law filing.
O&Y (U.S.A.) is a subsidiary of Toronto-based Olympia & York Developments, the giant property developer that reorganized under Canadian bankruptcy law last year and is now effectively controlled by its creditors, mostly Canadian banks.
The U.S. unit wasn't part of its parent's bankruptcy filing.
The sale of the building to Mr. Li, which could be announced as early as today, comes amid preliminary maneuvers by various parties that could eventually escalate into an ownership battle for O&Y (U.S.A.).
The focus of attention currently is on a key piece of debt that is secured by junior claims on some of O&Y (U.S.A.)'s best properties, including New York's World Financial Center.
The debt also could be converted into an equity stake in the entire company.
An investment fund run by Mr. Black has offered to buy the $140 million of debt, which is owned by a group of banks led by J.P. Morgan & Co.
Mr. Li and the pension fund of General Motors Corp. also are said to be considering making a bid for the debt.
And several big creditors to O&Y (U.S.A.)'s Canadian parent, including Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce and HongKong Shanghai Banking Corp., a unit of HSBC Holdings PLC, are understood to be interested in acquiring the debt.
"There's always a competition for a more solid position among unsecured creditors," a banker said.
J.P. Morgan reiterated an earlier comment that it continues to examine various alternatives to maximize the value of the debt.
Other parties didn't respond to requests for comment.
With the purchase of 60 Broad Street, Mr. Li, through his Dragon Holdings Ltd., inherits a building that was left two-thirds empty after Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. filed for bankruptcy-law protection in 1990.
Negotiations currently are under way to renew the lease of the current main tenant, Kidder Peabody, which expires at the end of this year.
