For 200 years, the family of O. Henrik Braastad has raised oats and barley on a rolling farm here on the stark banks of Lake Mjosa.
This week the crops suddenly look a little different.
A sheaf of satellite dishes and two-kilowatt spotlights sprouts from the old wooden eaves.
The back of the barn is piled high with bales of flashing electronic boxes.
And around the corner, below the Braastads' old rooster weathervane, here come the perky hosts of "CBS This Morning," Harry Smith and Paula Zahn.
"Blah blah blah blah Bosnia, live music, this angel thing," says Mr. Smith cheerily.
"Harry and Paula, take a leisurely stroll!" yells a rehearsal director.
They stroll.
On cue, a young skier glides by.
Fluffy snow wafts down on an old clock tower and a little wooden sleigh.
Inside the barn a crowd of technicians happily watches the scene on a wall of monitors.
CBS has stormed into the little Braastad farm and spent a fortune transforming it into the quaintest, most authentic postcard in all of Norway.
CBS engineers blasted a hole in the back of the barn to capture a sweeping vista of Lillehammer.
They filled the back porch with pretty wooden chairs and farm implements, some found in Mr. Braastad's basement and others constructed by CBS's prop designers.
They also created what must certainly be the only barn in the Gudbrandsdal valley with an official "green room," with comfy chairs for offstage talk-show guests, big mirrors hanging from the ancient stone walls, and a table piled with TV makeup.
The world will see the highly telegenic fruits of all these labors during CBS's morning broadcasts from the Olympics, beginning today.
CBS was zinged by critics during its 1992 Winter Olympics broadcast for building a bland interior studio that took no advantage of the majestic Alps surrounding Albertville.
"A dentist's waiting room," scoffed the New York Times.
CBS vowed not to make that mistake in Lillehammer.
"When you turn on the TV, you'll see Harry and Paula and say, `There they are at the Olympics!'" says CBS This Morning producer Ted Savaglio.
"I have this fantasy that they'll open up the first day arriving at the farm on a sleigh."
The Tiffany Network's venture into Nordic agronomy began two years ago, when its director of Olympics operations got lost on a back road in Lillehammer.
The director, Barry Zegel, found himself on a graceful embankment with a stately pink gingerbread house, a clock tower, some traditional wooden farm buildings, and a spectacular view of Lillehammer across the lake.
Mr. Zegel smelled TV heaven, and took a "CBS This Morning" producer back to take a look.
"We just drove in, not knowing if they were going to shoot at us," he says.
From a farmhouse window, the shutters flew open and a head poked out, shouting in Norwegian.
The CBS duo shouted back.
The man in the window summoned his English and told them to come back in the afternoon.
When they returned, Mr. Braastad greeted them at the door and showed them to a cozy dining room laid out for tea.
His daughters, Henriette and Johanne, paraded in with a tray of fresh-baked waffles and preserves.
"It was kind of like out of a B-movie," Mr. Zegel says.
Mr. Zegel returned soon afterward, impatient to talk business.
It went very slowly.
"It would take two hours to get through with the waffles," he says.
He came back more than 20 times.
Mr. Braastad, an earnest, bearded man with Ben Franklin glasses, took an intense interest in every contractual detail.
The farmer and the broadcaster became friends.
Mr. Zegel found out that when Mr. Braastad isn't tending the oats and barley, he runs a business consultancy specializing in the economics of industrial technology.
Mr. Braastad invited Mr. Zegel over for a gala Christmas feast with reindeer, lutefisk, aquavit and Norwegian carols.
"Barry and I have learned quite a lot about each other and U.S. broadcasting and Norwegian daily life during this co-operation," Mr. Braastad says.
During the last weekend of preparations, the boundary between U.S. broadcasting and Norwegian daily life is getting blurry.
Cameramen and producers with headsets are tramping past Mr. Braastad's tractor.
A quintet of young fiddlers and mouth harpists in folk costume are playing down by the barn, with a lad in black leggings doing traditional Norwegian break-dancing beside a lass holding a black hat on a stick.
"I want that kick to happen at the beginning!" shouts director Jeff Kaye.
"I am going like this?" asks the dancer, Mads Bohle.
He deftly kicks the hat off the stick and maneuvers to catch it on his head.
"Great, great, wait for your cue from Nancy!"
Later this week an encampment of indigenous Norwegian Sami people is expected to appear on the frozen lake, with reindeer.
Look for CBS weatherman Mark McEwen close on their trail.
"I'm sure he'll spend a day with the reindeer.
He looks for that kind of thing," says Mr. Savaglio.
"It's good TV and it'll provide us with with a look that'll say: `Winter Olympics.
