Asia's insatiable demand for electricity will spur the region to place more than 45% of all global orders for power-generation equipment over the next 10 years, according to a General Electric Co. forecast.
Industrialization, rural electrification and simply the "consumerism of a growing middle class" are among the reasons why Asia is right now "the world's hottest market" for such equipment, said Delbert Williamson, president of GE's Asian industrial and power-systems unit.
He predicted that the region will order more than 460 gigawatts of electric power in 10 years -- or more than what the U.S., Canada and many other Western countries combined will put on order.
Mr. Williamson presented his forecast at a Washington conference earlier this week on power requirements in the Asian-Pacific region.
He said the forecast is based on GE's analysis of various national and regional energy plans, fuel availability and price projections and other factors.
Gas and steam turbines, nuclear reactors and cogeneration plants are among the kinds of equipment that GE refers to.
GE is essentially forecasting a continuation of an already evident buying trend.
The region ordered 172 gigawatts of power in the five-year period between 1988 to 1992.
In the next five years, Asia will order 222 gigawatts more, and another 238 gigawatts in 1998-2002, the forecast says.
A gigawatt is a thousand megawatts.
By way of comparison, a 1,900 megawatt plant can generate enough power to supply the needs of Detroit, or any other modern city with a population of 1.3 million.
Two developing countries -- China and India -- will account for just about half of those regional orders, the Hong Kong-based GE unit said.
"Unquestionably, the biggest opportunity is China, which alone will account for more than 170 gigawatts of new orders, as their economy grows by leaps and bounds over the course of the next 10 years," Mr. Williamson said.
While China can eventually supply some of its own equipment, it will have to depend on imported technology in the short term.
GE expects China to seek foreign suppliers for as much as three to five gigawatts of new capacity each year.
Beijing is giving the provinces more authority to plan for and build new power capacity, but financing is still a major hitch, Mr. Williamson said.
"For example, Guangdong will need billions of dollars to cover the next five power projects, and must obtain export credits to cover this amount," he said.
Much of this credit has to come from "non-Chinese institutions," he added.
India can order as much as 60 gigawatts of power over the same period to cope with a still-growing population and serious power shortfalls, the GE unit said.
Financing is also a problem, but GE is encouraged by New Delhi's latest moves to invite foreign investors and independent power producers into the country.
GE regards Japan, South Korea and Taiwan as maturing power-equipment markets, but it still expects as much as 75 gigawatts of new Japanese orders in the next 10 years.
Some orders will be for nuclear power and combined-cycle plants, which generate additional power by using exhaust gases to drive a generator.
GE expects Indonesia's power demand to increase by 15% a year, or more than twice its economic-growth rate.
Private power again may be the winning formula, Mr. Williamson said.
Jakarta is pushing the private sector to supply 40% to 50% of the country's additional needs, he added.
GE doesn't provide estimates of the value of these Asian orders, but another firm, Gas Ventures Advisors Inc., expects China alone to spend $227 billion for power projects over the 1992-2000 period.
Gas Ventures also projects $126 billion in expenditures for India over the same period.
The firm in Boston presented these estimates at the Washington conference.
GE's Industrial and Power Systems division is itself a major supplier of this equipment.
It competes in the Asian market with a number of Japanese and European suppliers.
