With their plays for profit in rental car companies fizzling, Detroit's Big Three auto makers are finding that getting money out of rent-a-car concerns is a lot harder than putting it in.
In the late 1980s, the Big Three snapped up stakes in rental car companies, hoping to lock in high-volume customers whose orders would keep factories running during times of slack consumer demand.
Now, however, the consumer market is back, while the rental car business is stuck in park.
General Motors Corp. is shopping its National Car Rental unit on Wall Street, according to investment bankers.
Chrysler Corp. says it will consider offers for its car rental operations, but has no plans to sell them.
Only Ford Motor Co. is increasing its presence in the business, raising its stake in Hertz Corp. and proclaiming its commitment to the business.
But the poor profit outlook in the rental car industry has led analysts to question whether Detroit will ever recover the billions it invested in the rental car industry during the past seven years.
The auto makers pumped huge numbers of cars through the daily rental fleets from 1987 to 1992.
The result was dirt-cheap rental prices and a huge supply of late-model used cars that wreaked havoc with new car sales and pricing during the last recession.
Now, the recession's over.
But the explosion in business travel that fueled rental car industry growth during the past decade has slowed.
And a lot of the smaller rental car firms are going out of business or being merged into bigger companies.
Detroit's rental car investments also have fallen.
GM and Chrysler acknowledge they've posted losses in their rental car operations, though neither company will say how much.
Hertz has remained profitable but Ford is hardly unscathed.
In addition to its equity stake in Hertz, Ford invested "several hundred million dollars" to prop up Budget Rent-A-Car in the late 1980s, says David McCammon, Ford's vice president of finance.
The irony is that Detroit has itself to blame for much of the rental industry's current woes.
Before the late 1980s, rental car companies used to purchase cars, hold them nine to 14 months, and then sell them at their own used car lots.
But to spur more sales to the daily rental fleet, the Big Three during the late 1980s began buying back cars from the rental companies after just four months.
On top of that, car makers began giving rental companies cash rebates as high as $1,400 a car.
The terms offered by Detroit were so favorable that rental car companies began making money by buying cars and selling them back to the manufacturer rather than by renting them.
As a result, for example, a subcompact car could be rented for as little as $65 a week in Los Angeles in 1991.
It was, of course, too good to last.
The Big Three, led by GM President John F. Smith Jr., pulled the plug on the money-losing rental car deals.
Beginning in 1992, the Big Three began to sharply reduce the flow of cars to rental fleets.
They slashed the cash rebates for rental cars and started requiring that rental companies keep cars for six months instead of four.
In all, the auto makers jacked up prices charged to the rental companies by 60%, industry executives say.
That's been good for the Big Three, but hard on their rental car partners.
The rental companies have raised their rental prices in response, but market pressures have forced them to retreat from price hikes in the past.
While rates for leisure use have soared, corporate rates, which are often negotiated privately, have barely budged for the past two years.
Last week, Hertz raised its daily rental prices between 7% and 15% in response to yet another increase in car prices from Detroit.
Other rental car companies have already followed suit, and the industry is hoping that price increases will stick this time.
But industry analysts are skeptical.
"It's just not a particularly desirable business," says auto analyst Maryann Keller of Furman Selz Inc.
Consider GM's National Car Rental Systems unit, which was posting huge losses two years ago, resulting in GM taking a $744 million after-tax writeoff of its investment in 1992.
A year ago, GM hired a turnaround expert to run National Car Rental and the unit is now showing an operating profit, although GM refuses to say how much.
If the new round of price increases sticks, National Car Rental would be a solidly profitable company, according to Larry Ramaekers, National Car Rental's chief turnaround officer.
And he believes they will stick.
Others aren't so sure.
Chrysler has yet to see significant price increases in the competitive Florida market, says Joseph Cappy, head of Chrysler's rental car operations.
Subcompact cars in Florida are still renting for as little as $19 a day.
Mr. Cappy has no doubt rental rates will eventually rise because of market forces, but isn't sure how long that will take.
"Prices have to change," laments Mr. Cappy.
"They aren't anywhere near where they should be."
Until that changes, both Chrysler and GM are likely to have trouble selling their rental car businesses, analysts say.
While Mr. Cappy says Chrysler has no plans to sell its Thrifty, Dollar and Snappy rental units, Chrysler executives say privately they would sell if they could find a buyer.
Ford, meanwhile, is headed in the other direction.
It's in the process of increasing its 49% equity stake in Hertz to 54%.
Likewise, Ford has no plan to reduce its investment in Budget, Mr. McCammon, the Ford executive, says.
Hertz, which earned $53 million last year, has remained profitable and the same is believed true of employee-owned Avis Rent-A-Car and closely held Alamo Rent A Car.
But National and Budget are much shakier, industry observers say.
The picture is cloudy since most of the companies, including National and Budget, don't report financial results publicly.
Both Hertz and Budget rent about 70% of their cars from Ford and Mr. McCammon says Ford wants to continue its current relationship with both companies.
Indeed, Detroit isn't quitting rental fleet sales cold turkey.
This year, the industry will run about 1,150,000 cars through daily rental fleets.
That's down from a peak of 1,550,000 in 1991, according to Auto Rental News, a trade magazine.
But it's still enough to keep five assembly plants working full-time for a year.
And long term, analysts say, the car rental business may once again produce respectable returns.
"They should be OK," says analyst John Casesa of Wertheim, Schroder & Co., "as long as what happened in the late 1980s doesn't happen again, that the auto companies don't get stuck with a lot of excess capacity and destroy prices in the rental business."
