Here's a modest proposal: Drop ice dancing from the Olympics.
TV coverage of the Lillehammer event made it apparent that no one knows what's good and what's bad ice dancing.
CBS's Verne Lundquist and Tracy Wilson can't explain.
We dutifully watched all the ice dancing from Lillehammer and, as Ms. Wilson explained it to us during our viewing ordeal, the judges look for clever footwork, teamwork, close bodies and sensuality.
To explain why judges favored two Russian couples over the clearly superior Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean, she said that the British pair must have violated the rules by doing too many acrobatic lifts.
Others remarked on what a sexy outfit Oksana Gritschuk, the winning woman, wore.
So, it would seem the winners won by being sexy, the losers lost by being athletic.
That sounds like a definition of a nonsport.
Let's leave it to the Ice Capades.
Mark Phillips on Monday night did the most entertaining of the endless taped feature stories with which CBS is filling its Olympic broadcast time.
In the 1980s, figure skaters took to feigning death by falling to the ice (Ms. Torvill and Mr. Dean started it all with the finale of their Bolero routine).
Funny tapes of ice deaths were shown in rapid succession.
A sober figure-skating official explained that death had been banned from the rink because "If you're lying on the ice, you're not ice skating."
Brian Boitano was asked how he felt about the prohibition and said: "It kills me."
Mr. Phillips pointed out that figure-skating authorities had outlawed only death, not grievous bodily harm.
CBS's Monday night coverage drew 27.8% of the nation's 94.2 million TV homes, according to A.C. Nielsen Co. figures.
That was 28% higher than the second Monday of the 1992 Games in Albertville.
The shell-shocked competition now faces women's figure skating and some are throwing in the towel.
One rival network projects that CBS could draw 34% of the TV homes tonight, making counterprogramming futile.
With the Olympics continuing to clobber other networks, CBS is the battleground of the moment for commercial advertisers.
American Express has ambushed Olympic sponsor Visa vigorously ("If you go to Norway, you'll need a passport, but you don't need a Visa"), but the corporate sneering contest has no clear victor.
Coca-Cola Co. and VF Corp., on the other hand, have some ads that are winners, especially Coke's slo-mo bobsledders and Lee's women's aerobic squad trying to get into bluejeans that are too tight.
IBM has bought a lot of air time to tell the world how its computers were used to design the U.S. team's bobsleds, but in the two-man competition, Americans finished 13th and 14th.
Will Brian Shimer drive the U.S. to a gold with IBM's sled Sunday?
Or will a runner fall off?
What Do Critics Want?
Strange to say, some TV critics, like the New York Times's star-struck Richard Sandomir (Connie Chung calls him "Richard," he reports), are wondering why Greg Gumbel, the prime-time host, is so seldom seen and so blather-free.
We figure they must want to see him make himself tedious and foolish like some of his less-sensible CBS colleagues.
Mr. Gumbel isn't falling for it, though.
He remains to-the-point and, occasionally, amusing.
Monday night he told us that Norwegians are ribbing their Swedish neighbors and rivals for Sweden's relative lack of medals by passing out maps in Lillehammer that show Scandinavia with Sweden missing.
Then he quickly got off-camera.
