Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen has been in Beijing in advance of a showdown between China and the U.S. on the issue of human rights.
Congress must vote every June on whether to renew China's most-favored-nation trading status.
Under the terms of the executive order President Clinton issued last May, China must make "significant progress" on human rights, political freedom and the humane treatment of prisoners in order for the secretary of state to recommend renewal of MFN.
There can be little question that China has made no such progress.
The few political prisoners it has released in the past year have tended to have just short periods left to serve, and they were set free just before important events.
Last week, Tibetan activists Gendun Rinchen and Lobsang Yonten were released in advance of Mr. Bentsen's arrival.
Such cynical gestures serve as grim reminders of the many political prisoners who remain in Chinese jails, and of the fact that political dissent will not be tolerated in China.
Indeed, just a few days before the two Tibetans were released, China sentenced 12 Tibetan nuns to up to seven years in prison for trying to organize a pro-independence rally.
How, then, can the U.S. best prod China into treating its own citizens with greater respect and civility?
The answer, in our view, lies not in restricting trade, which hurts the very people the U.S. wants to help.
The Chinese who will suffer from diminished trading opportunities with the U.S. are the private citizens who have severed ties with government and are risking everything in the private sector, where they are making goods that Americans want to buy.
Millions of individuals are striking out on their own in China today, and as they do so, they are expanding the boundaries of personal liberty.
Trade ought to be recognized as an essential element in encouraging these trends.
Moreover, U.S. companies that are trying to crack the Chinese market will lose important business opportunities.
American consumers also will end up paying higher prices for Chinese-made goods.
There is the danger that the real motive for MFN pressure is protectionism.
Witness Congressman Richard Gephardt in Beijing last weekend carrying on about "market access," a phrase many Asians have come to interpret as just another code word for protectionism.
There is a role for human rights in U.S. policy toward China, but there are far more effective methods than trade restrictions for bringing China into the international community of civilized nations.
One is to limit lending by the multinational lending agencies such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the Asian Development Bank.
The huge sums lent by these organizations end up in the hands of the central government in Beijing, enhancing the power of the officials, who dole it out to politically correct cronies.
The U.S. could use its leverage at all of these institutions to express its displeasure with the Chinese government by withholding funds.
This is not a popular notion, to be sure, but surely it isn't too outrageous to note that a country that is lagging behind in this area is less deserving of international aid than other countries that are making progress.
Another way for the U.S. to express its displeasure with those who make policy in Beijing would be to acknowledge publicly another Chinese society that is well on its way to full democracy -- Taiwan.
Sending observers to this month's elections, pressing for Taiwan's entry into the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the United Nations, inviting President Lee Teng-hui to the White House -- such symbolic actions would help Taiwan's incipient democracy and weaken the prestige of Beijing's totalitarian government.
The message that Mr. Bentsen is carrying to Beijing is that the Clinton Administration is serious about seeking an improvement in China's human-rights performance.
This is the same message that former President Bush is said to have delivered in his private visit to China over the weekend.
And it is the same message that U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher will carry when he meets Chinese Foreign Secretary Qian Qichen on Monday in Paris.
We support the message but wish the U.S. would find a more economically constructive way of backing it up.
