"January," the calendar over my computer says, and at the top, in green ink, "women?"
This penned question to myself represents the tiny byproduct of a debate raging in magazines and opinion pages like this one.
Late last year the New Republic, itself no bastion of towering females, published a cover story by writer Naomi Wolf arguing that men alone control the world of opinion making.
Ms. Wolf's argument relied on a study that showed women write a mere 10% to 20% of op-ed articles.
The group that produced the study, Women, Men & Media, was rumored to be planning another, this time for January.
So the question here was, should we make an effort this month to lard our page with women writers?
"No" is the short answer.
The main reason, of course, is that op-ed pages, or magazines, aren't affirmative-action score cards.
When an article comes into a paper, editors, men and women, ask questions about it.
Is the article timely?
Is it well written?
On a page like ours, which stands for individual liberty, we may ask: "What does this say about free markets?"
Rarely is our question: "Is this by a woman?"
What else is weird about this discussion?
Well, first of all, its terms are wrong.
Ms. Wolf writes that "the agora of opinion is largely a men's club."
Yet a number of women are regulars in what Ms. Wolf has called the "white boy rolodex."
One is columnist Mona Charen.
Another is Loretta McLoughlin, until recently editorial page editor of the Boston Globe.
Anne Applebaum is foreign editor of Britain's most influential opinion magazine, the Spectator.
Two Washington voices are Nina Totenberg and Cokie Roberts.
Meg Greenfield runs the Washington Post's editorial page.
The Journal's editorial page prints a slightly greater share of articles submitted by women than by men.
The assistant editor here is Melanie Kirkpatrick; Dorothy Rabinowitz and Manuela Hoelterhoff also write.
Why then those percentages?
One reason is that age -- thank heaven -- still has some authority, and many older women unfortunately didn't get the experience that yields a pundit.
Another is one that might fit in with Ms. Wolf's argument, although not as she means it to: Women are civilizers.
They click the remote control past the screamers on "Crossfire" because they find them undignified.
The op-ed game, although it takes place in the tamer print world, can also be brutal.
Not everyone longs to scramble like a pit bull with his (or her) fellow opinion makers over a piece of week-old meat.
"Unfortunately," says Ms. Wolf, "you can't write strong, assertive prose if you are too anxious about preserving consensus."
Here we get to the nub of the problem: whose consensus?
The consensus, of course, of second-generation feminists like Ms. Wolf.
Yet this is a coterie, a small group who are the recent product of humanities departments of fancy universities.
Ms. Wolf and I attended the same college in the same years, so here I can speak with authority.
The sad fact about these women is that their consensus is not always interesting.
What, exactly, does this narrow group write about?
They write about sex, about their weight, about themselves as victims ("passive but institutionalized discrimination," in Ms. Wolf's words).
They do so because that is what that limited consensus tells them is their issue.
Pre-childbearing womanhood per se is not however the number-one issue for a large group, a group including all ages and both sexes.
For those people we do print articles, articles that indeed occasionally have female authors, on health care (Elizabeth McCaughey), on North Korea's bomb (Heather Wilson), on juvenile delinquents with shotguns (Rita Kramer).
Wolf-style revolutionary zeal spits on such women's accomplishments, for it views them as trapped in a cultural cage dominated by men.
"Never mind GATT, or foreign policy doctrines, or property prices, or whatever else journalists who happen to be women concern themselves with," writes a wry Anne Applebaum in a response to Ms. Wolf.
"We could all call ourselves feminists -- one seems to need no credentials -- and then earn lots of money."
The most concrete damage of work like Ms. Wolf's is the quota-ization of newspapers.
Groups like Women, Men & Media quantify references to women in papers and female bylines, and then use those figures to threaten.
The result is lower quality.
One op-ed editor from another newspaper told me that he got a watchdog call from a colleague warning the page had too few female bylines.
The page instantly instituted a 33% quota.
"Being surveilled is unpleasant," he said.
Worse though is "that the content doesn't matter at all -- but simply the gender of the byline."
Less direct, but as painful, is the disservice new revolutionary feminists do to the older women who went before us.
These were the real pioneers, women who fought palpable injustice in the days when a woman's place really was wiping grinds at the coffee machine.
Ms. Wolf disdains Jeane Kirkpatrick, whose battle at the U.N. against sexist communists and Third World jerks helped end the Cold War.
The ambassador's crime?
Writing in an objective "no uterus" style that is "uninflected by the experience of the female body."
The unhappy consequence of attacks on "no uterus" writing is a new ghetto-ization.
Thus the old "sexist" New York Times editorial page featured foreign affairs writer Flora Lewis; the new "sensitive" Times gives us Anna Quindlen, a doyenne of maternal prose by Ms. Wolf's own description.
Is this progress?
The truth though is that newspapers will print "no uterus" articles all the time, because they contain facts, because they excite, because they are not musingly solipsistic.
Well, rattle the bars on your cage, Naomi might say.
Well, I might respond, rattle the bars on yours.
Miss Shlaes, the Journal's op-ed editor, hopes this article will fill some "women" quotas.
