How do you set about righting the problems at Euro Disney, the troubled resort outside Paris that is losing $1 million a day?
Start by teaching the receptionists a smattering of German or Spanish, halving the number of different items available in the restaurants and persuading staff who sell admission tickets in the morning to sell Mickey Mouse T-shirts in the afternoon.
That, at least, is the new operational strategy being put in place by Euro Disney SCA's chief executive, Philippe Bourguignon.
He is counting on a host of piecemeal measures to revitalize the park by catering better to the needs of its visitors, remotivating staff -- and, above all, cutting costs and increasing revenue.
"Challenge 94," as this program is called, is part of a broader business plan to refocus Euro Disney as a less expensive and more efficient resort.
To help implement it, Mr. Bourguignon has brought in a new personnel director, Michel Perchet, who was hired away from another ailing French leisure group, Club Mediterranee.
To win over the 9,000 full-time permanent employees, known in Disney parlance as "cast members," the company is staging an in-house exhibition that uses Mary Poppins, video clips and serious flow charts to illustrate its plans.
Throughout, there are little quizzes to make sure staffers read and understand the displays, alongside exhortational signs that at times read like billboards from the former Soviet Union.
"In the near future there will be a unique wonderful land," one proclaims, on a display about how to welcome guests more warmly.
Euro Disney won't say what effect the campaign will have on earnings, but independent analysts reckon the revamped business plan -- including a staff reduction of 950 people announced last fall -- is designed to cut costs by as much as 300 million francs ($51 million).
That is just a drop in the ocean for a company with debts of 21 billion francs and a loss of 553 million francs in the most recent quarter.
The resort's future, officials concede, depends largely on the outcome of negotiations to reduce the debt burden that are now under way between Walt Disney Co., which owns 49% of Euro Disney, and the resort's 60 creditor banks.
Walt Disney has said it will only fund Euro Disney's losses until the end of March.
But Mr. Bourguignon's operational changes, by showing confidence in the future, do counter the doomsday scenarios about Euro Disney's future that are currently fashionable in parts of the French and European media.
They follow on the heels of other efforts by Euro Disney management taken in the past few months to cut prices at the park and woo back alienated European tour operators.
Such measures have now apparently been endorsed by a major independent report on the park's financial situation and prospects.
The 300-page report by auditors KPMG Peat Marwick was sent out to creditor banks Monday, several weeks later than expected after being held up by disputes with Euro Disney's own auditors, Price Waterhouse.
Its detailed analysis remains confidential, with the precise solutions left up to the negotiating parties.
Bankers involved in the negotiations have said they aim to slash Euro Disney's debt burden by at least 50%, reducing its annual interest payments to 800 million francs or less from last year's whopping 1.7 billion francs.
Even with such a debt reduction and savings from the operational changes being implemented, however, the park's finances are likely to remain precarious.
As it is, the park just breaks even at the moment before interest charges and various royalty and other fees it is contractually obliged to pay Walt Disney.
"Essentially it's going to be struggling to pay anyone any decent return at all," cautions Charles Allen, an analyst at Natwest Sellier in London.
Still, every penny counts, Euro Disney reckons.
It invited cast members last fall to suggest their own improvements.
Many did so, proposing measures that ranged from cutting back on internal memos to pruning trees that block the view from some hotel rooms.
The modifications now being proposed in the campaign cover almost every activity.
To attract business, management is trying to improve the technology used in direct marketing and simplify the different package holidays it offers.
It has also just merged two different operations responsible for selling and servicing conventions at the park.
Once in the park, efficiency and economy are the new watchwords.
In the stores, the number of different items stocked is being cut to 17,000 from 30,000, and a bigger proportion of them will be pure U.S. Disney products.
The company was surprised to find that visitors preferred garish Mickey and Minnie souvenirs to the more subtle items that it had thought would better suit European taste.
The ship in a bottle, for example, turned out to be a non-starter.
In the park's five hotels, there are plans to eliminate vouchers and introduce magnetic cards that will record all the meals each visitor has prepaid, thereby cutting hassles and red tape.
The number of different food items offered is being reduced to 2,000 from 5,400, and all supplies will be handled centrally.
Under the current system, the hotels and the park have separate suppliers.
That will give Euro Disney better negotiating clout with its suppliers, but it also intertwines the hotels and the park in a way the company originally had tried to avoid.
It had initially hoped to sell some of the hotels to raise money, but those plans have been thwarted by France's real-estate slump.
By increasing job flexibility and improving motivation and training, moreover, the company hopes to boost sales throughout the park.
As one sign in the exhibit noted, in a mixture of English and French: "I'm a salesman.
Regardez, c'est facile" (Look, it's easy).
Labor unions have given guarded support to the campaign and staff reaction, judging by the written comments of the 4,000 who saw the 10-day exhibit, was generally positive -- but also reflects very real fears about the future.
As one Italian cast member wrote in the comments book: "Here's to a long life for Euro Disney."
