Faced with falling market share, Japan's Nintendo Co. elevated the senior vice president of its struggling Nintendo of America unit to a power-sharing arrangement with the unit's president.
The senior vice president, Howard C. Lincoln, 54 years old, was named chairman of Nintendo of America, and, according to Nintendo officials, will share control over the Redmond, Wash.-based unit with its long-time president, Minoru Arakawa, 47.
Previously, Mr. Arakawa was the sole member of Nintendo of America's board, which now consists of himself and Mr. Lincoln.
The action, announced by Mr. Arakawa's father-in-law, Nintendo Co.
President Hiroshi Yamauchi, comes after latest market research figures show Nintendo trailing archrival Sega of America Inc., the Redwood City, Calif., unit of Japan's Sega Enterprises Ltd., by a widening margin in the all-important market for sales of 16-bit game players.
According to NPD Group Inc.'s Toy Retail Sales Tracking Service, Sega captured 57% of the U.S.'s 16-bit market last year, compared with 43% for Nintendo.
Sega's lead advanced to nearly two-thirds of sales during the Christmas season.
This is an astounding decline for Nintendo, which virtually monopolized the U.S.'s $6 billion video-game market as recently as three years ago, and analysts credit Sega's aggressive marketing along with some key Nintendo mistakes for the shift in momentum.
While Mr. Arakawa is credited by analysts for having directed Nintendo into a video-game powerhouse during his 14 years at the helm of the U.S. subsidiary, they say he erred by not pricing his 16-bit Super Nintendo Entertainment System games competitively enough and by not matching a Sega marketing blitz that portrayed Sega as the "cooler, hipper" alternative to Nintendo.
Banking on a turnaround with its upcoming new player, a 64-bit machine code-named "Project Reality" that is due to hit arcades in the fall, Nintendo officials said Mr. Yamauchi elevated Mr. Lincoln, an 11-year veteran of the company, to help direct the unit's intensified efforts to regain share.
"I think Mr. Yamauchi has been impressed with Howard's ability to provide direction," said Perrin Kaplan, a Nintendo spokeswoman.
How much authority Mr. Lincoln will have remains to be seen, given the idiosyncrasies of Japanese corporations.
"I don't know if he {Mr. Arakawa} is willing to do something which normally you wouldn't expect Japanese to do, which is to say, I need help,'" said Lee Isgur, analyst for Volpe, Welty & Co. in San Francisco.
"It {Mr. Lincoln's appointment} tells me they know they have to do something, but we have to watch for follow-through."
In a statement, Mr. Yamauchi said, "This appointment reflects my great confidence in Mr. Lincoln's ability to work with Mr. Arakawa in the overall management of Nintendo of America."
Messrs. Lincoln and Arakawa, who are known to be good friends, weren't available for comment.
In a statement, Mr. Arakawa said: "I welcome this promotion of Mr. Lincoln; it is well-deserved."
As part of Nintendo's plan to regain share, the company said it would embark on a record $185 million marketing campaign this year -- $20 million higher than for last year -- that will include its first-ever advertising in video-game magazines such as GamePro and Electronic Gaming Monthly.
The company said retailers will also begin including a free game with purchases of the Super Nintendo Entertainment System during April and May.
In addition, Nintendo has been offering retailers $20 rebates on sales of each 16-bit player since Feb. 1, enabling the stores to drop prices to compete with Sega.
The rebates will continue through April.
"All this is designed to rebuild momentum and assure ourselves that 1993 is only an unpleasant memory," said George Harrison, Nintendo's director of marketing and corporate communications.
