Hard on the heels of unveiling Brazil's new anti-inflation plan, Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso is widely expected to resign shortly to run for president in the October elections.
Mr. Cardoso denies press reports that he's already informed President Itamar Franco of his intentions and is coy about his plans.
"I'm under a lot of pressure, but I haven't made up my mind," he said recently.
Mr. Cardoso recently said the decision was causing him "anguish."
But Mr. Cardoso can't procrastinate much longer: Brazil's constitution obliges office-seeking members of the executive to leave their jobs six months before elections, so he has until April 2 to decide.
And while some say that his permanence in his current post is crucial to the success of his anti-inflation plan, most here expect him to argue that the best way to ensure its continuity is to elect him president.
"He's in a bind," says Andre Lara Resende, until recently Brazil's debt negotiator and one of the architects of the stabilization plan.
By resigning "he could be accused of abandoning his plan and pursuing uncertain political ambitions," she says.
"To stay in office is difficult because he's a natural candidate."
His opinion?
"I think he's going to run."
What also bolsters Mr. Cardoso's candidacy is a widely held perception that he stands the best chance of defeating Luis Inacio Lula da Silva, better known as Lula.
Mr. da Silva, president of the left-wing Workers' Party, which advocates a strong role for the state and a halt to Brazil's free-market reforms, has been consistently leading opinion polls with about 30% of the vote, and the search for an anti-Lula candidate has become something of an obsession of Brazil's political and business worlds.
Even before declaring his candidacy, Mr. Cardoso registers about 13% support in polls.
"He's the one who can defeat Lula," says Carlos Langoni, a former president of Brazil's central bank.
"He pleases the middle class, is trusted by the business community and can seduce the working class by exploiting a likely drop in inflation."
At first glance, the 62-year-old Mr. Cardoso's popularity is befuddling, for his positive image belies seeming ineffectiveness.
Since he took over last May as Mr. Franco's fourth finance minister in eight months, accumulated inflation has reached 1,483%, or 0.98% a day, the worst under any Brazilian finance minister.
Mocking Mr. Cardoso's track record, Congressman Roberto Campos was quoted in the daily Folha de Sao Paulo as saying: "In 10 months, inflation doubled.
Our tax regime worsened.
He didn't reform the social security system.
He did nothing for privatization.
Thus, he's a genius who deserves to be elected president."
But supporters of Mr. Cardoso and analysts say it's less his record than his style and the promise offered by his plan, Brazil's seventh in eight years, that make him popular.
Urbane and sophisticated, he was a sociology professor at Paris's Sorbonne University.
Mr. Cardoso, a senator from Sao Paulo, is commended for his forsaking of shock therapy measures.
Instead, his inflation fight plan emphasizes fiscal austerity to gradually cut the country's deficit and bring down inflation rates while laying the groundwork to introduce a new national currency.
Though the plan is complex and won't show immediate results, many here believe it has a greater chance of success than any of its predecessors.
Mr. Cardoso's willingness to negotiate tirelessly with Congress has also been commended.
And, at a time when many of Brazil's top politicians are embroiled in damaging corruption scandals, Mr. Cardoso is viewed as honest -- a quality that polls show is in great demand in the wake of former President Fernando Collor de Mello's 1992 resignation and a recent graft scandal involving several top congressmen.
To ensure that his inflation plan is kept alive, Mr. Cardoso is expected to try to name a member of his team to replace him, an expectation that has calmed financial markets.
"It makes no difference if he's there or not," says Sao Paulo businessman Lawrence Pih.
"He'll leave it to an ally of his and will be monitoring it closely."
