Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Arthur Levitt predicted a "rush" of bank acquisitions of mutual funds and warned that bank regulators are poorly equipped to deal with the onslaught.
Mr. Levitt said the rush will be inspired by Mellon Bank Corp.'s impending acquisition of Dreyfus Corp.'s mutual-fund business.
The acquisition has revived questions about banks' immunity from oversight by the SEC.
Many of those questions are being pressed by Rep. John Dingell (D., Mich.), chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee.
In the first of two days of hearings on the Mellon-Dreyfus merger, Mr. Levitt said the transaction "dramatically highlights the SEC's concerns about the current regulation of banks."
Rep. Dingell shares those concerns and has introduced legislation to give the SEC oversight of banks' securities activities.
Mr. Levitt repeatedly endorsed that legislation yesterday.
Current law allows the SEC to examine mutual funds that are operated by bankholding companies, but doesn't allow the agency to inspect banks that act as advisers to mutual funds.
"That's like operating with one arm behind our back," Mr. Levitt told the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, also headed by Rep. Dingell.
Federal banking regulators are responsible for most of the oversight of banks' securities activities, and Mr. Levitt made it clear that he has little respect for those regulators' abilities to recognize fraud and punish it.
When it comes to securities, he said, bank regulators "lack the experience in terms of training, in terms of a history of regulatory oversight in these areas.
It's not something that you come by by a manual."
The difference between banking and securities regulators "is a question of priorities," Mr. Levitt said.
The SEC's priority is investor protection, and bank regulators' "first and foremost concern is `is this bank being able to open its doors tomorrow morning?'"
Mr. Levitt said Mellon and Dreyfus have made provisions to add investor protections after the merger, including keeping the mutual-fund operations separate from Mellon Bank and thereby under SEC regulation.
But as more and more banks recognize the potential gold mine in affiliating with mutual funds, Mr. Levitt said, less-careful merger partners will surface.
"Generally, the first ones out of the gate are the ones that are most secure and most responsible," the SEC chairman said.
The merger must be approved by the Comptroller of the Currency, Eugene Ludwig, who is scheduled to testify today to the subcommittee.
The top officers of both Mellon and Dreyfus are also scheduled to testify.
Mr. Ludwig is expected to tell the subcommittee that federal banking regulators are fully capable of grasping the complexity of securities activities.
He is also expected to say that banks' entry into the mutual-fund business will contribute to the banks' financial stability.
