The nation's biggest brewers say the beer business is the toughest it has been since Prohibition.
For the new owners and managers of G. Heileman Brewing Co., that's good news.
"We see the whole premium-beer category decaying," William Turner, new chairman of the nation's fifth-largest brewer, says almost gleefully.
"We think it's the right time to be in the beer business."
That's because Mr. Turner and Hicks, Muse & Co., which recently bought Heileman for $390 million, expect Heileman to play a significantly different game than the nation's biggest three brewers do.
Instead of hitching their wagon to premium labels with wide appeal to a nation of customers (like Budweiser, Coors Light and Miller Lite), Heileman's new owners plan to capitalize on Heileman's longtime strength: little beers.
"You don't try to compete with the big brewers," says Tom Hicks, chairman at Hicks Muse.
"You try to emphasize your own strategy.
We're appealing to a smaller market than they are interested in."
This isn't an unusual strategy for Hicks Muse, a Dallas-based investment firm that seeks out niche players in consolidating industries.
Some Hicks Muse partners were involved in earlier leveraged buyouts of Dr Pepper, Seven-Up and A&W brands.
"There's no reason why several of the second-tier brewers cannot be successful in between AB Anheuser-Busch Cos. and Miller Miller Brewing Co. just as Dr Pepper and A&W were successful in between Coca-Cola and Pepsi," says Charles Tate, managing director of Hicks Muse.
Actually, Heileman was relatively successful through the 1970s and early 1980s doing precisely that.
The company acquired dozens of endangered small brands, paying cash and thus remaining debt-free for two decades.
Revenue increased tenfold, to $1.3 billion in 1986, from $107.5 million in 1970.
By then, the brewer was still producing 40 of the acquired brands and was among the first to introduce fancy bottled water and nonalcoholic brews.
Heileman also built a reputation as a tough "street-fighter" -- a beer-marketing term referring to the use of word of mouth and point-of-sale merchandising to push products.
Nevertheless, as the brewery giants started introducing new, low-priced brands backed by expensive advertising campaigns, Heileman's sales started to slip.
And, mesmerized by a barrage of TV commercials, U.S. drinkers were buying more Budweisers and Miller Lites and fewer regional brews each year.
But Heileman's problems accelerated when it was acquired by Australian financier Alan Bond in 1986.
The company struggled under the debt of the $1.3 billion buyout and erred strategically by trying to go head to head with the big boys, rolling out some brands nationally.
It simply couldn't compete with the ad budgets of the big brewers and sales slipped more.
Further, the Australian leadership didn't understand the U.S. brewing business very well, especially the relationship between the brewer and wholesaler, says Benj Steinman, associate publisher of Beer Marketer's Insights, an industry publication.
The U.S. three-tier system -- which mandates separate management of brewer, wholesaler and retailer -- means brewers must work with wholesalers rather than issuing orders.
Frustrated wholesalers jumped ship or stopped devoting time to the brewer's brands.
By 1990, Heileman's volume had slipped 23% to 12,250,000 barrels from 15,925,000 barrels in 1986.
Profit was eaten up by interest costs.
In 1991, the company filed for bankruptcy-court protection.
After emerging from bankruptcy, the company endured another two years of severe belt-tightening demanded by its banks.
But now, under new management, Heileman will return to its old ways, say Mr. Turner and Heileman's new president, Richard F. Gaccionne.
Regional brands will zero in where they do best, and the company will focus on its strengths in malt liquor and small-brand management.
Perhaps more importantly, it will return to a heavy reliance on street-fighting promotions in place of the expensive national marketing campaigns.
And it will try to mend the badly damaged relationship between the brewer and the distributors it depends on.
Timing may be working in Heileman's favor.
In the 1990s, specialty beers, such as those made by microbreweries and regional brewers, are commanding higher prices and the fickle consumer's greatest loyalty.
Heileman has a number of those brands, including Special Export, which it hopes to market to younger drinkers.
And Heileman has experience managing a number of tiny brands profitably-something the big brewers haven't done.
Mr. Gaccionne plans to capitalize on the company's strong position in the fast-growing malt liquor market.
It's a market where the big brewers' TV ads do little good; the market responds more to Heileman's traditional point-of-sale merchandising.
In a product niche that has averaged 3.2% annual growth for the past 12 years while the overall beer market has stagnated, Heileman's Colt 45 and Mickey's malt liquors saw volume increase 11% and 50%, respectively, last year.
Meanwhile, Mr. Gaccionne says Heileman has a bevy of very small, economy-priced brands that it can sell to supermarket and liquor chains as private labels.
Already, Lucky's in California has taken on Blatz and Von's has adopted Milwaukee 1851.
With no marketing expense, Mr. Gaccionne believes private labels can be a profitable market for the brewer.
He also plans to expand the company's contract brewing business (in which it brews beer such as Sam Adams for companies like Boston Beer Co.), which has been growing and contributing to Heileman's $70 million in annual cash flow, he says.
Still, the company can't completely escape the realities of the murderously tough beer market.
Smaller brands aren't as efficient to produce as multimillion barrel beers like Bud, Coors and Miller.
Some of Heileman's core brands have been slipping -- especially Old Style and Rainier -- and it's difficult to revive declining brands.
And, alliances between big brewers and regional brewers, expected to increase in coming years, are expected to crowd the specialty market with some very well-heeled players.
In addition, to return to its once-successful street-fighting days, Heileman needs the commitment and manpower of its distributors.
When he was president of Heileman before the Bond buyout, Russell G. Cleary spent about half his time talking with and visiting distributors.
"That partnership was our strength," he says.
But when Mr. Gaccionne and Mr. Turner met with distributors in 10 cities recently, they discovered no one from the brewery had visited the wholesalers for three years.
"We have to reverse things," Mr. Gaccionne said.
"We need more open communication.
Rather than pushing things down their throats, we need to work with them."
