The U.S. opened its trade offensive against Japan, threatening to levy sanctions on several hundred million dollars of Japanese imports because of a dispute over cellular telephones.
The action was far richer in symbolism than trade effects.
The U.S. has made the dispute, involving Motorola Inc., into a metaphor for the Japanese government's alleged discrimination against foreign companies.
By scheduling a decision on the case so soon after a trade summit that ended in failure and recrimination, the U.S. guaranteed maximum coverage of its complaints.
Two dozen television cameras recorded yesterday's announcement, which was attended by more than 100 reporters.
"We couldn't have had a better turnout unless we had Tonya Harding here," quipped Thomas Nides, a U.S. trade official.
U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor used the opportunity to berate Tokyo over its failure to open the cellular-telephone market.
"This is a clear-cut and serious case of Japan not living up to its agreements," Mr. Kantor said, surrounded by Ross Perot-style charts.
"Each trade barrier has been removed, only to be replaced by another."
But Mr. Kantor's remarks also gave a hint of how the cellular-telephone dispute, as well as the broader trade fight with Japan, could eventually be settled.
Tokyo wouldn't compromise on U.S. demands that it set sales goals for certain markets in the recent "framework" trade talks.
Japanese negotiators rejected the use of most numbers because of fears that it would lock them into sales commitments.
With the cellular-telephone dispute, Mr. Kantor listed a few possible criteria that would have made past agreements in this area effective.
The criteria included the date by which the Motorola cellular system would have to be built, and the geographic area covered.
"No guaranteed market share, no guaranteed subscribers, no market numbers," he said.
Some U.S. officials have indicated that if Japan would agree to ways of tracking such promises as changes in business and government practices, the U.S. might not insist on specific sales goals.
So far, though, Tokyo has steered clear of any numerical indicators that would require it to take actions in the future, U.S. negotiators said.
Although the dispute involves cellular phones, the U.S. probably won't be able to retaliate against Japanese producers of the goods.
That's because two of Japan's largest suppliers of cellular phones and network switches -- Fujitsu Ltd. and NEC Corp. -- already make in the U.S. much of what they sell in the U.S.
"Our cellular telephones are already manufactured 100% in the U.S., and we buy the subsystems from U.S. manufacturers," a Fujitsu spokesman said, adding, "The telephones are even exported from there to Singapore and Australia."
NEC said half of the 500,000 phones it sold last year in the U.S. were manufactured in Mexico and the U.S., while the other half were exported from Japan.
When a similar issue arose over Japan's cellular-telephone market in 1989, the U.S. threatened to impose import tariffs on a range of Japanese products such as television sets and photocopiers, which weren't directly connected to the trade issue.
The cellular dispute involves a densely populated area south of Tokyo, where Japan's Ministry of Post and Telecommunications paired Motorola with a company that also represents Motorola's main Japanese rival, Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp.
Mr. Kantor called that a "shotgun marriage," which worked out about as badly as most such unions.
In the Tokyo-Nagoya corridor, Motorola has signed up 12,900 subscribers through its partner, which has garnered 308,000 for the NTT technology.
Elsewhere in Japan, the U.S. estimates, the Motorola and NTT technology split the market roughly in half.
"Clearly the market is there.
Certainly the opportunity is there," Christopher Galvin, Motorola's president, said at a news conference in Washington yesterday.
"What is lacking is the access."
As a result, the U.S. yesterday declared that Tokyo had violated a 1989 cellular-telephone agreement promising Motorola "comparable" access to the Japanese cellular-telephone market.
The finding is the first step in levying sanctions, which are supposed to equal the damage suffered by Motorola in lost revenue.
Motorola estimated its loss at between $250 million and $300 million.
Although that's small change in comparison to U.S.-Japan trade of about $145 billion last year, the dispute takes on greater significance coming just after the collapse of the trade talks.
In 30 days, the U.S. will draw up a preliminary list of sanction targets.
That will be followed by a public hearing and the publication of a final list.
All that usually takes at least three months, during which time the U.S. and Japan will try to negotiate a deal.
Motorola's Mr. Galvin said that the company wanted assurances that its system would be expanded to cover about 95% of the Tokyo-Nagoya area within 18 months.
He indicated that Motorola had been offered a three-year period.
He also said the telecommunications ministry should end the "natural conflict of interest" concerning Motorola's Japanese partner, IDO Corp.
But he didn't demand that Motorola be paired with a different company.
Kiyo Nanao, economic minister at the Japanese Embassy in Washington, said that Tokyo has been "honoring with good faith" the cellular-telephone agreement.
"Conducting dialogue under the threat of unilateral actions won't lead to a constructive outcome," he added.
But he didn't say whether Japan would retaliate or appeal any U.S. sanctions to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the trade referee in Geneva.
The U.S. plans to turn up the heat on Japan another few degrees.
The administration intends to announce soon that it will renew a tough trade provision, known as Super 301, that singles out countries for retaliation and is aimed at Tokyo.
David P. Hamilton in Tokyo contributed to this article.
