General Motors Corp. and tiny Energy Conversion Devices Inc. agreed to develop an innovative electric car battery, with former GM Chairman Robert C. Stempel as a key player.
GM called the agreement "an important step toward developing viable electric vehicles."
But it insisted that Energy Conversion's Ovonic battery technology doesn't yet represent a breakthrough in the search for an affordable, practical electric car.
GM reiterated its opposition to a 1998 deadline California regulators have set for auto makers to field mass-market electric vehicles in California.
Without offering specifics, GM said it will "jointly pursue commercialization" of the Ovonic nickel metal-hydride battery developed by Energy Conversion, a Troy, Mich., technology company.
Energy Conversion has claimed its battery can be recharged in 15 minutes, compared with about eight hours for conventional lead-acid batteries.
The company has produced small batteries based on its nickel metal-hydride technology for use in computers and other small electronic devices since 1987.
If the Ovonic technology worked as claimed in a car, and could be manufactured at competitive costs, it would represent a breakthrough in the search for a battery that rivals the efficiency and low cost of gasoline-powered internal combustion engines.
Mr. Stempel, who said in January he wants to create a company to build electric cars, will act as a "senior technical adviser," GM and Energy Conversion Chairman Stanford Ovshinsky said yesterday.
Mr. Stempel was ousted as GM's chairman in November 1992, and had joined Energy Conversion's board in January.
According to Securities and Exchange Commission records, he purchased 5,000 shares of Energy Conversion stock in February at $9 a share.
Energy Conversion shares closed yesterday at $9.50 in over-the-counter trading, up from $8.75 Tuesday and $7.75 Monday.
Mr. Stempel played a key role in talks between GM and Energy Conversion as the venture took shape, according to Kenneth R. Baker, GM vice president for research and development.
Mr. Baker was head of GM's electric vehicle program when Mr. Stempel was GM's chief executive.
Once it became clear the GM deal would go through, Mr. Stempel resigned his Energy Conversion directorship, Mr. Ovshinsky said yesterday.
Mr. Ovshinsky wouldn't say how much his company or GM plans to spend on further development of the Ovonic nickel metal-hydride battery, but said "there will be a series of announcements."
