Copying another company's best ideas isn't something most executives boast about.
Managers of Royal Bank of Scotland and Banco Santander are proud of doing just that.
Last year, acting on a tip from Royal Bank, Santander profited by investing heavily in Spanish bonds, just before a series of peseta devaluations led to interest-rate cuts and a sharp rise in bond prices.
At about the same time, Royal Bank, taking a leaf out of Santander's book, was cutting staff in its branches and setting sales targets for its employees.
"We're getting ideas from each other all the time," says George Mathewson, the group chief executive of Royal Bank, which five-and-a-half years ago signed a wide-ranging cooperation agreement with Banco Santander.
"This is more than just an alliance," concurs Santander Chairman Emilio Botin.
"We're taking advantage of the synergies between two banks.
As international barriers to business come down, the alliance between Santander and Royal Bank, Spain's fourth-largest bank and Britain's sixth-largest, has become a paragon of cross-border cooperation.
While other banks and companies have similar tie-ups, many falter for lack of clear business plans or run afoul of cultural differences and commercial rivalries.
The partnership between Royal Bank and Santander, by contrast, is a success story of dialogue, candor and mutual respect.
"We trust each other," says Juan Rodriguez Inciarte, Santander's executive vice president in charge of retail banking, who skis and plays golf with Mr. Mathewson.
The relationship, echoes Royal Bank's chairman, Lord Younger of Prestwick, "is literally warming all the time."
Thanks to their alliance, both banks have introduced new operating methods and products, improving service to customers and, ultimately, profits.
"By building on complementary skills," says David Faulkner, a lecturer at Britain's Cranfield School of Management, "they have done things together that they might not have done alone, and grown stronger in the process."
Out of 67 cross-border alliances that he analyzed in a recent study, Mr. Faulkner identified their link-up as one of the three most successful.
(The other two were British auto manufacturer Rover's link-up with Honda -- now past history as a result of Rover's acquisition by Germany's BMW -- and British computer firm ICL PLC's relationship with Fujitsu Ltd. of Japan.)
Though still small alongside giants like Deutsche Bank or Barclays PLC, Santander and Royal Bank "are holding their own" in today's competitive European banking market, he says.
Mutual acceptance of each other's independence is one of the keys.
Both have shareholdings in each other, 9.9% for Santander in Royal Bank and 1.5% for Royal Bank in Santander.
But each sets its own strategy and agenda.
Last year, for example, Royal Bank sold its Charterhouse investment banking unit, arguing that it was peripheral to its main business.
The move contrasted with Santander's own strategy of building up its investment-banking operations around Banco Santander de Negocios.
But Royal Bank's move, though it raised some eyebrows in Spain, was accepted without a murmur.
The alliance was forged in 1988, at a time when both banks were nervous about possible takeover threats.
Plans for a unified European market were all the rage, and each was wondering how to stay independent while providing customers with banking services in other European countries.
Both had looked at other partners, but when their executives got together they realized they were on the same wavelength.
Six months of negotiations were concluded by Mr. Mathewson and Mr. Inciarte in September 1988.
In a statement soon afterward, Mr. Botin emphasized the two banks' "striking similarities . . . and common culture which emphasizes profitability and efficiency."
Both had venerable pedigrees, stretching back in Royal Bank's case to 1727 and in Santander's to 1857.
Both were "northern" banks, with bases away from the capital city, which they claim gives them a special character and business perspective.
To be sure, there were also differences.
Staff at the Scottish bank were sometimes unsettled by their Spanish partners' apparent casualness about travel schedules and answering letters.
The patriarchal manner in which Mr. Botin -- who with his family controls at least 3.5% of Santander -- dominated the Spanish bank contrasted with Royal Bank's more collegiate style.
While Mr. Botin and his colleagues spoke good English, the Royal Bank team needed interpreters at meetings in Spain.
Thanks to the friendly relations forged in negotiations, however, the partnership quickly bore fruit.
Arrangements were put in place for clients of one bank to be given special treatment in the other's home market.
The two set up a joint subsidiary in Gibraltar, under Royal Bank management.
And they took stakes in Portugal's Banco de Comercio e Industria, with Santander as the dominant partner alongside Royal Bank with a minority holding.
In 1989, Santander stunned competitors by becoming the first big Spanish bank to launch a high-interest checking account; before doing so, it had taken care to study Royal Bank's experience in that area.
In 1992, Royal Bank embarked on a project to streamline its U.K. branch network and improve profitability and service; many proposals were based on a study of how Santander branches were run.
The alliance also helped to discourage plans that probably wouldn't have proved profitable.
Before signing up with Royal Bank, Santander had embarked on a strategy of buying smaller banks in other European countries.
The Scots, however, kept rejecting proposals to buy a joint subsidiary in France as too expensive.
Santander gave up, and Mr. Botin has no regrets.
Owning a small bank in a foreign country often isn't commercially viable, as Santander found out in Belgium, where it closed its operation, and Italy, where it sold out.
Buying a bank in France "would have been too expensive," he admits.
Instead, the partners tackled the challenge of providing cross-border banking services in a totally different manner.
Using computer technology to link their branch networks, they set out to create what they called "seamless" banking, under which customers would be able to effect instantaneous payments from their account at one bank to a bank abroad.
The result was their Interbank On-Line System, or Ibos, currently the alliance's most high-profile product.
Launched in 1991, Ibos initially linked 1,350 Santander branches in Spain to some 800 Royal Bank branches in Britain.
Since then, it has been extended to include Credit Commercial de France and BCI in Portugal.
In the next few months, banks in Belgium, Italy and the U.S. are expected to join the system.
In partnership with Electronic Data Systems Corp., a unit of General Motors Corp. of the U.S., Royal Bank and Santander are now marketing Ibos world-wide.
By 2000, executives hope, commissions from transactions through Ibos could account for between 5% and 10% of the two banks' pretax income.
Thanks to the alliance, Royal Bank officials say the volume of their payments business to Spain has risen 50%, with more than half of the gain coming from new clients.
Of the customers that use Ibos, 25% have opened accounts with Royal Bank specifically for that purpose.
One of the next moves, predicts Mr. Mathewson, may be to bring the two banks' treasury departments closer together so as to take maximum advantage of the market savvy of each.
Santander, meanwhile, is wondering how it can imitate Direct Line.
Santander has "more of a trading culture," says Mr. Mathewson.
"We are more customer-oriented.
We have to learn from Santander on the trading side.
They have to develop their market and educate their clients."
So what is the secret of the alliance?
"You have got to know each other at the top, and you have got to be as open as possible," says Mr. Mathewson, a dry, former rugby-football player who came to banking from a post at the Scottish Development Office.
"What we have been doing is building an understanding."
Because the two aren't competing directly with each other on their home markets, adds Mr. Inciarte, "ideas have a better chance of being discussed."
If Royal Bank asks Santander a question, he says "they know we will tell them exactly the truth.
The value of that information is tremendous."
