The Clinton administration unveiled its plan for rewriting the Superfund law, to mixed reviews from members of Congress, environmentalists and industry.
The proposal, announced yesterday by Carol Browner, head of the Environmental Protection Agency, includes a new non-judicial arbitration process aimed at removing Superfund disputes from the courts; a new tax on commercial insurance companies, set to raise $3.1 billion over five years, to be used to settle Superfund-related lawsuits between polluting businesses and their insurers; and a relaxation of cleanup standards under certain conditions, which the administration contends will reduce cleanup costs as much as 25%.
The key Democratic leaders on the issue agreed to sponsor or cosponsor the administration's bill, though it is expected they will work to change some of it.
One of them, Rep. Al Swift (D., Wash.), called the bill "a good beginning."
Reaction by business and environmentalists was similarly ambivalent, with businesses generally hoping to reduce the liability of individual companies even further and environmentalists hoping to shore up the "polluter-pays" principle behind the Superfund and to stiffen the bill's cleanup requirements.
Main features of the proposal had been disclosed previously, but yesterday's announcement gave more details on the proposed tax on insurers, which would be based on premiums charged on commercial policies since 1971.
The administration hopes the bill will at least halve the litigation related to the 1980 Superfund law, which governs cleanup of abandoned hazardous-waste sites.
The money raised from the new insurance tax would be used to settle lawsuits filed against insurers by polluting companies held liable for Superfund cleanup costs prior to 1986, when the bulk of dumping subject to the Superfund law occurred.
Litigation costs paid by insurers represent roughly one-third of all Superfund litigation costs.
The new tax would be levied only on commercial insurers and certain reinsurers involved in the type of insurance that is used to reimburse companies for hazardous-waste cleanup.
The tax consists of two parts.
The first part, which would supply most of the revenues for the fund, is a 0.19% annual levy on all relevant insurance premiums charged between 1971 and 1985, adjusted for inflation.
The second part, which would supply the remainder of the revenue, is a 0.3% annual levy on all relevant insurance premiums charged since 1985.
Both levies could be deducted by insurers as a business expense, and companies that could demonstrate they've written few policies related to Superfund would be exempt.
Under the bill, the EPA would create a $300 million fund to pick up so-called orphan shares, or portions of Superfund cleanup costs that aren't assigned to a particular company.
An EPA official said that the money would come from a surplus in revenue from an existing Superfund tax on businesses.
Under the new allocation system, a non-governmental party such as a nonprofit group would assign Superfund cleanup costs among businesses that polluted at a hazardous-waste site.
If a business agreed to pay the amount requested, it couldn't be sued by other companies that contributed waste to the site and sought to shift cleanup costs elsewhere.
If the business didn't agree to pay the amount requested, it could be sued by the other companies, and the federal government could hold the company responsible for the entire cost of cleaning up the site.
Polluting businesses that chose to settle Superfund lawsuits with their insurers, drawing on the $3.1 billion fund, would receive 20%, 40%, or 60% of cleanup costs, depending on whether the law in the state where the lawsuit was filed favored the insurer, favored neither side, or favored the polluting business.
A company that received a given percentage in one Superfund-related lawsuit against an insurer would also be pledging to accept the same percentage to settle any future Superfund-related disputes with insurers.
Mike McGavick, director of the American Insurance Association's Superfund project, who helped the administration craft the bill, said: "With proper modification this could be a genuine step forward."
Similarly, Fred Krupp, executive director of the Environmental Defense Fund, which also participated in administration discussions on the bill, said his group is "greatly encouraged by the overall structure," but would press for "strengthening improvements."
The Sierra Club, however, termed the Superfund proposal "a major retreat" that would shift costs "from polluters to the government with no new revenue to pay for it."
