The curtain rises.
The portly figure of Robert Maxwell emerges from a dim-lit netherworld, eyebrows arched, eyes gleaming.
The music builds.
"I Am the Pirate King, ta da, ta da . . . " thunders "Captain Bob" to a tune from "The Pirates of Penzance."
But wait.
The show must not go on.
So ruled a high court judge here who banned "Maxwell: The Musical" four days before the play was set to open for previews.
The show about the late publishing tycoon was created by former Maxwell aide Evan Steadman, and advance publicity promised that "Maxwell: The Musical" would "make you laugh, sing -- and be angry."
But after reading an advance copy, Mr. Maxwell's sons, Kevin and Ian, didn't laugh, and they certainly didn't sing.
They got angry.
A play about their father's escapades wasn't the thing they wanted before they go on trial for their alleged role in concealing their father's seamier business schemes.
A judge, agreeing that the play might create "a substantial risk of serious prejudice," issued a temporary injunction.
"I shan't appeal," says Mr. Steadman, keeping a stiff upper lip despite the fact that he spent "several hundred thousand" pounds on the production.
The ban lasts only until the trial ends.
But since the court hasn't set a date yet for the trial, it is hard to say when the play will go on, Mr. Steadman says.
That means London audiences might have to wait a long time to see actor John Savident cavorting on stage in a padded baggy suit as his character buys stakes in various English football clubs, and a chorus sings, "He's the very model of a modern football millionaire."
The show would have opened with Mr. Maxwell emerging from the next world to recount his life story for a gathering of business associates, lawyers, politicians, enemies and friends (but not his sons; Mr. Steadman says the play doesn't even mention them).
Some 14 songs later, it ends with Mr. Maxwell's 1991 death, something that has remained a mystery since his nude body was found floating in the sea off the Canary Islands.
Last night, workers tore down ads for the play outside a theater near Piccadilly Circus.
At the box office, phones rang constantly as a clerk informed callers sales for the 11-week run had been "withdrawn."
Ticket holders will get refunds.
