Quick & Reilly Inc., the quiet member of the discount brokerage industry's Big Three, wants to make some noise, and figures California, the back yard of market leader Charles Schwab & Co., is the place to do it.
Quick & Reilly last month hired away one of Schwab's top executives, Mark Brandin, 43 years old, to direct an intensified marketing campaign.
Mr. Brandin, at one time Schwab's chief marketing executive, is already making plans to boost Quick & Reilly's profile with a stepped-up television advertising campaign and larger ads in print.
Most recently, he was executive vice president, capital markets/trading, at San Francisco-based Schwab.
Mr. Brandin's specific plans include emphasizing the company's satisfaction guarantee.
Dismissed by critics as a gimmick when it was unveiled in March 1992, the guarantee allows Quick & Reilly customers to get their commission fees back if they are unhappy with services received on a trade.
The guarantee doesn't apply to declines in stock prices.
The company says 0.01% of trades have led to a refund request.
Quick & Reilly's new aggressive tack underscores the changing competition for customers among discount brokers.
While the retail investing boom continues to surge because of the low-interest rate environment, the discount brokerage marketplace is tightening.
The Big Three -- including Fidelity Investments' discount brokerage business -- control more than 90% of the discount market, leaving little room for market-share growth that isn't at the expense of the other two.
Quick's new approach is "a not-so-subtle shift in strategy," says Michael Flanagan, an analyst with Lipper Analytical Services.
"Not only going after Schwab's niche more aggressively, but also geographically going after Schwab intrigues me."
He suggests that it could be a risky undertaking.
The full-service discount business in California is dominated by Schwab while Jack White & Co. dominates the deep-discount business.
Quick & Reilly, with a market capitalization of about $364 million, must take the battle to a much larger Schwab, which has a market cap of about $1.66 billion.
Friday, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Quick & Reilly fell $1.50 to $34.125.
To build a higher profile, Quick & Reilly will increase its marketing budget 50% to as much as $8 million a year, according to individuals familiar with the company's plans.
In addition, the company will add marketing staff and push more products, attempting to diversify away from its bread-and-butter transaction services.
Moreover, Quick & Reilly wants to promote recently introduced no-load mutual funds, an area that has been dominated in the discount brokerage arena by Schwab and Fidelity.
"We are reversing our traditional low-profile stance," says Tom Quick, president of the company's discount brokerage business.
"We want to emphasize what we can do for our customers beyond stock transactions, and that includes mutual funds."
Quick & Reilly Group Inc., the parent company, also operates specialist and clearinghouse businesses.
In the past few years Quick & Reilly has ridden the retail investing boom to strong earnings and revenue growth.
The company's net income rose to $28.7 million for the year ended last February from about $10 million for the year ended in February 1989.
Over that period, revenue rose to $195.9 million from $77.6 million.
Schwab, meanwhile, has watched net income grow to $118 million in 1993 from $19 million in 1989.
Revenue has nearly tripled, to $965 million in 1992 from $346 million in 1989.
Quick & Reilly's decision to launch an aggressive marketing campaign comes at a time when Schwab seems to have stumbled a bit.
The company's stock has fallen from $31.50 on Jan. 12 to $27.50.
Some analysts expressed concern that Schwab's spending plans have eaten too rapidly into earnings.
In fact, earnings before income taxes actually declined in the most recent quarter.
Schwab counters that tremendous growth in assets under management forced the company to accelerate capital spending programs.
In 1993, Schwab added almost $30 billion in assets under management, to give the firm about $97 billion in assets under management.
At least part of Quick & Reilly's campaign will be fought over the size of commissions, a battleground on which Quick holds an advantage.
According to a survey by Mercer Inc., a financial services research and consulting concern, to trade 1,000 shares of a $10 stock, Schwab charges a commission of $110, Fidelity $109.50, and Quick & Reilly $84.
But Quick finds itself at a disadvantage in the fight to offer investors more services.
Both Schwab and Fidelity offer a wider array of services, including such things as more extensive research and analysis.
Schwab made a big hit with its "no fee" mutual fund service, a tactic that both Quick and Fidelity followed.
There also are two new battlefields looming for all three firms: technology and international markets.
Analysts believe that technology will play an increasingly important role among discount brokerage firms as the information superhighway makes access to information easier for more people.
"We have more and more customers signing onto their personal computers and placing trades through on-line systems," says Donna M. Morris, senior vice president at Fidelity.
"And as customers become more educated and more accustomed to using computers, we expect growing demand for on-line products."
Currently, all three brokerage firms offer on-line trading and services, and 24-hour touch-tone access to account and stock information.
Internationally, growing interest in discount-brokerage operations has drawn Schwab and Fidelity to London.
Quick & Reilly, however, has yet to open an office overseas.
"Schwab is currently dominant, but Fidelity is a major factor," says Mr. Flanagan.
"Quick & Reilly is another player, not yet with the same size or presence.
I do believe they are an efficient, low-cost processor of trades, but in this market size is very important in challenging for supremacy."
The announcement by the Federal Reserve Board tightening its monetary policy sent small-company stock buyers scurrying for cover as prices slid sharply.
The Russell 2000 Index, which tracks the performance of small-capitalization stocks traded on the Nasdaq Stock Market and the major exchanges, finished with a sharp deficit of 5.90, or 2.21%, to 261.67.
On Nasdaq, the Composite Index tumbled 20.51, or 2.57%, to 777.28.
The composite's loss was its sixth-biggest ever on a point basis.
Observers agreed that the Fed's move wasn't unexpected, but did come sooner than anticipated.
Nasdaq decliners battered advancers, 2,443 to 807, on Nasdaq National Market volume of 321,303,400 shares, up from 278,326,200 Thursday.
Nasdaq total volume was its fourth-highest one-day turnover ever at 375,078,800 shares, compared with 331,623,100 Thursday.
Most groups were badly bruised, and interest-rate sensitive stocks were no exception.
Provident Bancorp, Cincinnati, fell 1 to 30; Mid Atlantic Medical Services, a health-maintenance organization, dropped 1 1/8 to 27 3/4; and Centerbank of Waterbury, Conn., lost 7/8 to 11 1/2.
Phoenix Laser Systems plunged 1 1/2, or 40%, to 2 1/4 on the American Stock Exchange.
The company said an involuntary-bankruptcy proceeding filed against it by two former employees and Microdyne won't affect a private placement agreement signed recently with Fujian Enterprises (Holdings).
Microdyne, a designer of satellite earth station components, added 1/8 to 5 3/8.
In earnings news, Ralston-Continental Baking Group declined 1 3/4 to 7 3/4 on the New York Stock Exchange after reporting a fiscal first-quarter loss of one cent a share after the close Thursday.
In the year-earlier period, the company had pro forma net income of eight cents.
In addition, Goldman, Sachs & Co. cut its rating on Ralston-Continental Baking to "market performer" from "moderate outperformer," citing unexciting fundamentals.
Southern Electronics, a distributor of personal computers, fell 1 1/4 to 10 3/4.
The company said its fiscal second-quarter earnings fell to 22 cents a share from 29 cents a year earlier.
National Vision Associates, an optical vision centers retailer, sagged 1 to 6.
The company said its January same-store sales fell 8.4%.
On the positive side, Corimon jumped 2 7/8 to 21 5/8 on the Big Board.
Investors, enthusiastic about the tenor of economic reform announced by Venezuela's new president, sent the building materials company's American depositary receipts higher.
On the new-issues front, Renaissance Communications jumped to 20 1/4 from its offering price of 19 late Thursday.
The operator of a group of television stations affiliated with the Fox Broadcasting Network plans to use proceeds to redeem outstanding Series B exchangeable preferred stock and to repay senior debt.
Alantec closed at 14 7/8, above its offering price Friday of 13.
The company, which designs, develops, makes, markets and supports intelligent switching hubs for Ethernet and FDDI local area networks, expects to use proceeds for general corporate purposes.
Caitlin Mollison contributed to this article.
MICRODYNE Corp., Alexandria, Va., a maker of computer hardware and software, isn't involved in a lawsuit against Phoenix Laser Systems Inc.
Yesterday's Small Stock Focus column incorrectly identified the publicly traded company as being involved in the suit.
Phoenix Laser Systems said closely held Microdyne Inc., Escondido, Calif., is the company involved in the suit.
(WSJ Feb. 8, 1994)
