The Chicago Mercantile Exchange, in an apparent effort to avert a nasty stock-market sell-off if interest rates begin to rise sharply, is making it more expensive to speculate in stock-index futures.
The Chicago Merc said it will raise the initial amount of money speculators must put up to buy or sell a futures contract based on the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index, effective Monday after the close of trading.
The 25% rise will require speculators put up $11,250, or 4.6% of the contract value, from $9,000.
So-called maintenance margin, or the amount of money needed to keep a position open, will increase to $10,000 from $8,000 for speculators.
It is the first time since January 1991 that the Chicago Merc has raised the initial margin requirements on the S&P futures contract.
The move applies to investors who aren't members of the Chicago Merc.
The action apparently follows pressure from Federal Reserve and Commodity Futures Trading Commission officials.
A Fed spokesman said the central bank had no talks with the exchange, but a CFTC spokesman confirmed that the agency discussed the matter with the Chicago Merc.
William Brodsky, president of the Chicago Merc, said the exchange decided it was "prudent" to raise initial margin requirements "after consultation with people in Washington.
"The truth is that the stock market is up 400 points in four months, a very significant one-way move," Mr. Brodsky said.
"Obviously, we are not unaware that there may be an uptick in interest rates and it may have an impact on the market.
But it is one of many things we consider."
Under the CFTC reauthorization bill that was passed in 1992, the Federal Reserve has oversight authority over margin requirements on stock-index futures, which it has delegated to the CFTC.
In addition to raising the margin requirements for speculators, the Chicago Merc is also raising the initial and maintenance margin requirements for hedgers in stock-index futures to $10,000 from $8,000.
Some economists suggested the Chicago Merc may be acting because it is concerned about a brutal sell-off in stocks if the Fed raises interest rates.
On Monday, a day before the Chicago Merc's move, Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan warned the Joint Economic Committee of Congress that the Fed would boost short-term interest rates "at some point" but refused to speculate about when it might do so or how high rates might rise.
The Chicago Merc "is, in effect, saying that they think the odds of Fed tightening have increased," said Edward Yardeni, chief economist at C.J. Lawrence.
"The Chicago Merc did the prudent thing: They want to make sure that people who are betting on the stock market are well-capitalized," he said.
Mr. Yardeni added that if the Fed did indeed weigh upon the exchange to raise its margin requirements, "one could assume that the Fed is gearing up to tighten monetary policy and they don't want to create a destabilizing sell-off in the market."
Initial margin requirements on stock index futures have varied significantly during the past decade and have been as high as $22,000 for speculators.
The Chicago Merc, under pressure from regulators, raised margin requirements on stock-index futures after the October 1987 crash and again after the Iraq invasion of Kuwait.
But, during the past two years, the Merc has been lowering the initial margin requirements on stock-index futures.
Thomas Gallagher, head of institutional equities at Oppenheimer, said the Merc's move suggests the exchange is concerned about the level of speculation in the market.
"It means that the people who run the exchange think that speculation is getting a little bit scary and they are making it harder for people to speculate," he said.
