Metallgesellschaft AG plans a series of divestitures as it changes into a streamlined holding company of three operating divisions for its trading, engineering and chemicals activities.
Chairman Kajo Neukirchen, the turnaround specialist who is restructuring the German company after its near-bankruptcy last week, said that the industrial concern will part with "numerous" domestic and foreign holdings in the medium term.
Mr. Neukirchen also said the work force of 58,000 will have to be substantially reduced.
Planned divestitures include Metallgesellschaft's small stake of less than 10% in methanol-producer Methanex Corp. of Vancouver, British Columbia, and the Korf steel operations in Brazil.
The official again listed Metallgesellschaft's 49% interest in Kolbenschmidt AG, a German auto parts supplier, as another holding up for sale.
Among its trading activities, Metallgesellschaft intends to restructure or sell loss-makers and capital-intensive units lying outside of the company's core operations.
Mr. Neukirchen was more specific in listing the companies that Metallgesellschaft intends to keep.
"Not for sale," he said, are:
-- Metallbank AG, the group's merchant banking unit.
The company previously had mentioned Metall Mining Corp., an international mining concern based in Toronto, as a spinoff candidate.
A Metallgesellschaft spokesman said the company's majority holding in MMC wasn't included on Mr. Neukirchen's latest list because of legal considerations that could delay its sale.
In the longer term, however, he said Metallgesellschaft may not be able to afford the capital demands of the big mining group.
The spokesman said the planned divestitures were only a partial list of what the company plans to unload in coming months.
He said more details on planned divestitures are likely to be announced at a news conference next month.
This is to come between a Feb. 11 meeting of the company's supervisory board and a Feb. 24 shareholders meeting, in which management will seek approval on a capital increase to raise 1.4 billion marks ($801.8 million).
Frankfurt analysts said the rough outline of the future Metallgesellschaft appeared to be going in the right direction, but judged that much more would be needed to restore investor confidence in the striken company.
At the close of trading on the Frankfurt stock exchange Thursday, Metallgesellschaft was down 2.8% at 238 marks from a day-earlier 245 marks.
The stock was later quoted at 237 marks in after-hours computer trading.
Metallgesellschaft's shares are still down nearly 50% after senior management was sacked in December on disclosures of 1.8 billion marks in operating losses and another 1.5 billion marks in potential losses from oil trading.
The company was pulled back from bankruptcy on Saturday after banks agreed to a 3.4 billion-mark financial rescue plan.
The package includes a 1.3 billion mark debt-for-equity swap, 700 million marks in new credits, and the 1.4 billion-mark share capital increase.
"It's obvious the company wants to concentrate its operations, but they'll have to show more," said Michael Broeker, who follows Metallgesellschaft for Bank Julius Baer in Frankfurt.
"The banks gave them new money on the condition that they sell off operations to raise cash."
