As the Mexican army braces itself for new attacks by the self-styled Zapatista National Liberation Army (EZLN) in the southern state of Chiapas, many Mexicans and most outside observers continue to harbor illusions about the nature of the revolt and the region itself.
Chiapas is the Peru of Mexico.
It and the neighboring state of Yucatan essentially encompass the historical zone of the ancient Mayas.
Unlike the rest of Mexico, these two states stood aloof from the successful process of biological intermixing (known as mestizaje) that helped to alleviate and dissolve ethnic tensions throughout the centuries of colonial rule.
A peculiar despotism, ethnic in its origins, typifies the authorities' treatment of the people at every level, including in the home.
In the past it was the feudal landowners (known as encomenderos), mayors, village bosses (known as caciques), governors and even priests who dictated their own terms to the indigenous population.
Today, the caciques, governors and presidents of town councils still dictate terms, but they are all integrated into the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI).
Because of this background and the revolutionary cloak worn by the "Zapatista" rebels, some analysts have classified the recent battles in Chiapas as a typical indigenous or peasant rebellion, like those that occurred during the three centuries of Spanish rule (1521-1821); or, to bring it closer to our days, an agrarian revolt like that led by the revolutionary icon Emiliano Zapata, whose name the guerrilla army has adopted.
There is no shortage of voices both at home and abroad spreading this romantic idea.
But this is not a classic Zapatista peasant uprising -- a freedom struggle over a concrete agrarian grievance, fought in a specific geographical region and settled by violence.
Nor is it like the indigenous uprisings of the colonial period, which were spontaneous and reactive.
This is a premeditated war.
It has, during its lengthy planning, absorbed the guerrilla experience of the 1960s in Mexico and of the 1980s in El Salvador and Nicaragua.
From eyewitness descriptions, it's clear that the rebel leaders in Chiapas are not of indigenous or peasant stock, and their stated goals are very different from those of Zapata.
His primary goal was to restore the lands appropriated from the landowners to the dispossessed indigenous communities.
Unlike today's rebels, he never wanted to take the capital or to introduce socialism.
In fact, the notion that Mexico should revert to an economic system employed only by the most retrograde dictatorships runs contrary to Zapata's respect for democratic principles; at which election did the Mexican people vote for socialism?
The hierarchy in the Chiapas uprising is clear.
At the base of the guerrilla pyramid lie the Indian and mestizo peasants.
Although they fight hard to settle real and concrete grievances concerning political oppression and social and economic inequality, they are also aroused by the religious preaching of thousands of catechizers.
These soldiers of Liberation Theology advocate the use of violence to instill the teachings of Jesus Christ and to achieve perfect equality on earth.
The Indians offer their fervor and lives, the catechizers their sermons.
Judging by their communiques, the rebel commanders are professional, urban guerrillas with university educations.
They are similar in profile to those in Central America or Peru.
Some of them are most likely veterans of these guerrilla movements who have at their command the huge arsenals no longer needed in their home countries.
Who is financing them?
Backing may come from kidnapping or misappropriation of official funds.
Perhaps the most likely source of income is drug-trafficking, which is common in this region.
As a national military threat, this guerrilla force has no future.
The country is too large, urban and, in some respects, developed for generalized social violence to prosper.
Nevertheless, whatever the outcome of the Chiapas uprising, it will change the future of Mexico.
The lesson to be learned is clear: If Mexico wishes to pursue the course of modernity, it is imperative that it create effective ways and means to provide social support and economic exchange systems for the poverty-stricken throughout Mexico.
And the practical success of this lesson depends on one prior condition: democracy.
If the members of the town councils in Chiapas were elected by the people, rather than being named by the central government and the local caciques, the peasants could then select the methods that would best serve them to improve their desperate conditions of economic hardship and social injustice.
This democratic reform from bottom to top and from the margins to the center is not a utopia: all it requires is respect for the vote at every level.
But how can this be achieved?
Perhaps the best formula would be a national agreement on democratic transition signed by all the parties and their candidates.
The PRI does not necessarily have to step down from power.
However, for the first time in its long history, it does have to consider that possibility and to permit impartial and independent electoral bodies to have the final say concerning the elections.
Throughout the centuries, Mexico has been torn between the magnetic attraction of the past and the call of the future.
Most of Mexico has already embraced the future.
No democratically elected president -- not even the statist candidate Cuauhtemoc Cardenas -- could invert this process.
Both the rebellious and the peaceful indigenous peoples of Chiapas speak from a remote past, but they have no desire to remain there.
On the contrary, they are striving for the same as everyone else in the nation.
If Mexico makes the most of this malleable moment to launch a program of political reform as far-reaching as its economic reform, the moral force of society will disarm the guerrillas and put them back where they belong: in an exhibition room next to the PRI dinosaurs in the History Museum.
Mr. Krauze is an author and co-editor of Vuelta magazine.
This article was translated by Charlotte Broad.
