When the elephant stumbles, not all the ants get crushed.
Last week's disappointing earnings news from microchip giant Intel Corp. may have sent tremors throughout the technology sector, but few money managers who play among small-capitalization technology issues are running for cover.
Indeed, some market pros strongly believe that an array of small-cap technology issues, particularly in the computer-networking, semiconductor and telecommunications fields, can easily weather the effects of Intel's disappointing news and move higher.
Those money managers and analysts figure that a mild correction in some of the smaller tech stocks is healthy because many of the group's issues have been trading at or near recent 52-week highs.
Buy on dips, they recommend.
"With Intel missing earnings estimates by four cents a share, you can't say `It's lights out for technology,'" asserts Roland Gillis, senior portfolio manager for Keystone Custodian Fund's S-4 Fund in Boston.
Money managers such as Mr. Gillis suggest that small-cap companies in the advanced electronic/information technology arena are strongly positioned to post sustained earnings growth -- a prerequisite for maintaining investor interest in an earnings-driven market.
But nobody's recommending throwing caution to the wind.
The fact that Intel, a Santa Clara, Calif., behemoth, could tumble 4 3/4 last Wednesday after coming up short of analysts' $1.39 consensus earnings forecast for the fourth quarter points up the sensitivity of tech stocks -- big or small -- to earnings disappointments.
(Intel's stock, infact, has recovered somewhat, climbing 1 1/4 Thursday and 1 3/8 Friday to close at 65 1/8.)
The trick, say money managers, is to pick selectively and hold for the long term.
Says Drew Peck, a semiconductor analyst with Cowen & Co. in Boston: "Nervous investors can't really sell entire groups at this point because there are so few other options.
So you're seeing the dissection of individual stocks that disappoint."
Thankfully, he says, "those alleged disappointments have generally been pretty minor."
Overall, "the outlook for the semiconductor industry is quite bright because of the expanding consumer-electronic and telecommunications sectors," says Mr. Peck.
But don't look for barn-burners, he cautions.
"Many of these stocks had a big 1993 run and, as a consequence, the upside for the group may be limited -- we're already seeing more selectivity among investors."
That holds true not only for semiconductors but the broad range of small-cap tech companies, savvy investors say.
Mr. Gillis, the Keystone fund manager, likes two companies engaged in the computer networking business, 3Com Corp. of Santa Clara, Calif., and Chipcom of Southborough, Mass.
What attracts him to 3Com, a low-cost provider of networking adapter boards (devices that connect personal computers to a network), is the company's ability "to grow in a low-margin marketplace, to introduce new products and, more recently, to move into higher-margin businesses," such as the networking router and hub markets.
Mr. Gillis favors Chipcom, in which his fund holds more than 300,000 shares, because the company operates in one of the "fastest-growing product lines in telecommunications, the hub market."
Hubs are intelligent switching systems, or what amount to electronic traffic cops for networks, and tend to be higher-profit-margin products.
Chipcom, he says, may see its earnings grow as much as 40% this year to $2 a share.
While Chipcom's stock is trading at a rich multiple of nearly 44 times trailing earnings, "its multiple relative to expected growth is low," Mr. Gillis says.
What also holds his interest is the fact that International Business Machines has been successfully marketing Chipcom's core product through a joint venture.
Computer networking stocks, including 3Com, also figure prominently in the hot Seligman Communications and Information Fund, last year's best-performing portfolio out of 20 science and technology stock funds, according to rankings by Lipper Analytical Services.
The $112 million-asset fund was up 35.7% last year and is up 7% so far this year.
Paul Wick, the portfolio's New York-based manager, says he wants to be invested in companies that "have strong secular growth" and have largely proprietary products, so that clients cannot easily go to competing vendors for essentially the same item.
He's therefore avoiding such banged-up sectors as computer-disk-drive makers and PC makers, which are suffering from overcapacity and vicious price wars.
In addition to 3Com, he holds stakes in a handful of networking and related software companies: Standard Microsystems, a manufacturer of local-area network equipment; Xyplex, a producer of datacommunications network systems, and FTP Software.
But the bulk of the Seligman technology portfolio is comprised of small-cap microchip makers and microchip-equipment manufacturers.
"These stocks are notoriously volatile, but people are going to just have to live with that volatility if they feel any kind of conviction about the positive secular trends," influencing the industry, he says.
One important trend, he asserts, is growing demand for "embedded intelligence" chips used in antilock brake systems, video games, remote-control devices and the like.
Three favorites: Zilog Inc., Dallas Semiconductor and Microchip Technology.
"All three have proprietary products, which enables them to have above-average profit margins."
Among small-cap chip suppliers to the portable electronics industry, Mr. Wick favors Maxim Integrated Products, a Sunnyvale, Calif., company that has had 30% compounded earnings growth for the past four years.
"What Maxim's products do is maximize battery power in battery-intensive portable electronic devices, such as cellular phones and portable PCs," he says.
Maxim, he notes, has had 30 consecutive quarters of higher revenue and earnings.
As for chip-equipment makers, Mr. Wick is bullish on Asyst, a small manufacturer of robotic-arm equipment used in miniature clean-room environments; Lam Research, which makes etching equipment used for the production of advanced semiconductors; and Cognex, which produces machine-vision systems that inspect for quality control in chip production.
Celadon Group Inc., an international freight concern, surged to 17 1/2 from its offering price of $14.50.
Mr. Coffee Inc., Bedford Heights, Ohio, jumped 2 1/4 to 14.
The company said it has received an offer to discuss "a possible business combination with a potential buyer."
Further details weren't disclosed.
Eldec Corp., Lynnwood, Wash., rose 1 1/2 to 9 1/4.
The maker and designer of electronic and electromechanical products said it has been approached by several companies that have expressed an interest in acquiring Eldec.
The Russell 2000 Index climbed to its eighth straight closing high, rising 0.43 point, or 0.16%, to end at 263.80.
The index charts the performance of small-capitalization stocks traded on the Nasdaq Stock Market and the major exchanges.
