At the outset of what promises to be a broad effort to increase scrutiny of wrap accounts, the Securities and Exchange Commission proposed the first specific disclosure rules in this area.
These accounts are investment programs sponsored by broker-dealers who "wrap" together asset-management, financial-planning and brokerage services for one annual fee, typically 3% of assets.
The agency wants wrap-account sponsors to provide descriptive brochures to account holders separate from the currently mandated documents that cover all products offered by investment advisers.
"We have found that current disclosure about wrap fee programs in general is not as clear or concise as it should be," said SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt.
But brochures are just the beginning.
"This is the first of three steps in our attempt to come to grips with wrap accounts," said Barry Barbash, director of the SEC's division of investment management.
One of the SEC's goals is to learn exactly how many investors and how much money are in wrap accounts.
The agency hasn't collected that data since wrap programs were introduced in the early 1980s, and estimates of total dollars invested vary wildly.
Mr. Barbash suggested $50 billion or higher; SEC Commissioner Carter Beese quoted figures of $40 billion and $90 billion -- from two different news articles by a single reporter.
Similarly, the SEC is a little hazy about what problems investors may be having with wrap accounts.
These investment programs "tend to have systems for dealing with complaints," so disgruntled investors are less likely to call the SEC, said Robert Plaze, assistant director of the SEC's investment management division.
And because wrap accounts require large investments from the outset, sometimes starting at $100,000, account sponsors respond to complaints quickly.
"These things are like valet services," Mr. Plaze said.
Nevertheless, SEC Chairman Levitt said the agency has "a number of reservations about certain aspects of these programs."
"We are concerned that these programs may impose excessive costs on customers, who may not realize exactly what service their fees are buying," Mr. Levitt said at a commission meeting yesterday.
"And the relationship between the program sponsor and the various service providers that it engages may not be entirely clear to customers.
We will be examining these questions further."
The SEC's first step is the proposed requirement of a separate brochure from wrap-account sponsors, laying out the cost of the program, the services provided, conflicts of interest that the sponsor may have and other relevant information.
Wrap accounts would have to disclose what percentage of the annual fee is paid to the wrap manager, but wouldn't have to disclose what percentage of that fee is paid to the broker.
Wrap-account providers wouldn't be required to disclose performance of money managers; if they did choose to report performance, they wouldn't be required to report performance in a uniform way.
However, they would have to disclose that they weren't applying a uniform standard.
The SEC will collect comments on the proposal for 45 days before considering a final rule.
Wrap-account information currently is part of the broad disclosure statements filed by investment advisers and updated annually.
Mr. Barbash said the proposal to obtain more information about wrap accounts could lead to an effort to overhaul disclosure requirements for all investment advisers.
The next step for wrap accounts probably will be an SEC staff directive reminding wrap-account sponsors of their duty to ascertain that wrap accounts are suitable investments for their clients and reminding wrap-account managers of their duty to obtain the best execution of customer orders, Mr. Barbash said.
Third, Mr. Barbash said the SEC intends to heighten its monitoring of wrap accounts, including increases in targeted inspections of the literature and sales practices of wrap-account sponsors.
