While the Clinton administration was battling with Japanese officials in Washington last month, the European Union's trade minister, Sir Leon Brittan, was in Brussels doing just the opposite.
He introduced a "Gateway to Japan" export promotion in concert with Tokyo.
Sir Leon, criticizing the U.S. approach as "a demonstration of managed trade," also renewed an EU program to teach Japanese language and business techniques to Europeans.
A week earlier, the EU tossed out thousands of national quotas that had protected European countries.
The developments underscore a shift on both sides of the Atlantic.
The U.S., self-styled free trader, appears to have grown frustrated with that approach and is leaning toward protectionism.
The Europeans, traditionally unrepentant protectionists, are now nurturing a cozy alliance with Japan, shedding trade barriers and encouraging Japanese investment.
The reversal poses a huge risk for Europe.
Many European countries had limited Japanese intrusion for years with the very protectionist policies they are now abandoning -- only to adopt a nice-guy approach that already failed for the U.S.
"Our market was closed to Japanese exports for many, many products," says Marco Pannacciulli, a trade policy specialist with Confindustria, the Italian manufacturers' association.
As a result, Italy in 1991 claimed only 1.2% of total Japanese exports, the lowest level in the EU.
Germany had 6.6%; the U.K., 3.5%; and the U.S., 30%.
But with the EU's opening of markets, Italy has seen a "slow but steady" increase in Japanese imports.
Though Confindustria supports the EU's moves, Mr. Pannacciulli warns, "This could create many problems.
We cannot allow Japanese companies to destroy important sectors of European industry."
While Europe's new tack has helped it to avoid the acrimony now brewing between the U.S. and Japan, it's not clear which strategy -- if either -- will work best.
Europe's trade deficit with Japan remains lower, an estimated $30 billion in 1993 compared with $59.3 billion for the U.S.
Since 1980, the U.S. trade imbalance has ballooned more than sixfold, about double the rate of increase in the EU's deficit.
Takashi Osawa, Nissan Motor Corp.'s manager of government affairs in Brussels, says the "softer approach" of the EU means "Europeans fare much better in Japan than Americans."
The U.S.'s tough line, he says, turns Japanese consumers against U.S. goods.
On the other hand, Europe's deficit of $30 billion -- up sharply in recent years -- isn't anything to brag about.
And Japanese investment in Europe has surged in recent years.
Some believe the EU will be forced to return to a harder line in the future as it feels the full effect of Japan Inc.'s exports and direct investment; both have been far below the level in the U.S. Llew Aviss, a Fujitsu Ltd. official in England, argues that Europe can afford to be laid back because it already lost its high-tech manufacturing edge to the U.S. and Japan.
At the same time, Europe risks getting squeezed out of the Japanese market if the U.S. wins a guaranteed market share.
Japan shied away from Europe in the past because it was a fractured and highly protected market.
Before the EU -- formerly the European Community -- had a common trade policy, southern European countries such as France and Italy kept the Japanese at bay by using some of the Asian country's own tactics: quotas and invisible barriers.
Italy limited Japanese auto imports to only about 3,000 a year, while France unofficially limited Japan to 3% of the market.
In one case in 1982, France tried to thwart VCR imports from Japan by making them clear customs in the inland town of Poitiers.
Of course, the Europeans haven't totally abandoned their heavy-handed trade policies.
Indeed, Vincent Cable, head of the Royal Institute of International Affairs economics program, warns that Europe remains "appallingly protectionist" in some areas, and on balance is a more difficult market than the U.S. for Japanese imports.
Japan was the EU's favorite target for antidumping and antisubsidy cases between 1987 and 1991, when duties were slapped on Japanese ball bearings, fax paper, disposable lighters, halogen lamps, CD players and other goods.
Even now, some EU members are requesting limits on cars produced in Europe by Japanese companies.
In recent days, Honda Motor Co. has been fuming about the sale of Rover Group, in which Honda has a minority stake, to Bayerische Motoren Werke AG, against Honda's wishes.
But the EU has clearly adopted a softer Japan policy than its more strident members once did.
In part this is because of the dominance of northern countries such as Germany and Britain, which have taken more of a free-trade stance, over more protectionist Italy and France.
On Feb. 8, the EU declared it had tossed out 6,417 different national quotas, replacing them with a handful of Europewide quotas that Dr. Cable calls "less restrictive."
A Europewide quota for cars last year -- similar to the Voluntary Restraint Agreements in the U.S. -- allowed a generous 1.1 million Japanese vehicles, more than Japanese producers could actually sell.
Japan and Europe have also set up a joint "Trade Assessment Mechanism" to monitor their balance of payments.
For better or worse, the Europeans' new openness may foster links with Japan that will soon rival the U.S.-Japan ties.
"Since the 1980s, Europeans have been in the process of rediscovering Japan," says Noriko Hama of the Mitsubishi Research Institute in London.
Ms. Hama says the Europeans could use the shift as a "wedge" to prevent a Pacific alliance.
"The Europeans would clearly like to exploit this relationship," she says.
Japanese investment has surged in Europe since the late 1980s, and now accounts for 20.7% of Japan's foreign investment.
Japan's companies invested some $13 billion in Europe between 1990 and 1992, according to the Japan External Trade Organization.
With half of the investment going to Britain, there are now 198 Japanese-owned companies in that country.
Part of the reason for Europe's calm relations with Japan is tradition.
While the U.S. and Japan have viewed each other as main trading partners, the Europeans have traded mostly among themselves.
Some 60% of EU trade is intra-EU, and only 10% of external trade is with Japan.
Japanese investment is seen more as a source of technology and employment than a political threat.
"Japan is a relatively small trading partner and is not seen as particularly as a threat," says Dr. Cable of the Royal Institute.
Europeans, particularly the British, Dutch, Danes and Germans, "have taken the view that there are positive benefits from our relation with Japan," he says.
