Bond traders and investors came to work in a bad mood yesterday, and neither their spirits nor Treasury issues made any gains: Prices fell from the start of trading here.
The sour sentiment and falling prices stemmed from the frustration of waiting for another sign from the Federal Reserve as to where it wants short-term interest rates to be.
Yesterday, the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dropped nearly 5/8 point, or nearly $6.25 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, to 91 6/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, rose to 6.95% from 6.90% on Friday.
"I believe strongly that the Federal Reserve is following the markets rather than leading them" in terms of interest rates, said Edward Riley, chief investment officer at Private Bank, in summing up the feeling of being cast adrift that he and many other big bond investors are experiencing.
Private Bank is a money-management arm of Bank of Boston.
Many are hoping the central bank will finally give a clear signal of its wants for monetary policy as soon as today , when the bank's policy-making Federal Open Market Committee meets.
The Fed controls monetary policy by exerting pressure on short-term rates.
The Fed last raised rates on Feb. 4.
Trade was light throughout the day, but what took place was clearly dominated by sellers, as few players were willing to take on new bonds before an FOMC meeting.
And late yesterday morning, many of the legion of frustrated bond players on Wall Street became even more frustrated when a story hit the Dow Jones Capital Markets Report news wire that seemed to them to indicate the central bank was far from decided on what it wanted to do with rates.
Dow Jones Capital Markets Report is owned by Dow Jones & Co., publisher of this newspaper.
The Dow Jones story said senior officials at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which executes the central bank's day-to-day chores in the money and bond markets, have been polling the 39 primary dealers of government securities as to what the Fed should do to calm the bond market.
Since it raised the federal-funds rate, the rate banks charge each other for overnight loans, from 3% to 3.25% on Feb. 4, the yield of the 30-year bond has jumped more than 0.60 percentage point.
Bart Sotnick , a spokesman for the Fed said late yesterday that "we have not been asking anything unusual."
The 30-year bond, down already by around 1/3 point, fell even further yesterday after the story ran.
But by the afternoon, traders and analysts began to have some misgivings about the idea that the Fed was doing anything other than its normal routine, and prices came off the lowest levels as dealers covered short positions.
In a short sale, a trader or investor sells a borrowed security on a bet prices will drop.
Covering the short means buying securities to replace the borrowed ones.
Explaining why the market was able to stage a mild recovery late in the day, Andrew Brenner, vice president in government securities at Nomura Securities International Inc., said: "The Fed was asking what would stabilize the market.
They just want to know what's going on."
The story suggested that the Fed was asking some of these kinds of questions during its daily calls to primary dealers.
Every morning, the New York Fed's own traders telephone dealers to chat informally about market conditions in what bond desks call a "moment-on-the-market" talk.
Mr. Brenner, like many of his colleagues figured the rumors may have been sparked by these calls.
"That's more of a normal kind of question," Mr. Brenner says of asking about what might stabilize the market.
"I've answered them numerous times," he said.
While Treasury players normally might not spend so much of the day assessing the value of the Fed's conversations with the dealer community, they were inclined to do so yesterday because the news came before an FOMC meeting and just on the heels of what some said was an unusual act by the Fed last week.
Last Friday, Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan canceled a speaking engagement in Houston to meet with President Clinton.
Though the White House tried to assure the markets that the purpose of that meeting wasn't to try to influence the Fed's decision-making process, bond players didn't like the feel of it, and they erased gains made midweek when Labor Department reports were released that showed inflation under control.
"Does the president meet routinely with the Fed chief?
Was the Friday meeting routine?
No," said Michael Strauss, an economist at Yamaichi International America Inc.
Whether Treasury traders and big investors like the way the Fed is handling monetary policy or not, none want to see the Fed become beholden to the politics of the executive branch, Mr. Strauss explained.
Like most other economists following the Fed, Mr. Strauss thinks that the central bank will raise rates sometime this week or soon thereafter.
While that's generally anticipated, what hasn't been nailed down is how much the Fed will raise rates.
The Fed controls short-term rates by adding or draining enough reserves from the banking system to change its target for the federal-funds rate.
Some bank watchers say the FOMC will vote to raise it another 0.50 percentage point, while almost as many expect just a 0.25 percentage point hike.
Mr. Riley of Private Bank would like to see the federal-funds target climb to 3.75%, but he envisions how the politically sensitive Fed could limit itself to a quarter-point hike.
"Clinton wants no hike, Greenspan wants 50" basis points, Mr. Riley explained.
(A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.)
"The compromise is 25 {basis points} and call it even."
The Clinton administration, while never openly calling for a limit to the Fed's autonomy, has said that raising rates at this point could jeopardize the headway the economy has made.
But Mr. Greenspan and economists have generally decried the idea that raising rates could put the recovery at risk, stating that there are signs of incipient price pressures in the economy.
"In the areas where we're seeing strength, we're starting to see producers able to raise prices," said Mr. Riley.
He cites the auto, steel, lumber and housing industries as examples.
Bond buyers abhor inflation, or even the threat of it, because it erodes the buying power of securities with a fixed rate of return, like Treasury securities.
As if the worries over what the Fed will do aren't enough, the Treasury market has to make room for new supply.
The Treasury is slated to sell $17 billion in two-year notes today and $11 billion in five-year notes tomorrow .
Late yesterday the two-year note was yielding 5.14% in when-issued trading, while the five-year note was yielding 6.05%.
Separately, the Treasury sold 13-week and 26-week bills at its regular weekly auction.
Here are the results:
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon-equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year.
Both issues are dated March 24.
The 13-week bills mature June 23, 1994, and the 26-week bills mature Sept. 22, 1994.
Digital Equipment Corp. surprised market participants yesterday by reducing the size of its first planned offering of preferred stock by $100 million to $400 million.
The computer company's offering was priced with a dividend yield at the high end of expectations.
Trading in the investment-grade market was light, with yield spreads over comparable Treasury securities changing little.
Junk bond market trading was also light, with prices ending down 1/4 to 1/2 point.
Digital Equipment's decision to cut the size of its deal didn't affect the placement of the offering, said Bradley Jack, global debt syndicate manager at lead manager Lehman Brothers Inc.
He said about 80% of the deal was sold to retail investors.
"It's a good, tightly priced well-distributed deal, given that this market is treacherous," he said.
The preferred stock was priced at par for an 8.875% dividend yield.
The 16 million shares were priced at $25 each.
Originally, the company had said it would sell 20 million shares.
Preferred stock is like a bond in that it pays a fixed dividend, much like the fixed coupon on a bond.
The preferred stock, which is noncallable for five years, is rated Ba1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and triple-B-minus by Standard & Poor's Corp.
Last week, S&P said Digital has a negative long-term rating outlook and that continued losses by the Maynard, Mass., company could prompt a ratings downgrade.
Digital sold its first preferred offering on schedule although a number of other issuers stayed on the sidelines yesterday in anticipation of today's meeting of the FOMC.
The Digital offering surprised syndicate officials, who noted that it is unusual to market a large issue and then to reduce its size at pricing.
Digital's decision to cut the size of its offering was viewed as a negative sign, one preferred-stock trader noted.
"The problem with Digital is the company," not the pricing, he said referring to S&P's negative rating outlook.
Digital viewed its first foray into the preferred market as a success, said Jim Chiafery, a manager of shareholder relations at Digital.
Digital's shareholders voted last November to authorize the sale of preferred for the first time, he added.
"We are just glad to raise $400 million in a difficult market," Mr. Chiafery said.
Prices of municipal bonds ended as much as 1/2 point lower after a slow session.
Among secondary issues, the Massachusetts Health and Educational Facilities Authority's 5.75% bonds of 2024 finished about 3/8 lower at 96 1/2 to yield 5.98%.
With jitters about the FOMC meeting depressing bond prices and boosting yields, some muni issuers are changing their debt-selling plans.
CS First Boston Inc. said the pricing of the Pennsylvania Higher Education Facilities Authority's $282.3 million issue of health-services revenue bonds has been postponed and put on a day-to-day basis.
The pricing had been scheduled for today.
While that issue has been put on hold, a J.P. Morgan Securities Inc. group still plans to price New York City's $685.7 million of fixed-rate, tax-exempt Fiscal 1994 bonds today .
Those bonds are part of an issue that is seen totaling about $1.1 billion.
The concurrent offering of $379.2 million of adjustable-rate bonds is expected to be priced a number of days after the sale of the fixed-rate bonds.
Among the other offerings still scheduled to come to the market today is a Philadelphia School District issue of $160 million of general obligation bonds.
Merrill Lynch & Co. is the managing underwriter.
Prices of mortgage-backed securities ended lower.
The more generous yields could attract buyers to the market, but mortgages are unlikely to reach their "fair value," until the volatility in the bond market disappears, says Rajiv Sobti, head of mortgage quantitative research at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp.
At the close of yesterday's session, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold 7% securities were yielding 7.53%, 0.97 percentage point above the Treasury's 5.875% 10-year note, a pricing benchmark for recently issued mortgage securities.
The yield spread between Freddie Mac 7% issues and the 10-year note was 0.94 percentage point at the close of trading Friday.
Earlier this month, Freddie Mac 7% issues yielded only 0.82 percentage point to 0.88 percentage point more than the 10-year note.
"After today's widening, mortgages again should be closer to the `buy zone,' " Mr. Sobti says.
In secondary trading, Government National Mortgage Association 7% issues for April delivery ended 15/32 lower at 97 9/32, Freddie Mac Gold 7% issues ended 14/32 lower at 97 22/32, and Federal National Mortgage Association 7% issues ended 14/32 lower at 97 14/32.
Meanwhile, activity was brewing in the asset-backed securities market, with at least $3.5 billion in supply expected to be priced this week.
Issuers often rush to complete deals by the end of the quarter, causing a last-minute crush of deals.
