Joblessness in the European Union will continue to increase this year and next to a record 11.25%, but it is likely that economic growth will reach 3% in 1996, and thus generate more jobs, the EU Commission said.
The EU economy appears to have reached the trough of the recession, but the recovery is expected to be slow.
The overall loss of output in the current recession could be the most severe in the EU's history, worse than the recessions of 197475 and 1980-83.
Although the economic shrinkage was sharper in 1975, in the wake of the first oil shock, that contraction was preceded and followed by periods of stronger growth.
Still, the main economic indicators have improved, and some of them -- especially the industrial and construction confidence indicators -- are again on a slightly rising trend.
EU-wide inflation fell to 3.8% in 1993 from 4.6% in 1992 and 5.4% in 1991; the inflation rate is expected to decline further to 3.5% this year and 3.2% in 1995.
Iraq is restoring the 2,000-year-old religious and trading city of Hatra for an international arts festival in April.
Iraq had spent about $15 million on refurbishing the city, situated between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers 210 miles north of Baghdad, before the country's 1990 invasion of Kuwait brought United Nations sanctions.
Iraq earmarked millions more dollars last year to prepare Hatra for the festival.
In spite of U.N. sanctions, the country expects the event to draw hundreds of performing troupes and dancers from the Middle East and Europe.
Britons are becoming more afraid of crime, a Readers' Digest survey found.
Of the 2,000 people interviewed, 77% said they were afraid of burglary, compared with 60% in the last such survey in 1987.
In addition, 57% of women surveyed said they feared rape.
However, the government says the vast majority of crimes in Britain are against property rather than violence toward people.
Recorded crime in England and Wales rose 3.8% in 1992 to a record 5.7 million offenses and has risen 74% over the past 10 years.
The European Union Commission called for a massive restructuring of the EU's troubled audio-visual industry.
The proposal says a tax could be levied on television programs and films regardless of their origin, with revenue redistributed to benefit the European industry's restructuring.
The proposal could be adopted as soon as next Tuesday.
The U.S. share of the European market for feature films is estimated at 80%, up from 60% a decade ago.
The European movie market is valued at more than $10 billion a year.
Cuban authorities are clamping down on illicit trade and robbery of farm produce bound for Havana, the Trabajadores newspaper reported.
Nearly a third of produce from Havana province fails to reach the city's consumers.
All farm produce is supposed to be sold to the state, which then distributes it.
In the latest crackdown, vehicles used for illicit trade are to be confiscated, and trucks carrying farm produce will be strictly controlled.
A survey of 18 of Sweden's leading economists shows a sharp split over whether the country, a prospective member of the European Union, should also join the EU's proposed common currency.
This marks a shift from a year ago, when almost all top Swedish economists favored participation in a common EU currency.
The currency union, which would be preceded by fixed exchange rates, is the third phase of the European Monetary Union, part of the 1991 Maastricht agreement on European unity.
The first phase, which calls for allowing free movement of capital between EU states, has largely been accomplished.
The second phase began last year with creation of the forerunner to a European central bank.
South Korea's Finance Ministry announced a sweeping package of looser regulations on capital markets.
As a result, the ceiling for listed companies' investments in other listed firms will rise to 30% of their capital from 20%.
Under the softened regulations, securities firms won't need advance government approval when they buy real-estate valued at less than 50% of their capital, relocate branches or invest in overseas subsidiaries.
The eased regulations are expected to take effect by June.
Investment trust firms will be freed from requirements that they maintain state and public bonds equivalent to 30% of their net bond holdings.
Foreign securities firms will be able to open offices or branches in South Korea unless their head offices have received warnings from their home country regulators in the past two years.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Saudi Arabia has said it will pay $20 million to help Palestinians set up development, health-care and social facilities in Israeli-held territories. . . .
A travel agency in Abkhazia is offering free tours of the breakaway Georgian province, with armed guards included.
The Black Sea region was a popular destination for Russian tourists before fighting broke out there in 1992.
