A routine filing by the law firm of Cyrus R. Vance, the mediator appointed to speed the reorganization of R.H. Macy & Co., is likely to be used by some creditors to raise questions about a number of potential conflicts of interests.
The filing by Simpson Thacher & Bartlett discloses a number of areas where the law firm has done work for parties involved in the Macy bankruptcy court proceeding.
Specifically, Simpson Thacher represented Dillard Department Stores in "the review of various strategies to acquire" parts of Macy.
Dillard considered making an investment in Macy's several months ago, according to people involved in the bankruptcy court proceeding.
The law firm has worked for the Little Rock, Ark., retailer since 1988.
The filing also discloses that the firm represented General Electric Credit when the unit of General Electric Co. bought Macy preferred stock in connection with the 1986 leveraged buyout.
Later, the law firm represented GEC when GEC recapitalized Macy in an attempt to stave off a financial crisis in 1990 and 1991.
Currently, GEC is in negotiations with Macy and Fidelity Investments, a Macy senior creditor, to formulate a joint reorganization plan.
The filing notes that Simpson Thacher has also represented Chemical Banking Corp.'s Chemical Bank unit, currently a lead lender to Macy.
The firm didn't "represent Chemical Bank in connection with its extension of credit" to Macy, according to the document.
However, a Chemical Bank representative involved in the reorganization reacted with dismay at the news of Mr. Vance's appointment.
Creditor groups have until Friday to object to the appointment of Mr. Vance as mediator and his firm as mediating counsel.
Judge Burton Lifland will consider objections at a hearing scheduled for March 3.
One attorney representing creditors said: "We are very concerned about this, and anyone who reads this will be equally concerned."
Mr. Vance and his firm were appointed Tuesday by Judge Lifland.
It is the first time a mediator has been appointed in a Chapter 11 bankruptcy court proceeding in the Southern District of New York.
Mr. Vance, in a statement released yesterday evening, said: "I am pleased to have been designated by the court."
