SENATORS URGED a freeze of aid to Moscow unless it helps in a spy case.
Top U.S. lawmakers, including Democrat DeConcini and Republican Dole, called for a suspension of the aid unless Russia cooperates in the case of Aldrich Ames, accused of giving the KGB details of U.S. spy operations.
But Clinton cautioned, "I think we should be careful before we make specific determinations about aid flows."
In Moscow, officials appealed to the U.S. not to allow the Ames affair to cause a major political rift.
Ames remained in jail but said through his lawyer that he would plead not guilty and wasn't bargaining with the government.
At least two U.S. agents -- officials in the Soviet government working for the CIA -- were killed after being exposed by Ames, according to reports.
The CIA's spokesman couldn't confirm the deaths.
MUSLIMS AND CROATS AGREED to a comprehensive truce in Bosnia.
Under pressure from the West, military chiefs of the Muslim-led government and their second-strongest foes, the Croats, signed a cease-fire accord in Zagreb.
Although earlier truces have collapsed, the accord is expected to gain strength from current diplomatic efforts to extend a truce in Sarajevo to the rest of Bosnia.
Croat-Muslim fighting has raged for a year in central and southern Bosnia following the collapse of their alliance against Serb forces.
If it is to succeed, the Muslim-Croat truce will have to mean an end to the fight for control of Mostar, where 60,000 Muslims are trapped in a Croat siege.
The Supreme Court gave U.S. agencies a broad shield against lawsuits seeking money damages based on alleged constitutional violations.
The decision specifically sheltered the government from suits arising from the cleanup of the savings-and-loan industry.
A report on health care challenges the popular belief that the U.S. can achieve enormous savings by curtailing aggressive, high-technology treatment for dying patients.
Russia's parliament voted to pardon the leaders of an attempted August 1991 coup and hard-liners who led an armed rebellion in Moscow last October.
The amnesty measure passed by a 253-67 vote, with 28 abstentions, indicating that a number of reformoriented and centrist parties supported it.
A new forest-management plan calls for stricter logging controls in Northwest forests.
Administration officials, in outlining their revised plan, cited evidence of further declines in the spotted owl population.
A South African woman was shot and killed during a rally of de Klerk's National Party when one of his supporters opened fire on African National Congress rivals.
The president canceled a planned appearance at the rally after he was hit by a rock earlier in the day.
Mexican rebels reached tentative agreements with government negotiators on about one-quarter of the insurgents' demands, a guerrilla leader said.
He said the accords dealt with health, housing, education and "respect and dignity" for indigenous peoples in Mexico.
Haitian military leaders are preparing to install a transitional government that could rule until the nation's political crisis is resolved, sources close to the military said.
Still to be determined, though, is who would head the three-man junta.
International efforts have stalled on returning ousted President Aristide to power.
Muslim militants detonated a bomb in a first-class car on an Egyptian passenger train traveling from Cairo to Aswan, slightly injuring six foreign tourists and five Egyptians.
Egypt's most active extremist group, the Gama'a, which seeks to install a purist Islamic state, claimed responsibility.
Aidid said he and other Somali faction leaders are near agreement on a transitional government, an initiative the militia chief apparently hopes will foil a U.N. democracy plan.
Aidid said the government would include representatives from 15 factions.
Hong Kong lawmakers adopted the first phase of Gov. Patten's democratic reform package, ignoring the Chinese government's threats to scrap the changes when it takes over the colony in 1997.
