Budget-minded entrepreneurs get great pleasure from saving a bundle on travel.
And courier flights are about the cheapest way to fly overseas.
By babysitting other people's packages on commercial flights, travelers can cut the cost of their international air tickets by 50% to 85%.
In rare cases they can fly for free.
In return, they must plan their travels far in advance -- or be prepared to leave on very short notice -- and surmount a number of other inconveniences.
"For business, it's perfect," contends Manuel Cabral, Miami-based foreign trade adviser for the Chamber of Commerce of Seville, Spain.
"And the prices are incredible."
Mr. Cabral flies as a courier to Madrid from Miami, for work and to visit his family, for about $400 round trip.
That compares with $618 for the least expensive advance-purchase price, and $1,200 for the full-economy fare.
Adds Suzanne Johnson, owner of a gemstone business in Lapeer, Mich.: "It definitely takes a little more planning.
But it's a cheap ticket.
It's easy."
In January, Ms. Johnson flew from Los Angeles to Tokyo, did business there for nine days, then took a pleasure trip to Kobe.
The cost of her air fare: $100.
The best bargains come from booking and flying at the last minute.
A recent New York-Brussels roundtrip, for departure the next day, was $99, while a Los Angeles-Hong Kong round trip, departing four days later, was $275.
Sometimes, when courier companies are desperate for bodies, they'll even give away tickets.
The International Association of Air Travel Couriers, a Lake Worth, Fla., clearinghouse for courier flights around the world, estimates that 35,000 couriers will leave the U.S. this year and another 40,000 will take off from overseas locations.
The number of courier flights available has grown by 25% in the past three years, the association estimates.
With the number of express shipments booming, new courier routes are being added.
For now, most U.S.-originating flights leave from New York, Miami, Los Angeles and San Francisco.
But an increasing number of courier flights are leaving from Chicago, Houston and Washington.
And the number of overseas destinations is growing.
This is how the courier system works: Say a company needs to send some time-sensitive documents overnight to Milan.
The company calls an express shipper, such as Federal Express Corp., which dispatches the parcel to a wholesale courier firm such as Halbart Express of Jamaica, N.Y. Halbart will add that package to its Milan-bound express shipments from United Parcel Service, DHL and other clients.
The courier firm sends that consolidated shipment to Milan in the baggage hold of a regular commercial flight -- as a courier's luggage.
Normally, the courier doesn't even see the shipment but merely hands over the paperwork on arrival.
Couriers travel in economy class and usually get to keep the frequent-flier miles they earn.
With the mileage on top of the savings, "your ticket is basically free," says Mario Sarafraz, owner of an electronics importing company in Emeryville, Calif.
Without a doubt, courier flights are logistically difficult.
Couriers must check in at the courier company's office two or three hours ahead of the flight.
They normally can travel with only one carry-on bag of their own.
Because airlines generally permit just one courier per flight, a companion would have to pay a higher fare to take the same flight, or arrange to be a courier on a different plane or an alternate day.
Courier tickets also stipulate lengths of stay in the destination.
Most flights to Europe require a seven-day stay; Asian flights have a 14- or 30-day turnaround time.
Latin American flights vary between three and nine days.
Usually the courier has to escort a shipment on the return leg as well.
And sometimes things go wrong.
Flights are canceled, courier representatives abroad can fail to show up with the shipment manifests and tickets, and once in a while the courier company bumps the flier who has already paid for the trip.
Some first-timers worry about the legality of the cargo.
Jim Salaz, a former gas-company clerk from Redlands, Calif., went to Bangkok for vacation on his first courier flight in October 1992.
"Oh no," he says he thought, "drug couriers.
I don't want to wind up in some Third World prison, never to be heard from again."
So he checked with his courier broker and United Airlines to make sure his shipment was aboveboard.
On three subsequent courier trips to Thailand, Mr. Salaz started researching how to set up an import-export business.
"People think they'll be asked to carry drugs, money, gold," says an official for World Courier, a New York firm that uses some freelancers.
"There are no handcuffs, no drugs, no ingots," she says.
"That's only in the movies.
We inspect everything that goes out and we make sure it is what it's supposed to be."
Thomas Nordanstad, a Swede who owns an art gallery in New York, found out about courier flights about 18 months ago.
Now he uses them once a month or so for trips to Europe, sometimes traveling to Washington's Dulles Airport to meet the flight he needs.
He uses his weeklong stayovers to meet artists, attend openings, buy contemporary art all over Europe and visit his friends.
"I have a travel budget," Mr. Nordanstad says.
"I managed to save $10,000 last year by staying with friends or at cheap hotels and by flying courier."
The easiest way to tap into this type of travel is through the courier association in Lake Worth, Fla.
