First Interstate Bancorp rejected a tentative merger proposal by Wells Fargo & Co. last week, reflecting the Los Angeles-based bank's wish to remain independent.
Details of the proposal, first reported in American Banker, weren't available.
But according to people familiar with the situation, First Interstate rebuffed the overtures mainly because profits have rebounded in recent years and the bank is expanding on its own through acquisitions.
There was also concern that the executives who helped engineer the bank's turnaround would lose their top positions in any merger with Wells.
Still, analysts said a merger of California's second and third-largest banks would have been a good move.
"It's the deal that makes more sense than any other deal in town but in all probability it isn't going to happen," said one adviser familiar with the spurned bid.
A First Interstate/Wells Fargo merger "would be a bellringer," says James McDermott, president of Keefe Bruyette & Woods Inc.
"It would be a whole new competitive entity in the market with a lot of clout."
Combining the two banks would have created a company with $104 billion in assets compared with the West Coast's goliath, BankAmerica Corp., San Francisco, with assets of $187 billion.
But more than size, Wells Fargo, whose overhead is lower than any big bank, is lured by the opportunity to pare as much as 30% from First Interstate's $2 billion in noninterest expense.
Analysts said that to restart the talks, San Francisco-based Wells would have to offer far more than it considers prudent for First Interstate.
A hostile bid is also unlikely because federal regulators take a dim view of protracted takeover fights that would tend to financially weaken a bank.
Nevertheless, some analysts think First Interstate would seriously consider an offer of at least $90 a share, or almost $7 billion, which is more than twice the company's year-end 1993 book value.
"I hope Wells doesn't pay that," said Thomas Brown, an analyst with Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette.
He noted that Wells Fargo isn't as interested in adding lots of costly branches at a time when many consumer-banking services are delivered electronically.
First Interstate's stock has gyrated during the past week on rumors that it was either selling itself or buying another bank.
Yesterday, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading, its stock closed at $66.75, up $1.875, on volume of 965,400 shares.
Wells Fargo's stock, also listed on the Big Board, closed at $137.625, unchanged, on volume of 322,600 shares.
Officials at Wells Fargo and First Interstate declined to comment on the reported merger bid.
In confirming the failed bid, people familiar with the situation denied a report that First Interstate is still considering the sale of its California bank unit to Wells.
First Interstate officials have said they are intent on expanding California operations, as indicated by a string of recent acquisitions.
The latest purchase, of San Diego Financial Corp., was announced in August.
Sixty-two-year-old Carl Reichardt, Wells Fargo's chairman, hasn't made any secret of his desire to buy a big California rival and use those cost savings to boost profits in a highly competitive period for retail banking.
First Interstate may be Mr. Reichardt's last chance, having lost out to BankAmerica in a bid for Security Pacific Corp. that Mr. Reichardt initiated in late 1990.
