When the executive board of Teamsters Local 705 in Chicago was ousted last year, the officials lost what may have been their biggest perks.
Not one, but eight Lincoln Town Cars, paid for with membership dues, had to be left behind.
All were 1991 or 1992 models, with leather seats, alarms and various other goodies.
Each board member, it turns out, had one.
Ed Burke, who with a team of assistants took charge after the ouster, parked the cars in a brick garage near the Teamster offices.
"I don't see driving up in a Town Car to some picket line where the guy is making twelve bucks an hour and saying, `Hey, I'm your representative,'" says Gerald Zero, assistant trustee.
Mr. Burke gets a $300-a-month car and local-travel allowance from the international union, but notes that he "rode into town in my own pickup truck."
He saw the luxury cars as particularly offensive, given the allegations by the international union's Independent Review Board that Local 705's executive board engaged in a "pattern of financial malpractice."
The former executive board members denied the charges and are fighting their ouster.
Even though union members had already paid for the cars, Mr. Burke decided to give them a chance to sit in the driver's seat.
He's auctioning off all eight to the rank and file, with proceeds going to educational programs at the local.
The cars had cost up to $38,000 each, but bidders had to start at minimums ranging from $10,000 to $17,000.
The results indicate that some of the local's 14,000 members aren't averse to luxury -- at least at second-hand prices.
When a local accountant opened the bids, members had met the minimum bids on seven of the eight cars.
A charcoal gray Signature model had five bidders, topping out at $18,500.
The eventual sale of all eight cars could net the local some $115,000.
That, plus payroll savings from the ousted and retired officials, should help the local balance its budget this year after what Mr. Burke says were seven years of deficit spending.
Mr. Burke, who managed Teamster International President Ron Carey's successful reform campaign in 1991, acknowledges that after the trusteeship ends, a new executive board could order another batch of luxury autos.
But he says he hopes they'll go for "blue-collar cars."
