BLACK MANAGERS often shrug off negative performance reviews from white supervisors, a recent study shows.
But by ignoring such feedback, they may help fulfill their own expectations that they will be treated badly by white managers, says Herdie Baisden, a psychologist who conducted the study.
Mr. Baisden, a vice president with Personnel Decisions in Arlington, Va., looked at how 500 black and 3,600 white managers rated themselves and how they were rated by their supervisors.
The black managers tended to get lower grades than their white counterparts.
And although all the managers thought they did better than their supervisors thought they did, the perception gap was significantly higher for black managers.
Mr. Baisden, who is black, concluded that black managers "discount some of the feedback they get . . . and say `consider the source'" to protect themselves in workplaces they consider to be hostile.
Even positive feedback is discounted.
"We end up with a view of ourselves that clearly is not shared by the boss, which increases the level of conflict," Mr. Baisden says.
"We still don't know why the white managers are rating them lower in the first place," Mr. Baisden says.
But instead of closing down to feedback, black managers should "try their boss's boss or peers or subordinates and see how their views line up," he says.
White managers, he adds, should be frank, consistent and specific in their evaluations of black subordinates to overcome inherent mistrust.
WHILE A DEBATE on multiculturalism is roiling the public relations profession, everyone seems to agree on one thing: The Public Relations Society of America hasn't done enough to bring minorities into the field.
Blacks and Hispanics hold about 6% and 2% of public relations jobs, respectively.
That hasn't changed since 1984, according to federal statistics.
Total industry employment has been flat for a decade.
"You get 30 members of PRSA in a room, and they agree on the need for diversity, but when it comes to their hiring practices we hit a wall," says Cheryl Procter, a member of PRSA's multicultural committee.
As a result, separate black, Hispanic and Asian professional groups have sprung up in recent years "because our leaders felt excluded," says Octavio Nuiry, president of the Hispanic Public Relations Association.
"In an ideal universe, I think we should be in one group . . . but we don't live in a perfect society," says Mr. Nuiry.
Some public-relations veterans think the multiculturalism push isn't doing the profession a lot of good.
Influential trade-newsletter publisher Jack O'Dwyer says the agenda is really about separatism, and "that only makes things harder when the goal should be integration."
Ray Gaulke, PRSA's new chief executive, says multiculturalism has been ineffective so far because the debate fails to address the bottom line: jobs.
"PRSA hasn't said to the membership that this is about jobs, jobs, jobs," he says.
Mr. Gaulke adds that PRSA is committed to nurturing the minority associations and plans to bring them under the PRSA umbrella eventually.
THE MULTICULTURAL Primary Care Medical Group is bringing a new meaning to the term "managed care."
The San Diego group aims to capitalize on the managed-care trend to bring "culturally appropriate" care to medically underserved ethnic communities.
Dr. Rodney Hood organized MCPC a few years ago because minority doctors were being forced to choose between joining medical groups outside their communities, or staying behind and losing patients as more enrolled in health-maintenance organizations and other managed-care plans.
Dr. Hood's goal is to provide care that is sensitive to MCPC's mostly Hispanic, black and Asian-American patients.
The group's doctors speak their patients' languages and know the social and spiritual place caregivers occupy among San Diego's emerging majority of color.
Some older black patients, for example, are put off if doctors young enough to be their children call them by their first name, says Dr. Hood, for reasons rooted in slavery and segregation.
MCPC recently affiliated with the University of California San Diego Healthcare Network, which manages health facilities and is looking to broaden its managed-care options.
MCPC will provide primary care at 24 sites under contract with insurers.
"We're positioning ourselves to get a larger piece of the management finances, to allow us to stay where we are," says Dr. Hood.
Hispanics, Asians and African-Americans, who make up 34% of San Diego county, are the fastest-growing segment of that managed-care market, says Edward Martinez, a consultant to the UCSD network.
Mr. Martinez says the affiliation with MCPC "is really crucial to the university's goal of servicing the entire community and becoming a major player in managed care."
PRODUCER-DIRECTOR Oliver Stone continues to mine Asian and Hispanic cultures for feature films.
His recent films centered on Chinese-American and Vietnamese stories.
Now Mr. Stone will direct a film version of the musical "Evita," after finishing the story of former Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega this year.
That film tentatively stars Al Pacino, who recently portrayed a Puerto Rican gangster and isn't Hispanic. . . .
AfroLink Software, Los Angeles, a black-owned producer of interactive computer software on African and African-American history, has added an Islamic culture program.
The program mixes sound, animation and text and includes a directory of Islamic terms.
