The Conference Board's index of consumer confidence slipped a bit this month in the face of bad weather and rising interest rates.
Although still 20 points higher than it was in October, the index fell to 80.8 from a revised 82.6 in January.
"I don't think it's a significant decline after the whopping big improvement since October," said Fabian Linden, executive director of the business-research organization.
Mr. Linden discounted the drop as too small to have any real meaning.
Consumers' attitudes about their present situation brightened, according to the board's survey, while expectations for the future dimmed.
Expectations have remained significantly higher than feelings about the present for the past year, but the gap has narrowed in the past few months.
The survey of 5,000 households, conducted for the board by National Family Opinion, indicated consumer confidence fell in many areas of the country, with New England taking the biggest plunge -- 19.0 points to 50.8.
Confidence rose in the states west of the Mississippi and east of the Pacific Coast states.
The Mountain region gained most, posting an 11.5-point increase to 118.3.
Mirroring the consumer confidence index, the weather was unusually severe in New England and milder than normal in the Mountain states.
"It's hard to be optimistic while walking through the slush," said Robert Dederick, chief economist for Northern Trust Co.
Economists also said higher interest rates might be having an effect on consumer confidence.
"How much is leaky galoshes and how much is rising interest rates we will have to wait for good weather to tell," Mr. Dederick said.
Despite the small drop in confidence, consumer spending isn't expected to flag.
Sandra Shaber, an economist with the WEFA Group in suburban Philadelphia, said "consumer confidence and consumer spending are not very related."
She expects real, or inflation-adjusted, consumer spending to increase between 3% and 3.5% in 1994.
Presaging the Conference Board's performance, the University of Michigan's consumer-sentiment index for the beginning of February fell 1.4 points to 94.3.
