Fresh from its victory in the battle for Paramount Communications Inc., cable-television programmer Viacom Inc. must now quell shareholder anger at Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. over the slumping price tag of Viacom's planned acquisition of Blockbuster.
Takeover stock traders generally believe the Viacom-Blockbuster merger will still take place, possibly on revised terms, because shareholders who control 23% of Blockbuster stock, including the videostore chain's chairman, Wayne Huizenga, have agreed to vote for the deal.
But many analysts and shareholders are protesting because the deal's current value of roughly $5 billion, or $22.70 a share, for Blockbuster has sunk far below Blockbuster's $33.50-a-share peak stock price in November.
That has happened because Viacom plans to issue millions of additional shares to pay for the Paramount and Blockbuster acquisitions and plans to assume new debt to buy Paramount.
"There is a chance that Blockbuster's institutional shareholders will veto the deal" in a shareholder vote scheduled for sometime in May, said Paul Marsh, an analyst at NatWest Securities Inc.
Overturning the deal would require a landslide vote of roughly 65% of shareholders who haven't agreed to back the deal.
Some traders believe that's a steep hurdle, considering that an organized shareholder revolt in 1992 over terms of an acquisition of Centel Corp. by Sprint Corp. failed to capture a bare majority.
However, other analysts point out that both Centel and Sprint managements campaigned for that deal, whereas some Blockbuster executives are said to be privately fanning the flames of their own shareholder revolt.
In an interview yesterday, Blockbuster's Mr. Huizenga acknowledged some disappointment over the performance of Viacom's stock.
But he predicted it would recover by the time Blockbuster shareholders cast their votes in three months, once executives of Viacom and Blockbuster have a chance to promote "the underlying values of the companies."
And he denied encouraging any shareholder dissent.
Mr. Huizenga said "it would be foolish" for him to ask Viacom Chairman Sumner Redstone to improve the terms of the deal.
"He wouldn't consider that."
But Mr. Huizenga said that if Viacom's stock price didn't bounce back, the Blockbuster board might decide not to recommend the deal to shareholders when it's time to mail proxy statements describing it two months from now.
The price of Viacom Class B shares has fallen 34% since the Blockbuster merger was announced Jan. 7.
The stock has been weaker than expected this week since Viacom won the Paramount bidding war; yesterday, the stock fell $1 a share to $27 in composite trading on the American Stock Exchange.
As a result of Viacom's stock price drop, Blockbuster shares have also fallen 16% since Jan. 7; it closed at $23.625, down 87.5 cents, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.
Mr. Redstone will be stopping by Blockbuster headquarters in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., to meet with Mr. Huizenga today, and Mr. Huizenga said he was certain the subject would come up, "just in discussion."
The Blockbuster deal is important to Viacom's ability to pay the interest costs associated with the $9.7 billion Paramount acquisition, because Blockbuster has strong current cash flow and little debt.
Blockbuster's stock is trading slightly above the current value that Viacom has agreed to pay because traders believe there is a chance that Viacom may have to sweeten the terms of the acquisition, or even that another suitor might emerge to make a higher bid, given the steep fall in the original $30-a-share value of Viacom's bid for Blockbuster.
Striking an understanding tone, Mr. Redstone said earlier this week that he sympathizes with Blockbuster's shareholders.
"I understand it," he said.
"I own 92 million shares of Viacom that are almost half the $55 they were worth."
But he said the weakness in Viacom's stock is a short-term phenomenon.
"We have been willing to take a short-term beating because we feel the ultimate reward" will be a big payoff, he said.
"We are all excited about the potential."
For example, Mr. Redstone pointed out that Blockbuster and Viacom's Showtime unit together will be able to squeeze price concessions on movies and home-video tapes from Hollywood studios, resulting in big savings.
"Between Blockbuster and Showtime, we will be the largest customer of Hollywood," he said.
Before the proxy materials are mailed to shareholders, Merrill Lynch & Co., Blockbuster's investment banker, must restate its opinion that the deal is fair to Blockbuster shareholders.
But that could prove ticklish for Merrill at current stock prices because it served as lead manager of an offering of 14.7 million Blockbuster shares last November at a price of $30 each.
Mr. Marsh of NatWest believes Blockbuster's directors would also be obliged to advise shareholders to reject the proposed deal at current price levels.
"When the Blockbuster board agreed to the merger, Viacom Class B shares were at $42," he said.
"Given the precipitous decline of the Class B shares since then, in my opinion, it would be the board's fiduciary duty to recommend a vote of no."
One large Blockbuster shareholder, who asked not to be named, said a shareholder veto is "a very real possibility."
Lawrence Haverty, an analyst at State Street Research & Management Inc., which owns 3.3 million Blockbuster shares, said, "We're not very happy, and we've communicated that to management."
Blockbuster's Mr. Huizenga had the right to veto any increase in the Viacom offer for Paramount under terms of the Viacom-Blockbuster acquisition.
But he never had a chance to exercise that veto because his lawyers advised him that the last two increases in Viacom's bid for Paramount weren't "material" -- meaning significant enough to trigger the veto power.
The traders who believe the Blockbuster deal will go through say Viacom's stock may well stabilize or rebound once the chief executives of Viacom and Blockbuster intensify their promotional efforts, which began Wednesday with an appearance by Mr. Redstone and Frank Biondi, Viacom chief executive officer, on NBC-TV's "Today Show."
Also, these traders say, some shareholders who oppose the deal now may sell their stock in the meantime.
Indeed, one money manager who opposed the deal, Andrew Graves of Friess Associates Inc. in Jackson Hole, Wyo., said his firm sold its 1.5 million Blockbuster shares after the announcement.
At the same time, some investors who buy Blockbuster stock between now and May may do so because they want the deal to go through, reducing the potential votes against the deal.
