Barry Diller got a blunt message yesterday from Leon Cooperman, one of the largest shareholders of Paramount Communications Inc.: You're losing.
It came during a meeting to promote the takeover bid for Paramount by Mr. Diller's QVC Network Inc. over croissants and coffee at the posh Fifth Avenue offices of Allen & Co., QVC's investment banker.
Unlike a political election, which rides on millions of individual decisions, the Paramount contest will be decided by people like Mr. Cooperman -- the few hundred traders and institutional investors who control a majority of the stock.
Mr. Diller and his bidding rival, Viacom Inc.'s Chairman Sumner Redstone, are in the homestretch of their hard-fought, five-month-old battle.
And they are furiously courting big investors like Mr. Cooperman -- who must decide which bid to accept -- in face-to-face meetings.
Mr. Cooperman, a Wall Street veteran whose Omega Advisers Inc. owns 4.5 million Paramount shares, told Mr. Diller that Omega will tender its 3.8% Paramount stake to Viacom on Monday unless QVC bolsters the value of QVC stock that makes up part of the QVC offer.
Viacom holds an edge in the bidding because it has offered a security that takes some of the risk out of its bid's stock component.
Emanuel Gerard, an entertainment analyst who attended the meeting, said, "Barry is a smart man and handled himself well.
But everyone in the group told Barry that if he doesn't do anything, he's going to lose."
Mr. Diller, bound by bidding rules barring him from changing his offer unless neither side wins a majority of Paramount shares on Feb. 14, said he couldn't make any promises.
But he and executives of Comcast Corp., a QVC investor, hinted they might say more on Feb. 15.
That was the first meeting of the day, which began at 10:15 a.m.
At a second meeting at 11:45 a.m., Mr. Diller and his partners went a bit further.
Edward Hatch, an analyst from UBS Securities Inc. who was present, said, "They said they are considering some mechanism by which BellSouth, and perhaps the other QVC investors, would buy a certain amount of stock at a stated price over a certain number of years."
While Mr. Diller talks to investors in Manhattan, Mr. Redstone and a team of Viacom executives are calling on investors this week in San Francisco, Los Angeles and New York.
One of his planned stops was Capital Group Inc. in Los Angeles, home of the influential media-stock analyst Gordon Crawford, who was a QVC supporter before he sold most of his Paramount stock.
Mr. Redstone is making his case for the combination of Paramount and Viacom, the cable-TV programmer that owns Nickelodeon and MTV, and Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., the video rental chain Viacom agreed to buy to finance a higher Paramount bid.
Although QVC and Viacom made their final offers Feb. 1, they are holding meetings known as road shows, designed to promote their stock.
That's because both offers include equity securities whose value fluctuates according to investors' view of how well each bidder would do with Paramount.
Mr. Diller isn't losing only among short-term traders like Mr. Cooperman.
Mario Gabelli, an institutional investor whose funds own roughly four million Paramount shares, has said he plans to tender at least 2.5 million shares to Viacom.
Some investors say they buy Mr. Diller's story that he would be a superior manager of the Paramount assets.
"I think Barry could do a lot with it," says Randall Haase, a portfolio manager at Alliance Capital Management who plans to tender 300,000 Paramount shares to QVC.
"Diller is a very creative individual.
I would like QVC to be the victor and turn around Paramount."
Some traders are skeptical of QVC's promises, which they view as aimed at sowing confusion in order to thwart Viacom from ending the contest by obtaining 50.1% of Paramount's 120 million shares outstanding.
"Anyone who doesn't tender to Viacom because of vague promises by QVC is crazy," said Mark Dickstein, president of Dickstein Partners Inc., a Paramount holder.
