Clinton administration officials outlined scaled-back welfare-reform proposals that would force participation in some kind of jobs program of only about one-third of all welfare recipients in 1999.
Most of the rest would continue to get welfare benefits without work.
In a meeting yesterday with cabinet members covering the domestic policy areas, representatives from Mr. Clinton's welfare-reform working group explained an optimistic plan that would cost $6 billion in 1999.
It would include child-care programs for the working poor to keep them from slipping onto welfare rolls.
But that plan, which the working group drafted Saturday, culminating months of negotiating, has one catch: it's more than $2 billion short of funds.
Because budget officials have been unable after weeks of searching to find sufficient cuts in other programs to pay for welfare reform, cabinet members were also presented with a more pragmatic, stripped-down alternative costing about $3.6 billion annually in 1999.
What's slashed in the stripped-down plan is child care for the working poor, considered a central element in making welfare reform a reality from the earliest working-group discussions last year.
Without a way to keep young, low-income parents from slipping into welfare, the victories of moving existing recipients off welfare would be undercut by a flood of new recipients, say working-group members.
If more money can be found, they said, that would be the first thing to be restored.
In yesterday's meeting, which administration officials said is probably the first of several such gatherings, cabinet officials also were briefed on key details the working group decided on Saturday.
The surprisingly Spartan version of reform offered yesterday showed how difficult it will be for the president to fulfill his campaign pledges, given budgetary constraints.
No decisions were made at the meeting.
The president expects to get a proposal to Congress by April.
Among the recommendations, recipients would be put into an intensive two-year job-training and placement program after a first child is one year old.
A central feature of Mr. Clinton's plan is to end benefits after that two-year jobs program is completed.
After that, the working group decided, recipients would have to work for wages rather than continuing to receive welfare benefits -- meaning they wouldn't get paid unless they showed up at various community-work jobs.
Though administration officials were projecting the annual cost of welfare reform in 1999 to be as high as $7 billion just last week, they asserted that a program costing half that much still would fulfill the president's much-applauded pledge to "end welfare as we know it."
The $3.6 billion penciled in thus far, just enough for the stripped-down plan, would come from proposed cuts in supplemental security income to noncitizen parents of immigrants, netting $2 billion; cuts in emergency assistance to the states, especially for housing, netting $500 million; and ferreting out fraud and duplication in the earned income-tax credit, passed last year to help the working poor.
The effort to reduce fraud and duplication is expected to net about $100 million -- far less than was originally anticipated.
Another billion or so would come from a wide array of smaller cuts that administration officials say they are now examining.
Also, the slow phase-in is a money saver for both the stripped-down and larger program.
Starting in 1996, the two-year time limit would be mandatory only for recipients born after 1972.
That would account for about 25% to 30% of all welfare recipients in 1997, according to administration officials, and 36% of an estimated 4.7 million adults on welfare in 1999.
Federal funding for the other 64%, about half of whom would be excluded from the program because of disabilities or special circumstances, would be proposed once the program is up and running.
One way money might be found to restore some of the child-care program is through a controversial proposal: a special tax on gambling establishments and the profits of gamblers, which is estimated as bringing in $800 million annually.
But creating a tax, albeit a narrow one, to help the poor is considered politically risky by some of the president's advisers.
