Secretary of State Warren Christopher is in Japan today, charged with the task of "getting tough" about trade.
If the Japanese government does not pretend to comply with the literally impossible demands of the U.S., the administration threatens to raise tariffs to inflate the cost of Japanese goods to American consumers and businesses, thus lowering our real incomes.
This sort of sadomasochistic trade policy is nothing new, of course.
President Nixon got even tougher on Aug. 15, 1971, slapping a 10% tariff on Japanese imports and then deeply devaluing the dollar.
President Reagan and Congress got tough with both Germany and Japan in the summer of 1987, shoving the dollar down and the bond yield up.
And President Hoover got tough with the whole world in 1929.
In each of those previous experiences with trade warfare, there was no visible increase in U.S. exports.
But the impact on world financial markets was swift and decidedly unpleasant.
This time has been no different.
"If Japan were to eliminate all formal and informal barriers to trade, U.S. exports to Japan would initially increase by somewhere in the range of $9 billion to $18 billion a year.
It should be made clear, however, that even if these barriers were eliminated, the bilateral balance would not change by this full amount: Japanese imports would increase initially, but the resultant depreciation of the yen . . . would boost Japanese exports and reduce Japanese imports, at least partly offsetting the initial change in the balance."
No country, least of all the U.S., is ever going to "eliminate all formal and informal barriers to trade."
But even if Japan did that, the president's own advisers say that would have only a rather small and temporary effect on the bilateral trade balance with the U.S.
Most important, the logic of the Council of Economic Advisers clearly shows that if the markets really believed that U.S. trade warfare would increase Japan's imports, then the yen should have fallen.
Instead, the dollar fell to about 103 yen from about 109 yen as soon as the administration began this battle.
The graph shows that whenever the market has expected the yen to rise against the dollar, long-term interest rates fall in Japan.
At the same time, interest rates usually rise in the U.S., or at least do not fall as much as the general world trend.
This lowers the relative cost of capital in Japan and raises it in the U.S. Protectionism always makes the U.S. a less attractive place to invest.
And that makes it harder to finance the U.S. current account deficit.
Long-term capital flees the U.S. stock and bond markets, requiring higher short-term interest rates to offset the loss.
Clearly, the administration's current trade battle has been scaring world capital out of the U.S.
In early February, the European press was already reporting a big surge of Japanese investment in European bonds.
Guess whose bonds they were selling?
Europe became a relatively safe haven.
Although all major bond markets suffered from a flight to liquidity brought on by trade threats, the dollar's weakness at least gave many European central banks an opportunity to lower interest rates.
The week after Feb. 11, when the trade talks were totally scuttled, the exodus from dollar bonds accelerated.
The administration insists that Japan do something that no government could possible do -- namely, guarantee that the private consumers and businesses of Japan will buy specific amounts of certain politically favored U.S. products.
Japan's index of industrial production fell by 11.2% between the third quarters of 1991 and 1993, and by this January it was still down 3.4% from a year earlier.
The Japanese -- who have seen their output, incomes and assets decline for two years or more -- have been in no position to buy much, at home or abroad.
Shoving the dollar down against the yen ultimately has to be deflationary for Japan, inflationary for the U.S., or a little of each.
So far, it has mostly been deflationary in Japan, where producer prices have been falling.
But the situation will be quite different now that Japan is cutting tax rates, in marked contrast to the period since 1988-89 when Japan was piling on new taxes on savings, sales and securities.
No country has ever cut tax rates by 20% without experiencing a big economic boost, almost regardless of the exchange rate.
Just look how strong the U.S. economy was in the early '80s, despite the Fed's 10% to 12% interest rates and the resulting soaring dollar.
Commodities priced in dollars become cheaper in Japan when the yen goes up.
Once Japan's economy gets moving, such bargains must raise Japanese demand for raw materials and thus bid up their prices in dollars.
So Japan ends this round of trade war with cheaper raw materials and relatively cheaper credit, while the U.S. gets the opposite.
From September 1992 to December 1993, the yield on 10-year U.S. bonds declined from 6.41% to 5.74%, or 67 basis points.
The yield on comparable Japanese bonds dropped from 4.99% to 3.25%, or 174 basis points.
President Clinton tries very hard to take credit for last year's drop in U.S. long-term interest rates.
But the drop in nearly all foreign bond yields was far deeper than in the U.S.
By this week, Japan's 10-year bonds were yielding about 4%, compared with over 6.25% for the U.S.
And the yield on 30-year U.S. bonds has now jumped by a full percentage point since mid-October, which is quite hard to blame on a recent quarter-point boost in the federal-funds rate.
What the Clinton administration really does deserve credit for is the deep drop in Japanese bond yields last year, as the administration talked the dollar down.
And the administration also deserves considerable credit for the world-wide flight from bonds, particularly U.S. bonds, since the latest trade skirmish began.
Mr. Reynolds is director of economic research at the Hudson Institute in Indianapolis.
