For two restless years, Muhamed Hodjic has stared at the rain-stained walls of his temporary home, a one-room refugee apartment slightly bigger than a walk-in closet, trying to envision the day when he can return to his real home in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Now, as a U.S. visitor appears at the door, he sees a glimmer of hope that the day may come sooner rather than later.
"America, America," he shouts, stumbling over the chairs in his room to greet the stranger with a tight bear hug and kisses on both cheeks.
"May God be with Clinton and America."
Mr. Hodjic, a 73-year-old Muslim farmer wearing second-hand clothes and a scrubby gray beard, believes that the U.S.'s recent stepped-up involvement in the search for peace will soon carry him back to his precious fields.
"America wants to solve this problem," he says fervently.
"Only America can."
The refugee's enthusiasm, following a long spell of despair, seemingly knows no bounds.
But it also seems to be tragically misplaced.
For it is likely that the U.S. initiative, starting with an agreement between Muslim and Croatian forces to form a federation in their parts of Bosnia, will only add another cruelty to this war: a peace that brings a cease-fire but little justice.
Mr. Hodjic's home near the north-central Bosnian city of Doboj, cleansed of its Muslim residents, is now in Serbian hands.
His homecoming can happen only if the Serbs are persuaded to leave, or are forcibly pushed back.
And then, he says, "we'll need American soldiers to protect us."
Those are all distant prospects.
Neither the U.S. nor its European partners are inclined to use force to push back the Serbs from the 70% of Bosnia they now control.
And with the Serbs unwilling to retreat, it is likely that all sides will settle for a two-way partition of the country.
The violent breakup of the former Yugoslavia has created some two million refugees -- Muslim, Croat and Serb -- who are scattered across the world, from North America through Europe to the Middle East.
A partition of Bosnia will mean that many of them won't be able to return to their homes, leaving an impoverished and bitter diaspora that will be a constant reminder of the unfinished peace, as well as a source of instability in their host countries.
Some of the refugees have settled in with relatives or friends and have begun making new homes.
But most are confined in makeshift camps, humiliated to be using communal toilets and wood-burning stoves and having to depend on aid organizations for clothes and food.
There they wait, seething with anger and disappointment of the Western democracies' inability to end the war.
"This has been a horrible, horrible tragedy.
We're very weak; we must wait until someone opens the way for us to go back," says Mr. Hodjic, who lives with his wife and teenage nephew in drafty wooden barracks that once housed construction workers.
"We've been really patient, but our patience is coming to an end.
Put yourself in our position: Wouldn't you want to go home today?"
"Yesterday," sighs Salim Mujkanovic, a 44-year-old truck driver from the same village.
"We'd rather have gone home yesterday."
Mr. Mujkanovic hasn't had a decent pair of shoes since he and his family were forced to flee in the spring of 1992.
Now he pads around in flimsy tennis shoes minus the laces as he commiserates with his fellow 300 refugees stuffed into the barracks and surrounded by a wire fence.
"We were once 900 Muslims in my village," he says.
"Until we go home and get to the graveyards, we won't know what's become of everyone."
Given their desperation, they embrace any wisp of hope.
"We couldn't go on living if we didn't have some hope," says Mr. Mujkanovic.
Thus, the refugees draw encouragement from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ultimatum that forced the Serbs to withdraw their heavy weapons from around Sarajevo.
And they try to convince themselves that similar tough action will make the Serbs back down in other parts of Bosnia as well.
"We're putting ourselves in Clinton's hands now," Mr. Mujkanovic says.
"You write this down for Clinton," says Mr. Hodjic.
"There's no way Doboj can remain on the Serbian side.
The Ozren mountains, near Doboj, are the stronghold of the Serbs.
If you can destroy them there, the war is over."
At another barracks near Zagreb, another group of refugees suggests more bombing targets.
They are Croats, from the Croatian town of Glina that was overrun and occupied by Serbs in June 1991.
"America just needs to give the Serbs an ultimatum to get out and they'll get out," insists Nikola Tomcic, a 39-year-old farmer.
"This is our third spring here.
We know that without military force, nothing will change."
An old friend of his from Glina, the neighborhood mailman, delivers this assessment: "Until America got involved, things weren't moving.
Now they are.
America should just bomb the stuffings out of the Serbs and we'll go home."
For most refugees, though, that wouldn't be enough.
The liberators would have to stay and guarantee the peace.
"Anyone who has lived through the war certainly wouldn't go back just like that," says Mubina Husakovic, snapping her fingers.
"It would be too dangerous."
She is a 29-year-old seamstress who fled the Doboj area with her two-year-old daughter after her brother was killed in the fighting and her husband disappeared.
She left with only the clothes she was wearing and a bottle of milk for her child.
"I don't know anything about politics.
I just want to go home," she says.
"But I don't want them the Serbs anywhere near me.
I'd go back only if someone was there to watch over us."
"NATO," she says.
"Let NATO open a base in Bosnia," adds Mr. Mujkanovic.
"The Americans," insists Mr. Hodjic.
"I just want the Americans.
Nobody else."
What if the Americans don't come?
"They'll come," he says.
"Or there will be no peace."
