President Clinton's "supercar" initiative looks like a gravy train.
The $1 billion federal program for developing a new generation of ultra-efficient, ultra-clean vehicles is shaping up to be a golden opportunity for the Big Three U.S. auto makers.
Detroit will be the primary recipient of the research funds, allowing the auto makers to bolster their research and development budgets with federal dollars well into the next century.
The Big Three "are trying to stay in business," said Dr. Mary Good, the Clinton appointee who is supervising the venture, in a recent press briefing.
Dr. Good bluntly expressed the administration's support of that same objective.
The goal of the supercar program is an affordable family sedan with three times the fuel efficiency of today's average vehicle.
The consequences of Big Three control are huge: The supercar program will have no input from Japanese auto makers, which Detroit and Washington are fighting over trade issues; no mandates for building zero-emission vehicles, which Detroit opposes in California and the Northeast; and no immediate pressure to produce a marketable product.
The program's first concept vehicle is due in six years, and its first production prototype is due in 10 years.
Supporters, like Joel Moses, dean of engineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, are optimistic.
The program, he said, is "opening the doors to universities and to a new breed of engineering students, who are interested in doing good things for the world, but also in making money for American industry."
But critics say that under the Big Three's leadership, the supercar program won't move as quickly or aggressively as it could.
"This is Detroit's show," said Joe Maceda, vice president of H Power Corp., a Belleville, N.J., developer of alternative fuel technologies that participated in the supercar program's first working meeting recently in Washington.
Moreover, General Motors Corp., Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have been promised a say in which technologies and companies will benefit from the program's $1 billion budget and resources, which will come from both Detroit and Washington.
(Washington will contribute the research and development funds, and Detroit will ultimately pay for manufacturing.)
That gives Detroit influence over any national lab or federal agency engaged in alternative fuel research, such as the Department of Energy.
In fact, the Big Three's biggest payoff from the supercar effort may be a relaxation of a broad array of costly regulations.
"If an industry works closely with a government, and you have an open book . . . such a government won't have to regulate to the same extent," said Francois Caistang, Chrysler's vice president of technology.
The supercar program may be the first example of what government-industry partnership will look like under the Clinton administration.
In the past, Washington has funneled billions of research and development dollars through its rich pool of labs, largely to the benefit of defense contractors.
Now the Clinton administration is reslicing the government's $78 billion R&D budget pie, giving less to defense and more to commercial and export-oriented manufacturers like the Big Three.
Some clean-car advocates argue that by 2004, other nations and industries will have a jump on the Big Three.
By that time the world, they say, may already be flooded with supercars powered by technologies such as fuel cells, flywheels and advanced forms of chemical batteries.
"The money is all funneled through the Big Three," said Paul Miller, a senior energy fellow for the W. Alton Jones Foundation, a Charlottsville, Va., endowment that funds environmental groups.
"The small entrepreneurial firms, even the defense contractors, are pretty much limited by what the Big Three are willing to give them."
That could mean that in the hunt to develop the automobile of the future, some cutting-edge ideas won't reach Mr. Clinton's desk.
At the program's first working meeting, only one of its 113 participants came from the growing number of companies developing electric vehicles for California's zero-emission mandate.
And one came from AeroVironment Inc., a Monrovia, Calif., company owned in part by General Motors.
Calstart, a Los Angeles-based group of alternative vehicle companies that was formed especially to acquire federal research grants, currently supports the supercar effort.
But the organization's president warns that could change if the Big Three starts to exert too much control.
"We have been assured by the administration that this would be much more than a Big Three effort," said Mike Gage, Calstart's president and chief executive officer.
"But certainly there are some conflicting messages here."
Already, there are signs that technologies unpopular in Detroit may get short shrift in the supercar effort.
Big Three executives are lobbying hard to roll back California's regulation that 2% of all cars sold in the state by 1998 be electric or "zero emission" vehicles.
Dr. Good -- Mr. Clinton's undersecretary for technology at the Commerce Department -- said she equates the search for zero-emission vehicles with the quest for "perpetual-motion machines."
That's a view certain to cheer Detroit.
The supercar effort won't have much direction in its early years, Dr. Good said, as it pursues a wide array of technologies.
Then there will be a winnowing process that isolates the technologies that make most sense for a family sedan.
Along the way, she expects plenty of criticism.
"We are trying to keep this simple from the start because we want to keep this successful," said Dr. Good, a past chairwoman of the National Sciences Board.
But "if all we do is end up bickering and nothing else. . .then
I think the program will probably be dismantled, as I think it should."
