QVC Network Inc.'s board plans to meet today to decide what steps to take in the two-day homestretch of the takeover battle for Paramount Communications Inc. before tomorrow's final bidding deadline, according to people in the QVC camp.
QVC already has taken the necessary steps to obtain financing for a possible higher bid from its banks and BellSouth Corp., the people said.
But they cautioned that a decision hasn't been made, and that any new bid would take into account the deterioration that has occurred in Paramount's business during the four-and-a-half month contest between QVC and Viacom Inc.
People following the contest expected that QVC would either make a new bid today, or announce that it plans to make a new bid tomorrow, in order to reduce the chance that Viacom could receive 50.1% of Paramount shares under its own $9.8 billion tender offer, which expires at the end of today.
Viacom could win the contest if it obtained 50.1% of Paramount stock today, and QVC didn't revise its own $10.2 billion offer.
So QVC is likely either to announce a small increase, which could automatically extend the contest, or announce plans to make a new bid tomorrow.
Traders said that even just an announcement by QVC of plans to make a new bid might be sufficient to dissuade investors from tendering their Paramount shares to Viacom, even though Viacom's bid has the endorsement of the Paramount board and the backing of many traders.
Disclosure of the board meeting itself could be a delaying tactic, because QVC's decision making resides among a small group of its chairman, Barry Diller, and its two lead investors, BellSouth, the regional Bell telephone company, and Comcast Corp., the cable-TV concern.
Although QVC's offer has a higher current market value, traders prefer the Viacom bid because it includes a contingent-value security that rises in value if Viacom's stock doesn't appreciate.
The reason traders mightn't tender to the Viacom bid is that they wouldn't want to close out the contest without finding out whether Viacom or QVC may be saving a much higher offer for the last day of bidding.
Both QVC and Viacom have agreed not to make new bids after tomorrow under bidding rules set up by Paramount.
One investment banker for QVC called some traders on Friday, asking their opinion on one possible component of a new QVC bid, a contingent-value right whose value would increase if QVC's stock went down.
