Spectrum Information Technologies Inc.'s troubles widened with the arrests of five executives of a financial-services firm with close ties to Spectrum and its president, Peter Caserta.
The executives of Paradigm Group Inc., formerly Caserta Group Inc., were arrested in a morning raid yesterday by federal postal inspectors.
Paradigm Group and the executives were later charged in federal court in Brooklyn, N.Y., with wire and mail fraud.
No charges were filed against Mr. Caserta.
People close to the investigation and to the U.S. attorney's office in Brooklyn said the investigation is continuing.
"It isn't over," said William Muller, executive assistant to the U.S. attorney for the Eastern District.
Yesterday's complaint alleges that the Paradigm executives ran a boiler-room operation designed to "knowingly and unlawfully . . . defraud" small- and medium-size high-tech companies out of fees for financial services that were never delivered.
The complaint estimates that the operation took in as much as $1.7 million a year.
The alleged financial scam would seem routine if it weren't for Paradigm's pedigree.
Mr. Caserta was president and owner of Caserta Group until January, when he sold it to his son-in-law, John Bohrman, who was one of the executives charged.
Mr. Bohrman became president and renamed the company Paradigm.
Mr. Caserta last October lured former Apple Computer Inc.
Chairman John Sculley to join Spectrum, a small wireless company, as chairman.
But Mr. Sculley quit the company last month in an acrimonious dispute with Mr. Caserta that escalated into a legal battle, which was recently settled.
In addition to Mr. Bohrman, the executives charged yesterday were Howard Schor, John Schiavo, John Schoonmaker and Vincent Muia.
Mr. Bohrman, a former Spectrum director, is married to Mr. Caserta's daughter Diana, who is vice president of technology for Spectrum.
Mr. Schor also is a vice president of Spectrum, where his job is to sign up licensees for the company's wireless data technology.
Spectrum, which is under a Securities and Exchange Commission probe for alleged stock hyping, had no comment on yesterday's arrests except to note that no senior Spectrum officer has been arrested and that it "intends to cooperate with the government in its investigation."
But the probe could get prickly for Spectrum.
Mr. Caserta is mentioned prominently in the federal complaint and yesterday William Callahan, a former federal prosecutor, confirmed that he has been retained by numerous disgruntled former clients of Caserta Group/Paradigm.
The complaint names several "victim" companies and describes in detail how these clients were allegedly duped by executives of Caserta Group/Paradigm into paying steep upfront fees in return for investment banking help that never came.
When the clients tried to obtain answers from Caserta Group/Paradigm executives, the complaint states, calls weren't returned.
The experience of one company, Louisiana Tannery Inc., of Baton Rouge, La., was typical.
Owner Richard Schaffert approached Caserta Group in late 1990 for help in raising capital to expand the company's business.
After signing an "engagement agreement," Mr. Schaffert "personally handed Peter Caserta a $30,000 check," the complaint notes.
Mr. Caserta "represented that he would be interested in investing in Mr. Schaffert's company personally," and that he knew of others who would consider making an investment, including "Edward Maskaly of Jasmine Shoes," according to the complaint.
But over the next few months, after submitting to numerous requests from Caserta Group for financial and management information, Mr. Schaffert's numerous calls to Mr. Caserta and his company weren't returned, the complaint says.
In April 1991, Mr. Schaffert was informed in writing from Mr. Caserta that Caserta Group and Jasmine Shoes were no longer interested in Mr. Schaffert's company.
The upfront fee was never returned, according to the complaint.
Mr. Maskaly, most recently the chief financial officer of Jasmine, yesterday became yet another participant in Spectrum's management merry-go-round.
He was named Spectrum's new chairman and chief executive officer, replacing Mr. Caserta, who had been acting chairman since Mr. Sculley quit.
Paradigm and Spectrum share the same headquarters building in Manhasset, N.Y.
A Paradigm insider yesterday said "panic spread through the building" when federal agents raided the suburban office building on Long Island's Gold Coast.
