Viareggio, Italy -- The smell of rughetta was in the air when the great and the near-great gathered at this Tuscan resort a few weeks ago for a muscular bake-off called the World Pizza Championship.
It was a test of dexterity and acrobatics, of style and culinary skills, where sincere ambition mingled with hype and gnawing worry about downturn in the trade.
Mondo Pizza, viewed up close, parted crisply into two tribes.
The Neckties carried briefcases and talked markets inside the hall of the Gran Caffe Margherita, a majolica-domed waterfront coffeehouse.
The T-Shirts hustled up their bubbling disks in the garden out back, loading them on creative "sets" for presentation to the tasters.
Eight of the 120 T-Shirts (and about the same percentage of the Neckties) were women.
Times have changed in pizzaland.
But not too much.
Rughetta -- that's arugula to you.
The peppery salad green trickled down from nouvelle garnish to pizza along with shaved Parmesan, as the Neapolitan pie migrated up the peninsula, shedding most of its classic flavors in the 1980s.
A glance at this year's entries at Viareggio confirmed that traditional tomatoes, oregano and anchovies were out.
Rughetta, radicchio, truffles and funghi porcini, not to mention deluxe foreign toppings such as salmon, crab and caviar, were in.
So, improbably, were the salad-bar vegetables: carrots, corn, broccoli, cauliflower and sprouts -- both Brussels and bean.
Those bean sprouts were introduced by Young Kyung Hae, a self-possessed young woman from Parma whose visually pleasing pizza was a study in pink with a sprinkling of tiny shrimp and sprouts in salsa rosa (ketchup plus mayo).
Wearing a Korean gown of mauve voile over her T-shirt, she floated up to the jury table on waves of crowd appreciation, although some admirers caddishly confessed later that they didn't think the sprouts "really worked."
They didn't, really, but as Ms. Young correctly perceived, making the disk look good was half the game.
Some aimed for effect with elaborate display sets: a basket of glazed bread flowers so perfect they could have been botanist's models; a butter sculpture of a blowsy blond Venus lounging under Mount Vesuvius.
It took Graziano Bertuzzo, of the Pizzeria Brian in Eraclea, near Venice, a month to make Jurassic Pizza, his four-foot-high bread sculpture.
Worked with a blowtorch to produce marvelous horny, blistered skin, his dinosaurs had a glossy reptilian finish, and the vegetation a convincing prehistoric look.
"Dough is sensitive.
It's like a woman.
You develop a relationship when you're working it.
OK, you can call it love," said Ibrahim Samer, 22 years old, who works in a high-volume by-the-slice pizzeria near Rome's main rail station.
The soft-spoken, Damascus-born Mr. Samer, bearing a tray of zucchini-and-mozzarella pizza, is an ardent newcomer to the old school that links (male) pizza prowess and amore.
That special relationship between a man and his pizza was probably born sometime in the late 19th century in Naples, when pizzamakers began to develop the athletic side of their art and show off their tossing and spinning.
Music tends to go with it.
"La Donna e Mobile," trilled the Gran Caffe Margherita piano as a pumpkin-and-sausage pizza topped with Grana Padana cheese made its appearance, the platter wreathed with thick decorative coils of raw sausage links.
While Giancarlo Sinico of the Mocambo Pizzeria in Goito, near Mantova, sliced up his entry for the jury, the pianist segued neatly into "All of Me."
(Mr. Sinico got first prize for whole pizza at the end of the day, while Francesco DiLillo of Pizza e Pizza in Bologna was tops for by-the-slice.)
Later, those mellow notes gave way to rock and disco during the "freestyle" pizza-handling competition, for which the T-Shirts (average age, 25; hair, long to very long) brought their own tapes.
In the freestyle, the contestant flattens a ball of dough and then tosses and twirls the ever-widening disk in a brief, thrilling pas de deux.
"I get lonely," the voice of Freddy Mercury chanted from the tape deck as last year's victor, Franco Grittani, began to bounce across the floor: ". . . living on my own."
Older than many at 37, the veteran, Ravenna-based Mr. Grittani had a velvety, effortless way of spinning the dough on his thumb while keeping time with his hips.
He only works with real pizza dough, refusing the synthetic goop used for similar contests in the U.S. "Sure, a rubber pizza never splits or gets holes; it doesn't make a mess with flour.
You can perform over a hotel carpet.
All it lacks is class," he sentenced.
This year, Mr. Grittani yielded his title to the versatile Mr. Bertuzzo, who did an antic, two-pizza number to "I Feel Good."
The serious-faced Necktie tribe didn't feel so good, however, contemplating market trends like those outlined by consultant Emanuele Ceccarelli, who said the $30 billion Italian pizza business is on the cusp between "mature industry" and "decline phase."
Something has to be done, everyone agreed, to open up new spaces, to rescue Eastern Europe from the dominion of Pizza Hut.
Tough European Union rules that create a standard for "real Neapolitan pizza" are the best way to protect against crass North American imitations, argued Mr. Ceccarelli.
But hey, how about applying that classical rigor at home first?
There were, in fact, some hints that this trade, dizzy with upscale Northern seasonings, might be about to embark on a new quest for roots.
Mr. Grittani, the pizza dancer, decorated his entry with salmon and radicchio this year, but freely admitted those might be flash-in-the-pan flavors.
He isn't worried.
"Salmon, caviar, they may pass away," he said.
"But not a piece of bread baked with oil and tomatoes on it.
There will always be pizza."
Ms. Randall is a writer in Rome.
