-- Annual sales are growing by 20%, earnings by 40%.
-- The company's key business -- selling moderate-to high-end ceiling fans exclusively through lighting showrooms -- is gaining market share.
-- There isn't any long-term debt, and management has a 40% stake in the company.
-- Its role as the primary supplier of lamps to Bombay Co., one of the hottest retailers, is growing.
With all of that, you'd think Craftmade would inspire a whirlwind of activity among investors.
But the stock has barely created a breeze.
In the past year it has hovered for the most part between $9 and $10.
Craftmade's earnings multiple of 15, based on projected 1994 earnings, is less than half of the company's expected growth rate, indicating the stock might be undervalued.
And there aren't even enough analysts following the company to put together a significant fan club.
The problem: "Nobody knows this company exists," says Dick Edelman, analyst at Southwest Securities in Dallas.
"Bombay receives all the recognition; nobody ever pays attention to its vendors."
That will change for Craftmade, analysts say, if the company's results continue to increase at a healthy pace.
"And there's no reason to think that won't happen," contends Tim Ebright, a portfolio manager at Eagle Asset Management, a St. Petersburg, Fla., fund company that holds 315,000 Craftmade shares.
To be sure, there are some well-defined risks.
Although it is quietly prospering in the shadow of Bombay Co.'s growth, Craftmade relies heavily on the Fort Worth retailer's orders.
As much as 75% of Craftmade's lamp-division revenue comes from Bombay.
Any misstep by Bombay, or problems on Craftmade's end with delivery or quality, could hurt earnings.
To decrease its dependence on Bombay, the company has been courting new customers.
The Horchow Collection, a catalog company, has already signed on, and Craftmade officials say they expect discount retailer Tuesday Morning to follow soon.
In addition, Craftmade has begun selling its lamps in the lighting showrooms where its ceiling fans have been a hit, and in early 1994 will introduce its lamps in furniture stores.
Another potential pitfall is that Craftmade depends solely on one Taiwanese manufacturer for its supply of fans.
That exclusive, long-term relationship provides for ample capacity for increased production.
But a major problem or disruption at the facility would wreak havoc on Craftmade's ability to meet customer demand and would devastate income.
Still, some analysts and money managers hold high expectations for the company.
For the fiscal year ended June 30, revenue leaped to $27.5 million from $600,000 in 1985, when Craftmade was founded.
Revenue should exceed $32 million in 1994.
Analysts estimate the company will earn 66 cents a share this year, a 38% increase from the 48 cents posted in 1993.
Also impressing analysts: Craftmade management's frugal fiscal practices.
The company's top four officers combined command just $400,000 in salary; James Ridings, the company's founder and chief executive officer, is on Forbes's list of the 10 lowest-paid chief executives among the country's best small companies.
Administrative expenses have decreased to 19.8% of sales in the most recent quarter, from 25.8% in 1991, despite the heady growth.
Back in 1991, it appeared that executives may not have been circumspect in one decision: their $450,000 purchase of DMI Products, a struggling maker of table and floor lamps.
It turned out they had underestimated DMI's shortcomings, which included lax quality control and product shipment delays.
In the first year, the lamp division lost $200,000, causing a 70% drop in overall earnings.
But DMI had one asset that Craftmade wanted and that proved invaluable: Its customer list included Bombay, a retailer with which Craftmade hadn't yet connected.
By whipping DMI into shape, Craftmade was able to expand lamp sales to Bombay Co. to more than $2 million in 1993 from less than $50,000 in 1991; sales are expected to double in 1994.
More important, the lamp division contributed more than $500,000, or 19%, to Craftmade's pretax profit in 1993.
"That purchase . . . has proven to be a worthy buy," says Alan D. Bernstein, analyst at Hamilton Investments, Chicago, who foresees a $15 stock price this year.
Until the DMI purchase, 90% of Craftmade's business was in ceiling fans.
And although lamp sales are expected to provide the greatest growth opportunity -- expanding by as much as 40% a year -- fans remain the company's strength with 75% of the company's sales.
Sales in that division are expected to grow about 15% a year.
Craftmade sells its fans in about one-quarter of the 5,400 lighting showrooms nationwide, giving it plenty of growth potential.
The company is supplying about eight new showrooms a month. a share.
NL Industries, Houston, last week traded at 5.5 times its average daily volume and dropped 20% to $4.50 after Standard & Poor's said it would remove the company from the S&P 500-Stock Index.
NL, which was removed after the close of trading Monday, was part of the chemical industry group, where it accounted for less than 1% of the group's market value.
It was replaced with Eastman Chemical, the Eastman Kodak spin-off.
EZCorp, the Austin pawn-shop chain recently profiled in this column, gained 9.7%, on nearly double its average daily volume.
Analysts at Kidder Peabody on Thursday included EZCorp as a "top small-cap pick" for 1994.
Shares of Celebrity, a Tyler maker of artificial flowers, shed more than 18% after the company said it expects to post a loss for its second quarter ended Dec. 31.
The company attributed the weakness largely to poor performance at its Magisilk unit.
Celebrity also had considerable nonrecurring expenses in the quarter associated with its acquisition of Cluett Corp., a supplier of artificial trees and plants.
For the year-earlier quarter, Celebrity earned $1.1 million, or 27 cents a share.
Babbage's, the consumer software retailer reviewed here last week, said Monday that December sales at stores open at least a year tumbled 15%.
The company blamed the weakness on anemic video-game sales and said it expects gross margins in the quarter to be hurt by video-game markdowns.
Total sales for December were $64.29 million, up marginally from $64.23 million a year earlier.
