The dollar received a boost against the yen yesterday on signs the U.S. and Japan are making peace in their long-festering trade dispute.
But the U.S. currency fell against the mark on a smaller-than-expected cut in the Bundesbank's securities-repurchase rate.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7025 marks, down from 1.7143 marks late Tuesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 105.80 yen, up from 105.80 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4944, up from $1.4880.
About noon Thursday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 105.58 yen and at 1.6935 marks.
The dollar achieved its biggest gains of the day against the yen following comments by U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor that the U.S. and Japan appear close to resolving the trade dispute over Motorola Inc.'s access to Japan's cellular-telephone market.
Cited That, with remarks by Secretary of State Warren Christopher that the U.S. wishes to avoid a trade war with Japan, gave the market confidence that the U.S. is backing away from any attempt to push for a strong yen to address Japan's trade imbalance.
"Kantor's comments in particular made people wonder if the Super 301 club is being put back in the closet," said Randolph Donney, director of research at Pegasus Econometric Group in New York.
Super 301 is a provision that permits retaliatory action against nations the U.S. deems engage in unfair trade practices.
While there isn't any direct link between the Motorola dispute and possible actions on President Clinton's reauthorization last week of Super 301, the apparent about-face on trade "has abated pressure to keep the yen strong," Mr. Donney said.
Still, the dollar's rise to an intraday high of 106.05 yen was firmly capped by strong technical resistance.
The market is leery of taking the dollar above 106 yen, where Japanese exporters are seen with big orders to sell the dollar and take profits, said Matt Porio, vice president at Chase Manhattan bank.
But he noted dollar-yen movements will continue to pivot around the issue of trade, rather than around the relative strengths and weaknesses of the U.S. and Japanese economies.
"These were the first statements that we've seen that have been positive in terms of the trade issue, and the yen is a trade-dominated currency," Mr. Porio said.
The biggest beneficiary of the yen's softening, however, was the mark.
The mark gained strength across the board on the Bundesbank's meager three-basis-points easing of its rate for securities repurchase agreements, or repos.
The repo rate -- the Bundesbank's favored instrument for influencing money markets -- was cut to 5.94% Wednesday from 5.97% last week.
Traders said the slow pace of German easing and the scant indication that the Fed will again raise interest rates have combined to cast a cloud over the dollar.
"The yen is weak, but people who got hammered holding on to long dollar positions are looking for alternatives to trading the dollar-yen," Mr. Donney said.
That leaves the mark-yen cross as a play, he said.
The mark was at 62.06 yen in late New York trading, compared with 61.46 yen late Tuesday.
"The move above 62 looks like a breakout play to the upside," Mr. Donney noted.
Indeed, later yesterday, the dollar continued to sink against the mark when it broke beneath technical support of 1.7040 marks, said Andreas Mann, a trader with Commerzbank in New York.
The dollar sank to a new low of 1.6980 marks in early Australasian dealings.
About the same time, the mark rose to 62.29 yen.
