The Securities and Exchange Commission proposed new rules for investment advisers, including a requirement that advisers' clients receive independent reports about activity in their accounts.
The rule calling for independent reports is intended to help investors avoid the losses that befell clients of Steven Wymer, a California-based adviser who has admitted that he purposely kept account reports away from clients to conceal losses exceeding $100 million.
The rule proposal is also intended to break up a logjam between House and Senate versions of legislation that would toughen SEC standards for investment advisers and, more importantly to the agency, raise advisers' registration fees specifically to pay for more SEC inspectors.
The House version of the legislation is much tougher than the Senate version, and the SEC's hopes for a compromise have been dwindling.
By using its own authority to enact some of the controversial House provisions, the SEC believes a compromise is more likely.
The rules proposed yesterday by the agency specifically address situations in which clients give advisers full discretion to make investment decisions.
In such cases, the clients' assets are typically held by a third-party custodian.
The SEC proposal would prohibit investment advisers from striking agreements with the custodians of investors' assets to funnel all account statements to the advisers.
The rule also would prohibit advisers from making any transactions on behalf of clients without "reasonably believing" that the client had received account statements from the custodian at least quarterly, enabling the client to see any questionable investment activity.
A separate proposal would prohibit investment advisers from making investment recommendations that are unsuitable for clients, a duty that has been imposed by courts but never before by the SEC.
A similar proposal in the House bill has been criticized by the securities industry, according to Robert Plaze, assistant director of the SEC's division of investment management.
The SEC expects to hear some of the same during the 60 days that it will collect comments before enacting a final rule, Mr. Plaze said.
The SEC hopes to hire 180 more inspectors for investment advisers and mutual funds with some of the money requested in President Clinton's fiscal 1995 budget.
That budget calls for a $309.6 million appropriation for the agency.
"No other single program at the SEC is in as dire a need of resources as is the investment-management regulation program," SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt said in testimony yesterday before a subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee.
The SEC currently oversees 20,000 investment advisers managing client assets totaling $9.6 trillion.
"The SEC can't continue to inspect investment advisers only once every 27 years, as is the case at present," Mr. Levitt said.
"That's tantamount to no inspection."
