Bosnian Muslims and Croats agreed to form a "binational" state, raising the diplomatic pressure on Bosnia's Serbs to seek peace.
The agreement -- the product of a new U.S. "diplomatic engagement" in Bosnia -- is aimed at not only ending some of the fiercest fighting in the region, but also to lay the basis for an economically viable, if considerably smaller, Bosnian state.
Further strengthening its chances for survival, the new state would be linked economically and militarily with Croatia, which also joined in yesterday's signing.
The agreement barely mentions Bosnia's Serbs, who control about 70% of the territory in Bosnia-Herzegovina and have been the primary aggressors in the war.
But U.S. officials said they hoped that by creating a stronger opponent for the Serbs, the Serbs would now be forced to give up some of the territory they have seized.
While Bosnia's Serbs also will be invited to join the new "Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina," U.S. officials conceded that a more probable outcome would now be a two-way partition between the new Muslim-Croat federation and a Bosnian Serb republic.
The officials, however, wouldn't say what additional military or diplomatic pressure might be brought to bear on the Serbs.
There are also strong doubts about whether the Bosnian Muslims and Croats would stick to the agreement if the Serbs refuse to concede any more territory.
In recent weeks, when confronted by the threat of Western military attack, Bosnia's Serbs have shown that they can be pressured.
First, they withdrew their heavy weapons from around Sarajevo rather than receive air strikes by North Atlantic Treaty Organization planes.
Hoping to head off a similar ultimatum, they agreed yesterday to the reopening of Tuzla airport in northeastern Bosnia for the delivery of critically needed relief supplies.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said the agreement showed that "peace is possible" in Bosnia.
Bosnian Prime Minister Haris Siladjic said he hoped and prayed that "this is a first step toward peace."
Conscious that many Bosnian peace agreements have been accepted and discarded before, U.S. officials went out of their way to invest yesterday's ceremony with as much pomp and circumstance as possible.
Among the luminaries witnessing the signing in the State Department's gilt-and-marble Franklin Room were Secretary Christopher, Defense Secretary William Perry, Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman John Shalikashvili and a host of diplomats, including a Russian representative.
In his introductory remarks, Mr. Christopher also hinted at some of the broader incentives awaiting the signers, including desperately needed economic reconstruction help from the West, as well as peacekeepers from NATO and the U.S. once a broader agreement is reached with the Serbs.
Croatia, in turn, was offered "a chance to become part of the West," according to a senior U.S. official, including possible membership in the NATO's Partnerhsip for Peace program, as well as future associate status in the European Union.
More immediately, Zagreb is expecting the West to back its demands for the return of the one-third of its territory now occupied by the Serbs.
The 10-page "framework agreement" goes into considerable detail about how political power would be shared between Muslims and Croats at the national, regional and local levels and among the executive, legislative and judicial branches of government.
While the new federation would be divided into mainly "ethnic majority" cantons, along a Swiss or Belgian model, the rights of the minorities in each canton would in theory be closely protected.
