THE U.N.''S CHIEF SOUGHT NATO backing for air strikes in Bosnia.
As Sarajevans mourned the deaths of 68 people killed in a shelling attack Saturday, U.N. Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali asked the Western alliance to give him the power to order NATO air strikes against artillery positions in and around the Bosnian capital, a U.N. spokesman said.
Meanwhile, U.S. cargo planes evacuated victims of the shelling at Sarajevo's central market.
It was the deadliest attack in the 22-month siege of the Bosnian capital.
In Washington, President Clinton called the latest attack "outrageous" and said he hoped that "the shock of these deaths" might spur new peace overtures in Bosnia.
A THIRD BUSINESS GROUP SAID it rejected Clinton's health reform plan.
The National Association of Manufacturers announced that it can't support the president's plan "in its present form."
Until Saturday's 56-20 vote by the NAM's board, the group had followed a strategy of public neutrality.
The Clinton plan also was rejected last week by the Business Roundtable and U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
Meanwhile, Ross Perot said his organization eventually may endorse Rep. Cooper's rival proposal.
Cooper received 35% of his identifiable campaign contributions from the health-care industry in the second half of 1993, according to an analysis by a group that opposes his plan.
An Internet investigation team spotted what may be the largest computer security breach on the Internet and urged tens of thousands of users last week to change their passwords.
The group that put out the warning said it isn't clear whether the invaders vandalized computer systems or unleashed "viruses."
The Clinton administration faces a backlash from high-tech firms over its decision to proceed with a plan to push one system for protecting telephone and computer communications.
The decision came after a review of plans for a new computer chip to be included in devices that scramble sounds or data.
Four tax analysts agree that the Clintons appear to have taken nearly $20,000 in improper interest deductions during the 1980s on Whitewater-related loans.
A White House aide denied that the Clintons took any improper deductions.
The deputy U.S. attorney general voiced complaints about having White House lawyers sit in on staff interviews by Justice Department investigators following the July suicide of Vincent Foster, the White House deputy counsel.
A figure skating panel found "reasonable grounds" to believe Tonya Harding was involved in a Jan. 6 attack on rival skater Nancy Kerrigan.
The U.S. Figure Skating Association issued a statement Saturday calling for a disciplinary hearing against Harding, but the panel stopped short of ousting her from the U.S. Olympic team.
A 10.3% postal-rate boost may not be high enough, some Postal Service board members apparently think.
The rise, backed by Postmaster General Runyon and applying evenly to all classes of mail, is the lower of two proposed increases that are to be presented to the board.
Byron De La Beckwith was convicted Saturday of murdering civil-rights leader Medgar Evers in 1963.
Beckwith, 73, an avowed white supremacist, had escaped conviction by two all-white juries in 1964.
He was immediately sentenced to life in prison after the verdict by a Jackson, Miss., jury of eight blacks and four whites.
Veteran diplomat Ahtisaari won Finland's first direct presidential election, setting up potential conflicts with the center-right government of Prime Minister Aho.
Ahtisaari, leader of the Social Democrats, wants to expand the role of the presidency -- usually confined to foreign policy -- to tackle the nation's severe economic problems.
Russia's former economic czar declared that Yeltsin hasn't changed his attitude toward market reform.
In an interview, Gaidar stressed that the president is the "strongest political factor in favor of reform" in the country.
Died: Joseph Cotten, 88, veteran actor who first gained national fame for his role in the 1941 film "Citizen Kane," in Los Angeles, of pneumonia.
