Tonight President Clinton is expected to give a prominent place to his health care reform in the State of the Union message.
The debate over his plan has been dominated by policy wonks who, like the president himself, are never so happy as when they are poring over the details.
Lost in all this has been the large question of whether a massive transformation of our health care system is necessary.
The idea that there is a severe health care crisis stems from four sources.
The first is the insecurity generated by the most recent recession.
Most Americans' health insurance is linked to their jobs, with employers paying about 86% of the total cost: lose your job, lose your coverage; get a new job and you might not get coverage if you have a health problem.
Then there is the concern over costs.
Already claiming 14% of our gross national product -- a figure high by international standards -- health care costs have been rising.
Many people have convinced themselves that this will lead to the impoverishment of America.
Additional pressure for reform comes from the notion that everyone should have health insurance as a matter of right.
Since at least 37 million Americans are now widely said to be without coverage, the system must be failing.
The fourth contributor to the sense of crisis is the liberal bias of the major media.
This helps explain one of the great anomalies in the debate: Although 75% of Americans have been convinced that there is a crisis, 80% simultaneously report themselves as "very" or "somewhat" satisfied with their own health care.
All this adds up to a great political opportunity for the Democrats.
To wed the middle class to the party, it needs a modern version of Roosevelt's Social Security system.
Enter health-care reform.
Unfortunately for the president's political strategists, however, the crisis on which the case for this reform rests is an artificial one, and the intended beneficiaries are its biggest losers.
Take the much-heralded 14% figure.
The approximately $940 billion Americans spent on health care in 1993 did indeed represent a bit more than 14% of the nation's total output of goods and services.
But by what standard is that too much?
If we prefer to devote a larger portion of our incomes to top-quality health care than do other nations, what is wrong with that?
After all, we do not settle for the housing standards that prevail in poorer countries: We insist on central heating and air-conditioning, the latter now installed in nearly half of the homes of even those we classify as poor.
Nor are tiny cars with mechanical clutches, common elsewhere, the stuff of the American dream.
Neither is spartan health care.
International comparisons also give no weight to differences in the quality of service.
The Congressional Quarterly cites the fact that "Japan's government plays a much greater role in private health-care delivery than does the U.S. government" to explain how Japan keeps its costs considerably lower than those of the U.S. No mention of what Fred Barnes calls "Japanese . . . assembly-line treatment from doctors who see an average of 49 patients a day," and who perform gynecological examinations on scores of women assembled in a single room, as physicians scramble to maintain incomes in the face of too-low per-capita reimbursements.
Because payment in Japan is based on patient visits, the doctor keeps the average length to five minutes, and the Japanese on average make 12 visits a year, or about three times as many as Americans, whose average visit length is 15 to 20 minutes.
These decreases in convenience for patients, and increases in patient time and travel costs, points out Patricia Danzon of the Wharton School, "are excluded from the national health accounts and from public visibility."
International cost comparisons also ignore queuing and other forms of rationing that reduce recorded costs by forcibly limiting the availability of the service.
Joseph White, a Brookings Institution researcher whose comparison of America's system with those of six other nations leads him to conclude that "America's health-care system must be reformed," nevertheless concedes that other countries have restricted capacity and forced patients to endure delays that would be intolerable in America.
And Germany achieves its low costs by limiting malpractice suits; eschewing extraordinary life-prolonging measures for those judged to be terminally ill; buying fewer pieces of high-technology equipment than Americans typically use; and by price controls.
Even so, costs are soaring and the insurance funds are broke, despite premiums that come to 13% of payrolls.
International comparisons omit societal attitudes.
The high expenditures in the U.S. reflect a basic American value: Damn the costs, save lives, and use expensive technologies whenever necessary.
Don't blame this on your doctor.
Ezekiel Emanuel of the Harvard Medical School notes that fewer than one out of 10 physicians surveyed would put Grandma on a respirator if she had a stroke, whereas 40% of family members would.
High health care costs in America also reflect another distinctive feature of our society -- the social pathology of our underclass.
President Clinton pointed this out in October to an assembly of doctors at Johns Hopkins: "We'll never get the cost of health care down to where it is in other countries as long as we have higher rates of teen pregnancies and higher rates of low-birthweight births and higher rates of AIDS, and, most important of all, higher rates of violence."
And, he might have added, nothing in his own health care plan addresses any of those problems.
The second basis of comparison offered to support the contention that we are spending too much on health care is our own past.
In 1960 we devoted 5% of GNP to health care; by 1993 we were up to 14%.
Yet we do not compare the price of a modern automobile with that of a Model T and then complain about how much more the new car costs.
So why ignore quality changes in medical care?
An operation to remove cataracts once involved a hospital stay of two to four days and an even longer recuperative period at home.
That surgery is now typically done on an outpatient basis.
As Ira Cohen, formerly chief of the Division of General Medicine at New York City's Beth Israel hospital, tells us, in the days when the electrocardiogram was the sole diagnostic tool, the victim of a heart attack could count on a four- to six-week hospital stay; now, improved diagnostic techniques and equipment permit the doctor to discharge the typical heart patient in a week or 10 days.
Yet, astonishingly, the reductions in suffering and lost output nowhere appear in our accounting of trends in health care costs.
Nor can we credit the projections that bring us from 14% to 26% of GNP by 2030.
Such projections assume that recent trends in health care prices and in the volume of services consumed will continue indefinitely.
But this is unlikely.
The health care industry is offering an unprecedented range of new products.
They will go through a cycle of rapid growth, followed by falling prices and costs as competition among suppliers emerges, consumers become more discriminating, and cost-saving production and application techniques are developed.
In addition, if faced with the costs of their decisions, consumers might adjust.
Remember the "energy crisis"?
If there is no crisis in health care costs, is there one in insurance coverage?
Here we come to the second major statistic driving the health-care debate: At some point in 1991, the last year for which comprehensive data are available, 37 million people lacked medical insurance.
It should be noted that these citizens are not denied health care.
Emergency rooms provide care to all comers.
In fact, nonprofit hospitals -- 88% percent of those in the U.S. -- cannot legally turn away any patient needing medical care, or unreasonably deny access to all the modern technology hospitals have available.
And not just for the duration of the emergency: The hospital is obliged to see the treatment through.
Per-capita health care spending on the uninsured, pre-Medicare population is about 60% of per-capita expenditures on the insured population -- a level sumptuous by the standards of other industrial countries.
Nonetheless, if the 37 million figure did mean what it is often taken to mean -- that 15% of our population lives with the unnerving and continual threat of being unable to pay for medical care -- there would certainly be grounds for revising the way we provide medical services.
Fortunately, there is less of a problem here than meets the eye.
Some of the uninsured are between jobs; some are students entering the labor market.
Katherine Swartz of the Harvard University School of Public Health notes that most are uninsured for only a short time.
The chronically uninsured group in our society numbers closer to 5.5 million than 37 million people.
And probably fewer than 5.5 million.
Only 1% of those under age 65 are uninsurable, according to the Employee Benefit Research Institute.
More than half of the uninsured are in families headed by fulltime workers; 40% have incomes in excess of $20,000, and 10% have incomes in excess of $50,000; only 29% are below the poverty level.
And those with incomes below $20,000 spend several times as much on entertainment, alcohol and tobacco as they do on health care.
Furthermore, 37% of the uninsured are under age 25, a generally healthy group for whom health insurance is often not a cost-effective buy.
If we put all this together, we come up with a figure of perhaps 3% of the population who -- although able to obtain health care -- cannot obtain affordable health insurance.
Should we perform radical surgery on our health care system for the sake of that 3%?
Before answering with a resounding No, we have to consider the possibility that when the uninsured are treated in a hospital, and cannot pay, the cost of that treatment is loaded onto the rest of us.
But even if cross-subsidization from the insured to the uninsured does occur, the cure is simple: Subsidize insurance for the truly poor, and compel payment by the voluntarily uninsured.
There are reforms that could and should be made within the context of our present system.
In addition to subsidizing the involuntarily uninsured, the most important is to make coverage "portable," so that the loss of a job does not deprive a worker of his insurance.
Such tweaks to the system would avoid the disaster in store for us if we follow the Clintons down the path to a health care system presided over by the same people already doing such a wonderful job delivering our mail.
Mr. Stelzer is director of regulatory policy studies at the American Enterprise Institute.
This article is adapted from the current issue of Commentary.
