The Senate and the House are both moving closer to hearings on Whitewater, although dates may not be nailed down quickly.
The House voted 408-15 to hold hearings on the web of issues surrounding the Whitewater affair.
The House followed the example of the Senate and instructed its leaders to design a hearing format and schedule that won't interfere with investigations launched by Special Counsel Robert Fiske.
Senate Republicans were preparing to propose the creation of a special committee, containing the ranking Democrat and Republican from each Senate committee that has jursidiction over the banking, small business, tax and other issues that have been lumped together in the Whitewater affair.
The issues include the dealings of President and Hillary Rodham Clinton with a failed Arkansas savings and loan, their involvement in a former land company called Whitewater Development Co., and their influence on financial agencies in Arkansas and Washington.
The Clintons have denied any wrongdoing or impropriety.
Last week the Senate voted 98-0 for a resolution instructing Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine) and Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.) to work out the details this week for hearings.
But yesterday, both officials hinted that the arrangements may not be solidified until after the Passover-Easter recess that starts this week.
In another Whitewater-related development, David Hale, a former Little Rock municipal judge, pleaded guilty to two felony counts of conspiracy and mail fraud.
Mr. Hale has alleged that Mr. Clinton pressured him to make a loan to Whitewater partner Susan McDougal and that some of that money ended up in Whitewater accounts.
Mr. Hale's settlement of the charges, which was expected, means he will be able to testify before a special grand jury to be convened this week.
The plea, Mr. Fiske said yesterday in federal court in Little Rock, "will allow us now to investigate all of the allegations that Mr. Hale has made . . . and other allegations he has made during the time he has been cooperating with us."
Mr. Hale won't be sentenced for at least 120 days to give him time to "fully demonstrate his cooperation with the government," Mr. Fiske said.
He could be sentenced to as much as 10 years in jail, and be required to pay $500,000 in fines, but the judge is likely to take his cooperation into consideration at the sentencing.
As president of Capital Management Services Inc., a company licensed by the Small Business Administration to make loans to disadvantaged business people, Mr. Hale admitted that he had defrauded the agency out of $900,000.
He also admitted that between 1985 and 1991, he used government and CMS funds to make loans for improper purposes.
The recipients of those loans weren't disclosed, but the loan to Ms. McDougal was made in 1986.
Mr. Hale also said he had made improper loans to three companies owned by Arkansas Gov. Jim Guy Tucker and his family.
Also yesterday, the Senate Banking Committee released a third letter from Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman disclosing additional discussions he held with White House officials.
The conversations followed a Feb. 2 meeting that Mr. Altman attended at the White House on procedural matters related to possible government charges involving Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan, a failed Arkansas thrift linked to the Whitewater investment.
Mr. Altman revealed the Feb. 2 meeting at a Banking Committee hearing late last month.
He had sent two previous letters to the committee disclosing other contacts with White House officials in which issues relating to Madison were discussed.
In the newly disclosed meeting, Mr. Altman said he discussed his decision to recuse himself from the Madison case and to step down as acting head of the Resolution Trust Corp., the S&L cleanup agency.
Mr. Altman wrote the latest letter on the eve of his appearance before a federal grand jury that is looking into whether the White House tried to improperly influence the case.
Mr. Altman and other Treasury and White House officials have called their discussions proper and above board.
Separately, Patsy Thomasson, the White House director of administration, told a House subcommittee that the Secret Service issued her a permanent security pass on March 5.
Republicans have criticized the administration, and Ms. Thomasson in particular, for working in the White House for over a year without the proper security review that comes with such a pass.
But Rep. Frank Wolf of Virginia questioned the integrity of the White House, saying he has been assured for months by Chief of Staff Thomas McLarty that the administration wasn't taking any security risks, only to learn from Ms. Thomasson that Mr. McLarty just recently received his own permanent pass.
Mr. McLarty, however, had received other security clearances.
Ms. Thomasson also said that four veteran consultants from the presidential campaign -- Paul Begala, James Carville, Stanley Greenberg and Mandy Grunwald -- would undergo background checks and probably receive permanent non-government passes, instead of the temporary ones they have been using.
She insisted there were no instances in which the Secret Service had rejected the issuing of a pass and been overruled by others in the White House.
But Ms. Thomasson conceded that Dee Dee Myers, the press secretary, had access to documents requiring a security clearance, even though she doesn't yet have a permanent pass.
Ms. Myers only recently completed the application paperwork and has a temporary pass.
