It's hard enough to figure out what multimedia is.
Imagine figuring out how it will work.
That's the challenge computer, phone and cable companies have taken on.
To deliver a world of movies-on-demand, virtual shopping and information at viewers' command on everything from the weather to the background of soap-opera characters, they must resolve a spectrum of battles over technological standards.
And they must forge advances in four broad areas: creating, encoding, distributing and playing multimedia works.
Computer-game makers and big Hollywood directors have the talent and resources to develop interactive works.
But software companies are developing tools and templates that will make everyone a multimedia producer -- enabling, say, a small retailer to create an advertisement that distributes electronic coupons over the TV.
"Tools" refer to programs that translate ideas and commands into the ones and zeros that computers understand.
They range from programming languages that use arcane text commands to newer, simpler tools that can construct programs, Tinkertoy fashion, by combining ready-made symbols or images.
As they become easier to use, tools will put more power in the hands of artists and ordinary people.
"We have a responsibility to get out of this nerdy ghetto," says Fabrice Florin, an executive producer/designer in Apple Computer Inc.'s Discovery Studio, its multimedia development group in San Francisco.
"Until we do that, we are going nowhere fast."
One type of tool for non-techies will help people send friends and relatives video letters.
Card shops are likely to set up kiosks that will let customers record a message, spice it up with selections from a library of simple graphic effects, and send it to the electronic mailbox of their choice, says Gregory Riker, director of Microsoft Corp.'s future-home-technology unit, which recently demonstrated several such greetings.
Another software company, eShop Inc. of San Mateo, Calif., is developing a virtual-store program, which will allow retailers large and small to easily create video tours of their stores.
The tour packages will be sent to customers on-line, on compact disks or on newfangled small cards that slide into computers.
Some tools won't care what type of machine you play them on.
Kaleida Labs Inc., a joint venture of Apple and International Business Machines Corp. in Mountain View, Calif., is striving for just that with a new programming language called ScriptX.
It uses a technique called object-oriented programming, based on building blocks of reusable parts.
In a demonstration, Kaleida programmers pick up an image of a swimming fish from an Apple Macintosh program and paste it -- still swimming -- into a Windows program on an IBM-compatible PC.
But creating such broadly applicable tools is a mind-boggling task.
ScriptX, originally due out in the second quarter of 1993, now is expected to hit the market late this year.
To exploit computerized sights and sounds, it helps to scramble and squeeze.
Cable companies already scramble programming to foil pirates.
For PC users, compression software yields more storage space on hard drives, and shrinks files for quicker phone transmission.
These processes become much more crucial as TV signals are converted to digital form, the key starting point for interactive programming.
A typical cable system that now has enough capacity for 54 channels could carry only nine uncompressed digital channels.
With compression technology, however, cable companies expect to squeeze four to 10 digital channels in the space of one current analog channel.
Frozen orange juice is a popular analogy.
By taking the water out of the juice, it can be stored and shipped more easily.
Digital compression schemes take out extraneous information before sending an image; the recipient has a decoding device that decompresses the signal, much as one adds water to the frozen juice.
There's plenty of extra information.
For every second of video, 30 still pictures flow by to convey a sensation of movement.
For a stationary object, those 30 frames could theoretically be boiled down to one.
On the other hand, more frames would be needed to show the action in a basketball game.
Compression schemes use special circuitry to analyze motion in each frame and predict where the objects will appear in the next, says Craig Tanner, vice president of advanced television projects at the industry think tank CableLabs, Louisville, Colo.
By sending shorthand codes that indicate the motion, plus some error-correcting signals, compression systems can send fewer bits and still deliver moving pictures.
One compression technology, developed by a 300-member international organization called the Moving Picture Experts Group, already has a wide following.
Its MPEG-1 technology squeezes digital video signals down to 1.5 million bits of data a second from 100 million bits, or 10,000 times the volume of a high-end PC modem.
Many CD-ROM programs store video images using the MPEG-1 scheme, and Bell Atlantic Corp. plans to use the technology to ship movies-on-demand to homes, starting in northern Virginia this spring.
MPEG-1 images are about as good as those from VHS VCRs.
That satisfies many consumers but is far below the quality of laser disks or high-definition TV.
So, companies hope to produce better pictures using compression schemes that transfer three million to seven million bits a second.
A battle looms at the next quality level, however.
MPEG-2, a higher-resolution standard compatible with MPEG-1 programming, has already been selected by companies developing the U.S. standard for HDTV.
That means cable companies that adopt MPEG-2 won't have to overhaul their systems when HDTV comes along.
But Chicago-based General Instrument Corp., a leading supplier of cable-TV decoder boxes, hopes to tempt cable operators with an incompatible technology called DigiCipher II.
Its compression quality is comparable to MPEG-2, and it also scrambles signals to prevent piracy.
As they wrestle with video, communications and computer companies also are grappling with sound.
MPEG has its own compression standard for delivering two-channel stereo.
But a rival system, from San Francisco sound pioneers Dolby Laboratories Inc., has been selected as the U.S. HDTV standard and is gaining support.
The Dolby technology, called AC-3, has five channels for surround sound.
It would allow cable companies to install two-channel systems now that would work with five-channel signals sent later.
Apart from the compression battles surrounding home TVs, PC makers are rushing to turn business machines into twoway video-conferencing stations.
That takes compression, too.
Intel Corp., the kingpin in microprocessor chips, is promoting a compression scheme called Indeo.
With the aid of special circuit boards, software, cameras and a headset, two PC users can work on the same document at once while talking and watching each other on a small window of the PC screen.
The system requires use of an interim advance over standard telephone transmission, called ISDN, for integrated services digital network.
But Intel may collide with backers of a proposed international standard called H.320, says Elliot Gold, president of Telespan Publishing Corp., a market-research firm in Altadena, Calif.
In taking sides, hardware and software companies must weigh which technology will hit the market first against which might make the most money over the long run.
"You have to look at the greed factor," Mr. Gold says.
"There will be no standard that comes from the Vatican."
Once created and compressed, multimedia wares have to reach their audiences.
One safe bet for distribution is CD-ROM.
A single disk holds enough data to pack an encyclopedia with room to spare.
Prices of CD-ROM players have plunged, and they are becoming standard equipment on many PCs.
The disks cost less than $2 to make, about one-tenth the cost of a video-game cartridge.
That's an important selling point for companies like multimedia upstart 3DO Co. that hope their formats become new standards for systems hooked to the family TV.
But even the most ardent backers of disks expect them to be augmented, if not replaced, by multimedia services flowing over phone and cable lines.
In that scenario, games, movies, music and information will be doled out from repositories called servers, a term used loosely to mean both the computer and database that file and retrieve multimedia information.
The opportunity in servers has attracted many leading hardware and software companies.
IBM, Digital Equipment Corp., Hewlett-Packard Co. and Silicon Graphics Inc. have all been picked for major trials of their video-server technology.
Bell Atlantic in January chose supercomputer server technology from Oracle Corp., a database software giant in Redwood City, Calif., to offer movies-on-demand.
Microsoft is working on its own software -- code-named Tiger -- which it says can distribute multimedia on standard PC hardware.
A corner hardware store could afford a video server, for example, or a big company might assemble large systems from scores of PC circuit boards, says Nathan Myhrvold, Microsoft's senior vice president of advanced technology.
While server standards are nonexistent, a consensus is emerging over the most visible symbol of the multimedia age: the communications pipelines that will deliver new services to the home.
The overused metaphor of a data superhighway connotes a vast construction project, laying high-capacity wire from city to city and house to house.
Actually, phone companies have already installed much of the long-distance fiber-optic cable needed to boost their capacity.
And fiber-optic cable needs to be strung only to each neighborhood, not to each house.
Cheaper coaxial wires -- the kind already used by cable companies -- have enough capacity to carry two-way video on the final leg to each home.
Pacific Bell plans a $16 billion system upgrade to deliver interactive services throughout California.
The Pacific Telesis Group unit will run fiber cables from a central office to neighborhood feeder devices.
From there, coaxial wires will make the final link to 480 homes each.
Some phone companies aren't waiting for coaxial cable.
Bell Atlantic plans to send movies to the home over standard copper wires using a technology called ADSL, for asynchronous data subscriber line.
But many industry watchers consider ADSL a transitional technology.
It offers a much slower return path for home users to send data back through the network, and it requires an expensive set-top box in each home.
Cable companies have different problems.
They already shove massive amounts of conventional analog programming through their coaxial cable, and are steadily adding fiber-optic backbones to connect neighborhoods and territories.
But their systems need amplifiers and other equipment to allow two-way communications, plus switching systems to steer signals among all the houses or businesses on their networks.
The cost and complexity of adding switched services is a big reason many cable companies have found phone-company partners.
"Over three to five years, the cable network that used to be analog, one-way and passive will become digital, two-way and interactive," says Matt Miller, vice president of technology at General Instrument.
One piece of jargon stands above all others in this confusing world.
ATM, which has nothing to do with cash machines, is emerging as the lingua franca that will ensure that all parts of these new networks should eventually work together.
The technology's full name is asynchronous transfer mode, a new set of ground rules for how multimedia data is transported and routed.
It doesn't require a particular type of wire or specify a particular speed.
Rather, ATM defines what might be described as the atoms that will make up the future communications universe, converting each message, video clip or song into data packets that are a consistent size and act according to consistent rules.
And the cable, phone and computer industries, with a rare degree of unanimity, say ATM will be the language they adopt as they prepare for 21st-century networks.
"It will touch virtually everybody sometime in the next decade," says Andrew Ludwick, chief executive of SynOptics Communications Inc., a network-hardware maker in Santa Clara, Calif.
Playback is where the hottest standards battles are raging.
Though CD-ROM drives for PCs are a sure bet, it's far from clear whether any company can develop and successfully market a popular technology for playing disk software on TV.
Philips Electronics NV has sold only 300,000 of its compact disk-interactive players in 2 1/2 years.
Tandy Corp., after disappointing sales, has stopped making its VIS system for playing special CD-ROM disks on TV.
The first licensee for 3DO's higher-speed technology, Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., hasn't sold many of the game players.
More-powerful machines are on the way.
A more far-reaching struggle involves the link between the TV and the information highway.
At its heart is a basic question: Who controls the information that flows to the home?
The set-top decoder box is a key symbol.
Today, cable operators own it and dictate the choices available to consumers.
Telephone and computer companies are pushing for a broader concept of two-way communications that would allow every consumer to be a video broadcaster.
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. argues that a consumer should own his own set-top box and take it with him to use in any city or town.
"Who gets the royalties and how many gates you go through -- these are public-policy issues," says Jeffrey Berg, chairman of the Los Angeles talent agency International Creative Management.
"It's not just an act of commerce."
Technology and pricing will shape the debate.
Cable companies pay about $125 for set-top decoders based on today's analog technology.
For movies-on-demand, interactive games and other new services, the boxes must get a lot smarter.
They will need a microprocessor chip to handle computing functions, memory to store data, and other special chips for manipulating graphics at high speed.
That's all in addition to circuitry to descramble video signals and change channels.
Depending on how much sophistication is desired, smart set-top boxes are currently expected to cost $200 to $500 each.
That means it could cost as much as $30 billion to equip all 60 million U.S. cable subscribers.
With so much money at stake -- and exactly what consumers will be willing to pay so uncertain -- it doesn't make sense to commit to any technology too early.
The Federal Communications Commission is backing the idea of upgrades: Decoders and TV sets would have slots so that special modules of circuitry could be easily added later.
This plan also fits the strategies of some big cable operators, such as TeleCommunications Inc.
Rather than jump all the way to two-way video, TCI wants to move initially to simpler 500-channel systems to head off competition from direct-broadcast satellites.
The DBS systems are expected to deliver about 150 channels, starting next month, to homes equipped with small receiver dishes.
AT&T and some computer companies want to let TVs, home computers and other appliances share information among themselves and with the outside world.
The telecommunications giant is backing a concept, called Sage, that uses a home networking device controlled by various hardware and software add-ons from third-party companies.
"The whole idea of open technology is that most of the smart people work for somebody else, no matter who you are," says Carl Ledbetter, president of AT&T's consumer-products group.
Existing set-top box makers, including General Instrument and Scientific-Atlanta Inc., face new competition from computer and chip makers such as Hewlett-Packard and Intel.
But the power of customers such as TCI may keep set-top boxes a low-profit, commodity business.
"I feel sorry for these guys," says W.M. "Trip" Hawkins, chief executive of 3DO.
"They are at the mercy of their customers."
Software suppliers could be in the driver's seat.
Without guides and navigation programs, consumers will have trouble finding their way through myriad entertainment choices.
So-called agent programs are expected to learn their preferences and highlight offerings.
Hidden below what consumers see on the screen will be a more fundamental software layer.
New varieties of operating systems will have to control the flow of video and sound to a television in "real time," without the interruptions tolerable in computers.
Operating systems also will help establish technical ground rules for developing applications like interactive game shows, home shopping and video mail.
Companies that hope to supply operating systems include Microsoft, Apple, Silicon Graphics, 3DO, Kaleida Labs, Geoworks, Alameda, Calif., and Microware Systems Corp., a small company in Des Moines, Iowa.
Microware landed the operating-system order for the boxes Bell Atlantic will use.
Because this software will wield so much influence over how people communicate, customers are evaluating operating systems very carefully.
"We will be very cautious when we pick a vendor for the operating system," says Robert Thomson, a senior vice president at TCI.
"We have to make sure there is a premium for open access that doesn't create hurdles or hidden advantages for any particular company."
Some industry executives want the government to require publication of key specifications for communications, compression, privacy and other functions that will determine whether future set-top boxes can work together.
Wayne Rosing, president of a Sun Microsystems Inc. unit called FirstPerson Inc. working on its own operating system for set-top boxes, uses the analogy of camera film: The spacing of sprocket holes is fixed, but that doesn't prevent competition among film makers or development of proprietary technologies.
But Microsoft, which has more than 300 people working on interactive-TV projects, argues that it is too early for such specifications.
Chairman William Gates predicts that standards will emerge only after years of tests and marketplace jostling.
"Everybody's going to take a shot at this thing," he says.
Mr. Clark is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau.
Function: Squeezes video and other multimedia information so it can be transmitted and stored more easily.
Contestants: DigiCipher II, developed by General Instrument, vs. MPEG-2, from the Moving Picture Experts Group.
Betting line: DigiCipher II has a head start, but cable-TV companies are lining up behind nonproprietary MPEG-2 approach.
Function: Store and distribute movies, TV shows, music and other multimedia information.
Contestants: IBM, Digital, Silicon Graphics, Oracle, Hewlett-Packard, Microsoft.
Betting line: Wide open.
Several players have important market tests or partnerships.
Function: Provide computing power to give TVs interactive capability.
Contestants: General Instrument, Scientific-Atlanta, Zenith, IBM, H-P, Digital, Apple, Silicon Graphics, 3DO.
Betting line: Cable and phone companies will buy from multiple vendors, limiting prices and profits for box makers.
Function: Manage set-top decoders and their connections with servers and other networking hardware and software.
Contestants: Microsoft, Oracle, Geoworks, Silicon Graphics, Apple, Microware, Kaleida Labs, 3DO, General Magic, Sun.
Betting line: Microware has a head start, but big orders won't be placed until 1995 or 1996.
