Borland International Inc., seeking to restore profitability to its operations, said it is considering layoffs and that it might raise capital by selling a minority stake to an outside investor.
To help streamline operations and impose tighter controls on expenses, Borland said it named its first chief operating officer, Keith A. Maib, formerly a partner in Price Waterhouse's Dallas office.
Mr. Maib has spent the last few weeks examining Borland's business as part of a team of "turnaround specialists" from Price Waterhouse.
While insisting that Borland "isn't in a crisis," Mr. Maib said "Everything is an option in this environment."
He conceded that it might take strong measures to restore health to Borland, which sells software products that are technically distinguished, but which has had repeated difficulties in posting a profit.
Analysts were skeptical about the decision to fill such a key post with a consultant with no operating experience in the software industry.
They also questioned whether belt-tightening would bring enough benefits to Borland, whose sales have stagnated over the past year.
"This is happening way too late," said Terence M. Quinn, an analyst at Furman Selz.
People familiar with the situation say Mr. Maib has discussed cutting as much as $120 million out of Borland's roughly $400 million in annual expenses.
They also say that Novell Inc., a maker of computer networking systems, is considering making a significant investment in Borland.
Mr. Maib declined comment on Borland's specific plans, though he said the company "is exploring" a layoff.
Mr. Maib will report to Philipe Kahn, Borland's chief execuitve officer.
In recent months, Mr. Kahn has seen several of his most senior executives resign, including the chief of the company's product division, who officially left yesterday.
Mr. Kahn said the decision to hire a chief operating officer was his idea and that Borland's board backed the move because it frees Mr. Kahn, a gifted product designer and marketer, to concentrate on ensuring that Borland delivers new products -- and more of them -- on time, something the company has had trouble doing lately.
A major supplier of database and spread-sheet programs for personal computers, Borland is both a victim and beneficiary of the sharp declines in software prices in recent years.
Low prices on its programs have enabled Borland to stay in the race against the likes of Microsoft Corp. and Lotus Development Corp., much larger rivals who dominate the so-called "business productivity" software category.
Borland also has been hurt by a copyright-infringement lawsuit, filed by Lotus in a U.S. District Court in Boston, that has disrupted Borland's spread-sheet business and left the company open to a potentially large damage award.
Losses from operations also have weakened Borland, Scotts Valley, Calif.
The company had a thin profit for its fiscal third quarter ended Dec. 31, 1993, but has said it will post a loss for the quarter ending March 31.
The impending loss has rekindled fears about the company's cash position, which last year was believed to be perilously low for a time.
Mr. Maib dismissed worries of a cash crunch, saying that Borland's cash is "not materially different today" than it was on Dec. 31, when the company reported cash of $65 million.
