General Electric Co.'s finance arm and international financier George Soros are jointly forming a multibillion-dollar fund to develop power plants in emerging nations, hoping to profit from the growing demand for modern power facilities around the world.
GE Capital Corp. and a new unit set up by Mr. Soros's Quantum Group are each investing $200 million in equity and expect to raise another $2 billion to finance and build privately owned power facilities in emerging nations such as China, India, Indonesia and Mexico.
International Finance Corp., a unit of the World Bank, has signed a letter of intent to invest $50 million, and GE executives say the rest will come from international investors and companies involved in the energy market.
While agencies such as the World Bank have financed the development of power projects, the fund, called Global Power Investments, could become the largest private source of capital for the fast-growing world-wide energy market.
Unlike most equity funds that take direct equity stakes in companies, this fund will finance and build projects from scratch.
A spokesman for Quantum Group -- an offshore investment vehicle -- said that there are attractive returns in "direct equity investments with a longer-term investment horizon."
Global Power could ultimately be $10 billion or bigger in size after using the equity to borrow funds for construction projects.
While the fund would own the projects in many cases, it will also co-own plants with governments or government-owned utilities.
"There's a tremendous need for power infrastructure," said Gary Wendt, president and chief executive of GE Capital.
Global Power would invest in projects in China, India and Mexico in which GE Capital has already begun discussions.
The Stamford, Conn., financing giant has signed a management contract with the fund to originate and manage the facilities, while the fund will make the investment decisions.
Global Power will also be based in Stamford.
GE Capital has $4.5 billion of power projects in the U.S., and wants to parlay its experience with its parent's strength in building power generators.
Mr. Wendt said, "We expect to be working very closely" with GE to source and develop projects.
"Now we're going abroad," he said of GE Capital.
Amid a mature market in the U.S., demand for electricity is growing faster in East Asia than anywhere else in the world.
China spends about $10 billion to $14 billion a year on electric-power projects, and capacity is forecast to nearly double by the turn of the century, analysts say.
Coal-related programs are important in the East Asian region because of the huge reserves there.
China uses about 1.1 billion tons of coal annually, more than any other nation.
And 40% of its new energy spending is expected to go into coal-fired power.
Globally, "there is an enormous latent demand for increased power production, and the fuel of choice is expected to be coal," said William Owens, chairman and chief executive of SGI International, a La Jolla, Calif., company that cleans coal for commercial use.
The fund will build various types of power facilities, including gas, oil, coal and hydroelectric plants.
A typical 200-megawatt project could cost upward of $200 million.
Local Asian companies have already seized on the opportunity.
One competitor of the new fund will be Hopewell Holdings, a Hong Kong infrastructure company that has a big presence in China.
The company is setting up a separate company to build power stations in China, the Philippines and elsewhere in Asia.
As Hopewell showed, the business can be quite lucrative.
In 1987 Hopewell completed the 700-megawatt Shajiao B power station on China's Pearl River.
The ownership will ultimately be transferred to China, but the "build-operate-transfer" agreement gives the company a return of about 18% on its investment.
The $200 million from Mr. Soros will come from a new fund set up by Quantum to make longer-term equity investments.
Investors in four of Mr. Soros's existing funds will be given the opportunity to invest in the new fund, called Quantum Industrial Holdings, the spokesman said.
Mr. Soros's funds have begun to make other investments in developing countries, including a real-estate venture in Mexico.
While Mr. Soros is a major contributor to charitable organizations in emerging countries in Eastern Europe, "We and Mr. Soros are in this activity to make profits," said Mr. Wendt.
