Nissan Motor Co. released plans Friday to increase its purchases of U.S.-made auto parts, in a move aimed at satisfying American demands that Japan set numerical goals for bringing down its huge bilateral trade surplus.
Nissan said that by the year ending March 31, 1998, it intends to boost procurement of U.S.-made car parts for its plants in the U.S. to an annual total of $3.4 billion, an increase of 75% over the year ended March 31, 1993.
It also said it plans to increase imports of foreign-made car parts, machinery and vehicles by 70% over the same five-year period to $1.7 billion.
Nissan's announcement comes a month after the collapse of the "framework" talks, the most recent round of negotiations aimed at reducing Japan's mammoth bilateral trade surplus.
The talks broke down following Tokyo's refusal to accept numerical measurements of U.S. penetration of Japan's markets.
The U.S. has said it is now up to Japan to come up with measures to narrow its surplus with the U.S., which by Japan's count exceeded $50 billion in 1993.
Trade in autos and auto parts, which comprises the lion's share of the surplus, has been one of the most contentious issues in the bilateral trade fight.
Toyota Motor Corp. was scheduled to unveil a plan similar to Nissan's later today, and other Japanese auto makers are expected to follow suit.
The country's top auto producers have set a goal to buy a combined $19 billion worth of U.S. auto parts a year by 1995, and the U.S. has pushed them to publish plans for succeeding years.
The auto makers had resisted setting new goals for fear of inviting U.S. retaliation, should they fail to meet them.
Nissan, the first to take the plunge, said that its new goals are nonbinding.
Japan's government, meanwhile, plans to announce as early as tomorrow some unilateral market-opening measures, including deregulation and import-promotion plans.
Tokyo also may disclose plans to boost government procurement of foreign goods and to improve foreign access to Japan's insurance market, two areas that fall within the framework of the stalled talks.
But Japanese officials lately have been trying to play down expectations for the package, noting that Japan would have delivered measures to America's liking a month ago if such plans were feasible.
One area where Tokyo may disappoint Washington is macroeconomic policy.
Japanese legislators and business leaders have been urging the government to set stimulative fiscal-policy goals, including the idea of raising Japan's 430 trillion yen ($4.1 trillion) target for public works spending this decade.
Boosting public spending would spur domestic demand and thus imports.
But some politicians now say substantive fiscal pledges probably won't be forthcoming.
"I think it's difficult to come up with numbers, but some sort of direction or intention" may be stated, said Kozo Yamamoto, a coalition legislator involved in shaping economic policy.
Pledging greater outlays would raise the question of how to finance them, one of the thorniest issues in Japanese politics.
What's more, auto industry executives are quick to point out that any plans to boost procurement of foreign goods are only targets and may be subject to change.
Nissan stressed the nonbinding nature of its new goals.
"This is only a business plan," said Nissan spokesman Takashi Matsushita.
"Whether or not we make that plan depends on the conditions of the market."
