Whittle Communications L.P. said it will close down its Special Report Network, an unprofitable unit that put television programming in physicians' waiting rooms.
The unit was once an example of the closely held company's innovative media properties.
Currently in 30,000 doctors' offices, Special Report will be suspended for at least two years, Whittle said.
That will result in layoffs of 150 people from Whittle's work force of 1,100.
Whittle, based in Knoxville, Tenn., also said yesterday it had named its first president and chief executive in four years.
Whittle appointed Donald F. Johnstone, 63, who has been president and chief executive of Knoxville-based Philips Consumer Electronics Co., the U.S. consumer electronics arm of Dutch electronics giant Philips Electronics N.V. Mr. Johnstone will assume his new post in early March.
With the closing of Special Report, Whittle said, Mr. Johnstone will oversee the company's focus on "building interactive highways in fields of education and health."
Whittle plans to spend millions in the coming years to expand what it considers as its "promising businesses," including Channel One, the advertising-supported news program broadcast in schools, and Medical News Network, a physicians' interactive medical news network.
Whittle is also pouring money into the Edison Project, a for-profit school project seeking management contracts with public school systems nationwide.
"Is it a disappointment?
Did we fail?
Yes," said Christopher Whittle, the company's founder and chairman.
"But it's not a setback for the company.
We've lopped off the only loser in terms of dollars."
Launched in 1988, Special Report hasn't shown a profit for three years.
Faced with high distribution costs -- it played programs from laser disks pressed every two weeks -- Special Reports brought in less than 20% of Whittle's estimated annual $200 million revenue.
Its hand-delivered distribution system "caused expenses to significantly exceed revenues," the company said.
Mr. Whittle apparently wasn't forced by his partners to name Mr. Johnstone, though there has been speculation by people close to the company that Mr. Whittle is increasingly under pressure from his large partners to bring costs under control.
Whittle's partners include Time Warner Inc., which holds 37%, and Philips Electronics and Associated Newspaper Holdings PLC, which hold 25% and 24.6%, respectively.
Philips Electronics is expected to increase its stake to 33% soon.
Last December, Mr. Johnstone was named to head a task force, called by Mr. Whittle, to look at Whittle's operations and costs.
One recommendation from the task force was to close down Special Reports and direct the money to Medical News Network.
However, Mr. Johnstone made it clear yesterday that he no longer represents Philips' interest in Whittle Communications.
"I have severed my relationship with Philips," Mr. Johnstone said.
"I now work for all of Whittle's partners and Chris."
Mr. Johnstone will report directly to Mr. Whittle, who remains the managing general partner with full operational control of the company.
