American Express Co. said it will spend more than $1 billion to spin off its Lehman Brothers Inc. investment banking unit as a publicly traded company.
To prepare Lehman for public ownership, American Express will pump money into Lehman by buying $890 million in newly created Lehman common stock and $200 million in new Lehman preferred shares.
The stock purchases are intended to provide a capital infusion that will put the newly independent Lehman, which has been owned by American Express for nearly a decade, on a sound financial footing.
But the infusion is double the amount American Express executives told analysts last summer that it would take to shore up Lehman's balance sheet, reflecting demands by rating agencies.
When completed in April, the long-expected spinoff will reduce American Express's equity by $2.4 billion, based on the company's own valuation of Lehman and the cost of the share purchases.
American Express will distribute the Lehman common shares to American Express shareholders as a tax-free dividend; American Express will retain the preferred shares.
But the spinoff will have no effect on American Express's earnings.
Yesterday, the company reported record 1993 profit, helped in part by a large one-time gain related to the sale of another unit.
The expensive spinoff completes a nearly two-year plan to shed units not considered strategic to the company's focus on personal financial services.
Since 1981, American Express had spent almost $4 billion on various ill-conceived efforts to become a full-service financial supermarket.
But merchant banking failures such as a soured bridge loan to Prime Computer Inc. and the volatility that is part of the securities business convinced the company that it should get off Wall Street and back onto Main Street.
The shift in strategy accelerated after Harvey Golub was named chief executive officer one year ago today.
"On one hand it does take away from American Express's equity base," said John Keefe, an independent financial analyst.
"But Lehman would have threatened the company and its credit rating in the next downturn" in the securities business.
"It's a very good idea."
American Express will have a chance to earn back some of its spinoff expenses.
The spinoff arrangement calls for the huge charge card company to receive 50% of any Lehman Brothers net income in excess of $400 million a year, not to exceed $50 million or so a year or cumulatively, $400 million over an eight-year period.
For Lehman, founded in 1850, the biggest benefit is that the company, ranked third world-wide as an underwriter of stock and bond offerings, is once again free.
It had nine years of often rocky relations with its corporate parent and with its former partner, Shearson.
Among other irritants, Lehman officials resented being saddled with legal ties to troubled Shearson limited partnerships.
Shearson and Lehman, which American Express had melded into an unwieldy partnership, announced in March 1993 that they were going their separate ways.
The two had been operating as separate entities since 1990, when Lehman revived its name on a separate division.
Shearson joined Travelers Inc.'s Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co. brokerage unit in July.
Lehman management will participate in and probably profit from the stock offering.
Last September, in lieu of their 1993 bonuses, the top 900 or so senior managers were offered shares in a $60 million private placement of "phantom" Lehman stock.
Lehman valued its phantom shares at $10 each and will convert them 1-for-1 into real shares -- probably at a higher price -- when the company's shares are distributed to shareholders.
An employee stock ownership plan will pump another $100 million into Lehman.
The clock was ticking for American Express: Lehman was anxious to go public before the end of the already three-year-old underwriting boom.
As Lehman prepares to fly solo, money managers, analysts and even rivals say what the company has going for it is an envied reputation for client service and a venerable name that still carries tremendous cachet on Wall Street.
Other assets: 9,000 employees, a tony headquarters in New York's World Financial Center, well-respected fixed-income and research divisions and a global derivatives business that's growing rapidly.
But the firm lost the huge Shearson network of stockbrokers, a major selling point to clients.
It has had stormy relationships with other firms on the Street, and has been faulted in the past for buying market share through predatory pricing.
So far, it hasn't had the cash to play in the big leagues: at $2.05 billion, Lehman has half the equity capital of some of its competitors.
American Express's capital infusion will bring Lehman's equity capital to $3.3 billion.
The money should help Lehman maintain a single-A credit rating on a stand-alone basis and may pave the way for it to create a triple-A-rated derivatives unit, a proven business-getter for other investment banks.
Richard Fuld Jr. will remain Lehman's president and chief executive officer.
A chairman may be named later, the company said.
Three Major Units Remain The spinoff of Lehman will leave American Express with three major operating units: Travel Related Services, IDS Financial Services and American Express Bank.
"Our overriding objective will be to make American Express the world's most respected service brand," said Mr. Golub, now chairman and chief executive of American Express.
In addition to the Lehman announcement, American Express also reported fourth-quarter earnings of $399 million, or 78 cents a share.
The earnings, which compare with a year-earlier $82 million, or 15 cents a share, that included a $217 million restructuring charge, were slightly higher than Wall Street expectations of 74 cents a share.
The announcements were made late yesterday afternoon.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, American Express closed at $31.50, up 62.5 cents.
Most of the company's major operating units had better earnings in the fourth quarter than they did the year before.
The company's flagship Travel Related Services unit had net income of $213 million, up from $181 million, a year earlier.
IDS Financial Services had net of $98 million, up from $82 million.
The American Express Bank had profit of $20 million in both years.
Travel Related Services' quarterly results included several positive developments.
For the first time since the fourth quarter of 1991, the number of its outstanding cards increased on a year-over-year basis, from 34.7 million at the end of 1992 to 35.4 million at the end of last year.
The increase included approximately 900,000 cards that were issued to federal government employees as part of a previously announced contract.
The total amount of money billed through cards also increased from both the previous quarter and the fourth quarter of 1992.
And although net revenue received by TRS was basically flat due to a continued decline in the "discount" paid by merchants, earnings were helped by improving credit quality.
The fourth-quarter provision for losses and other claims was $395 million, down from $493 million a year before.
"The numbers aren't what they were five years ago, and the environment for travel and retail spending is still pretty tough, but it does seem to be improving," said Mr. Keefe, the independent stock analyst.
Lehman Brothers had net income of $114 million, compared with a $166 million loss a year before.
