Sales of diet foods are shaping up in Europe, thanks to new products and heavy advertising.
The 1989 launch of Slim-Fast, the powdered diet drink by New York-based Slim-Fast Food Co., has boosted Britain's stagnant diet-food sector, and marketers say waist-watchers on the Continent offer similar potential for growth.
In Britain, retail sales of diet foods grew 14% last year, after a 37% climb in 1992, according to a survey by Mintel International, a London-based market-research concern.
Within four years, Mintel predicts the market will grow another 12%, as diet foods are working to change their image from medicine to convenience products, and from chemical-laden concoctions to fun-filled fare for modern lifestyles.
In Britain, diet foods' expansion from pharmacies onto supermarket shelves is further boosting their popularity.
"With pharmacies, you always had the connotation of a medical problem," explains Peter Mensing, a consultant with Booz, Allen & Hamilton Ltd.
"Wider distribution and advertising allows for impulse buying," he says.
Demographic trends also favor diet foods: By 1997, the number of women in Britain aged 25 to 54 will increase 4%, according to Mintel.
British women also are giving birth later in life and are suffering more from postpregnancy weight gain as a result, the firm says.
Meal-replacement drinks and food are a current favorite.
But like crash-diet plans and appetite-suppressant pills, these newer products are struggling against consumers' growing taste for natural foods, generally healthier eating habits that make diets obsolete, well-publicized dangers of excessive dieting and cautious consumer spending at the end of Britain's recession.
At a supermarket in central London, for instance, a six-serving box of Slim-Fast's dried soup costs #6.49 (about $9.70).
Diet-food makers are fighting potential sales hurdles by boosting advertising budgets.
Between 1988 and 1992, British ad spending on diet meals grew more than 1 1/2 times to #7.6 million, Mintel said.
Last year, Slim-Fast alone had a gross advertising expenditure of #8 million.
"We're making a top-quality product, presented by continuous, forceful advertising," says John Costa, who heads Slim-Fast's international operations in Paris.
Germany's BioNorm, a diet-food maker owned by chemicals maker E. Merck Chemische Fabrik OHG, is doubling its ad spending this year, after Slim-Fast's intensive marketing effort upon its arrival on German store shelves in March 1993.
Marketers say consumers' lack of loyalty toward diet-food brands also calls for a promotional push stronger than that required by other consumer goods.
"Dieters are extremely promiscuous," says Allyson Stewart of AAI Consultants in London.
"It's stuck in their head that the product didn't work, even though it did, and they just put the weight back on," she explains.
"Slim-Fast has poured a lot into advertising, and it worked," observes Michele Simmons, editor of Britain's Slimming magazine.
"They promoted it, made sure it's available everywhere, and it's really caught on now."
In Britain, Slim-Fast holds an 80% share of the diet-food market, compared with 8% for Nestle SA's Carnation Slender, 5% for Shapers, the store brand of the Boots Co. drugstore chain, and 4% for Scholl PLC's Limmits brand.
In Germany, Slim-Fast has conquered over two-thirds of the market within 10 months of its launch.
Industry leaders are trying to sustain the current craze for meal replacements with a colorful range of relaunches and line extensions.
Slim-Fast has complemented its instant drinks with soups, nutrition bars and ready-to-drink juices.
Nestle's Carnation Slender recently launched a new formula with a higher fiber content.
And Boots says it's developing more unusual diet foods, such as complete diet lunches or ice creams.
To broaden sales, manufacturers are targeting another market segment: men.
"It's still an untapped area," says SlimFast's Mr. Costa.
"Men haven't realized that overweight equals health problems," he laments.
In Germany, for instance, Slim-Fast ads feature only male television stars.
"Women also find it interesting if a man loses weight for a change," adds an executive on the Slim-Fast account at Grey Advertising Inc. in Duesseldorf.
"It adds to the credibility," she explains.
