The head of the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board said that bond dealers are chiefly to blame for the "pay-to-play" abuse that the board is trying to end.
However, MSRB Chairman David Clapp said a rule drafted by the board probably is unfair in blocking bond dealers from making political gifts to state and local officials running for Congress, while allowing dealers to continue contributing to incumbents in the House and Senate.
Discussing the board's controversial proposal, Mr. Clapp said the blame for the pay-to-play practice lies "more with dealers than politicans."
The term "pay to play" refers to bond dealers' efforts to obtain bond business by making political contributions to state and local officials.
Mr. Clapp, who also is general partner of Goldman, Sachs & Co., said a few top muni-underwriting firms could have joined forces to quash the practice some years ago.
Instead, "We actually escalated it," he said, to the point where politicans couldn't help but realize that "Wall Street was a good place to go" for political money.
He made his remarks here Saturday to bond dealers attending the annual convention of the Public Securities Association.
The MSRB's proposal, which would take effect April 1, would bar bond dealers from doing business in a jurisdiction within two years of making a political contribution to an official of the jurisdiction.
The Securities and Exchange Commission, which is receiving public comments on the rule until March 11, is expected to approve it promptly.
Mr. Clapp joined SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt, who also spoke to the PSA, in predicting that the MSRB's proposal will withstand a widely anticipated constitutional challenge.
Several critics feel the proposal raises serious First Amendment questions.
Mr. Levitt said that the SEC's lawyers feel the proposal will pass constitutional muster and that he personally agrees with that assessment.
He acknowleged, however, that the outcome of any court challenge "can't be predicted with certainty."
Despite vocal criticism of the proposal by some state and local government groups, Mr. Clapp said he has been told by "quite a few" elected officials that the board is doing the right thing.
Similarly, Mr. Levitt said many state and local officials are picking up on their political antennae that pay to play is pernicious, and, therefore, they don't want to be associated with it.
