U.S.-Japan trade talks remained deadlocked after negotiators wrapped up two days of talks, raising the possibility that the two sides won't be able to reach an accord before a summit meeting next month.
U.S. officials used unusually blunt language to describe the deadlock, saying they had managed only "marginal" progress in some areas and were at an "impasse" on others.
The two sides are expected to continue the negotiations over the so-called Framework talks late next week in Tokyo.
The U.S. and Japan want to wrap up an agreement in time for a summit meeting in Washington Feb. 11 between President Clinton and Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa.
The political turmoil in Japan has made the already difficult talks even tougher.
Robert Hormats, a Goldman, Sachs & Co. executive and former trade negotiator, likened the negotiations to a "Greek tragedy" because the two sides are heading for collision that both can clearly see, but neither can avoid.
For the U.S., President Clinton has made Japan his top trade priority and is committed to wresting pledges from Japan to increase imports.
The U.S. is pressing Japan to agree to specific trade targets and ways to measure progress toward those goals.
Any retreat would be an embarrassing setback for the administration.
For Japan, its trade negotiators have turned the trade fight into a test of national will, portraying Japan as the defender of the free-trade system -- with the U.S. cast as the bully.
Meanwhile, the political instability has given greater power to Japanese bureaucrats, who have a big stake in resisting compromise because greater foreign competition could diminish their power.
The U.S. has been trying to get Japanese political leaders involved, on the theory that they would place greater emphasis on maintaining cordial relations with the U.S. than would the bureaucrats.
But so far the political leaders have been absorbed with the domestic battle over political reform, and have shown no signs of interceding.
"The U.S. pounding looks funny in Tokyo," said I.M. Destler, a Japanese trade specialist at the University of Maryland.
"With the government hanging on by its fingernails, the U.S. is coming along saying, `Don't forget about our talks.'"
