Federal regulators proposed practically shutting down salmon fishing in the Pacific Ocean this year, citing a "disastrous" collapse in the fish's population.
The Pacific Fishery Management Council, a quasi-governmental agency that sets fishing policies for U.S. waters from Mexico to Canada, had been expected to propose tough limits on this year's salmon catch.
But the council's three proposals are more dire than many environmentalists and fishermen had expected, and far outstrip last year's highly restrictive limits.
The new limits are the most restrictive ever placed on salmon -- and a gloomy reminder of the failure to halt the salmon's rapid decline.
Even under the most generous of the council's three options, fishing for Coho salmon, once a mainstay of western fisheries, is banned completely for sport and commercial fishermen, other than Indian tribes.
The three options also severely limit catching other once-numerous species, such as many runs of Chinook, although catching some species of Chinook will be allowed in certain areas.
The council will hold public meetings before deciding on which option it will forward to the U.S. Commerce Department, which routinely approves the council's recommendations.
Larry Six, executive director of the council, said the proposals reflect "very severely depressed populations, the worst we've ever seen."
For example, he said counts of Oregon Coho salmon, which two years ago totaled about three million, now hover around 240,000.
The fishing restrictions aren't likely to affect prices consumers pay for salmon, as most salmon comes from Alaska or foreign waters.
Still, they underscore the downfall of a once mighty and still symbolic resource.
A decade ago, salmon still supported a multibillion dollar industry in the West.
But salmon numbers have been rapidly sliding for years, largely as a result of logging, irrigation, pollution, hydroelectric dams and overfishing.
Federal regulators have been unable to significantly alter the human activities driving the fish's decline, despite years of haggling, negotiating and legal skirmishing.
Salmon populations, which a few decades ago were estimated at 16 million, last year were estimated at two million.
This year, early counts of the number of salmon making it back to spawning grounds have taken an even steeper dive, alarming scientists.
Some blame unusually warm ocean temperatures, but others think the cumulative toll of environmentally damaging human activities may have driven the fish over some so-called extinction threshold from which they may never recover.
