The day before Congress reconvenes to begin work on legislation overhauling the U.S. health system, groups representing doctors and insurers stepped up campaigns lambasting government or bureaucratic controls on the health industry.
The American Medical Association and the Health Insurance Association of America both unveiled new advertising campaigns.
But as industry groups were intensifying their criticism of various health-reform proposals, other organizations were embarking on plans to promote a vast overhaul of the health system.
Last weekend, the Health Care Reform Project -- a coalition of unions, consumer groups, and other organizations -- began a radio, television and print campaign promoting some of the same reforms President Clinton has proposed-including caps on insurance premiums.
The AMA ad began running yesterday in national newspapers, including The Wall Street Journal.
In it, next to a photograph of a physician's hands gently feeling a patient's bare shoulder, bold black print asks: "Would you rather trust your life to an MD or an MBA?"
"There is a serious problem with the health system reform plans now being debated in Congress," the ad goes on to proclaim.
"They don't guarantee that your physician will continue to set the quality standards for medical care."
At the same time, the HIAA said it has begun airing two new "Harry and Louise" commercials.
The controversial series of television ads show an ordinary couple worrying about features of the White House health plan.
One of the new commercials shows Harry and Louise in their living room, fretting about health-care alliances, the regional health insurance buying pools that would be set up under the Clinton plan.
"This plan forces us to buy our insurance through these new mandatory government health alliances," says Louise during the 30-second spot.
"Run by tens of thousands of new bureaucrats," adds Harry.
"Another billion-dollar bureaucracy," laments Louise.
Such criticism isn't new.
But the medical groups' campaigns have taken on a new urgency because, despite all the talk of changing the health system over the past year, the legislative debate is only now beginning in earnest.
President Clinton's State of the Union Address tonight will stress health care.
After that, panels responsible for health-care legislation in the House almost immediately will begin drafting bills to restructure the medical system.
On Capitol Hill, Republican members of the Joint Economic Committee released a report that said the White House's proposed financing scheme for extending health coverage to all Americans will fall $1 trillion short over the first seven years of the plan.
The Democratic chairman of the committee, Rep. Dave Obey of Wisconsin, angrily attacked the report as a "straight partisan hatchet job."
At a news briefing, AMA officials said they wouldn't endorse any of the half-dozen major health bills introduced in Congress.
But they said they would insist that any health-reform proposal have several features: medical coverage for all Americans, guaranteed patient choice of health plans and doctors, assurances that quality won't be sacrificed, revision of antitrust laws to allow doctors to negotiate with insurance companies and hospital networks, and assurances that doctors make the primary decisions about medical care.
The officials also repeated their intention of setting up a "grass-roots" lobbying campaign by asking doctors to keep "information" on health-care reform in their waiting rooms.
They also urged physicians across the country to write letters to the editor and give speeches on health-care reform to civic clubs.
HIAA officials met yesterday for 1 1/2 hours with senior administration officials, including White House aides Ira Magaziner, George Stephanopoulos and Harold Ickes.
The HIAA has been involved in something of a public feud with the White House ever since it began airing the Harry and Louise ads, which many people criticized as distorting features of the Clinton plan.
HIAA President Bill Gradison called yesterday's session "very constructive."
Much of the conversation, participants said, focused on the insurance industry's opposition to mandatory health alliances.
Mary Agnes Carey contributed to this article.
