Monday's earthquake did only modest damage to stock prices of companies doing business in California.
Market lore says that's a good omen: when a depressed stock group no longer plunges on bad news, a rally is at hand.
Even before the quake, California-dependent stocks were on their knees.
The Golden State got hit harder than most by the recession of 1990-1991 and its economy stayed flabby while most of the country gained strength.
But now, some respected market veterans say California is beginning to recover and investors should consider putting some money there.
"California is not dead forever," says John Rogers, president of Ariel Capital Management in Chicago.
Investors have been behaving as if everyone is going to flee "and leave the place an empty beach."
The Chicagoan's favorite California stock is Longs Drug Stores, which has a heavy concentration of stores in California and Hawaii.
Longs has "very good locations, and owns a lot of the real estate under its stores," Mr. Rogers says.
"It has a rock-solid balance sheet with no long-term debt.
I've been buying more and more as it gets cheaper and cheaper."
This month, Goldman Sachs issued a major report called "California Dreamin'."
Salomon Brothers issued one called "California Is Turning."
Both brokerage houses say they see early signs of a recovery; they hint that people who agree can scoop up bargains before it becomes obvious to the vast herd of investors that California is making a comeback.
The stocks they recommend aren't necessarily based in California, but do get a significant portion of their revenue there.
According to Goldman's report, written by Abby Joseph Cohen and Edward F. McKelvey, "California-based retailers are reporting an upturn in sales," and some home builders and service providers see glimmers of improvement.
Yet "most broad-based indicators show little life yet," so California investments "are not for the short-sighted or faint of heart."
Nine California-recovery plays make Goldman's official Recommended List.
Alaska Air Group (based in Seattle) gets about half its revenue in California, the firm notes, "and we expect air travel in general to strengthen in 1994."
Among retailers, Goldman recommends Ross Stores, Good Guys and Utah-based Smith's Food & Drug Centers.
In banking, Goldman says BankAmerica "is expected to generate earnings growth on par with other banks and above the S&P 500 yet trades at a 40% discount to the market on a P/E basis."
Goldman also likes H.F. Ahmanson, a savings and loan that makes commercial as well as residential loans.
Rounding out Goldman's top picks are builder Kaufman & Broad Home, refiner Ultramar (based in Greenwich, Conn.), and minimill operator Birmingham Steel, of Birmingham, Ala.
Salomon's report, by David Hensley and David Shulman, points to a "little-noticed drop-off in layoff announcements by California aerospace contractors since April."
It also cites a slew of other economic indicators to support its contention that the state will "emerge from its long recession by the second half of 1994."
Salomon suggests a basket of some two dozen California stocks to consider.
Only two of them -- BankAmerica and energy producer Unocal -- make the firm's official Recommended List.
Among Salomon's other buy-rated stocks that get a significant portion of revenue from California are: the airline SkyWest, of Utah; health-services providers Foundation Health and National Medical Enterprises; retailers Carter Hawley Hale, Dayton Hudson of Minneapolis and May Department Stores of St. Louis; restaurant operator Carl Karcher Enterprises, and thrifts Golden West Financial, Great Western Financial and SFFed.
Like Goldman Sachs, it favors Kaufman & Broad Home and Good Guys.
Mr. Hensley, a Salomon economist, says the earthquake, terrible as its human consequences are, probably won't have a major effect on California's economy.
Disruptions of commuting and trucking and some loss of tourism will occur, he says, but "there will be a lot of construction and refurbishing."
Salomon bank analyst John Leonard says that among major banks, Wells Fargo offers the purest play on the California economy.
But he considers Wells Fargo's stock a bit pricey compared with that of BankAmerica.
The latter bank also has more room to improve profit through cost cutting, he says.
Of course, not everyone wants to climb on California's bandwagon.
"I don't sense that things have improved at all," says John Cleland, chief investment officer at Security Management in Topeka, Kan.
Mr. Cleland just returned from a trip to San Diego, where he says he talked with people from clarinet players to cab drivers.
"They continue to be concerned about losing their jobs," not planning big purchases or launching new ventures, he says.
"I walked through Balboa Park to try to get a feeling for the number of homeless.
My feeling was that there were more this time than there were the last time."
But Springfield, N.J., economist A. Gary Shilling thinks California is getting better.
His real-estate clients say that in California property markets "things have finally stabilized," he reports.
"This is the first time in two years that they've been anything but crepe-hangers."
And Charles Biderman, a California investment-newsletter writer who for the past two years had advocated short-selling (betting against) California stocks, has changed his tune.
December "was the first positive month in quite a while" for California retail sales, he says.
Unfortunately, Mr. Biderman says, "I don't know what you would buy that is cheap, that is a California play . . .
The builders are not undiscovered.
Certainly, Wells Fargo you can't say is undiscovered."
But he does like Unilab, a big clinical laboratory with a stronghold in the California market.
"The insiders have been buying a ton of stock," he says.
These 10 stocks get a large percentage of their revenues in California.
If the long-depressed state rebounds, as some analysts predict, the stocks could achieve strong gains.
If Rip Van Winkle slept through 1994, he would wake up to find the Dow Jones Industrial Average nearly unchanged, according to a poll of 100 money managers.
The poll was conducted Dec. 15 to Jan. 4 by Roper for the Consulting Group of Smith Barney Shearson.
On average, the managers expect the industrial average to end this year at 3797, which would constitute a gain of 1.1% from year end.
But the managers don't expect a quiet year.
Two thirds of them anticipate a stock-market decline some time during 1994.
Whenever the next decline comes, 46% of managers expect it to be mild (a 10% drop or less), 35% expect it to be moderate (a 10% to 15% decline) and only 8% expect it to be severe (more than a 15% fall).
The rest had no opinion.
