Overall consumer prices didn't increase at all in January, according to the Labor Department, some thing that hasn't happened in more than four years.
Analysts said the figures show, yet again, that inflation is well under control despite a noticeably improving economy.
Last month's steady prices followed a moderate increase in December, when prices were 0.2% above November's.
The bitterly cold weather didn't damage crops enough to force up prices, as the cost of food declined last month.
Clothing, trans portation and energy prices declined as well, while housing prices moderated.
Medical-care and entertainment prices both rose 0.3%, the same as they did in December.
The so-called core rate of inflation, which excludes the volatile food and energy sectors, was up only 0.1%, com pared with a 0.2% rise in December.
January's consumer price report marks the first in which the Labor Department has used new seasonal adjustments to help diminish the report's tendency to show larger price increases at the beginning of the year and smaller ones at the end.
For that reason, analysts were unsure how much credence to put into the January price figures.
"I don't believe the headline should read 'inflation is dead,' but if I saw no change at all in February and March, I would consider it a real trend," said Kathryn Kobe, economist for Joel Popkin & Co. in Washington.
What's worrisome on the pricing front, however, is that a survey released by the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank yesterday suggests that pricing pressures could be headed up the pipeline.
The survey found that more manufacturers in the bank's district were raising prices than in the previous survey.
Most of them still reported no price changes at all, however.
"It isn't where we are that's important, but where we are heading, and at the industrial level we are starting to see more in the way of price increases," said James Glassman, senior economist for Chemical Securities Inc.
The Philadelphia Fed report caused bond prices to tumble, dragging down stocks as well.
In another report, the Labor Department said initial claims for unemployment insurance rose by 5,000 last week, to 371,000.
Analysts say that claims so far this year have been higher than expected, given the strength of the economy.
One possible explanation is temporary business closings because of severe winter weather.
The four-week moving average of claims, considered a better marker of labor-market conditions, rose to 375,750 in the latest reporting week from 373,250 the week before.
Figures have been adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
Here are the price indexes (1982-1984=100) and percentage change for the components of the Labor Department's consumer price index for all urban consumers for January.
The percentage changes from the previous month are seasonally adjusted.
