John Cahill, chairman of British Aerospace PLC, is to resign in the wake of a boardroom tussle, according to various newspaper reports in the United Kingdom yesterday.
Mr. Cahill became chairman of the defense contractor and car maker just over 1 1/2 years ago and has a contract to stay on until 1997.
According to the reports, Mr. Cahill's expected departure comes as a result of clashes with some directors, notably Chief Executive Richard Evans and Finance Director Richard Lapthorne.
The failure of British Aerospace to successfully complete a longstanding negotiation with the Taiwanese government on a joint venture to build jets had led to speculation a few months ago that Mr. Cahill would resign.
He was closely involved with that particular project.
News reports say Mr. Cahill's resignation could come as early as today, just a week after British Aerospace grabbed headlines by announcing the #800 million ($1.2 billion) sale of its 80% stake in Rover Holdings PLC to Germany's Bayerische Motoren Werke AG.
Officials at the company couldn't be reached yesterday.
Meanwhile, the president of Honda Motor Co., which owns the remaining 20% of Rover, indicated that his company may eventually sever its ties to Rover if BMW goes ahead with its planned purchase.
The Japanese company's help has been key to Rover's transformation in the past few years into one of the fastest-growing car makers in Europe.
In a interview with the British Broadcasting Corp., Nobuhiko Kawamoto said he preferred to see Rover remain a British-controlled company.
But, he said, if Honda's connection to Rover "becomes only a joint venture with BMW, and Rover ceases to be a British company, our cooperative relationship with Rover will not last very long."
A British Aerospace spokesman last night declined to comment on Mr. Kawamoto's interview, calling it "a matter for BMW and for Honda."
Separately, British Aerospace said it will take a #250 million provision to clean up the balance sheet at its turboprop division.
The provision, to be taken on the 1993 books, will bring the accounting treatment of pre-1993 sales in line with its current policy of taking a provision against all regional aircraft sales, the company said.
Analysts said the provision may be a prelude to the sale -- or merger -- of the turboprop unit.
