The former heads of Israel's top four banks were convicted of fraud for their role in a 1983 stock scandal that led to the collapse of Israel's securities market and a $7 billion government bailout.
In a lengthy decision capping a two-year trial, Jerusalem District Court Judge Miriam Naor harshly criticized the bankers, who include some of the most prominent figures in Israeli financial circles, saying that by violating public trust they had harmed the banking system's most valuable asset.
Bank Hapoalim, Bank Leumi, United Mizrahi Bank and Israel Discount Bank were also convicted, along with 11 other former senior officials.
The officials face up to five years in jail; sentencing is set for next month.
All declined to comment after the verdict was read.
Ernst Japhet, former chairman of Bank Leumi, still faces trial after he was extradited from the U.S., where he had fled after the scandal.
"This is a landmark decision because it establishes the principle of accountability for economic transgressions, a principle that has never really been enforced in Israel," says Marshall Sarnat, a capital-markets expert who participated in the public commission set up in the wake of the crash to examine what had gone wrong.
The bankers were accused of manipulating their own banks' stock prices in order to offer investors higher returns.
Judge Naor wrote in her decision that the defendants found themselves locked in a "snowball effect," which forced them to continue propping up prices artificially as the magnitude of the potential losses grew.
The charade ended in autumn 1983, when investors anticipating a devaluation began dumping bank shares in favor of foreign currency.
The market collapsed and the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange shut down for two weeks while a $7 billion bailout was negotiated.
Under it, the government made loans to subsidiary companies of each bank, which used the funds to repurchase the shares.
The government ultimately took control of the banks, and the state now is selling off the banks as part of a privatization drive.
Yesterday's decision is the climax to a scandal that caused many Israelis to lose their life savings.
The events of 10 years ago still cast a shadow over the financial situation.
The collapse precipitated far-reaching reforms of the securities market, but many recommendations for change made by the public inquiry commission haven't yet been implemented.
Israel's banks still serve as the country's leading stockbrokers and investment advisers, says Mr. Sarnat, and overwhelmingly dominate the equity market through their ownership of most of the country's nonbanking financial institutions, such as mutual funds and insurance companies.
"This decision is food for thought about the need for a much more thorough separation and restructuring of the market," Mr. Sarnat said.
ERNST JAPHET, former chairman of Israel's Bank Leumi, voluntarily returned to Israel recently to face possible trial in connection with the 1983 stock scandal.
A Feb. 17 article on the convictions of other former officers of Israeli banks said incorrectly that Mr. Japhet had been extradited.
