You may be talking to your computer sooner than you think.
Lower prices are landing speech-recognition software -- once pigeonholed as a product for the disabled -- on the hard drives of a small but growing number of doctors, lawyers and executives who don't want to type.
This "large-vocabulary" speech software is a different breed from so-called command-and-control programs like Apple Computer Inc.'s PlainTalk, which lets computers respond to brief verbal commands such as "open file."
Large-vocabulary programs instantly recognize thousands of words, allowing users to dictate memos or even entire documents with more than 90% accuracy, and at speeds that are faster than many users can type.
The catch: Users must pause briefly between every word they dictate and must learn to pronounce words more or less the same way every time.
A price war heated up this month when Dragon Systems Inc. of Newton, Mass., the closely held industry leader, halved the price of its DragonDictate program, which recognizes 30,000 words and runs on personal computers that use Microsoft Corp.'s MS-DOS operating system.
The program now lists for $1,000, down from $9,000 when it was introduced in 1990.
This month, Articulate Systems Inc., Woburn, Mass., will introduce PowerSecretary, a version of DragonDictate that runs on Apple computers.
By June, the version will also run on Apple's new Power Macintoshes.
Dragon's price cut was a response to moves by two rivals.
In January, International Business Machines Corp. introduced its 20,000-word Personal Dictation System, which runs on IBM's OS/2 operating system, for $1,000.
And late last year, Kurzweil Applied Intelligence Inc., Waltham, Mass., halved the price of its 50,000-word Kurzweil Voice program, which runs on MS-DOS, to $3,000.
These prices are still too high for the average consumer, especially considering the programs' hidden cost: They require 12 to 16 megabytes of memory.
With four megabytes the standard for most PCs now, many users will have to spend $400 or more to add memory chips to run the programs.
Another obstacle: The programs can be tough to learn to use.
Joan Lichterman, an editor based in Berkeley, Calif., says she used the first version of DragonDictate "for a couple of months before I was really efficient at it.
And even then, there were times I wanted to throw it out the window."
Dragon's second version is "much better" at recognizing her words, she says.
Still, a small but growing number of professionals like Ms. Lichterman will pay the price to dictate in stilted speech.
Software resellers say sales have jumped since the latest wave of price cutting began last December.
Esquire Reporting Co., a legal services unit of Esquire Communications Ltd. of New York, says that when Dragon cut its prices to $2,000 last December, sales of DragonDictate increased to five or 10 copies a month, up from fewer than one a month previously.
Lawyers say they use the program to do more work with fewer secretaries.
Duncan & Craig, a law firm in Edmonton, Alberta, bought 12 DragonDictate programs in 1991 and has since cut its support staff.
In its bankruptcy practice, for instance, the firm now has eight lawyers and four staff members, down from nine lawyers and eight staff members, says partner Darcy Readman.
He estimates his firm pays 17,000 Canadian dollars (US$12,420) a year, including benefits, to secretaries, who spend about half their days typing from a Dictaphone.
"If you can replace even half of that, that's a substantial amount of money," he says.
He figures the 12 systems, which cost a total of $62,000 after a volume discount, paid for themselves within six months.
Doctors use the program to enter complete observations on electronic patient charts, instead of scribbling curt descriptions longhand or dictating, especially when they can't afford a secretary.
"There's no one here to act as a transcriptionist," says Andrew Rochester, a podiatrist in Painted Post, a hamlet in upstate N.Y.
"I have lots of patients.
I want to spend time with them.
I don't want to spend time writing things."
Although some users complain the programs never really go faster than 40 words a minute, counting corrections, Dr. Rochester, a computer whiz, says he can get his IBM Personal Dictation System to spew out text at a rate of 200 words a minute.
He does it by using "macro" commands, which allow users to store entire phrases or paragraphs in one verbal command.
When he says "last MD," for instance, his computer types, "the patient last saw their family physician," followed by a colon.
Or when he names a particular treatment, the computer instantly spews out lines of text describing the treatment in detail.
Lawyers use the same strategy to insert boilerplate text into contracts and other documents.
Actually, the longer and more complex the words, the better the computer understands, because few long words sound alike.
With use, the programs adapt to individual speakers' accents, which means that even someone like Hildreth Noronha can use them.
Mr. Noronha, who is of Portuguese descent, was born in India, grew up speaking British English, lived for seven years in Germany and now works as a translator in Baltimore.
He says the IBM program can understand his British pronunciation, lilting Hindi speech pattern and w's that sound like v's.
One snag: He doesn't always pronounce "the" the same way, leading to confusion.
But he won't be truly impressed until he can find a program that understands continuous speech.
When he's translating computer manuals from German to English, he thinks in lengthy English phrases but has to slow down to dictate them one word at a time to the computer.
"By the time you've said word No. 7, you forget what the rest of the sentence is going to be," he says.
The solution: When he's on a roll, he speaks into a tape recorder and later redictates the words into the IBM system.
Speech-recognition programs should become much easier to use in the next two to three years, industry executives say, when companies expect to sell "continuous speech" programs that understand speech without pauses.
When that happens, and prices fall to around $500, "this will really be mass-market-appeal kind of stuff," says Andy MacLean, general manager of software reseller DCR Inc., San Rafael, Calif.
Until then, he adds, companies that hope speech recognition will become a mass market product are "fooling themselves."
