After only six weeks on the job, special counsel Robert Fiske has launched aggressive probes on all fronts of the tangled Whitewater controversy.
His opening salvo was a stern warning to the White House, Congress and Hillary Rodham Clinton's former law firm that he won't tolerate anything that impedes his investigation.
In a show of prosecutorial muscle, Mr. Fiske came to Washington last week from his Little Rock, Ark., headquarters to urge lawmakers to delay hearings.
He also questioned White House aides before a grand jury to see if there were improper contacts with Treasury officials about a criminal inquiry into a failed thrift once owned by a Clinton business partner.
The fulcrum of the investigation will soon shift again to Little Rock, where a small band of lawyers and FBI agents has been poring over records of Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan and preparing to question witnesses before a special grand jury set to convene on March 23.
So far, Mr. Fiske, a Republican, is getting good marks from veterans of other investigations, including Iran-Contra prosecutor Lawrence Walsh.
But Thomas Puccio, who prosecuted the Abscam corruption cases, says it was a waste of time to subpoena White House officials to testify about how they learned of the impending Madison investigation because the Justice Department would have eventually told them about it anyway.
Mr. Fiske has a reputation for fierce independence and is staying clear of the web of social and professional connections that helped spawn the Whitewater controversy in the first place.
Shortly after his appointment in January, Mr. Fiske received a friendly note from Little Rock lawyer Alston Jennings Sr., who like Mr. Fiske is a former president of the prestigious American College of Trial Lawyers.
Mr. Jennings represents Seth Ward, a former Madison consultant and father-in-law of Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell.
But when Mr. Jennings followed up with a call, he got a polite brushoff from Mr. Fiske.
"He obviously didn't want to be seen anywhere with me," Mr. Jennings said.
Mr. Fiske, a New York litigator on leave from the Wall Street law firm of Davis, Polk & Wardwell, is pursuing a number of different investigative threads at once.
The heart of the Whitewater controversy centers on the Clintons' business relationship with Arkansas businessman James McDougal, who owned Madison, and his ex-wife, Susan.
The Clintons and McDougals were partners in Whitewater Development Co., a 230-acre real estate venture on Arkansas's White River, in which President Clinton and the first lady say they lost money.
Unsorting the tangled business dealings between the Clintons and the McDougals is one of the central preoccupations of Mr. Fiske's squad of investigators in Little Rock.
Mr. McDougal, a highflying deal-maker with connections to prominent members of Little Rock's business and political communities, ran Madison as his own financial fiefdom.
In 1985, Mr. Clinton asked him to host a fund-raiser to help retire a $50,000 campaign loan.
At the fund-raiser, which then-Gov.
Clinton didn't attend, Mr. McDougal raised $30,000.
But there is evidence that some of the money may not have come from contributors but from Madison accounts.
The Fiske staff hopes that documents involving Madison, a Cherry Valley, Ark., bank that furnished the 1984 campaign loan, and the Clinton campaign, will shed light on that flow of money.
Mr. Fiske is expected to investigate allegations that Mr. McDougal "carried" the Clintons in the Whitewater venture, launched with $203,000 in loans.
There is evidence that the McDougals shouldered more of the financial burden in the investment than the Clintons even though the two couples had an equal stake.
Mr. Fiske will also question why Mr. McDougal and President Clinton have conflicting accounts of their investment.
For example, the Clintons say they lost almost $69,000 in Whitewater but Mr. McDougal says they lost only about $9,000.
The Clintons didn't claim any Whitewater loss on their tax returns.
Cash also inexplicably moved between Whitewater's account and other accounts at Madison, which failed in 1989.
The investigators already have voluminous documents involving the McDougals' business interests.
James Lyons, a Denver lawyer who prepared a report on Whitewater for the Clinton presidential campaign, has also turned over documents.
Mr. Fiske is trying to discover whether the Clintons improperly used their influence to bolster Madison's sagging fortunes.
In 1985, Madison hired Mrs. Clinton and the Rose Law Firm to help it get authorization for a stock offering.
The Arkansas securities department, which had to approve the plan, was headed by Beverly Bassett Schaffer, a Clinton appointee.
Mr. Fiske recently subpoenaed the commission's records.
Mrs. Schaffer, a lawyer now in private practice, has turned over her private calendars for that time, according to her husband.
Mr. Fiske has subpoenaed files from the Rose Law Firm as well.
Also on Mr. Fiske's agenda is an examination of the web of Mr. McDougal's failed business and real-estate interests.
Mr. McDougal had business relationships with many people prominent in business and in politics, including current Arkansas Gov. Jim Guy Tucker.
Gov. Tucker received a grand jury subpoena before Mr. Fiske was appointed special counsel.
Mr. McDougal has complained that allegations of mismanagement at his S&L are being recycled from a 1990 federal fraud trial in which he was acquitted.
The Rose firm, meanwhile, has become tangled in the Whitewater controversy on several levels.
Mr. Fiske is expected to examine whether the firm had conflicts of interest when it represented the Resolution Trust Corp., after it took over Madison, in litigation against the thrift's auditor.
A grand jury has subpoenaed documents involving Seth Ward, Mr. Hubbell's father-in-law, who sued Madison for commissions stemming from real-estate transactions.
Ronald Clark, Rose managing partner, says the firm is cooperating fully with Mr. Fiske.
Several rooms at the firm are devoted to culling documents to ensure that client confidences are not divulged as documents are turned over.
Mr. Clark also insists that any documents that may have been shredded have nothing to do with Mr. Fiske's inquiry.
Later this month, Mr. Fiske will prosecute David Hale on charges of defrauding the Small Business Administration, which had licensed him to grant loans through his Capital Management Services.
On the face of it, this case has nothing to do with Whitewater.
But Mr. Hale, a former municipal judge, has alleged that Mr. Clinton, when he was governor, pressured him into making a $300,000 loan to a firm owned by Mr. McDougal's wife, Susan.
Some of that loan was allegedly diverted to Whitewater.
When Mr. Fiske replaced other federal prosecutors in the Hale case last month, Mr. Hale's co-defendants objected strenuously because they didn't want to be pulled into the Whitewater controversy.
But Mr. Fiske's lawyers prevailed.
The trial is set for March 28.
Mr. Fiske has assigned a deputy, Roderick Lankler, to take charge of the most sensitive corner of his investigation, a full-scale probe of the death of Vincent Foster.
The goal is to solve the mystery of why Mr. Foster killed himself and whether the Whitewater controversy contributed to his despondent mood.
Even if a definitive answer can't be found, investigators hope to quash some of the zanier conspiracy theories.
They don't believe speculation, rampant in the tabloid press, that Mr. Foster was murdered.
Forensic experts and pathologists will examine documents already turned over by the U.S. Park Service, which investigated Mr. Foster's death, and Mr. Lankler is considering retaining a psychiatrist to evaluate Mr. Foster's mood before he died.
Under the supervision of Mr. Lankler, who once prosecuted homicide cases in the Manhattan District Attorney's office, investigators are also looking into allegations that White House officials may have impeded the park-police investigation.
In the aftermath of the suicide, a file containing Whitewater documents was found in Mr. Foster's office and turned over by White House counsel Bernard Nussbaum to the Clintons' personal lawyer.
The file has now been turned over to Mr. Fiske.
According to White House accounts, Mr. Foster had the Whitewater file in his office because he was preparing delinquent tax returns for the partnership.
Fiske must answer the following questions: Madison Guaranty and Whitewater Development Co. afloat? campaign coffers? $300,000 federally sponsored loan to a Whitewater partner? counsel Vincent Foster's suicide, and did White House officials attempt to impede an investigation of his death? an impending criminal investigation of Madison?
