"What would you do with a million dollars?"
That's the question posed every Wednesday and Saturday, as Texans await the televised dropping of 50 numbered ping-pong balls, holding their breath to see whether their lives are about to be forever altered.
Last week, five groups of people shared in the biggest jackpot in Texas history, totaling $77.1 million.
At beauty salons and shoeshine stands, in boardrooms, bathrooms and bedrooms, everyone has been talking of picking the six winning Lotto Texas numbers.
But what if you did strike it rich?
What would you do with a million dollarsor more?
To find out how past winners have handled their windfall, Texas Journal tracked down a few of the more than 120 people made millionaires by Lotto Texas and the Texas Lottery's instant-win scratch-off tickets.
Here are their stories.
Emmett Neal Jr.
How Much: $10.8 million in May 1993
Never tell the press you're interested in emu ranching.
"Boy, I made that mistake," says Emmett Neal Jr., recalling his offhand comment to reporters, who asked what he planned to do with all that money.
"I got people from all over Texas sending me information, and trying to get me to buy emus and ostriches.
All the mail on emus must weigh 20 pounds."
Dealing with emu enthusiasts was just one of many changes that the 39-year-old Mr. Neal has had to adjust to.
Before striking the mother lode last year, Mr. Neal, who is divorced, was earning just $13,000 annually as a cook at a Red Lobster restaurant in Lubbock, where he had worked for 16 years.
The day he won the Lotto, he quit.
And in the time it took to endorse his check, Mr. Neal jumped from the lowest tax bracket to the highest.
Today, the federal government demands 39.6% of his annual income -- a percentage he considers outrageous.
"My favorite charity since winning," he says, "has been the Republican Party."
For Mr. Neal, being thrust into such a high income bracket was sobering.
He had never given much thought to investing, and suddenly he was swamped with advice.
Invest in gold, silver, platinum and palladium deals, he was told, and make millions more.
Invest in a bar.
Invest in a carwash.
Bewildered, he didn't do anything, letting his first $393,000 sit in his account at First National Bank of Lubbock for several months.
But because banks only insure deposits up to $100,000, "I was paranoid that something might happen to the bank and I would lose my money," he says.
On the advice of the Texas Lottery Commission, he hired an accountant and an investment adviser.
Through his bank's trust department, he established a brokerage account, into which he moved $200,000 of his first check -- after buying his dad a van, himself a house, and 332 acres of land, on which he runs 35 head of cattle and grows sorghum to attract the birds he likes to hunt.
Though he has never before roped cattle or planted fields, "I've now got the time to throw at it," he says.
Mr. Neal's investment adviser, Steve Exter in Lubbock, has divided the money among municipal bonds, growth funds and blue-chip stocks.
Mr. Neal's goal is to contribute $200,000 annually to his investment account, while learning the ways of Wall Street.
"I've read the horror stories of the people who trusted their money to others and lost it all," he says.
"I don't want to be like that."
How Much: $3.4 million in December 1992
If there's any lesson Linda and Jim York have learned, it's this: Friends and money don't mix.
When the Yorks, both 51 years old, picked up the first of their 20 annual $121,000 checks, a friend approached with a business proposition: For $30,000, he would bring them in as partners in the two feed stores he owned.
Two-thirds of the money, he said, would pay off the stores' debts, while the remaining third would be pumped back into the operation.
The Yorks, who live near Fort Worth, agreed, in part because it would give Mr. York -- until then a home remodeler -- entry into the cattle business, long his father's line of work.
But, the Yorks say, the bills weren't paid off as expected.
Then things got messy -- with threats of lawsuits, and plenty of bad feelings on both sides.
The Yorks have ended up taking control of one of the feed stores while they try to negotiate a settlement.
"Do not deal on business terms with friends and relatives," says Mrs. York, who refers to their partner as her husband's "ex-best friend."
Still, the investment isn't a total loss.
The Yorks use the tax benefits from the feed stores, and Mr. York gets a break when buying feed with which to fatten the cattle he trades as part of his new business.
Moreover, the couple is happy with their one other investment so far: a modest $185,000 home built on 30 acres of land.
Although the Yorks quit their jobs as remodelers about a month after winning the lottery, Mrs. York's days are still filled with wallpaper and drywall -- she's remodeling her new home.
Through their investments in the house and the feed store, the Yorks managed to burn through their entire check last year.
The spending has since slowed; they expect this year they will only use about $80,000 -- still nearly 50% more than their entire income the year before they struck it rich.
"We figured we would spend five years getting out of the way all the things we want to do, like building a house, starting a business and visiting my daughter in Germany," Mrs. York says.
After that: "Save as much as we can every year."
To that end, they're now looking to an estate planner to help them set up annuities to provide for their retirement years, and to establish trusts for their eight children.
And don't tell Mrs. York that winning millions puts you on easy street.
"You might be able to do more in life, but you have exactly the same worries and the same bills," she says.
"It's just that your bills now have more zeros on the end."
How Much: $7.2 million in February 1993
Dick Shanklin's interests haven't changed all that much since he penciled in the six numbers that now earn him more than a quarter million dollars a year: 3, 18, 27, 36, 41, 43.
It's just that now he can pursue them on a grander scale.
The money, for instance, has let him add to his investment portfolio (he already had more than $300,000 of stock), buy more old cars (he had 13 classic Oldsmobiles, Cadillacs and Lincolns), and build his dream home -- a $1 million, 5,080-square-foot house in fashionable Colleyville.
It was a Monday when Mr. Shanklin received verification that his lottery ticket was a winner.
On Tuesday, he quit his job as an engineer at a Dallas-area television station.
Today, the lifelong bachelor spends his time restoring his fleet of old cars, and meeting with contractors and designers putting together his new home.
Much of his first check went to family and friends, as well as to buy the $205,000 lot on which he's building his house.
Then there were the automobile purchases: a new Cadillac Sedan Deville and a Jaguar XJ6.
After paying taxes and $128,000 in annual mortgage payments, the 48-year-old Mr. Shanklin has about $110,000 a year on which to live, about half of which goes into the stock market.
(Between $10 and $15 a week goes to buying lottery tickets.)
He expects to pay off his home loan before he has received half of his 20 annual checks, allowing him to invest more as he closes in on retirement.
His investment decisions thus far have come from his own research in financial magazines and newspapers.
But to a large degree his equity investments have been limited to telecommunications stocks.
Says Mr. Shanklin, who had spent 23 years in the business: "I'm investing in what I know."
How Much, Really: $720,000, after withholding taxes.
Before a scratch-off ticket called Millionaire made one of San Antonio's Jerry Hockman, his only exposure to Wall Street was a hundred or so shares of Pitney Bowes Inc. left to him as part of an inheritance.
And even those sat untouched in a desk drawer.
His interest in investments, to say the least, has changed dramatically.
Like most lottery winners, the 46-year-old Mr. Hockman, who still holds his job as a quality-assurance inspector in an electronics-repair shop for the U.S. Air Force, was concerned about sticking his entire sum in a bank.
So he initially moved his winnings into a tax-free money-market account, where he let his money sit -- safely and untaxed -- while he boned up on myriad investment options and philosophies.
With the help of financial magazines, newspapers, pamphlets and analysts' reports, Mr. Hockman defined his own investment style: broadly diversified conservatism.
His investments, for the most part, have leaned toward real estate.
He has picked up three rental homes and a mobile home in a trailer park.
All are generating returns "well in excess of 10%," Mr. Hockman says.
Now he is on the hunt for an eight- to 10-unit apartment complex.
Keeping with the real-estate theme, he has also diverted some of his money into Ginnie Maes, government-backed home mortgages sold to investors, which are generating returns a little above 6%.
Mr. Hockman's early forays onto Wall Street haven't proved as successful.
Relatives and neighbors, he maintains, are all too eager to proffer their investment tips.
But after placing bets on the basis of four such tips, Mr. Hockman lost a few thousand dollars, and decided that the road to success was paved with "doing your own homework instead of betting on the rumors of others."
Though Mr. Hockman kept his job -- he realized $1 million before taxes won't last forever -- paydays aren't that significant anymore.
He and his wife -- who have three grown children -- also don't worry about monthly bills.
"Having this sort of money is a whole different life process," says Mr. Hockman, who before buying his winning scratch-off ticket earned roughly $40,000 a year.
How different?
Mr. Hockman is about to tell all: He is writing a book, "The Post Years," exploring the changes a lottery winner undergoes after moving, literally overnight, from a middle-class lifestyle into the rarefied world of millionaires.
"It's certainly a difficult process," he says, "to learn how to be a millionaire."
Lottery scratch-off games began in May 1992.
Here are some facts about the games:
