South Korea's Economic Planning Board unveiled incentives, including tax breaks, to encourage private participation in public-works construction such as roads and ports.
Companies could even own part of what they build.
Most economists agree on the need to improve the inadequate infrastructure that hampers the economy.
But the government has been stingy amid wariness about budget deficits and inflationary effects of expanded public projects.
The new measure, assuming it is approved by Parliament, would let companies charge tolls and rents from public-sector projects, and build leisure and tourist facilities by roads or railways to attract more users.
Participants would be exempt from paying some taxes and fees and could borrow abroad, now tightly restricted.
Because of rules that repel investors, private firms participate in less than 5% of South Korea's public works.
To help defray its training costs, Swissair is offering "rides" in flight simulators when pilots aren't using the $20 million machines.
Rental prices range from $338 to $575 an hour, depending on the model; the Swiss flag carrier has seven, representing five types of jets.
The airline, which uses the devices between 4,000 and 5,000 hours a year, hopes to rent about 1,000 hours to the public.
Swissair staff will explain cockpit controls and guide flying buffs through a takeoff, flight maneuvers and landing.
Britain's Office of Fair Trading asked the Mergers and Monopolies Commission to investigate the video-game industry for any uncompetitive trade practices.
The market for video-games equipment and software in Britain totals $1.05 billion annually.
The inquiry was recommended following public complaints that prices were too high and far more than in the U.S. Retailers say distribution practices hinder their pricing freedom and software publishers fault licensing deals that control production of games for use on certain equipment, a government official said.
In an effort to increase acceptance of foreigners, Germany's biggest television network said it planned to hire more non-Germans as anchors.
Westdeutsche Rundfunk, known as WDR, also will show more programs depicting daily lives of foreigners in Germany and educational spots to counter neo-Nazi attacks and other racist violence that have reared up since German reunification in 1990.
WDR said its TV and radio network would try to combat the spread of rightist ideology through programs that encourage understanding and dispel prejudice.
Pakistan's government aims to tax wealthy landowners, a powerful group that dominates the economy and has legally avoided taxes for decades.
The plan, which would raise $230 million a year and help relieve the country's chronic financial problems, was devised by Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto in response to pressure from the International Monetary Fund, which wants the levy imposed before approving a $1.3 billion loan.
The tax proposal was viewed as a test of the government's seriousness about economic reforms.
Mrs. Bhutto's coalition government is expected to approve the measure soon.
Residents in and around Pusan, South Korea's second-largest city, bought bottled water or lined up at mineral-water springs after the environment agency said their tap water had been contaminated by chemical waste that can cause cancer and other illnesses.
In tests after complaints about foul odors, benzene and toluene were found in the Nakdong River, the main water supply for about 10 million residents of the southern area.
The levels detected were within permissible limits for drinking water and the contamination was presumed temporary, caused by illegal industrial dumping.
Arrest warrants were issued for a chemical company's officials.
In the first auction of a natural-gas producer in its privatization program, Russia next Monday will open a month-long offering of Norilskgazprom stock.
Russian investors may use privatization vouchers to bid for a 6% stake in the midsize gas company.
The government, through its Gazprom gas-monopoly holding company, will retain a 38% holding -- and a majority of voting shares -- for as long as three years in a strategy to keep initial control as the firms are sold off.
Workers at the company, in northern Russia near the town of Norilsk, own 51% of the shares, and 5% is reserved for residents of the regions around Norilskgazprom's fields.
In last year's first 11 months, Norilskgazprom's output totaled 4.3 billion cubic meters, down 5.7% from a year earlier.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
German political leaders agreed to move Parliament to Berlin from Bonn along with government agencies by the year 2000.
The government couldn't relocate the 662-member legislature without lawmakers' approval . . . .
Russia's Parliament is weighing a plan to slash the country's energy use 30% this year through efficiency improvements and further increases in prices, previously kept artificially low through subsidies.
