By rights, personal-injury lawyers should be quaking: Many people detest them, politicians threaten them and everyone makes fun of them.
Yet trial lawyers continue to win giant damage awards, reap big fees and let the stream of criticism slide off their backs.
Their secret?
An extraordinary octopus of a professional group: the Association of Trial Lawyers of America.
ATLA officials describe the group as a misunderstood, even beleaguered consumer-activist body.
"We're the good guys," says Past President Roxanne Barton Conlin.
Though plaintiffs' lawyers score barely 20% in public-approval surveys, "we aren't so concerned about image," she adds.
"We know our mission is to be the burr under the saddle of manufacturers of defective products."
But the public-interest persona -- "ATLA for the people" is a current slogan -- is a world away from the organization's nitty-gritty work of self-preservation.
ATLA officials won't comment on their political operation, and much of their important work goes on behind closed doors.
However, Federal Election Commission data and tax records, along with interviews with dozens of lawyers, help explain the near-invincibility in Washington of the plaintiffs' bar.
ATLA is so effective because it does so many things so well.
Its clout starts with money: Trial lawyers have plenty and are unusually willing to use it to promote their professional interests.
In fact, ATLA raises much of its money by tapping members' checking accounts for automatic monthly contributions.
So ATLA spends more per member on political donations than almost any other major lobbying group, including the American Medical Association.
ATLA, with 60,000 members, lavished $2.4 million on congressional candidates in the 1991-92 campaign; thousands of individual lawyers give as well.
ATLA also hires top-drawer lobbyists.
It underwrites seemingly independent consumer organizations with parallel agendas.
And it uses nationwide, computerized working groups to expand lucrative fields of litigation.
Led by an affable and highly successful Washington trial lawyer, Barry J. Nace, ATLA also brings ingenuity to politics.
A month before the 1992 elections, for example, the group found it didn't have enough cash to make good on all its pledges to candidates.
But to keep the money flowing, an ATLA representative, whom officials won't identify, arranged a $400,000 bridge loan from the Private Bank, a Chicago lender specializing in serving the rich.
The idea of such a loan surprised the FEC.
"I've never heard of a PAC political action committee doing that before," says the agency's chairman, Trevor Potter, who adds that the maneuver wasn't illegal.
Now the ATLA's main tests will be whether it can protect members from any medical-malpractice proposals that would cut into their fees and can defeat a bill that would put some limits on product-liability awards.
Judging from past experience, Cardozo School of Law Professor Lester Brickman says he is "skeptical about any bill passing that the trial bar is opposed to."
Prof. Brickman is one of the conservative scholars who last week proposed a way for courts to limit personal-injury-lawyer fees in certain cases.
The trial lawyers certainly seem confident.
According to an Iowa contingent's minutes of an ATLA meeting on health care in Chicago last June, the lawyers were told that "for any Clinton health-care proposal to pass into law, it will have to `appear' that trial lawyers are taking a hit just like the doctors."
But reality would be different, the lawyers were assured: "In the words of Roxanne Conlin," the minutes said, "`Trust us on this one.'"
A few months later, when the Clinton proposal was announced, ATLA leaders looked prescient.
The administration said sacrifices would be required of everyone, including lawyers, whose fees would be capped at one-third of any damage award.
Although some lawyers dutifully protested, the proposal protects them.
It left the litigation-based malpractice system intact instead of mandating arbitration and put the fee cap at precisely the level that most lawyers charge anyway.
Robert Berenson, a Washington internist who co-chaired the administration's working group on medical-malpractice reform, says he wondered whether the trial lawyers' strong support for fellow lawyers Bill and Hillary Clinton during the campaign -- ATLA members contributed about $500,000 -- just might have played a role.
Dr. Berenson says he and some others in the working group sought much tougher changes, such as a graduated system for limiting pain-and-suffering damages, but were ignored by the White House.
Robert Boorstin, an administration health-care spokesman, responds that the trial lawyers got no favors and that "we think that the malpractice reforms included in the Clinton approach will go a long way towards protecting consumers and reducing the burden on doctors."
Of the cap on fees, he says "we don't see it as fictitious" and notes that a few states allow attorneys to charge more than a third of an award.
He adds that a cap on damages was "obviously discussed" but that administration officials believed that the issue should be left to state governments.
"We want the states to retain as much flexibility and power as possible while setting national standards," he explains.
Ms. Conlin says she didn't mean to imply at the Chicago meeting that trial lawyers had struck a deal with the administration; indeed, she considers the resulting proposals "awful."
Since ATLA was founded in the late 1940s by a Harvard Law School graduate named Samuel Horovitz, it has always sought to promote the interests of a breed of lawyers widely vilified as ambulance chasers.
But the group's tactics have changed.
At first, it provided members with a journal edited by former Harvard law dean Roscoe Pound and helped disseminate court opinions and practical information.
It didn't even establish a presence in Washington until the early 1970s.
Then came a proposal for nationwide no-fault auto insurance that, to the trial bar, translated into no-lawyers.
ATLA's then-president Marvin E. Lewis, who had once successfully represented a woman who claimed that a fall from a San Francisco cable car had left her a nymphomaniac, decided the organization needed to hire a lobbyist.
By the time ATLA killed the proposal at the end of the 1970s, the group had become a political powerhouse.
Now, its chief outside consultant is Thomas H. Boggs Jr., one of the most influential lobbyists in Washington.
Its top in-house lobbyist, Alan Parker, is a former chief counsel of the House Judiciary Committee.
Executive Director Thomas H. Henderson Jr. is a former head of the Justice Department public-integrity section.
The current president, Mr. Nace, is a kind of ATLA hero for shepherding the "junk science" case that last year resulted in a Supreme Court decision liberalizing the use of scientific evidence in court.
These leaders don't like to compromise and seldom do.
"You help your friends and kill your enemies," sums up Leonard Ring, a former ATLA president who started the ATLA PAC and remains very influential in the organization.
Robert Joost, a Washington lawyer who worked for ATLA in the 1960s, says he had a change of heart about the organization after sitting in on meetings with trial-lawyer lobbyists.
"These guys have it all programmed," he says.
"Democracy doesn't have a chance."
High on ATLA's legislative hit list since 1982 has been the product-liability bill, which industry groups want and this year is co-sponsored by 45 senators and 138 House members.
The earliest, toughest version of the bill would have eliminated strict liability, which allows plaintiffs to win defective-product cases without proving negligence; the lawyers' lobby knocked that out in an early round.
A later version would have required a litigant to pay both sides' legal costs if the party refused a settlement offer and then recovered less at trial.
That idea, intended to deter frivolous litigation, was killed, too.
The Latest Draft Supporters of the current bill hope that it will get its first-ever vote, in the Senate, this spring.
This watered-down draft has the narrow aim of limiting punitive damages in cases of products cleared by federal regulators.
But it still draws fire from lawyers and consumer groups, which contend that manufacturers exaggerate the costs of product-liability suits and that protecting them from punitive damages would encourage reckless conduct.
Even if the bill passes in the Senate, it probably is doomed for another year in the House.
Likely to be instrumental in blocking it is the House Judiciary Committee, which in 12 years has yet to hold a hearing on the issue.
Committee Chairman Jack Brooks always strongly backs the trial lawyers.
The Texas Democrat also is the biggest recipient of ATLA PAC money among House Democrats.
He didn't return phone calls seeking comment.
Another bill the trial lawyers want to block this year -- as they have each year since 1987 -- would prevent lawsuits against manufacturers of general-aviation planes (private aircraft) more than 15 years old.
Such suits have nearly destroyed the industry, aviation lobbyists say.
Trial lawyers counter that the suits enhance safety.
But a Brookings Institution report has found that even as the number of such suits was rising in the 1970s and '80s, a trend toward fewer general-aviation accidents was slowing.
"This is not some kooky proposal," says Edward Stimpson of the General Aviation Manufacturers Association.
"One lobbyist for the trial lawyers told me, `If you ever get this thing on the floor, you are going to pass it.
We are going to keep you from getting it on the floor.'"
The bill has 317 co-sponsors in Congress.
ATLA's lobbying successes tend to overshadow its other work.
But for practicing trial lawyers, what matters most day-to-day is its beyond-the-Beltway operations.
One prominent personal-injury lawyer, Paul Rheingold of New York, describes ATLA as "a big house, where you come to get stuff" to help in suing people.
In one "room" is the computerized "ATLA Exchange," a cooperative database with information about 6,000 cases on subjects ranging from air rifles to zoos.
Attorneys can gain access via a toll-free number, and the exchange, operating from ATLA headquarters here, receives more than 10,000 inquiries a year.
The information is especially helpful because most cases haven't been published in law books.
Besides copies of suits, the exchange offers depositions and names of expert defense witnesses who allegedly have given inconsistent testimony.
Other information includes the going rates for certain kinds of injuries, indexed by body part, and the names and phone numbers of attorneys willing to share their expertise.
David Baum, an ATLA member in San Francisco, says the exchange helps him find precedents to lawsuits, including whether a potential defendant has had other troubles with a product.
Recently, he says, he caught a maker of lawn mowers lying about the litigation history of a product that had cut off a client's hand.
The case was settled, he says, after he disclosed what he knew.
In another "room" are roughly 80 "litigation groups" through which attorneys handling specific types of cases compile a vast array of legal theories.
One group pioneered in coordinating cases involving the Dalkon Shield contraceptive device.
Others are breaking new ground in such areas as electromagnetic radiation, penile implants and automatic doors.
The subject-area groups are the single biggest draw at ATLA meetings.
"It is one of the most valuable aspects of being a member of ATLA," says Gary C. Robb, a Kansas City attorney who heads the Vending Machine Tipover Litigation Group.
It includes about 35 lawyers who have represented people allegedly injured or killed by unstable vending machines, which, he says, can weigh up to a ton.
Last August, more than 500 members of the largest such group, the ATLA Breast Implant Litigation Group, jammed a San Francisco hotel to share internal corporate documents that seemed to show that manufacturers of the implants knew that they were impure, contaminated and possibly carcinogenic but had a well-designed system to hide this from doctors.
The lawyers watched with anticipation as one document after another, shown with a projector, indicated apparent disregard for patient safety.
"It was getting everybody hopped up," Mr. Rheingold recalls; the atmosphere was "you go out and get those cases."
(A $4 billion class-action settlement is expected to be submitted soon for court approval.)
Trial lawyers say litigation groups especially help attorneys practicing outside major metropolitan areas and battling often-better-funded corporate adversaries.
"The deck has been stacked against us," contends Michael Hugo, a Boston lawyer.
"This is our way of getting even."
It's only one of the ways.
The Roscoe Pound Foundation, a tax-exempt research group, is legally distinct from ATLA but gets most of its $1 million endowment from trial lawyers.
Over the years, scores of ATLA members have paid up to $25,000 for the privilege of becoming fellows of the foundation and meeting prominent judges and academicians at its functions.
In each of the past two years, the foundation has sponsored seminars in connection with the ATLA convention for state judges on such issues as how to use state constitutions to expand individual rights to sue.
It spent $120,000 to fly 120 state appellate-court justices from more than 40 states to such a forum in San Francisco last August.
It also does basic research; the "Papers of the Roscoe Pound Foundation" investigate, for example, the expanding liability of blood banks to patients contracting the AIDS virus, and juries' surprising disinclination to award punitive damages in defective-product cases.
Another ATLA tax-exempt affiliate, the Civil Justice Foundation, has contributed $600,000 since 1986 to some 75 consumer groups, with missions ranging from researching childhood lead poisoning to lobbying for federal legislation to improve airport security.
Some are among the trial lawyers' most effective spokesmen before legislators, partly because such consumer groups don't carry visible trial-lawyer fingerprints.
"When people like the actual victims come and tell their stories, people listen," says Abraham Fuchsberg, a New York lawyer and president of the Civil Justice Foundation.
The Center for Patients Rights, which in 1992 got half its $21,000 budget from the foundation, helped last spring to kill a medical-negligence measure that the bar opposed in New York State.
Another recipient, DES Action USA, a support group for women whose cancer is believed linked to the antimiscarriage drug, has provided testimony before Congress against the defective-products bill.
In addition, groups such as the Center for Auto Safety, founded by Ralph Nader, regularly look to ATLA for information to use to put pressure on federal agencies.
"We mine them all the time for nuggets," says Clarence Ditlow, the consumer group's executive director.
Moreover, Mr. Nader's Public Citizen lobbying group testifies on positions sympathetic to trial lawyers, sends representatives to their conventions and helps ATLA direct some of its public-interest grants.
Dennis Eckart, a former trial-lawyer-backed congressman from Ohio and now a Washington attorney, says he considers ATLA's consumer message "grossly misleading."
He says, "Seldom would you hear the debate correctly centered around the issue of excessive litigation.
You would always hear them focus the debate on the citizens' right to sue."
He ultimately decided that the right to sue was getting out of hand and threw his support behind the defective-products reform measure.
LEONARD RING of Chicago, a former president of the Association of Trial Lawyers of America who was quoted in a page-one article about that organization Thursday, had been interviewed Jan. 11.
The article failed to note that Mr. Ring died of a heart attack Feb. 4.
(WSJ Feb. 22, 1994)
