Citicorp is holding talks with the Comptroller of the Currency to end the strict regulatory supervision the banking giant has been under for the past two years.
The move could pave the way for Citicorp to reinstate its dividend by April.
The regulatory agreement, which gives the Comptroller extraordinarily broad powers over Citicorp, was imposed in February 1992 as the bank was struggling to recover from billions of dollars of bad loans.
Although the entire banking industry fell victim to the real-estate slump in the early 1990s, Citicorp's problems were worse than most, prompting regulators to put the bank on a tighter leash.
Citicorp's financial position has recovered since then as it built reserves and capital while slashing costs.
Last week, the bank reported record 1993 earnings, which are expected to help Citicorp build a strong case with the Comptroller.
Although people familiar with the talks say there's a good chance the pact will be terminated, they cautioned that it is not guaranteed.
John S. Reed, Citicorp's chairman and chief executive officer, recently told a group of consumer bankers that the memorandum of understanding will be reviewed next month in the hopes of terminating the pact.
"It certainly could happen in February," said one person familiar with the discussions.
Both Citicorp and the Comptroller declined comment.
Wall Street analysts said that if the regulatory accord is lifted, Citicorp's common stock dividend could be reinstated by the end of the first quarter, perhaps at the company's annual meeting.
Most expect the dividend won't be more than 50 cents a share annually.
Regulators forced Citicorp to suspend the dividend in late 1991, before the regulatory pact was signed.
"I'd be real surprised if they didn't initiate something" involving the dividend, said Diane Glossman, banking analyst at Salomon Brothers.
"It's most likely to be a token dividend initially."
Aside from the possibility of a dividend reinstatement, the cessation of the pact would give the nation's biggest banking company further room to expand business lines.
Among other things, the agreement has restricted the bank's ability to expand through acquisitions.
Mr. Reed recently told employees that although Citicorp will be cutting additional costs, there will be capital available for growth.
Citicorp wasn't the first so-called money-center bank to come under tighter regulatory scrutiny.
When BankAmerica Corp. faced acute financial difficulties in the mid-1980s, it also was required to sign an agreement with regulators.
In late 1991 Citibank, the banking company's main bank subsidiary, was also put on the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.'s list of "problem" banks, a list reserved for banks in dire financial straits.
It has since been removed from the list, people close to the bank say.
The FDIC declined comment.
Like the rest of the banking industry, Citicorp's recovery has been helped by wider net interest margins, or the difference between loan rates and the banks' own cost of funds.
In addition, the real-estate market has stabilized and become more liquid, allowing for the sale of some assets.
Close regulatory scrutiny also helped the bank recover.
"A number of areas of regulatory concern have been either totally or partially alleviated," said Ms. Glossman of Salomon Brothers.
Since the 1992 agreement, Citicorp has sharply raised its capital ratio through asset sales and stock sales, as well as greatly reduced expenses.
In addition, the company overhauled its management by putting in new systems for tracking the risks from loan portfolios.
It tapped Christopher Steffen, the former chief financial officer of Eastman Kodak Co., to oversee financial controls and expense management.
Problem loans are also on the mend.
Nonperforming real-estate loans have fallen to $4.1 billion, from $5.6 billion one year ago, while reserves have risen to 100% of nonperforming commercial loans, from 20% three years ago.
It is now considered "well-capitalized" for regulatory purposes.
The decline in problem real-estate loans is "better than I predicted," Thomas Jones, executive vice president, told analysts last week.
Another strong sign of improved financial condition was a statement by Moody's Investors Service Inc. that said it was reviewing Citicorp's Baa-1 credit rating for a possible upgrade.
