Inflation-adjusted "short-term rates are more likely to have to rise than fall from here.
I cannot, however, tell you when any such rise would occur," Mr. Greenspan told a House banking subcommittee two weeks after the Fed's first move to raise interest rates in five years.
While acknowledging financial markets' anxiety that "a strengthening economy is sowing the seeds of an acceleration of prices later this year," the chairman of the nation's central bank used his semiannual report to Congress to try to convince markets that they don't have much to worry about.
"Overall cost and price pressures still appear to remain damped," he said.
Stock and bond prices climbed amid investor relief that Mr. Greenspan delivered no unpleasant surprises in his testimony.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average jumped 24.20 points, to 3911.66.
"History . . . tells us that inflation requires financial tinder, which, at the moment, as I see it, is lacking," Mr. Greenspan said.
Wages don't seem to be accelerating, he said.
Advances in productivity, or output per hour of work, are holding down labor costs.
The money supply, broadly defined, is growing slowly, he added.
Moreover, he played down fears that the U.S. economy is growing so fast that it threatens to overheat.
Although its "forward momentum remains intact," the Los Angeles earthquake and the severe winter weather have slowed the economy, and an uptick in claims for unemployment benefits suggests "a somewhat less buoyant degree of activity," the Fed chief said.
The central bank, Mr. Greenspan vowed, won't wait until inflation actually shows itself before raising interest rates again.
Instead, it is watching reflections of market expectations for inflation -- particularly the price of gold, exchange rates and the relationship between long- and short-term interest rates.
Responding to a question from Rep. John LaFalce (D., N.Y.), Mr. Greenspan underscored the significance of changes in the price of gold, saying it is "a reasonably good indicator amongst others of what inflation expectations are doing. . . .
It's not a perfect indicator, but it is a very good indicator."
With money-supply measures no longer providing a useful guide for the Fed, Mr. Greenspan added, "we are seeking anything which gives us insight into the process, and what history does tell us is that gold is a useful indicator thereof."
Former Fed Gov. Wayne Angell, long an advocate of tracking gold prices, smiled and nodded from his seat in the audience.
Gold prices surged late last year as the U.S. economy rebounded, and haven't moved much this year.
Fed policy makers expect consumer-price inflation of about 3% this year, "a shade higher" than last year's 2.7%, according to a report Mr. Greenspan submitted with his testimony.
The report also said that a poor 1993 harvest has left some crops scarce, a repeat of last year's decline in energy prices is unlikely, and "competitive pressure damping wage and price increases will be less strong and less pervasive than they have been recently."
President Clinton told reporters he was encouraged by Mr. Greenspan's testimony, citing the Fed chairman's view that conditions for economic growth are better than they have been for decades and that there isn't any sign of an increase in inflation.
The president refused to talk about short-term interest rates, however.
Mr. Greenspan described the Fed's move to raise short-term interest rates earlier this month as "low-cost insurance" against the risk of "a future destabilizing build-up of inflationary pressures."
He said the central bank had been holding interest rates "abnormally low" in response to the unusual drive of consumers and businesses to pay down debt.
With that phase of the economic expansion past, the Fed no longer had any reason to continue holding rates so slow, he said.
Neither Democratic nor Republican members of the subcommittee were convinced.
"Inflation is frozen in its tracks," said Rep. Paul Kanjorksi (D., Pa.), chairman of the subcommittee.
Fed critic Rep. Henry Gonzalez (D., Texas), chairman of the full committee, didn't attend.
Mr. Greenspan in the past has pointed to the Fed's goal of setting short-term rates at levels that will encourage the bond market to keep long-term interest rates low.
But as Mr. Kanjorksi and others noted repeatedly, long-term rates have risen since the Fed's Feb. 4 move.
Put on the defensive, Mr. Greenspan said that short- and long-term interest rates tend to move together and suggested that the test of monetary policy is whether long-term rates rise less than they otherwise would; he didn't say how that can be determined.
In other matters, Mr. Greenspan and the report he submitted said:
-- Fed officials expect the economy to grow a moderate 3% to 3 1/4 % this year, but at best they expect only a slight decrease in the unemployment rate from the 6.7% reported for January.
-- The Fed's unusual public announcement of its Feb. 4 decision to raise interest rates wasn't intended as a precedent, but the central bank does plan changes in its disclosure policies, which are to be announced in the future.
-- The signals from money-supply measures, once crucial to Fed thinking, have been "effectively jammed" by changes in financial markets and the unusual nature of the current business cycle.
Thus, the Fed continues to largely disregard them.
-- The Fed has deliberately lengthened the maturity of its portfolio of Treasury securities to 3.2 years from 3.0 years in 1992 by buying longer-term debt.
At the beginning of the 1980s, the average maturity of the central bank's portfolio was greater than four years and it declined steadily until 1991, when it reached 2.9 years.
Some economists have urged the Fed to buy more longer-term securities to help reduce long-term interest rates.
