In an unusual union of the traditional and the hip, Mercedes-Benz will join forces with the maker of the Swatch to make a small, low-cost car known as the Swatchmobile.
The agreement, announced yesterday by Mercedes's parent, Daimler-Benz AG, Stuttgart, Germany, was a victory for Nicolas Hayek, chairman of Swatch manufacturer SMH Swiss Corp. for Microelectronics and Watchmaking Industries, Biel, Switzerland.
Mr. Hayek, creator of the popular plastic watch that reinvigorated Swiss watchmaking, had long been seeking a partner to build the Swatchmobile.
For Mercedes, it was a daring -- and some analysts said dangerous -- bid to broaden its presence in the mass market.
The company already is planning to introduce a series of small "A-class" luxury cars in 1997, and the collaboration with Mr. Hayek could enable it to reach younger and more-frugal buyers.
The strategic impact of the project on the luxury-car maker's business wasn't immediately clear because so many details of the arrangement were lacking.
The company didn't disclose, for example, how many Swatchmobiles it would aim to produce, what price it would charge, what quality standards it would set, how much it would invest in the project or how closely it would tie the new model's image to its prestigious Mercedes star.
Mr. Hayek was less reserved.
He said the project would aim to sell 100,000 cars in the first year, possibly 1996 or 1997, and up to one million annually in the fifth year.
Prototypes of the Swatchmobile have been driven on Swiss roads for more than a year, he added.
Whatever the details, some analysts said Mercedes was taking an extremely risky leap into the unknown.
"It's already a massive gamble for someone like Mercedes to build the A-class.
To build a small Swatch car in addition is completely illogical," said Peter Schmidt, joint managing director of Automotive Industry Data Ltd., a British consulting concern.
"There are huge potential risks in terms of damaging Mercedes's reputation."
Other analysts were more upbeat.
Karsten Rahlf, auto industry analyst for M.M. Warburg Bank Investment Research in Hamburg, described the alliance as a smart strategic move that would enable Mercedes to make better use of its overcapacities in production and engineering.
Moreover, by marketing the cars under the Swatch label, Mercedes would be able to enter the subcompact market without stretching the brand image of Mercedes too far downward, he said.
Mercedes is getting a proven marketing genius to lead its foray into the subcompact world -- as Mr. Hayek himself points out.
"A car is an emotional consumer product, like a watch," he said.
"I was born to sell emotional consumer products."
The approval of SMH's administrative board and Mercedes's supervisory board still is required before the project is official.
Mercedes's supervisory board has a regularly scheduled meeting this week.
SMH investors responded favorably to the announcement, sending the stock sharply higher on the Zurich Stock Exchange, to close at 207.5 Swiss francs ($143.84), up 6.50 Swiss francs.
The German stock market, however, left Daimler shares largely unmoved by news of the cooperation intent.
Daimler stock ended trading in Frankfurt at 818.20 marks ($477.91), down 1.80 marks.
"When Hayek first came out with the idea, there was considerable excitement about it.
But now people are skeptical.
We have already seen the project get a start with VW just to see it run aground," said Barbara Schulz, international investment adviser at Merck Finck & Co. in Duesseldorf, referring to ill-fated earlier attempts at cooperation between Mr. Hayek and Europe's biggest car producer, Volkswagen AG, to launch the Swatchmobile.
Executives at Adam Opel AG, the German subsidiary of General Motors Corp., have indicated that they, too, had considered a partnership with Mr. Hayek but decided against it.
Even so, "the lifestyle appeal of Swatch certainly is a great marketing concept," one Opel official acknowledged.
The exact structure of the cooperation between Mercedes and SMH must be negotiated in the coming weeks, a Mercedes spokesman said.
Industry insiders speculated that Mercedes probably would seek to house the project in an independent subsidiary, to clearly distinguish between Swatchmobile and Mercedes operations.
That way, if the project were to run into problems, it wouldn't hurt Mercedes directly.
