Alexander J. Trotman, Ford's chairman and chief executive officer, declined to discuss the pending reorganization.
But Ford officials who asked not to be named said the company will announce its move next month.
Mr. Trotman has scheduled a meeting with Ford's top 400 executives in Toronto next month and is expected to disclose his plans there.
The new organization will be a radical departure from the existing, decades-old structure, in which Ford North America, Ford of Europe and, more recently, Ford Asia/Pacific operate as quasi-independent car companies.
Soon the autonomy of those geographic groups will be greatly diminished in favor of global czars with worldwide authority for their specific function.
The new structure reflects the thinking of Mr. Trotman, who took the helm at Ford in November.
It's understood that he wants a structure that will let Ford avoid costly duplication of efforts in different parts of the world.
Specifically, that means efficiently developing vehicles which, with minor modifications, can sell in several parts of the world.
Ford has such a vehicle in a compact car, dubbed the Mondeo in Europe and the Ford Contour/Mercury Mystique in the U.S.
But it cost $6 billion to develop -- more than four times the cost of Chrysler Corp.'s Dodge/Plymouth Neon, because of expensive and time-consuming coordination of effort between Ford's engineering organizations in Dearborn, England and Germany.
Ford of Europe took the lead role in developing the car, but Ford North America also had a major, and sometimes competing, voice.
The styling of the Contour/Mystique was changed late in the development cycle, because the European styling was deemed too conservative for U.S. tastes.
While it's not clear who Mr. Trotman plans to appoint to key positions in his new organization, Ford's new chairman has been clear in recent months about the direction he wants to move.
"We want to be a global company in primarily product development, manufacturing and purchasing to optimize the strength Ford has in various parts of the world," Mr. Trotman said in an interview.
"I don't think that it was so in the past."
The ultimate goal of any changes in Ford's current management will be to cut costs by eliminating duplication of effort and bureaucracy, Mr. Trotman said.
"We are using resources around the world more than we have in the past," Mr. Trotman said.
"We're avoiding duplication."
Industry analysts have speculated that Mr. Trotman would move to reorganize Ford's product-development and engineering operations.
Ford has the most efficient factories among Detroit's Big Three, and rivals Japanese assembly-productivity levels.
But company executives acknowledge that Ford still takes too long and spends too much to develop new vehicles and engines.
Moreover, Ford, like rival General Motors Corp., drains away cash and engineering talent by designing slightly different cars and engines for North America, Europe and other markets.
"It looks like Ford is at last dealing with its functional sclerosis," said James Womack, co-author of the influential 1990 book on the auto industry, "The Machine That Changed the World."
Mr. Womack said Ford has long been plagued by a product-development organization that spent too much money developing cars.
Mr. Trotman himself made the same complaint as head of Ford's North American operations in the early 1990s.
In an effort to spark change, Mr. Trotman deputized a team of engineers to study how Ford could develop a new Mustang coupe in three years, instead of the normal four to five years.
That study led to the formation of a single, cross-functional team housed in one office; the group produced the Mustang, launched last fall, in less than three years on a budget roughly 30% less than comparable programs in the past.
Now, Mr. Trotman is overseeing the construction of a new "program team facility" and declaring that all Ford's future products will be developed by teams similar to the one that produced the Mustang.
The risk Mr. Trotman runs is that Ford's existing product development fiefdoms will resist any loss of power.
Mr. Trotman tried to play down the potential upheaval.
"It's not a night-or-day change," he said.
"The organization isn't really that important," he added.
"It's really the process."
Separately, Ford averted a possible strike at its Avon Lake, Ohio, assembly plant by reaching a tentative labor contract with the United Auto Workers union three hours before a midnight strike deadline.
The pact still must be ratified by rank-and-file union members.
