Textron Inc. has sold 24 businesses, from foundries to flatware, since 1985 and is de-emphasizing financial services to concentrate on manufacturing.
Its revenue is at record levels, its earnings have doubled since it began streamlining -- and its stock is up 201% from its 1990 low.
ITT Corp. has sold 240 companies since 1979, including makers of perfume and Hostess Twinkies.
With only a few businesses left, ITT bounced back from a 1992 loss and earned $913 million last year -- and its stock is up 141% from its 1990 low.
And AlliedSignal Inc. has reduced its business units to 32 from 49 in the past four years.
Operating profits of the once-perennial corporate also-ran have climbed 20% a year for three years despite flat revenue -- and its stock is up 207% from its 1990 low.
In short, some conglomerates are making a comeback -- with important differences from their halcyon days.
In the 1960s, conglomerates -- corporations made up of dozens or even hundreds of disparate companies -- were all the rage.
James Ling gained fame building Ling-Temco-Vought after starting out by selling stock from a booth at the Texas State Fair.
In a mix of fear and mockery, Charles Bluhdorn's Gulf & Western Industries was satirized as Engulf & Devour.
Ultimately, the old conglomerates became hopelessly unwieldy.
LTV's 1986 bankruptcy was the nadir.
And now few flamboyant acquirers, similar to LTV's Mr. Ling or ITT's Harold Geneen in the 1960s, are building new conglomerates.
But a funny thing happened on the way to the corporate graveyard: A new generation of management realized that the problem wasn't necessarily with the conglomerate concept -- the idea that companies could grow by acquiring disparate businesses and thereby achieve some protection from the cycles of a single industry.
They concluded that the concept had simply careened out of control.
Today, these conglomerate chief executives, including James Hardymon at Textron, Lawrence A. Bossidy at AlliedSignal and Richard Smith at Harcourt General Inc., are focusing on a relatively few, rather than many, businesses.
While slowing acquisitions, they are working harder on the nitty-gritty job of improving productivity.
Hands-on management, cost cutting and selective pruning are in vogue.
Like their forebears, the new conglomerate chiefs are promising that their various businesses will create synergies, with one-plus-one making more than two.
And they seem to be finding some.
"We're all focusing a little bit more and, I believe, becoming a little easier to understand," says Mr. Hardymon, Textron's chairman.
Since coming to Textron from Emerson Electric Co. in 1990, he has done more than sell off businesses.
He also has made acquisitions, but they are fewer than in the past and are geared toward enhancing existing lines.
Two major ones: Cessna Aircraft for $600 million and the plastics operations of Chrysler Corp.'s Acustar parts unit for $138 million.
But in addition, Mr. Hardymon is pressing Textron's remaining units, from helicopters to golf carts, to better manage cash flow and control inventories.
Moreover, he brings together twice a year Textron's division heads, who used to see little of each other.
He also has started training programs that draw in others from various groups.
"We've had most of our manufacturing groups visit" two auto-parts divisions to learn how they turn inventories 70 times a year, he says.
"That helps trying to get throughput.
Instead of taking 24 months to build a helicopter, it's now 14, and we're pushing for 12."
Despite buying Acustar last year, Textron cut inventories by $100 million and freed up cash.
At AlliedSignal, productivity rose 5.6% in 1992, and Mr. Bossidy, chairman of the Morristown, N.J., company, has set a goal of "6% improvement a year, forever."
AlliedSignal's success is partly due to synergy.
Edwin L. Williams Jr., manager of its chemical plant in Catoosa, Okla., had never seen one of the company's automotive operations before last year, much less considered them worthy of scrutiny.
But when an automated production line he installed kept failing, Mr. Williams heeded directions from corporate headquarters to step up cooperation, and he sought advice from Allied's Fram division, which makes oil filters for cars and had installed a similar line.
In just two days, Catoosa and Fram engineers agreed on a dozen steps, and they installed sensors that pinpointed where malfunctions were occurring.
Now, Catoosa coats with chemicals 10 million catalytic converters a year, up from four million in 1989, while the payroll has grown only to 160 from 130.
It has cut inventories 30% a year for the past three years, while trimming overtime and improving job safety.
At ITT, Chairman Rand Araskog has spent a decade unwinding a morass of businesses created by Mr. Geneen.
Mr. Araskog (who also is a director of Dow Jones & Co., publisher of this newspaper) is cutting corporate overhead built up during ITT's expansion, including 1,000 of 4,000 staffers at headquarters and operating divisions.
ITT now has just 250 people in New York City, down from more than 3,000 10 years ago.
The corporate-relations staff, once 150 strong, is down to three.
Of course, some corporate giants that are highly diversified but nevertheless aren't generally considered conglomerates have posted strong sales and earnings growth all along.
An outstanding example is General Electric Co., which operates in a wide range of industries, from railroad locomotives to aircraft engines to broadcasting to financial services.
Yet many conglomerates are still finding it hard to increase revenue.
Eric Olsen, a vice president of Boston Consulting Group, says that of 15 conglomerates that he has studied and that have outperformed the stock market in the past two years, only two posted significant sales growth.
And that is a major problem.
However rewarding gains in shareholder returns can be for several years, companies eventually need to grow to create opportunities for and keep talented employees.
"If you haven't got growth, it's difficult to add value for a long period of time," Mr. Olsen says.
So, as conglomerates get stronger, he predicts, the urge to merge as a way of growing and diversifying is likely to revive.
"Over the long haul, with any company there's a five-to-10-year evolution of focusing down, and then when you've maximized the potential, you're required to make a leap into a new area," he says.
Moreover, executives at conglomerates say good ones can outdo single-industry companies.
Being concentrated in one industry "is great if you're Coca-Cola," says Thomas King, chairman and president of Standex International Corp., a small conglomerate based in Salem, N.H.
But "it's not so great if you're Wang Laboratories."
Wang, tied to a narrow data-processing line, sustained huge losses and slipped into bankruptcy proceedings, from which it recently emerged.
Standex, by contrast, has businesses ranging from shopping-cart casters to mail-order grapefruit and religious tracts.
Net income rose a tidy 9% to a record $24 million last year on $506 million in sales.
Spurring conglomerate chiefs to simplify operations, however, are trends in executive pay.
"More than ever, management compensation is tied to stock performance," says Jack Kelly, an analyst at Goldman, Sachs & Co.
This spring, for example, ITT shareholders will vote on an incentive plan involving large stock options at $92 that executives can exercise when the price hits $115 and $128.80.
ITT's stock closed yesterday at $96.875, up $1.125 a share, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
After selling off 240 companies, ITT's Mr. Araskog realigned its business into four lines: manufactured products, insurance and financial, Rayonier forest products and Sheraton hotels.
Yesterday, ITT completed a spinoff to its shareholders of the Rayonier operation, in a move that analysts say will reduce cyclicality and remove a unit that sucks up capital.
"While we saw strength in being a conglomerate, we saw additional strength in being a little less of a conglomerate," says James Gallagher, a spokesman.
Most corporate chiefs have strong incentives to dispose of weak units and raise earnings per share, but those at conglomerates have more units to discard.
"Now, with stock appreciation paramount, maybe you consider a spinoff" of a poor performer, Mr. Kelly says.
Responding to conglomerates' pruning and the prospects for further actions, their stocks have been rebounding from their depressed levels of a few years ago.
Jack Modzelewski, a conglomerate analyst at PaineWebber Inc., says the stocks he follows rose 25% last year and 20% in 1992, compared with consecutive gains of 7% and 5% for the Standard & Poor's 400 industrials.
Value Line, the investment service, says diversified-company shares have beaten the overall market since 1991 while the group's price-to-earnings ratio -- a key barometer for investors -- is nearing that of the market after lagging behind it for much of the 1980s.
Every investor may hope that conglomerates that pare down will end up as Gulf & Western did.
The erstwhile conglomerate sold, closed or spun off far-flung units and, renamed Paramount Communications Inc., recently agreed to be acquired by Viacom Inc. for about $79 a share; it was at $10 a share 10 years ago.
But holders of conglomerate stocks can't count on getting such a bonanza.
The companies have a way of sticking around, reshaping themselves and defying predictions of their dissolution.
Take Dover Corp., a New York company that has 60 businesses and makes elevators, pumps and petroleum equipment, among other things.
It averages a 19% return on equity, and its stock has doubled in market value every five years.
Dover also has reported 15% annual growth in revenue, to $2.4 billion last year, thanks to steady expansion of its existing businesses and "an acquisition program that is opportunity-based," says John McNiff, chief financial officer.
Although Dover would appear to operate like an old-line conglomerate, Mr. McNiff bristles at the label; "we stick to manufactured industrial products," he says.
Last year, the company spun off to shareholders an electronics unit in a move to tighten its focus, but, not hesitating to go beyond its existing product lines, also acquired Heil Co., a maker of garbage trucks.
"We're always active and always hopeful," Mr. McNiff says.
