Nationwide Cellular Service Inc. expects to report strong sales growth in the fourth quarter, which paradoxically will result in a net loss because of one-time costs of adding new subscribers.
In an interview, Chairman Stephen Katz said the reseller of cellular services expects to report that sales in the quarter grew about 8%, to more than $48 million, from $44.9 million a year ago.
For the quarter, Mr. Katz said Nationwide will post a net loss of about $1 million, or 15 cents a share.
That compares with year-ago net income of $5.7 million, or 65 cents a share, including a one-time gain of $6.3 million, or 72 cents a share, from the sale of a subsidiary's assets.
"We typically lose money when we grow because of the cost of acquiring new subscribers," largely reflecting losses on the sale of new equipment and commissions paid to sales representatives, Mr. Katz said.
And although the entire expense of acquiring subscribers is reflected in the period in which they are added, there is usually a lag time before revenue and profit from new subscribers are reflected.
"By all indications, this is the best first quarter in our history in terms of subscriber growth," because of increased emphasis on retail sales and marketing, Mr. Katz said.
For the year, net will exceed $1.75 million, or about 12 cents a share, a decline from the year-ago net of $6.7 million, or 79 cents a share, including the one-time gain.
Without the one-time gain, year-ago profit from operations totaled about $400,000, or three cents a share.
The company expects to post a 29% increase in sales for the year, to more than $182 million from $141.8 million.
Nationwide expects to post its fourth-quarter and year results early next week.
Nationwide has about 195,000 subscribers in seven markets in New York, Chicago and the northeast corrider.
Earlier this week, the company added 14,000 subscribers in the Baltimore/Washington area by buying assets of Unicel America Inc., another reseller.
It expects subscribers this year to grow by more than 40%, to about 250,000, through acquisitions and internal growth.
