With the Los Angeles area gripped by traffic delays and facing hundreds of millions of dollars in costs to repair roads and other infrastructure, might Governor Pete Wilson take a cue from the presidential response to Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki?
George Bush ordered the relaxation of Davis-Bacon "prevailing wage" standards to facilitate repairs in Florida and Hawaii from those natural disasters.
California, with its own labor law extending union rules to public-works projects, enjoys a similar opportunity.
Governor Wilson can't expect Bill Clinton to follow in the Bush footsteps.
The new President was quick to undo his predecessor's Davis-Bacon changes upon taking office, as a payback for organized labor's support.
On a trip to California yesterday, Mr. Clinton didn't offer to relax the rules as they apply, most significantly, to federal interstate highways.
California has plenty of its own public works to repair, however.
And nonunion contractors estimate a 15% to 20% saving if builders are spared not only the expense of paying the union wage, but also of shouldering the work rules and the paperwork of ascertaining exactly what is owed each worker under the complex prevailing-wage schedule.
Each craft may have several classifications, and the rates change by county.
In fact, Governor Wilson might use this occasion to initiate some long-overdue changes in the way his state, like many others, assists the craft unions in restricting employment and training options.
More than 75% of the construction business today is nonunion, but when it comes to public works, the union apprenticeship gatekeepers hold tremendous sway.
The result is that hundreds of thousands of blue-collar jobs, paying decent wages, have been stifled.
Underrepresented groups in the labor force have suffered most.
Nonunion training programs are opening here and there, but unions have been able to delay most of them with unending procedural ploys before sympathetic state regulators.
The California Apprenticeship Council is no exception.
Governor Wilson, who appoints that body, might wish to suggest a contrary course prior to the council's early February meeting, at which more nonunion proposals are on the table.
The California disaster, which several politicians say will require yet another increase in the state sales tax, raises other possibilities.
The early track record of privatized road construction suggests work could be done cheaper and faster where roadways could be turned into tollways.
(This would also permit adoption of congestion pricing.)
Even for traditional highways, the state Department of Transportation has been trying to contract out design, engineering and landscape work, but its unionized staff last year succeeded in a lawsuit to block much of that effort.
Policymakers could right that wrong.
Meantime, legalized jitney service could help alleviate traffic congestion.
An earthquake is a dramatic reminder of the importance of roadways and other major public projects.
The costs of getting such facilities built (and now rebuilt) has a lot to do with business competitiveness in any jurisdiction.
Recession-weary California could use the misfortune of its latest calamity to create a better climate for enterprise and employment.
