MIGRATION patterns grow ever more complex -- and potentially troublesome.
University of Michigan demographer William H. Frey analyzed 1990 census data to see how immigration and migration flows within the U.S. affected states and regions between 1985 and 1990.
Dr. Frey found that Hispanic, Asian and black immigrants from abroad predictably clustered in the half-dozen easily accessible states with large minority populations: California, New York, Texas, New Jersey, Illinois and Massachusetts.
At the same time, however, residents of these states were leaving in droves.
And all but California lost substantially more people to other states than they gained from them.
Even California, long a mecca for residents from other states, had an unusually small increase of population gain from internal migration.
Those leaving the six states included strikingly large numbers of less-skilled, lower-income whites.
Some had lost their jobs, often to immigrants, but Dr. Frey believes many were seeking to distance themselves from the newcomers, often moving only to neighboring states.
At the other end of the scale were states, largely in the Southeast and the West, where people coming in from other states far outnumbered those leaving.
Biggest gainers were Florida, Georgia, North Carolina, Virginia, Washington and Arizona.
Strong economies and/or good climate were the main attractions.
Except for Florida, most had comparatively low immigration from abroad; even in Florida, the net gain from internal migration was almost three times that from abroad.
And the economically depressed states in the upper Midwest and oil patch saw minimal immigration from abroad and other states but had large outflows of residents.
Michigan, Ohio, Iowa, Oklahoma and Louisiana were among these states.
The exodus included substantial numbers of better-educated men and women heading for greener pastures in the Southeast and Pacific coast.
Dr. Frey worries about a "Balkanizing" pattern emerging from these trends.
He warns that "the continuation of these processes -- a minority-dominated immigration coupled with an internal migration `white flight' -- could lead to sharply divergent race and sociodemographic structures across broad regions and states."
VIOLENT-CRIME victims have increased since 1973, but the number of victims of other crimes has decreased.
The government's Bureau of Justice Statistics has analyzed 20-year trends shown by the annual National Crime Victimization Survey, which since 1973 has tracked crime by interviewing large national samples of households.
The survey covers rape, robbery, assault, burglary, personal and household theft and motor-vehicle theft.
The analysis reveals that the number of people victimized by the covered crimes had fallen 6% by 1992.
There were 35.7 million victimizations in 1973; the number peaked at 41.5 million in 1981 and then dropped fairly steadily to 33.6 million in 1992.
The biggest declines came in thefts from individuals and homes.
Violent crimes -- robbery, rape and assault -- presented a different picture: up 24% by 1992.
The report noted that black men and women, particularly teenagers, were victimized by violent crimes in 1992 at the highest rates ever recorded.
Victimizations of white teenagers also rose.
Male victims of violent crimes are far more likely to be victimized by strangers than by acquaintances, the bureau reports, but female victims are as likely to be victimized by a husband, boyfriend or other intimate as by a stranger.
Most violent-crime victims are victimized by people of the same race; about 75% of white victims are victimized by whites and about 85% of black victims are victimized by blacks.
HISPANIC OR Latino?
It's a controversial question.
The Census Bureau and other federal agencies use the term "Hispanic" to describe Americans whose origin was in the Spanish-speaking countries of the Western world.
Many other public and private groups follow that lead.
Most news media generally use "Hispanic" when discussing broad national trends, but those in areas with large populations from Mexico and Central America often switch to "Latino" when referring to the local community.
Academics and liberal groups increasingly favor "Latino."
They claim it more accurately describes the origin of most Spanish-speaking U.S. residents.
Moreover, they say, "Hispanic" became official government nomenclature during the Nixon administration, and that's a mark against it.
Many Spanish-speaking groups aren't happy with either and prefer terms indicating their country of origin, such as Mexican-American, Puerto Rican or Cuban-American.
Specialists who have delved into the issue say preference tends to vary by region and socioeconomic class.
Businessmen and those who have been in the U.S. for many years seem to prefer "Hispanic," while poorer groups or more recent immigrants opt for "Latino."
Actually, the specialists say, the two terms cover pretty much the same groups, but that doesn't lessen the depth of feeling over the issue.
Says Andres Jiminez, director of the California Policy Seminar of the University of California: "It's a minefield."
THE CENSUS BUREAU has chosen the sites for a 1995 test of sampling and other new techniques to be used in the next decennial census.
They are New Haven, Conn.; Oakland, Calif.; Paterson, N.J.; and six rural parishes in northwestern Louisiana. . . .
Almost half of all visits to psychiatrists are made by people between 25 and 44 years old, according to a study by the National Center for Health Statistics.
