The Palestinian economy has lacked any comprehensive banking services since Israel captured the West Bank and Gaza Strip in the 1967 war.
Now, Israeli, Jordanian, and Palestinian banks are fighting to be the first to open their doors during the coming period of Palestinian self-rule.
Establishing a strong banking system has long been viewed as a key to developing the Palestinian economy, but the banks aren't battling over which of them gets to provide financial services to the Palestinians, who up until now have kept their savings at home and relied on the local money-changer for any banking needs.
Instead, what is driving the competition is the prospect of millions of dollars in lucrative commissions and related business arising out of the transfer and distribution of the $2 billion in aid pledged over the next five years by Western nations to help the Palestine Liberation Organization set up a self-ruling authority.
"Banks," says one Palestinian economist, "are going to be a profitable business."
Ideally, the Palestinians would like to keep the profits for themselves.
"Aid coming to the West Bank should be in Palestinian hands only and distributed through Palestinian institutions," says Khaled Shair, chief executive officer and general manager of the Commercial Bank of Palestine, which is set to be the first Palestinian bank when it opens its doors in Ram Allah this month.
It has received PLO approval to act as a conduit of foreign aid.
But the Palestinians are increasingly worried by Jordan's eagerness to reopen its banks.
Eight Jordanian banks with a total of 31 branches operated in the West Bank before 1967, and the Jordanian Central Bank has already given approval to five of them to reopen some of their branches.
(Currently, all banks wishing to operate in the West Bank must also be approved by the Israeli Central Bank.)
The PLO and Jordan may speak of enjoying a brotherly relationship, as reflected by the signing last month of an economic cooperation agreement, but privately many Palestinian bankers "are afraid that the Jordanian banks are going to overpower us," says the economist.
So, in what surely must be one of the oddest economic alliances to arise out of the Israel-PLO peace accord, the PLO has turned to the Israelis as a kind of insurance policy against the impending Jordanian banking invasion.
It has given the go-ahead to a group of Palestinian businessmen to set up a new commercial bank in the occupied territories in partnership with Bank Leumi, an Israeli bank closely associated throughout its history with the Zionist movement.
The bank, to be called the International Palestinian Bank, or IPB, will be jointly owned by the Palestinian investors, who are in the process of registering as a company to be based in Ram Allah; Bank Leumi; Banque Commerciale du Maroc of Morocco; and Banco Central Hispano of Spain.
Each group will invest $10 million and nominate three members to the board of directors of the new enterprise, which will be managed by "a qualified banker of Arab origin," according to Moshe Sanbar, chairman of Bank Leumi.
Mr. Sanbar says the agreement, which has been formally signed by all of the parties except the Palestinian investment group, is based on the premise that "all politics will be kept out of the bank vault."
The combination of partners makes the bank ideally positioned to win a large chunk of business from foreign investors and donors, says Mr. Sanbar.
Bank Leumi will turn over the two branches it currently operates in the West Bank to IPB as well as a sophisticated computer system.
Banco Central Hispano has important ties in Europe, Banque Commerciale du Maroc in the Arab world, and the Palestinian partners with the PLO.
Since the Palestinians profess to fear Israeli intentions toward their fragile economy as much as they do those of the Jordanians, why go to the Israelis instead of forming an alliance with one of the Jordanian banks?
"We have learned not to put all our eggs in one basket," says Hanna S. Siniora, a Palestinian businessman in Jerusalem who is considering investing in IPB.
One Israeli banking official says the Palestinians' economic pragmatism also stems from a desire to ensure that there are no delays in the arrival of aid pledged by the donors.
"Culturally and languagewise, the Palestinians would be more comfortable with Jordanian banks as partners," he says.
"But they think the Western donors would be more comfortable with us."
