Big Six accounting firm Coopers & Lybrand said Eugene M. Freedman will retire as chairman toward the end of the year.
There had been speculation that Mr. Freedman, 61 years old, would seek a vote to change the firm's bylaws regarding retirement age, thereby enabling him to run for a second three-year term when his current term ends in the fall.
Mr. Freedman said he had circulated a confidential poll among the firm's 1,250 partners and had received "very substantial but not overwhelming" support for a possible re-election bid.
Mr. Freedman will retire as chairman and chief executive officer of the U.S. unit on Sept. 30, and as chairman of the parent company in late October.
The four partners who ran against Mr. Freedman three years ago are said to be leading contenders to succeed him.
Two vice chairmen, John Roberts, 48, and Stephen McKessy, 56, are considered by some to be the favorites.
Another vice chairman, William O'Brien, 49, and Vincent O'Reilly, chief operating officer, 56, also are likely to be in the running.
Mr. Freedman is credited with attracting a lot of business for Coopers & Lybrand, as well steering it toward more profitable business opportunites.
For instance, he urged that the firm enter the business of providing outsourcing services for internal audits and taxation for corporations.
He also started a $10 million advertising and promotional campaign, and helped "redefine our lines of business," one partner said.
For the year ended Sept. 30, Coopers & Lybrand had world-wide revenue of $5.22 billion.
Mr. Freedman had a reputation for pushing employees hard to lure new clients.
"Gene is entrepreneurial," one partner said.
"Some partners had a fear of change, and wondered about the challenges" Mr. Freedman brought to the firm.
People familiar with the situation suggested that Mr. Freeedman failed to receive unanimous support for a re-election effort because some partners were reluctant to change the firm's long-standing bylaws.
Coopers & Lybrand's partnership agreement requires that partners retire from the firm at the end of the fiscal year in which they turn 62.
Mr. Freedman said he "respects" the opposition of some partners to not change the bylaws.
While noting that he planned to pursue other business opportunities, he was also upbeat about Coopers & Lybrand's prospects.
"The firm is on a roll," he said.
"It's leaner, we've brought in new work and it's increasingly profitable."
He said the firm will name a new chairman in May or June.
