Information Resources Inc., which stunned investors by announcing that it will report fourth-quarter earnings half of what was anticipated, has lost a major account.
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., a client of the Chicago-based marketing research company since 1991, is expected to move its business back to the A.C. Nielsen unit of Dun & Bradstreet Corp.
An announcement of the switch, as well as possibly another account defection to IRI's archrival, could come within days, according to people familiar with the situation.
IRI last lost a major client, the Kraft General Foods unit of Philip Morris Cos., in 1992.
After IRI said on Friday that earnings would be lower than expected, its shares fell $8.875, or 24%, to $28.75 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
The company said it would report per-share fourth-quarter profit of between 15 cents and 17 cents rather than the 32 cents to 34 cents Wall Street had predicted.
For the full year, IRI said it now expects to report per-share earnings of between 88 cents and 90 cents, against a consensus forecast of $1.06 and year-earlier earnings of 78 cents.
The shortfall translates to about $4.2 million in net income.
IRI attributed about two cents of the unrealized earnings to extraordinary costs associated with acquisitions.
IRI blamed most of the shortfall on new-client business that hadn't developed -- largely, it said, because of "swat team" salesmanship by an executive who had temporarily left IRI for Nielsen.
During his four months as president of Nielsen's North American operations, George R. Garrick is credited with convincing several major clients to remain there, with promises that service would improve.
"He didn't have to do that at too many places for it to really hurt our revenue numbers for the quarter," IRI Chairman Gian M. Fulgoni said.
Last November, Mr. Fulgoni succeeded in wooing Mr. Garrick back to IRI, where he heads up its North American business.
Mr. Fulgoni said that Wall Street expects IRI's InfoScan scanner-data operation to grow by at least 20% a year, and that new InfoScan clients represent high-margin business.
"A couple of jobs could total $2 million in pretax earnings easily," he added.
He wouldn't identify clients IRI had been counting on other than to characterize them as "blue chip."
But during the quarter, several clients renewed with IRI, Mr. Fulgoni said -- among them Hershey Foods Corp., Bayer AG's Miles Laboratories, Land O'Lakes Inc., J.M. Smucker Co. and the Continental Baking Group of Ralston Purina Co.
He also said that since Mr. Garrick has returned, IRI has added former Nielsen client Dole Food Co.
In an apparent effort to cushion the blow, IRI bundled the earnings revision with announcements of acquisitions, including that of Survey Research Group, a Hong Kong-based concern, for $76 million in stock.
SRG will give IRI entry into Asia as part of its efforts to match Nielsen in global reach.
Increasingly companies want to track consumer buying habits world-wide.
SRG operates in China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.
IRI, which outbid Nielsen for SRG, said the acquisition would be antidilutive to its shares.
IRI also said it had signed a letter of intent to buy Neo Inc., a Shelton, Conn., management consulting firm specializing in consumer packaged goods.
Terms weren't disclosed.
Mr. Fulgoni, who incurred a one-day paper loss Friday of about $2.6 million on his personal holdings, sought to minimize the stock's plunge, calling investors "short-sighted."
"A 5% revenue shortfall here caused a 50% earnings shortfall," the chairman and co-chief executive officer said.
The company cautioned Wall Street "not to read too much" into quarter-to-quarter earnings, he said, adding, "The volatility of our earnings shouldn't be used to indicate the fundamental strength of the company."
Indeed, some analysts regard IRI's stock decline as a buying opportunity.
"I recommend purchase at these levels because I think the fundamentals of the business are actually better in light of the SRG acquisition," said Rita Spitz, of William Blair & Co., Chicago.
Ms. Spitz said she isn't changing her 1994 earnings estimate of $1.40 a share, with a range of $1.35 to $1.45.
