In a rosy economic forecast, the National Association of Manufacturers projected that sustained domestic growth will help to create 200,000 manufacturing jobs this year.
Many economic analysts and even the NAM's executive committee, a group of 15 industrialists, have predicted flat employment prospects for 1994.
But NAM President Jerry Jasinowski said residential building and furniture manufacturing show signs of a strong pickup, which could lead to more factory jobs.
He acknowledged, however, that the NAM's estimate was "robust."
Modest job creation would mean a sharp turnaround for the manufacturing sector, which lost 181,000 jobs last year and 319,000 in 1992, according to Labor Department data.
Manufacturing employment hasn't grown since 1988, when 226,000 jobs were created.
"When companies spend money now, they're not looking to hire people," said Thomas Runiewicz, an industrial analyst with the WEFA Group near Philadelphia.
"They're looking to invest in innovative machinery."
"We are not getting the kind of rehiring we have traditionally had," Mr. Jasinowski said.
"Over a million jobs are associated with what we regard as a decrease in the hiring habits, largely because firms are attempting to restore profit margins."
Increased worker benefits and fairly low prices in the world market are keeping the pressure on profit margins.
Mr. Jasinowski said President Clinton's health-care package would increase the cost of worker benefits, but it isn't expected to be enacted this year and thus had little impact on the 1994 forecast.
The NAM has asked Mr. Clinton to scale back the basic employee benefits component of his plan.
Mr. Jasinowski said the North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico would have positive short-term effects.
He called Mr. Clinton's 1993 budget reconciliation "moderately restrictive," however, and said the package's tax increases might hamper growth.
Interest rates and inflation will remain stable in 1994, Mr. Jasinowski said.
He also projected the world economy would gain strength this year.
"I'm a bit more optimistic about our trade outlook for 1994 than other analysts, believing the U.S. will see its exports begin to rebound," he said.
"Due to stronger global demand for our products, exports will increase to a 6.3% growth rate in 1994 and 7.5% in 1995."
The NAM predicted a 3.0% increase in gross domestic product -- the value of goods and services produced in the U.S. -- for 1994, with business-equipment spending rising.
