This year's trade negotiations between the U.S. and Japan seem likely to result yet again in either an impasse or a face-saving agreement.
It will probably be sufficiently ambiguous to enable both Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and President Clinton to express satisfaction with the outcome at their summit meeting in Washington on Friday.
The modest stimulus package that Mr. Hosokawa's coalition government has just endorsed will contribute to this result.
According to the ritual of previous U.S.-Japan negotiations, the Americans vigorously assert that the fundamental reason for Japan's large trade surplus with the U.S. is Japan's closed markets, and the obvious remedy is to open them by specific measures, with precise targets attached to them.
The Japanese negotiators contend, no less vigorously, that the real culprit is the large U.S. budget deficit, and the obvious remedy is to eliminate it by raising taxes and reducing spending.
In fact, neither side of the debate has much going for it.
The American contention is accurate but largely irrelevant, while that of the Japanese is simply wrong.
Moreover, Japan has a striking opportunity to depart from the standard ritual by a series of innovative economic policies that would do well at home while doing good abroad -- reversing Japan's protracted recession and reducing its chronic export surpluses with the U.S. and the rest of the world.
The American stance in the standard ritual is irrelevant because, while Japan's domestic markets are demonstrably less permeable than markets elsewhere, the U.S. current-account deficit -- covering both merchandise and services trade with Japan, as well as with the rest of the world -- does not result from that fact.
It results from, and is equal to, the amount by which U.S. gross domestic saving falls short of U.S. gross domestic investment.
Thus, the global U.S. current-account deficit -- about $90 billion in 1993, more than half of which was with Japan -- won't be significantly helped by the opening of Japan's markets, although such a move is long overdue.
The Japanese position has more serious flaws than the American one.
The first flaw is empirical: The link that the Japanese assert between the two deficits doesn't exist.
As the accompanying graph shows, since the mid-1980s the U.S. budget deficit and current-account deficit have shown no correlation.
They moved in opposite directions more often (five years) than in the same direction (two years).
Although the two deficits have sometimes been referred to as "twins," they are at most third cousins.
Second, the Japanese refrain is weak on theoretical grounds.
Establishing a causal link between budget deficits and current-account deficits involves a questionable chain of reasoning.
On the one hand, government borrowing (to finance budget deficits) is supposed to deplete private savings by a corresponding amount, thereby increasing the imbalance between domestic savings and investment and hence raising the U.S. current-account deficit.
On the other hand, government borrowing also raises interest rates and crowds out private investment, thereby reducing the imbalance between savings and investment, and presumably lowering the current-account deficit.
How these complex and offsetting effects net out is not well understood, and does not warrant the standard admonition imparted by the Japanese to the Americans -- that cutting the U.S. budget deficit would cure the trade deficit.
Third, the Japanese emphasis on the causal effect of the U.S. budget deficit carries with it mistaken implications for policy.
The usual policy inference is that eliminating or at least narrowing the budget deficit will affect the current-account imbalance by an equal amount.
But this inference is wrong.
The U.S. current-account deficit can be reduced only if gross saving in the U.S. is increased, or gross investment is decreased, or saving rises by more than investment so the gap between them narrows.
If the budget deficit is reduced by fiscal policies that increase taxes on high savers, there will be little or no effect on the current-account deficit because revenues raised from these sources will simply reduce the savings that would otherwise have occurred.
The savings-investment imbalance won't be changed, and the current-account deficit won't be reduced.
Finally, it is worth reminding Japanese policy makers -- and the influential bureaucrats in the ministries of finance, foreign affairs, and trade and industry -- that the U.S. savings-investment imbalance is neither more nor less culpable than is Japan's corresponding but opposite imbalance.
The excess of Japan's domestic savings over its domestic investment is the mirror image of the U.S. shortfall of savings over domestic investment, and this excess is the fundamental source of Japan's chronic export surpluses.
This key fact provides a basis for the Japanese to depart from the established ritual and instead initiate economic policies that would redress Japan's recession and mitigate its export surpluses with the rest of the world.
The appropriate set of remedial policies would include: 1) lowering Japan's marginal income-tax rates (the highest individual rate is 50%; the highest corporate rate, 39.5%); 2) eliminating the existing 3% national consumption tax (export sales always have been exempted from this tax); and 3) removing the substantial tax exemption of income from private savings.
From the standpoint of Japan's narrowly focused Ministry of Finance, the first and second of these measures might, in the short run, reduce revenues.
But the third measure would increase them, thereby making the package more palatable.
In combination, the measures would boost domestic spending, reduce savings, and thereby diminish the imbalance between saving and investment that is responsible for Japan's chronic export surpluses.
Mr. Hosokawa's government is evidently now prepared to embrace the first of these measures, but only to a very limited extent.
Because the income-tax reduction would be only for a single year, and the sales tax is to be maintained -- and perhaps later increased -- the effects are likely to be minimal.
If, instead, Japan were to make a major departure from the ritual of the past, its recession would be reversed and its imports from the U.S. and the rest of the world would increase.
As for the U.S., negotiators would be well-advised to emphasize such improvements in Japan's macroeconomic policies rather than try to open Japan's protected markets by seeking to "manage" them.
Mr. Wolf is dean of the RAND Graduate School in Santa Monica, Calif., and director of international economic research at its National Defense Research Institute.
