We would have happily watched more ski jumpers.
CBS cameras were masterfully placed to capture the 120-meter hill event.
The largely Norwegian crowd of 100,000 made a truly joyful (and almost constant) noise.
The athletes responded with thrilling jumps, while announcers Phil Liggett and Jeff Hastings got caught up in the excitement and gracefully embellished it.
To set the scene, CBS attached a camera to a jumper's skis.
That proved, as Mr. Liggett said, the sport is "really, really scary."
By the time Mr. Liggett signed off saying, "This has been sport at its very best," a viewer could only agree.
Viewers may be complaining about CBS's coverage of the Games but they are watching in large numbers.
CBS continued to win all of the gold medals of TV ratings over the weekend, culminating with Sunday night's broadcast, which had the second-largest audience ever for Summer or Winter Games, an estimated 78 million people.
According to preliminary A.C. Nielsen Co. figures, CBS drew 29.2% of the nation's 94.2 million TV households.
CBS drew 25.8% Saturday and 27.5% Friday.
Numbers for the other networks are only available for 30 major cities and they show what a rout CBS is inflicting on its competitors.
On Saturday, the closest competitor to CBS was ABC, which drew a paltry 6.3%.
For the first nine nights of Lillehammer, CBS is averaging 25.6%, well beyond the 18.6% that the network promised advertisers.
And women's figure skating hasn't even aired yet.
Too much of the time CBS was gasping Sunday and Monday to fill up its Olympic broadcast hours.
If the network were willing to show more of the unpopular (with Americans) events, there might be enough sport.
But Winter Olympics simply don't have enough events deemed of interest to Americans to fill the eight-hour-plus broadcast days that CBS gives them on weekends.
The result is frequent tedium, teasing of viewers, and occasional outright blather.
Mark Phillips did a taped profile of Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean that helped CBS fill up time until the ice dancers' performance finally was shown Sunday night.
It included a bit of their famous dance to Ravel's "Bolero" at Sarajevo 10 years ago.
Yes, that was great ice dancing, but Mr. Phillips said it marked people's lives like other great world events.
So help us, he said that people ask each other: "Where were you during the moon landing?
Where were you for Bolero?"
In spite of the tawdriness that has engulfed women's figure skating, these Games continue to give girls around the world a new generation of sporting role models.
Over the weekend, Picabo Street and Pernilla Wiberg joined Stine Lise Hattestad and Donna Weinbrecht in this all-too-small category.
Infuriatingly, CBS saw fit to broadcast a profile of Russian Nordic skier Yelena Valbi with the simple message that elite athletes make bad mothers.
It focused almost entirely on the anguish Ms. Valbi felt about leaving her son in the care of his grandmother for six months of each year while she traveled the skiing circuit ("I only hope that he can forgive me for what I have done to him").
No word yet from CBS on the distress of Olympic fathers.
