The Senate Banking Committee voted unanimously to allow banks to operate nationwide branch networks, adding political momentum to a proposal that would change the shape of American banking.
Nationwide banking is moving forward in the House as well, and, barring unexpected obstacles, appears headed for passage in this Congress after years of lobbying by large banking companies, such as BankAmerica Corp. and NationsBank Corp.
"The chances are very good," said committee Chairman Donald Riegle (D., Mich.).
"This bill has a good head of steam."
Passage of the bill would accelerate the current wave of bank acquisitions as big companies rush to construct nationwide empires.
For consumers and businesses, nationwide branch networks would make it easier to use one bank for all their banking needs, no matter where they were in the country.
The change would be particularly convenient for the four million workers who commute daily across state lines.
Current laws generally require banking companies to operate separately chartered banks in each state.
For example, a Connecticut resident who works in New York City and has an account at a Chase Manhattan bank there, couldn't deposit money into that account through a Chase bank in Connecticut.
Nationwide banking would allow banking companies to consolidate separate operations in different states into unified networks.
This would save the banking industry billions of dollars a year by eliminating duplicative accounting, management and other systems.
One year after enactment, the Senate plan would allow banks that are deemed adequately capitalized and well-managed to acquire existing banks in any state, as long as the acquisition didn't boost the banking company's share of federally insured deposits beyond 25% of those in the state or 10% of those in the country.
This would repeal the 1956 Douglas Amendment that prevents bank holding companies from acquiring banks outside their home states without approval from the state of the bank being acquired.
Most states already allow interstate acquisitions to some degree, but under the 1927 McFadden Act, the banks have to be operated separately, rather than as part of a coherent branch network.
Two years after enactment, the Senate plan would allow banks to combine multistate operations into a unified branch system.
States would have the right to opt out of this arrangement or to allow a faster consolidation.
A panel of the House Banking Committee has cleared a bill that does the same thing, but on a different schedule.
The full House Banking Committee is expected to consider the measure in early March.
A coalition of consumer groups complained yesterday that the Senate bill allows federal regulators to pre-empt state consumer-protection laws.
In the House Banking Committee consumer groups may press to win stronger community-reinvestment requirements and new low-cost "basic banking" services for low-income customers.
The banking industry opposes these measures.
For several years, efforts to allow the creation of nationwide banking networks have failed because insurance agents, a politically powerful group, have tried to use the bills as vehicles for limits on insurance sales by banks.
Banks, determined to preserve their right to sell a wider range of financial products, opposed any bill with insurance restrictions.
Earlier this month, Sen. Christopher Dodd (D., Conn.), an insurance ally, said he would no longer support an insurance amendment that had blocked passage of interstate banking.
"Rarely in my public life have I been able to make so many people happy at one time," he said yesterday to a hearing room filled with bank lobbyists.
He said he would like to see an interstate-banking bill on President Clinton's desk by Memorial Day.
The administration supports interstate banking.
