An innovative small-business health-insurance program in California that pools employees into purchasing cooperatives is cutting premiums by an average 6.3%.
Michael Roush, an official with the National Federation of Independent Business in Washington, D.C., a group of 600,000 small businesses, said the California co-op's success comes as most small businesses nationally experience "low- to mid-single-digit increases, compared to double-digit increases as recently as last year."
The nearly year-old Health Insurance Plan of California announced that it has negotiated the premium cuts with 23 health plans to take effect July 1.
The plan, which covers 2,500 businesses with 44,000 employees and dependents, is the nation's first statewide government-backed health-insurance purchasing co-op.
Many experts consider it a model for the various sorts of purchasing pools being debated by national health reformers.
Under the California plan, employers voluntarily join the cooperatives.
This gives them the same bargaining clout as large businesses.
Employes at participating small businesses can pick among several plans and employers are required to cover at a minimum the cost of 50% of the cheapest plan, with employes paying the rest.
"The rate decrease that members are receiving will come as welcome news to all proponents of managed competition," said Richard Figueroa, deputy director with the California Managed Risk Medical Insurance Board, a 13-person agency overseeing the alliance.
"It shows that alliances can be put together in a short period of time with a lot of insurance-company participation."
The premium cut comes on the heels of a 1.1% premium reduction announced by the giant California Public Employees Retirement System for members in 18 health-maintenance organzations.
Announced last month, Calpers' new rates will benefit 920,000 public employees and family members.
In the most recent round of negotiations for the California co-ops, "competition was intense," said Ronald Brewer, a regional director for Aetna Life & Casualty Co., which captured nearly 40% of the program's business in its first year.
"Through our success, others have seen that there's a lot of business to be written, and people who weren't aggressive last year came back much more aggressively."
The heightened competition is most evident when comparing the negotiated rates, Mr. Figueroa said.
Beginning July 1 in the Los Angeles area, for example, six of the 17 participating companies will offer monthly rates below $100 for an individual between 30 years and 39 years old, with the lowest one at $87.
Last year, only one of 15 participating companies offered a monthly rate below $100.
The rate: $88.29.
Robert Laszewski, a consultant with Health Policy and Strategy Associates, Washington, D.C., said the California coops are "probably the best example of what the marketplace will be happy with."
The program, however, still has a small market share, just several percent of the small business market.
