The dollar drifted slightly higher yesterday in sluggish trading as uncertainty over German interest rates and a new Japanese fiscal stimulus package overshadowed bullish U.S. economic data.
Traders said the market is divided on whether the Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, will cut interest rates at its policy-making council meeting today.
They also noted a marketwide reluctance to take new positions.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.7336 marks, up a bit from 1.7320 marks late Tuesday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 107.88 yen, up from 107.70 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.4955, down from $1.5010.
About midday Thursday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 108.21 yen and at 1.7355 marks.
"There is a lot of uncertainty in the market," said Jack Griffin, assistant vice president of corporate foreign exchange at Fuji Bank in New York.
He said traders who had been burned by past expectations of Bundesbank decisions "are unwilling to place bets on which way the market will go."
In addition, the market was unsure about the implications of Japan's longawaited economic-stimulus program, based on the initial news reports from Tokyo.
Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa announced a plan to cut income and residence taxes by six trillion yen ($55.5 billion) immediately and to raise the current 3% consumer sales tax to a 7% "people's welfare" in April 1997.
However, even the delayed consumer tax increase appears imperiled with the Socialists threatening to quit Mr. Hosokawa's fragile ruling coalition if the measure is passed by parliament.
In addition, the U.S. response to the stimulus program has been weak at best.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen issued a terse, three-sentence response, saying he was pleased that Japan had taken a step toward providing economic stimulus, but cautioned that more details were needed.
Analysts said the package, once fully unveiled, is likely to be given a sour greeting by the Clinton administration, and could resurrect U.S. pressure for a strong yen as an antidote for Japan's huge trade surplus.
"The tax cut is not going to be large enough to satisfy the U.S.," said Sung Won Sohn, chief economist for Norwest Bank Corp. in Minneapolis.
"We would like the tax cut to have been in the seven-to 10-trillion-yen range, but it's less than that."
"Given the quarrelsome coalition that Hosokawa is heading, there are questions whether this thing will make it through parliament," he added.
"The market has little confidence in Hosokawa's ability to really deliver."
There also appeared to be little progress in the continuing U.S.-Japan talks on lowering trade barriers.
The so-called framework talks between U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor and Japanese Deputy Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata were described as "severe," and a visit to Japan by high-level U.S. negotiators was put on hold, implying a lack of progress prior to Mr. Hosokawa's visit to Washington on Feb. 11.
Traders said events in Germany and Japan dimmed the market's reaction to more bullish U.S. economic news.
The Commerce Department said sales of new single-family houses rose a stronger-than-expected 11.4% in December to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 862,000, the highest since 1988.
