The chairman of German luxury car maker Bayerische Motoren Werke AG said he expects increased 1994 sales and earnings, and expressed optimism that Japan's Honda Motor Co. won't abruptly abandon its product-sharing partnership with Britain's Rover Cars operation, once BMW assumes control.
BMW agreed in late January to acquire Britain's Rover Group from British Aerospace PLC, including an 80% stake in Rover Cars of Britain.
BMW's offer blindsided Honda, which holds the other 20% of Rover Cars, and led the Japanese auto maker to declare it would unwind its stake in Rover and "review" agreements to provide the British auto maker with crucial vehicle designs, engine technology and manufacturing know-how.
Now, after two months of talks, BMW Chairman Bernd Pischetsrieder said Honda appears willing to continue existing product and technology-sharing arrangements with Rover, at least for the remaining lifespan of the current Rover 200, 400 and 600 series models.
Those cars are based mainly on Honda technology.
"We assume that the Honda-Rover relationship will continue," Mr. Pischetsrieder said, cautioning that no new contracts have been signed.
Honda officials have expressed reluctance to be partners with a company that is a fierce rival in every major world market.
By pulling out of its technology agreements with Rover, Honda could stick BMW with the cost of developing new engines and vehicles on its own.
However, an abrupt exit also could leave Honda holding a backlog of Rover components and snarl its own European production.
Rover supplies body parts for some of Honda's U.K.-built models and assembles the Honda Concerto at its Longbridge plant.
Meanwhile, BMW officials said groupwide sales rose a preliminary 2.7% during the first quarter to 7.50 billion marks ($4.48 billion) from 7.30 billion marks a year earlier.
Despite sluggish European sales and a 7% drop in its first-quarter production, BMW officials said new orders this year have "clearly overshot" last year's levels, and the company expects 1994 earnings will improve upon last year's performance.
