Your Jan. 11 page-one article "Junta's Helper: Shunned by the West, Burma's Rulers Find an Ally in Manhattan," helped expose Miriam Segal's corporate collaboration with the Burmese State Law and Order Restoration Council (Slorc).
Her categorical dismissal of slave laborers in Burma as just "murderers and drug addicts" exemplifies her callous disregard for the Slorc's pervasive violations of human rights.
Who mandated Miriam Segal to decide what is best for the Burmese people?
That is for the people of Burma to decide through their elected representatives.
Unfortunately, you failed to mention the call for economic and investment sanctions made by the National Coalition Government of the Union of Burma.
After visiting refugees on the Thai-Burma border in February 1993, 10 Nobel Peace Prize laureates, including the Dalai Lama, Archbishop Desmond Tutu, Betty Williams, Mairead Maguire and Dr. Oscar Arias, along with representatives of Amnesty International and American Friends Service Committee, reaffirmed the call for economic and investment sanctions on Burma.
The coalition government has the mandate to speak for the Burmese people.
Its legitimacy is based on the fact that it consists of representatives, duly elected in 1990, who were prevented from taking their seats and forming a government by the military junta.
In those elections, the National League for Democracy, led by Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi, won more than 80% of the seats.
The Slorc's lack of legitimacy is starkly evidenced by the fact that in the same elections its National Unity Party won a minuscule 2% of the seats.
Burma stands to be the South Africa of the 1990s.
It is a country where a brutal, pariah regime holds reign, propped up by an unlikely combination of Chinese military assistance, drug profits, and support from Western and Asian corporate investors.
The Coalition for Corporate Withdrawal From Burma brings together social investment firms, environmentalists, religious investors, trade unions, human-rights activists and Burmese exiles.
The coalition stands in support of the people of Burma, their elected representatives, and their clearly expressed desire for democracy and human rights.
We summarily reject the self-serving arguments of Miriam Segal and other corporate apologists for the Burmese military junta.
The coalition will not rest until the corporate lifeline to the Slorc is cut.
The old adage tells us, "For evil to triumph, it is necessary only that good men remain silent."
As the world maintains relative silence about the antidemocratic repression in Burma, people like Miriam Segal wittingly or unwittingly act as stooges of the military junta, spreading its evil propaganda.
The self-styled State Law and Order Restoration Council is not the legitimate government of Burma.
The people of Burma are no less deserving of their democratic rights than the people of Haiti, similarly despoiled by a military junta.
Until it recognizes the results of the 1990 election, in which the Burmese people overwhelmingly affirmed their desire for democracy, and negotiates a transition to democratic rule, the West and the rest of the world should subject Slorc to sanctions at least as severe as those imposed on Haiti.
Moraga, Calif.
