We have to sympathize with Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who told China on Sunday that "time is running out" for saving its Most Favored Nation trading status.
Maybe he should have brought along a team of opticians.
The other side could certainly use some help getting reality into focus.
The Chinese leadership is suffering from an extreme case of Middle Kingdom myopia if it thinks it somehow has the U.S. over a barrel.
First we had the conspicuous trip of Vice Premier Zhu Rongji to Japan, where he high-fived Tokyo's business leaders in a crude gesture toward Washington.
Next the regime began rounding up dissidents on the eve of Secretary Christopher's visit to talk about human rights, and Monday it sent him home with only the skimpiest of diplomatic fig leafs.
Perhaps China's leaders have come to believe the hype about how they have their hands on the throttle of the next economic superpower.
They think the rest of the world has little choice but to kowtow.
Not that we doubt China's ballpark estimates of 15% economic growth.
That's what happens when people who've been conditioned by decades of Maoist poverty and worse suddenly get a chance to go to work in a Western-financed factory or get Western help in setting up their own businesses.
But our sense is that for every genuine entrepreneur in China today, there's a Communist Party hack grown fat on his ability to control the economy's tollgates.
A friend tells us of an urban police department that decided to go into the business of manufacturing fireworks.
Its first move was to outlaw its competitors.
Behavior of this sort doesn't create wealth.
Wealth is created only when entrepreneurs under the lash of competition seek better ways to combine resources to create value for consumers.
Some in China are doing that, primarily by combining cheap local labor with Western technology to serve markets mostly in the West.
Our view has always been that trade strengthens China's legitimate private sector and encourages liberalization, even if it also feeds the corruption of the party bureaucrats.
In the end, we suspect that today's crass displays of official avarice will only contribute to shortening the regime's grip on power.
In this regard, it's not irrelevant that there is a foreign devil the Chinese treat even more rudely than they treated the Secretary of State -- Christopher Patten, the democratizing governor of Hong Kong.
Mr. Patten, who surely understands the link between free markets and free societies, is the most eloquent advocate of MFN status for China.
And we have argued before here that MFN is a crude political tool, most likely hurting the people we want to help in China.
If the U.S. and other responsible governments want to discipline Beijing, a better tool would be to cut off multilateral aid.
These handouts -- principally from the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank -- go directly into the coffers of the state, giving the party resources with which to reward its friends and punish its enemies.
Another way for the U.S. to express displeasure with the autocrats in Beijing would be to boost Taiwan, the "other" China, which is well on its way to full democracy.
A third tool -- one that the Clinton Administration is wielding effectively -- is to support publicly those who are working on behalf of freedom in China.
Assistant Secretary of State John Shattuck's recent meeting with Chinese dissident Wei Jingsheng and President Clinton's welcome to the Dalai Lama last year both infuriated the mandarins in Beijing.
The United States alone among Western countries deserves credit for taking the human rights issue to Beijing, and for being willing to run risks on behalf of Western values.
