American Cathy Turner defended her 500-meter short-track gold medal with a performance that was protested by opponents.
China's Zhang Yanmei, who finished second, stormed off the medals stand and hurled her honorary bouquet of flowers.
Ms. Zhang pointed at Ms. Turner as soon as she crossed the finish line and made a clipping motion, complaining that Ms. Turner brushed her right leg.
Earlier, short-track world champion Nathalie Lambert of Canada left the track in tears after falling in the quarterfinals -- a fall she blamed on Ms. Turner.
In the final, Ms. Turner tailed Ms. Zhang until making her move on the outside with two laps to go.
Ms. Turner battled elbow-to-elbow with Ms. Zhang through two corners before jumping into the lead.
Ms. Turner's time was an Olympic record of 45.98 seconds.
American Amy Peterson won the bronze.
Deborah Compagnoni of Italy won the women's giant slalom, leading a European sweep of the medals.
Ms. Compagnoni beat German Martina Ertl by 1.22 seconds and Swiss veteran Vreni Schneider by 2 seconds over the two runs.
Ms. Compagnoni's time was 2 minutes 30.97 seconds.
Diann Roffe-Steinrotter of the U.S., winner of the women's super-giant slalom, had a first-run time of 1:23.55, 3.18 off the lead, then skipped the second run, complaining of a virus that has bothered her for several days.
Manuela Di Centa of Italy led from start to finish and beat Norway's Marit Wold by 16.2 seconds to win the women's 30-kilometer cross-country ski race.
Finnish veteran Marja-Liisa Kirvesniemi took the bronze.
Lyubov Egorova of Russia, trying to win a historic seventh Olympic gold medal, finished fifth.
It was the first time she failed to medal in 10 Olympic races.
Ms. Di Centa medaled in each of her five races in Lillehammer.
She finished the women's longest race in 1 hour, 25 minutes, 41.6 seconds.
Japan, with a big lead from its ski-jumping triumph, easily held off Norway on the cross-country trails to defend its Nordic combined team championship.
Based on ski-jumping points earned Wednesday, Japan's three-man team started the 30-kilometer relay 5 minutes, 7 seconds ahead of Norway and lost only 18 seconds of that margin, winning by 4:49.1.
Switzerland won the bronze medal, 7:48.1 behind the winners.
The U.S. ended seventh.
Andreas Schoenbaechler of Switzerland soared past the "Quebec Air Force" to win the men's event.
Mr. Schoenbaechler, currently ranked fourth on the World Cup behind the so-called Quebec Air Force -- Philippe LaRoche, Nicolas Fontaine and Lloyd Langlois -- outjumped them all.
His second jump -- a triple with four twists -- was the best of the day with a score of 121.48 points.
Mr. LaRoche won the silver medal and Mr. Langlois the bronze.
In the women's competition Lina Cherjazova of Uzbekistan won the gold medal after barely qualifying for the final round.
Sweden's Marie Lindgren won the silver and Norway's Hilde Synnove Lid took the bronze.
