Several Phar-Mor Inc. directors and other shareholders could be forced to repay about $75 million that they received from the deep-discount retailer in a 1991 stock buyback.
Last month, a court-appointed examiner in Phar-Mor's Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law case said the closely held Youngstown, Ohio, company was insolvent when it bought back the shares.
The $75 million had been invested in Phar-Mor in 1991 by Corporate Partners L.P., an investment fund affiliated with Lazard Freres & Co., for use in stock buybacks.
Stuart Hertzberg, an attorney for the unsecured creditors' committee in the case, said he will consult with Phar-Mor management about trying to recover the money.
According to legal scholars, it's possible under some federal and state laws to rescind such a repurchase transaction if it took place when a company was insolvent.
Under corporate law, insolvency means an inability to pay debts when they come due in the ordinary course of business or having liabilities greater than assets properly valued.
Bankruptcy law gives the debtor the first option to pursue such an action.
"As far as the $75 million, we are trying to determine what kinds of actions we feel are appropriate," Mr. Hertzberg said.
He added that there also may be profits to recover from shareholders, including Phar-Mor Chairman David Shapira and several directors, on stock-option transactions that, according to the examiner's report, occurred after the options expired.
Moreover, if creditors don't pursue actions to recover the money, Judge William T. Bodoh, the bankruptcy-court judge overseeing the Phar-Mor case in Youngstown, is expected to authorize a court-appointed examiner to do so, according to people familiar with the situation.
Judge Bodoh declined to comment.
The U.S. attorney in Cleveland is also understood to be planning a criminal investigation of the stock-option transactions.
John D. Sammon, assistant U.S. attorney, also declined to comment.
David Armstrong, attorney for Mr. Shapira, said his client shouldn't have to return the money he received in the stock buyback because Phar-Mor "wasn't insolvent at that time.
It was paying its bills as they became due."
In August 1992, Phar-Mor filed for bankruptcy-law protection after disclosing it was the target of a fraud and embezzlement scheme by several executives.
The fraud came to more than $500 million and subsequent accounting adjustments totaled another appoximately $500 million, according to the court report, which was written by examiner Jay Alix.
Michael I. Monus, Phar-Mor's co-founder and former president, was indicted on 129 federal counts and faces trial.
Two former executives, Patrick Finn and Jeffrey Walley, have pleaded guilty to federal charges and are cooperating with authorities.
According to the Alix report, Mr. Shapira and several other directors exercised options to buy Phar-Mor stock in September 1990 even though the options had expired in June of that year.
The report says promissory notes were dated to suggest they had been exercised in June.
Less than a year later, some of that stock was sold back to Phar-Mor, which drew on Corporate Partners' $75 million investment, according to the report.
Mr. Shapira and other directors sold shares back to the company in 1991 for $24.44 a share, for a profit of $13.44 a share, the report says.
Mr. Shapira -- who wasn't found to be involved in the fraud by the court examiner -- has said the board was told by its outside accountants and attorneys that it was proper to exercise the options after they had expired.
Mr. Armstrong, his attorney, said the profits were insignificant given the amount of money Mr. Shapira and other directors lost when Phar-Mor filed for Chapter 11.
However, according to Ronald Coffee, a law professor at Case Western Reserve University, the stock-option transactions might violate state corporation laws covering the duties of directors or the issuance of options.
"If these options are truly invalid -- that is to say, expired -- then it seems to me there might be breach of performance obligations on the part of the directors," Mr. Coffee said.
Moreover, there might be a violation of federal securities laws, he added, if the options were exercised and the stock repurchased by Phar-Mor "under conditions where independent corporate decision-makers were not fully informed."
Separately, people close to the U.S. attorney's office in Cleveland said the government plans to investigate whether Nathan Monus, father of Mickael Monus, profited at Phar-Mor's expense when he was a director.
Mr. Sammon, the assistant U.S. attorney, had no comment on the matter.
The Alix report said Nathan Monus held paid positions with companies that supplied Phar-Mor while he was a director, and may have taken part in transactions that benefited him at the company's expense.
Saul Eisen, attorney for Nathan Monus, who is in his early 70s, said: "Nate emphatically denies any impropriety.
We believe that the Phar-Mor directors knew of Nate's outside interests."
