WHAT international law firm recently handled a $3.05 billion transaction nearly single-handedly and is working on one of the biggest price-fixing cases in a long time?
General Electric Co.'s 440-lawyer in-house law department, which technically isn't a law firm at all.
In-house status, though, hasn't prevented the GE troops led by Benjamin W. Heineman Jr. from developing a reputation as one of the most formidable legal teams anywhere.
GE will need its in-house strength, along with substantial outside help from former Iran-Contra lead trial prosecutor Dan K. Webb, as it embarks on its defense against federal criminal charges that it conspired with De Beers Centenary AG to fix prices in the industrial-diamond market.
Both companies have said they are innocent.
Mr. Heineman was deeply involved in the company's efforts to deter the federal indictment that came last week.
As previously reported in this newspaper, Mr. Heineman placed a last-minute telephone call to Webster Hubbell, associate attorney general, in what turned out to be a futile attempt to hold up the charges.
The executive says he and an in-house team of lawyers will continue to work on the defense.
He adds, "At this point, I still think it's important in high-profile litigation to have a nationally recognized trial lawyer," such as Mr. Webb, a partner at Chicago's Winston & Strawn, to lead the courtroom defense.
BUT IF EVER there was a company that could handle most of its legal work without the help of outside law firms, GE is it.
Mr. Heineman has labored since arriving at GE six years ago to upgrade the talent of the department, and more than half of the company's lawyers have been replaced since his arrival.
Pricey hires from the private bar include former Arnold & Porter partner Ronald A. Stern; Richard Cotton, now general counsel of GE's National Broadcasting Co. unit, who was lured from New York's Dewey, Ballantine, Bushby, Palmer & Wood; and John Samuels, a tax expert, also formerly with Dewey.
To snare them, Mr. Heineman paid law-firm market rates or better, in some cases doubling lawyers' previous salaries, according to people familiar with GE salaries.
Most of the prior GE staffers had come up through the corporate ranks, the traditional career path of in-house lawyers.
Mr. Heineman, whose own dazzling resume lists a Rhodes scholarship, a Supreme Court clerkship, former government posts and a private law partnership, earns $1.2 million a year.
That makes the 50-year-old lawyer the country's second highest paid corporate general counsel after Peter Haje of Time Warner Inc., according to a survey by the trade journal Of Counsel.
Mr. Heineman says the investments in salary and recruiting time have paid off because the company has been able to bring much more work inside.
For example, when GE sold its aerospace business to Martin Marietta Corp. in the $3.05 billion deal last year, GE's in-house lawyers handled so much of the work that the company needed only two outside lawyers -- partner Dennis Hersch of New York's Davis, Polk & Wardwell, and an associate.
"Their total fee was six figures, not seven," as might be expected for such a large deal, Mr. Heineman says.
He says his goal has been to create an "international law firm" that could "basically do almost everything."
But in more than a few prickly cases, GE has still felt the need to go outside.
For example, the company retained the Washington law firm Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering when GE pleaded guilty in 1992 to charges that a GE employee and an Israeli general conspired to divert U.S. funds for personal use and for Israeli projects not authorized by the U.S. government.
The company paid $69 million in fines to settle civil and criminal charges.
And GE turned to Salem Katsh of New York's Weil, Gotshal & Manges when it brought a trade-secrets case against a Korean maker of industrial diamonds.
(Earlier this year, a federal judge ordered that Iljin Corp. of Seoul be banned from making high-grade industrial diamonds.)
Nonetheless, even in such cases, Mr. Heineman says having strong in-house lawyers helps the company better monitor the work of outside attorneys.
Mr. Webb says that so far in the diamond case, he has "probably strategized a lot more" with the GE legal department than he usually does with in-house lawyers.
(Mr. Webb's work for GE derailed his possible appointment as special counsel in the Whitewater affair, after he and Attorney General Janet Reno agreed there "might be a conflict," he says.)
Of course, most legal matters that GE faces involve neither the drama nor the complexity of a price-fixing case or a giant corporate deal.
And specialists in managing corporate legal work question whether a company ordinarily needs as much in-house firepower as GE has assembled.
SOME outside attorneys who have worked closely with GE privately mutter that its top staff lawyers may sometimes be engaged in work for which they are overqualified.
"When you take the GE legal department as a whole, there's almost too much quality for the kind of legal services that are demanded," says a private-firm lawyer who has represented the company.
"You have a surfeit of talent, and there may not always be the flow of high-level matters that would demand the attention of that quality lawyer."
Comments David Maister, a Boston consultant to professional firms, "There is a danger that high-powered in-house lawyers will hoard work inappropriately" and not delegate it to outside law firms, "but that doesn't appear to be the case here."
Mr. Maister adds: "If I were a major corporation, I'd want to err on the side of having high-powered lawyers in-house, because the in-house general counsel has to manage the company's total legal need.
You wouldn't want weak inside lawyers trying to manage strong outside lawyers."
Source: Fraud Survey Results 1993, KPMG Peat Marwick; based on responses from 330 of the 2,000 largest Dun & Bradstreet companies.
Totals exceed 100% because typically companies use more than one method.
