ONE of the country's best known tax law firms, Kostelanetz, Ritholz, Tigue & Fink, has broken up in a nasty fight over money.
To some lawyers, this particular tale of sound and fury signifies what can happen when a firm outlasts its forceful founders and doesn't have a mechanism for allocating power and profits to the next generation.
Like the larger Shea & Gould earlier this year, Kostelanetz Ritholz was torn apart by internal squabbling and not by any financial difficulty.
"It's another example of how fragile law firms are as institutions," says Lawrence Feld, a former Kostelanetz Ritholz partner who left for a larger firm four years ago.
Without the original leadership, "there wasn't enough holding the firm together, and ego and greed overcame the notion that we ought to try and work together and preserve what we have," he says.
The Kostelanetz Ritholz collapse is also a case study of the problems that can plague specialized firms in which partners compete for the same kind of business.
"It becomes difficult because they're all sort of drawing from the same well," says Leonard Rosenblatt, a former Kostelanetz Ritholz associate and now a New York solo practitioner.
EVER since its founding in 1946, Kostelanetz Ritholz focused on what its partners delicately refer to as "IRS controversy work": the defense of civil or criminal tax cases.
Clients generally came to the firm in extremis, referred by accountants or corporate lawyers who had been contacted by the Internal Revenue Service.
Sometimes disputes would arise over which partner would be credited with bringing in a particular client, but these incipient internal battles were quickly put down -- in the early years by Boris Kostelanetz, who was soon joined by the hard-charging Jules Ritholz, who ruled the firm autocratically after the aging patriarch stepped aside in the mid-1980s.
Despite its small size -- about 20 attorneys on average -- Kostelanetz Ritholz was able to build a national reputation, and a virtual trademark attached to its name.
(Some say Mr. Kostelanetz, now 83 years old, is better known in the tax bar than his famous older brother Andre, the late conductor.)
Among the firm's well-publicized recent successes is the 1992 acquittal of the former law partner of Sen. Alfonse D'Amato's brother on charges of tax evasion.
Famous clients have included former New York mayor David Dinkins and the late musician Miles Davis.
But after Mr. Ritholz died of cancer in November, problems began to rise to the surface.
According to one partner, the firm began to feel the pinch of escalation clauses in its expensive lease, and the three-member executive committee made such unpopular cost-cutting decisions as firing support staff and eliminating the perk of free soda.
Bad came to worse two months ago when the troika disagreed about how to divide last year's profits.
Screaming matches shattered the firm's normally sedate conference rooms above the bridges of lower Manhattan.
A few weeks ago, executive-committee member Robert S. Fink, who had been with the firm for 25 years, informed his partners that he planned to start his own firm.
Last week he fired off an angry internal memo after John J. Tigue Jr., a fellow committee member, publicly released the news of his own departure first.
"I was outraged," Mr. Fink says.
"All I'm prepared to say is that I had an opportunity for a better job," Mr. Tigue says.
Mr. Fink, 51 years old, claims he decided to leave after Mr. Tigue and the other member of the executive committee, Peter Driscoll, insisted upon paying themselves more than he believed they deserved.
"They didn't believe in investing in the next generation," says Mr. Fink, who discussed the breakup while propping up his feet on cardboard boxes in his packed-up office.
(He's planning to move within the month, taking about a half-dozen other lawyers with him.
Mr. Tigue has said he will join the white-collar criminal defense boutique Morvillo, Abramowitz, Grand, Iason & Silberberg.
Mr. Driscoll says he hasn't decided where he's going.)
Mr. Tigue won't respond publicly to Mr. Fink's claims.
"No useful purpose would be served by a public airing of our firm's internal affairs," he says.
Mr. Driscoll also declines comment.
AS in a divorce, the real story is complicated, and its recounting varies like the tale of Rashomon.
But one lesson seems clear: A near half-century of history might have been extended if the firm had established a more formal system of governance.
Like many small law firms, Kostelanetz Ritholz never set down principles of profit allocation.
As a result, some current and former partners say, there came to be too much focus on who brought in clients and not enough attention to other factors.
Because partners at boutique law firms vie with each other and not just outside competitors, there needs to be a mechanism to quell internal rivalries, say lawyers at successful small firms.
Some have done just that, enabling them to survive the passing of the first generation, and even to grow.
For example, the New York intellectual-property-law boutique Kenyon & Kenyon requires each partner to give his or her view of how profit shares should be allocated among partners on a percentage-point basis.
Then all the partners' proposals are averaged to determine the actual division of profits.
Ten years ago, Pennie & Edmonds, another New York intellectual-property boutique, abolished a system that gave a tiny coterie of its senior partners virtually total control over the firm.
In its place, the Pennie firm established a rotating compensation committee, which considers hourly billings and other objective factors in setting salaries.
Jonathan Marshall, senior partner of Pennie & Edmonds, says, "We don't want a situation where if something happens to someone, or someone retires, everyone is milling around saying, `What do we do now, boss?'"
