The record slide of the ruble and conflicting reports that pro-reform Finance Minister Boris Fyodorov is about to defect from President Yeltsin's cabinet spotlight the power of the Central Bank and its Soviet-style chairman, Viktor Gerashchenko.
For the past year, Messrs. Gerashchenko and Fyodorov have sparred over fundamentally opposed visions of what role the Central Bank of Russia should play.
Mr. Fyodorov has insisted that the bank's main task should be to defend the stability of the ruble and let credit flow via market forces to where it will be most useful.
Mr. Gerashchenko has favored pumping out cheap credit to subsidize failing Russian industries, collective farms and former Soviet states that in turn can serve as customers for Russian products.
The result of this easy money has been double-digit monthly inflation and a radically devalued ruble since he took charge of the Central Bank in July 1992.
The 18.5% plunge of the ruble against the dollar during the past three days largely reflects market fears that Mr. Gerashchenko and his central-planning inflationary ways are about to prevail.
Feeding these fears is Mr. Gerashchenko's latest coup against reform: a deal he signed Jan. 5 with the former Soviet state of Belarus for a new "ruble zone" monetary union.
It's an agreement likely to carry a high cost for Russia, and, more important, it represents a trend back toward central planning.
This plan for a Moscow-Minsk ruble zone was one of the two affronts to reform policies specified by former reform czar Yegor Gaidar when he resigned as first deputy prime minister Sunday.
And the recent turn of the policy tide in Mr. Gerashchenko's favor is one reason why Mr. Fyodorov, as a condition for staying on in Mr. Yeltsin's new cabinet as finance minister, has been demanding the resignation of Mr. Gerashchenko.
Unruffled, and so far unremoved from his job, Mr. Gerashchenko in a television interview Sunday defended his inflationary central-planning ways.
Mr. Gerashchenko told viewers: "Frankly, I can see no reasons for panic."
But many Russians are scared.
Since Sunday the ruble has lost about 100 points daily against the dollar, closing Wednesday at a record low of 1,607.
Yesterday, Mr. Fyodorov was quoted by the independent Interfax news agency as saying he's willing to bet 100,000 rubles that if he indeed quits the cabinet, the ruble by the end of the week will fall to 2,000 to the dollar.
The aim of the new ruble zone deal is that the National Bank of Belarus will effectively become a ruble-emitting branch of the Central Bank of Russia.
This would create a new channel for the Russian Central Bank to issue subsidized credits, which could be targeted roughly where it might choose.
So Belarus will be ceding its economic sovereignty not simply to Russia, but to the directives of the Russian Central Bank.
In exchange, Belarus will get to cash in its fast-depreciating currency, the zaichik, or "rabbit," for rubles, and then start issuing rubles in the form of both cash and credit.
The implicit understanding is that Belarus will use these rubles to buy goods from Russia -- including desperately needed oil at Russia's below world-market domestic prices.
Much about the deal remains to be firmed up, including the rate at which the initial swap will take place.
But once this new ruble zone swings into action, Mr. Gerashchenko will have expanded his power base beyond Russia's borders, at a cost of subsidies to Belarus that will ultimately come from the pockets of already strapped Russians.
This is exactly the kind of policy that Mr. Fyodorov in particular has been laboring for the past year to prevent.
Under pressure from the Finance Ministry, Mr. Gerashchenko raised Central Bank lending rates to a level that, by the end of the year, was beginning to mesh with normal market rates.
The ruble began to stabilize at about 1,200 to the dollar, and inflation in December dropped to 12%, its lowest rate in months.
While this was going on, however, Mr. Gerashchenko was trying to outflank Mr. Fyodorov's disciplinary efforts, by setting up what was billed last October as "a ruble zone of a new type."
A weaker version of this month's Belarus ruble-zone deal, this previous scheme would have allowed five other former Soviet states -- Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Armenia, Uzbekistan and Belarus -- access to Mr. Gerashchenko's ruble largesse.
Meanwhile, Mr. Gerashchenko also fired one of the two most reform-minded deputy governors of the central bank's board, Sergei Ignatiev.
Removing Mr. Ignatiev allowed Mr. Gerashchenko more room to maneuver toward issuing more credits.
And according to a Swedish adviser to the Russian Finance Ministry, economist Anders Aslund, Mr. Gerashchenko last fall also requisitioned the printing of sufficient cash rubles to fully cover a surprise swap of the other five countries' currencies for new Russian rubles.
The deal collapsed when Deputy Prime Minister Alexander Shokhin added the condition that these republics had to deposit gold or hard currency reserves with Russia's Central Bank as collateral for ruble credits.
The recent Belarus ruble deal, says Mr. Aslund, is "much worse" than the rublezone plan Mr. Gerashchenko was aiming for last fall.
Among other things, its assumption of economic control over a neighboring country fits neatly in tandem with the past year's trend toward Russian military intervention in what Mr. Yeltsin's government has been calling the "near abroad."
And it is the constant see-saw struggle to produce a coherent reform policy that is frustrating reformers.
This is why Russians are frantically unloading their rubles, fearing that Mr. Fyodorov may clear out of the Finance Ministry, leaving Mr. Gerashchenko a clear field to further expand the zone of the depreciating ruble.
