Teamsters President Ron Carey, in a bold attempt to punish his enemies, moved to eliminate an influential management layer at the union.
The step, which would consolidate Mr. Carey's power at the 1.4 million-member union, comes amid signs that a 25% dues increase urged by the president is being voted down by the rank-and-file.
That dues vote is seen as a referendum on Mr. Carey's two-year-old reform effort at the Teamsters.
In a news briefing yesterday, Mr. Carey repeatedly stressed that just having a membership vote on the dues increase was victory enough.
It is the first time in Teamsters history that the membership has voted directly on a dues matter.
Teams began counting the roughly 525,000 ballots late yesterday, and the union won't announce results until later this week.
But Mr. Carey's opponents already have begun gloating that the dues boost, which is designed to keep the union solvent, has overwhelmingly been defeated.
"I think it's going down big time," said William Hogan Jr., chairman of the Central Conference and a target of Mr. Carey's political move yesterday.
Added Gene Giacumbo, a Teamsters international board member and now a Carey foe: "I don't know anybody who voted for the dues increase.
Mr. Carey yesterday began sending teams of his allies to monitor the activities of the four "conferences," the regional bodies that act as a meeting place for Teamsters locals, providing bargaining and organizing support.
Mr. Carey called them "outmoded, undemocratic and wasteful," saying they siphon $14 million of union dues from the members.
"Regardless of the outcome of the dues vote," Mr. Carey said, "the members have made it clear that there is still too much waste, duplication and bureaucracy in the structure."
Mr. Carey said the union's general executive board will hold a hearing April 19 to determine whether to keep the area conferences.
But it seems clear that the board will vote then to eliminate the layer.
Walter Shea, who runs the Eastern Conference, noted that the assault on the conferences came just three weeks after the conference chairmen unanimously urged the rank-and-file to vote against the dues increase.
"This is totally retaliatory," he said.
Day one of the conference monitoring didn't go particularly well for the Carey team, at least in Chicago at the Central Conference once headed by Jimmy Hoffa.
Shortly after noon central time, Mr. Carey's five-person squad went to the conference's offices and announced that they were there to pore over records under the "authority of the general president."
They were blocked by Mr. Hogan from interviewing anyone on the 57-employee staff or seeing paperwork, pending a possible legal challenge from the conference.
Then the team was asked to wait in the lobby, where the phone service suddenly stopped working and the volume of the radio grew increasingly loud.
"Ron Carey is out to destroy the International Brotherhood of Teamsters," Mr. Hogan seethed in an interview.
"He wants to destroy it because he can't control it."
For his part, Mr. Carey said he expected problems.
"Throughout Teamster history, area conferences were part of a feudal system based on local and regional fiefdoms whose chiefs would get together and negotiate over who would hold what conference and international union position," he said.
"None of these positions was elected by the Teamster membership."
While Mr. Carey was elected by the membership -- in the first rank-and-file election in Teamsters history -- he will likely have to figure out what to do without the extra funds from the dues increase.
Those funds were needed to help pay for enhanced strike benefits that are among the most generous in organized labor.
Mr. Carey could call a convention of delegates to ask for money, but isn't expected to do that since delegates, angry over Mr. Carey's tactics, would also likely strip him of power, making the president's post a figurehead.
Mr. Carey also could slash spending at the international level or even sell the Washington headquarters, a splashy building angled to face the Capitol dome.
