The Los Angeles jury in the closely watched murder trial of Erik Menendez was dismissed late yesterday after failing to reach a verdict.
Prosecutors have said they would seek a retrial.
Mr. Menendez, 23 years old, was accused with his older brother of murdering their wealthy parents four years ago.
A separate jury considering the charges against Lyle Menendez, 26, continued to deliberate.
The brothers testified that they had feared for their lives after years of sexual abuse by their father.
The inability of Erik's jury to reach a unanimous decision after five months of trial and 20 days of deliberations shows how complex questions of guilt and justification can polarize jurors even in cases where confessed killers shot at point-blank range.
A guilty verdict on the toughest charge of first-degree murder could have brought the death penalty.
Two juries were used in the case because some evidence was presented against only one brother, though both were charged with the same crimes arising from the same basic facts.
After declaring a mistrial, Judge Stanley Weisberg told members of Erik's jury they could speak to lawyers but instructed them not to speak to the press until the second jury returns.
Some observers suggested that the deadlock meant some jurors in Erik's case gave credence to claims by his lawyer, Leslie Abramson, that the older brother had been the instigator and Erik followed out of panic and confusion, but lacked the intent to kill required for a murder conviction.
The case stemmed from the Aug. 20, 1989, shotgun slayings of Jose Menendez and his wife, Kitty, in their Beverly Hills, Calif., home.
The killings attracted immediate attention not only for their brutality, but also because the senior Mr. Menendez, chairman of the Los Angeles videocassette retailer Live Entertainment Inc., was well known in Hollywood social and business circles.
After initial speculation that the couple had been targets of organized crime, their children -- who stood to inherit a $14 million estate -- were arrested a few months later.
When they conceded a few months before trial that they had fired the shots, it seemed an open-and-shut matter.
But over the course of the five-month trial, a case that had been billed by prosecutors as classic cold-blooded murder was shaped by defense lawyers into a wrenching chronicle of suffering and desperation.
Their lawyers argued that Lyle's and Erik's lifelong experience of sexual and emotional abuse had traumatized them into believing that their father, with their mother's tacit assent, was prepared to kill them.
Both brothers took the stand, tearfully claiming that they lashed out after their father threatened them not to reveal the family's horrifying secret.
The prosecution argued that the allegations of abuse were fabricated, and that the brothers were spoiled rich kids who had acted merely out of hatred and greed.
Although the Los Angeles Superior Court trial isn't likely to break legal ground, it served as an important testing arena for newer theories justifying the use of violence.
Under traditional self-defense doctrine, people may kill only when they have a "reasonable" fear that their lives are in imminent danger.
In such cases, they are guilty of no crime.
But courts in California and a growing minority of states have ruled that people may be partially justified in killing when they have a fear of being killed that is "unreasonable."
Such "imperfect" self-defense cases don't result in acquittals, but the crime is manslaughter, not murder.
Last month Judge Weisberg ruled that the Menendez brothers couldn't possibly have had a reasonable fear they would be imminently killed -- and that manslaughter would be their best hope.
"By their own testimony, they had other means to deal with the threat," the judge said, citing the brothers' admission that they were able to leave their home on the fateful night to go to their car and load their guns.
Before trial, the Menendez case had also raised questions about the legal privilege accorded to conversations between psychotherapists and patients.
In a 1992 ruling, the California Supreme Court broadly interpreted precedent to protect tapes of therapy sessions that had been overheard by a third party -- in this case, the mistress of the brothers' therapist.
However, some tapes were ruled admissible under a "dangerous patient" exception to confidentiality rules.
On them, the brothers confessed to the killings and allegedly threatened the therapist's mistress and wife, but didn't mention sexual abuse.
Last year, Judge Weisberg admitted another tape, on the theory that the defendants had waived the privilege by making their own emotional state an issue at trial.
Perhaps more than any other court case in recent memory, the Menendez trial tapped into a deep vein of national anxiety about such current issues as the pervasiveness of child abuse, the degree to which claims of victimhood can diminish personal responsibility, and even the legacy of the money culture of the 1980s.
Indeed, as the case progressed, Menendez trial-watching became something of a national obsession.
Court TV, which carried the only gavel-to-gavel coverage, reported that it received the fourth-highest Nielsen rating among cable networks during the day, when the trial was generally aired.
Celebrities such as Holly Hunter and Steven Spielberg talked publicly about following the case.
