There is one in just about every office: a desk that doubles as a drugstore.
The contents may vary -- a bottle of ibuprofen and some aspirin in one drawer, a jar of vitamins and some headache powders in another -- but the idea is the same: to furnish a quick remedy for the day's aches and pains.
Says Beth Gault, a hospital administrator in Atlanta: "It seems like everybody in the office is always coming in to borrow my Advil."
The danger of overusing over-the-counter remedies has always been present: If two tablets are good, the thinking goes, four must be better.
What is changing for the worse, according to doctors, is people's desire or willingness to consume these drugs on a regular basis -- almost as a matter of habit.
"I see people out for dinner, who are obviously well and healthy, and between their main dish and dessert, they take five or six vitamin pills," says Bernard Rosof, a gastroenterologist in New York.
"That's overusing."
Americans as a society are overmedicated, some experts say, because of a culture that no longer makes allowances for pain.
Advertisements on television or in magazines, they say, have left the impression that there is a pill to make every pain or problem go away.
Some of these ailments, doctors note, will go away by themselves if left alone for a few days.
But sales of ibuprofen products -- such as Advil, Motrin IB, Nuprin and private-label versions -- have more than tripled since the painkiller was approved for over-the-counter sales nearly a decade ago.
The prescription antifungal drugs that went over the counter in 1990 and 1991, Monistat, Gyne-Lotrimin and Mycelex, have also seen sales skyrocket: Sales of Gyne-Lotrimin and a related product, Lotrimin, for example, jumped to $146 million in 1992 from $64.9 million before the drugs went over the counter, according to data collected by two monitoring companies, IMS America Ltd. and Nielsen Marketing Research.
And more drugs will soon be heading toward over-the-counter status.
The Nonprescription Drug Manufacturers Association says the Food and Drug Administration is evaluating some 25 drug-company applications for medicines to be sold over the counter, compared with 51 approvals in the past 20 years.
Self-medication carried to an extreme can have serious consequences.
Some vitamins, if taken in large amounts, can cause kidney stones, Dr. Rosof says.
Heavy doses of some types of painkillers can raise blood pressure or cause gastric problems.
Even when excessive use of drugs isn't directly harmful, the practice can delay diagnosis of a more serious ailment.
"It certainly would be ridiculous to go to the doctor for every little thing," says Reginald Harris, a physician in Shelby, N.C.
"But all over-the-counter drugs are dangerous if overused, and we are overusing them."
But the drugs' benefits, consumers say, are numerous.
Janice Steege, an Atlanta housewife, says she used to get severe migraine headaches regularly.
Prescription painkillers left her feeling drowsy and afraid of becoming addicted, so she switched to four ibuprofen tablets at the first sign of pain.
"I keep a packet in my purse, a packet in the car," she says.
"And I don't get headaches anymore."
Other consumers use nonprescription drugs to save time and money.
Women with chronic yeast infections, for instance, say they can now treat themselves without going through the bother of an uncomfortable pelvic exam, just to find out what they already know.
"People are busy," says Shirley Cantwell Davis, a registered nurse in Atlanta whose husband takes an aspirin daily to prevent a heart attack.
"We don't want to go sit in a doctor's office all day."
But consumers may nevertheless find themselves in the doctor's office -- either for complications arising from prolonged use of over-the-counter drugs themselves, or for failing to recognize the presence of a more serious illness.
"It's really uncommon for a woman to have more than two yeast infections in a year," says Michael Spence, a Philadelphia obstetrician and gynecologist.
"You're out there and you're buying these creams over and over again, and you're thinking, `I'm getting better, I just have this problem.'
But it could be a symptom of something else, like HIV."
Recurrent yeast infections were recently added to the list of symptoms of AIDS.
Other serious diseases can also remain undetected for a period with the help of nonprescription drugs.
A 32-year-old social worker in Sandy Springs, Ga., recently discovered that her painful menstrual periods, which ibuprofen pills had alleviated for six years, were actually a sign of endometriosis, a condition of the uterus that is now preventing her from getting pregnant.
"The pills took care of the pain, so I never bothered going to the doctor," she says.
"I just thought it was normal."
But many consumers are not about to let any discomfort go untreated, even for a few minutes.
Paige Young, a 28-year-old banker in Greensboro, N.C., recalls a morning when menstrual cramps prompted her to take some ibuprofen tablets.
By the end of the day, she had taken 18 in all and was suffering abdominal pains.
A doctor told her that the ibuprofen had damaged the lining in her stomach.
The experience didn't scare her off.
Far from it.
Now, says Ms. Young, when her cramps begin, she takes three pills -- and then follows up later in the day with six more.
"I don't worry about using too much," she says, adding that the manufacturer's daily recommended dosage of six tablets is probably overcautious.
"It's only nine."
