Atlantic Richfield Co. said Mike R. Bowlin was elected chief executive officer, effective July 1, succeeding Lodwrick M. Cook, who will remain chairman until his expected retirement in June 1995.
Mr. Bowlin is currently Arco's president and chief operating officer and will retain those titles at the oil company.
His election as chief executive had been expected and reinforces Arco's interest in foreign exploration and development.
In an interview yesterday, Mr. Bowlin said that broader international developments will have considerable influence at Arco in coming months, in light of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries' failure last weekend to agree on production curbs, which has dimmed the outlook for oil prices.
As oil prices fell yesterday on news of OPEC's inaction, Arco's stock price joined a broad decline among the major oil companies.
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Arco closed at $98, down $3, or 3%.
Mr. Bowlin said Arco is reviewing its strategic plans in light of lower oil prices, that it is likely to cut somewhat its $1.9 billion planned capital spending this year and that it also is likely to have further work-force reductions, both in its operating companies and head-office staff.
He declined, however, to discuss details, saying that the analysis process will likely take some months.
Among other things, Mr. Bowlin indicated that Arco's prospective public sale of a 17.7% stake in its newly created Vastar Resources Inc. unit may be delayed as Arco watches the market for such stocks.
Vastar was created last year and holds Arco's interests in a vast range of naturalgas properties in the Gulf of Mexico and onshore in Southern states.
Mr. Bowlin, 51 years old, has during his recent career been closely linked with Arco's expansion in overseas petroleum operations and steered the company's accumulation of exploration and production interests in Europe and the Far East.
Prior to his management of Arco's international operations, Mr. Bowlin came up through a variety of human-resource and administrative positions, a route much like that taken by Mr. Cook.
Mr. Cook, 65, will step aside after nearly nine years as chief executive, an office he first held along with the post of president and then additionally as chairman.
In February, he was named chairman of Rebuild L.A., a civic group formed after the 1992 Los Angeles riots to channel reconstruction efforts in the city.
