Maclean Hunter Ltd., reversing its opposition to a takeover, accepted a sweetened offer from Rogers Communications Inc. that would create a Canadian multimedia giant.
Under terms of its revised offer, Rogers will pay Maclean Hunter shareholders a total of 2.89 billion Canadian dollars (US$2.13 billion), or C$17.50 a share.
That includes the C$17 a share it originally bid, plus a special cash dividend of 50 Canadian cents a share.
Maclean Hunter, a cable-television, publishing and printing concern based in Toronto, had rejected Rogers's earlier bid and promised to come up with a competing plan that would give shareholders more value.
But the Maclean Hunter camp suffered several setbacks in recents weeks and Rogers, which has interests in cable television, broadcasting and long-distance and cellular telephone services, had been expected to prevail.
The combined company would serve a third of Canadian cable-TV subscribers, or 2.4 million homes.
Indeed, Rogers actually sweetened its offer very little.
The dividend Maclean Hunter shareholders will receive was substituted for a participation right, which Rogers had initially offered to allow Maclean Hunter shareholders to receive some of the proceeds from any sale of Maclean Hunter's U.S. cable assets.
"Certainly, 50 cents cash up front is easier for shareholders to accept and measure" than were the rights, said Phil Lind, vice chairman of Toronto-based Rogers.
The dividend will be paid with Maclean Hunter's existing cash reserves.
The additional cash payment brought the offer within "the range of fairness that we thought was appropriate," said Ronald Osborne, president and chief executive officer of Maclean Hunter.
Maclean Hunter said its board would recommend that shareholders accept the offer.
Edward Rogers, president and chief executive of Rogers, said he was "spooked" by the possibility that Maclean Hunter would manage to assemble enough interested parties to put together a rival bid.
But industry analysts said there had been little expectation that Maclean Hunter could put together a competing proposal that would have been worth more to shareholders than the C$17 a share offer by Rogers.
Such a proposal became increasingly less likely in the wake of a decision by the Canadian government to close tax loopholes that would have favored Maclean Hunter and a move by the U.S. Federal Communications Commission mandating a 7% cut in U.S. basic cable rates.
The latter move may have impaired the value of and cash flow at Maclean Hunter's U.S. cable operations.
"Rogers seems to have been willing to pay a little extra in return for getting the poison pill settled," said Carla Larson, an analyst with Bunting Warburg Inc. in Toronto.
Maclean Hunter has agreed that the company's shareholder rights plan won't be used to block a bid by Rogers.
In trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange yesterday, Maclean Hunter's shares closed at C$17.125, up 62.5 Canadian cents.
Rogers's widely traded Class B shares finished at C$23.25, up C$1.25.
The compromise was worked out in three days of private meetings last weekend between Mr. Rogers, Mr. Osborne and Don Campbell, chairman of Maclean Hunter, arranged by top officials at Toronto-Dominion Bank.
Mr. Rogers signed the final agreement during Rogers Communications' annual meeting yesterday, and details were announced a few moments later.
A Maclean Hunter flag was hastily produced and draped over the podium beside the Rogers Communications logo.
But when the festivities end, Mr. Rogers will face one major hurdle in his efforts to build Canada's first multimedia giant: the approval of Canadian broadcast regulators.
Mr. Rogers has said he plans to argue to the Canadian Radio-Television and Communications Commission that economies of scale are needed if Canadian broadcasting companies are to be able to compete with direct broadcast satellites from the U.S. and the "voracious advances" of domestic telephone companies.
To win CRTC approval, Rogers could have to commit to investing as much as C$100 million in a fund to strengthen Canadian programming, analysts said.
Mr. Osborne already has extensive experience with the CRTC.
In 1988, Maclean Hunter agreed to acquire Toronto-based Selkirk Communications Ltd. for C$606 million.
The transaction was approved in principle by the CRTC eleven months later, but it took an additional three years for Maclean Hunter to complete a series of asset sales required by the regulator.
Rogers executives "are in for a rare and special treat" in the regulatory maze, Mr. Osborne said.
He will remain with the company to help guide Rogers through the process.
Mr. Rogers declined to give details of discussions that are continuing between Rogers and two Montreal printing and publishing concerns, Quebecor Inc. and Telemedia Inc.
Both companies are said to be interested in acquiring some of Maclean Hunter's publishing operations, although Mr. Rogers said there is no financial pressure on Rogers to complete such sales.
He declined to comment further on the interest of potential purchasers in Maclean Hunter's U.S. assets.
