Charlene Barshefsky's colleagues call her "Stonewall," a tribute to the U.S. official's tenacity in trade negotiations.
So when Sozaburo Okamatsu, a Japanese bureaucrat, met her for talks last year, he wanted to show he was tough, too.
"If you're Mrs. Stonewall, I'm Mr. Stonewall," he told Ms. Barshefsky, who quickly told her colleagues to cut out the nicknames.
"The last thing we want is for Japan to think it's all right to stonewall."
But as the two governments race the clock to try to reach a new trade agreement by Friday, that is precisely what each side is running into: a stone wall.
Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa and President Clinton will try to sign off on a significant trade deal, based largely on the two negotiators' work.
And in the run-up to the summit in Washington, the two sides still face gaping areas of disagreement, chiefly over the U.S. insistence that Japan commit to numerical goals for raising imports.
The Clinton administration, which last summer trumpeted an emerging breakthrough with Japan, still finds that it must redefine the very foundations of the U.S.-Japan trade relationship.
American officials say past deals have done little to pry open Japan's closed markets, and despite early hopes, this one doesn't look much more promising.
The problem, Washington complains, is intransigent career mandarins who try to talk Americans to death -- such as Mr. Okamatsu.
The Japanese contend the Clintonites are wrongly, even dangerously, trying to dictate the terms of trade.
The problem, Tokyo complains, is that U.S. policy is shaped by lawyers with little understanding of Japan -- such as Ms. Barshefsky.
The Japanese "look at policies in their historical perspective," says Noboru Hatakeyama, a recently retired negotiator at Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry.
"However, in the case of the U.S., almost all of their negotiators seem like they came in just yesterday."
Bureaucratic flimflam, replies Bowman Cutter, deputy director of the White House's National Economic Council.
U.S. political appointees can move fast, he says, while "the pace of change is occurring much more rapidly than the senior civil servants in the Japanese ministries are able to adjust to."
The stakes are huge.
Success would ease longstanding tensions, create billions of dollars in business for Americans and accelerate a much-needed restructuring of Japan's economy.
A prolonged trade battle between the world's two largest economies could raise the price of imports and hobble joint ventures between U.S. and Japanese companies.
Ultimately, a fight could even undermine the U.S.-Japanese political alliance while North Korea looms as a military threat and Russia's own chaos is menacing as well.
Ms. Barshefsky and Mr. Okamatsu embody the strengths and weaknesses of their countries and illustrate how the two sides are trying to reach an agreement and why they are floundering.
Each makes demands that feed into the other's fears, leaving each searching for more senior officials -- fixers -- who will override the negotiators.
In the end, the two heads of state just might break the impasse.
The negotiators couldn't differ more.
He is a 56-year-old Japanese who grew up during the American Occupation and recalls eating powdered eggs distributed by GIs.
She's a 43-year-old American baby boomer who quotes John Lennon to explain her negotiating style.
He is a member of Japan's government elite -- a Tokyo University graduate, the son of a MITI vice minister -- who has spent 34 years climbing the ranks at MITI until he became vice minister for international affairs.
She is the daughter of immigrants who made her mark as a high-priced trade lawyer with blue-chip clients and joined the government only last year.
He speaks so softly that he had to utter the threat of "retaliation" twice before any reporters at a news conference noticed.
She is as blunt as an exclamation point.
At Ms. Barshefsky's confirmation hearing as deputy U.S. trade representative, when most nominees are deferential to the point of obsequiousness, she took on Sen. Donald Riegle.
He questioned whether she was an "economic patriot" after The Wall Street Journal reported about her work for foreign clients.
"I do not come to this job to build a reputation," she lectured the Michigan Democrat, whose own reputation was marred by his S&L lobbying.
"I am here because I have a reputation."
She quickly earned a name in Japan as a brawler, arguing toe-to-toe in Tokyo last June with Mr. Hatakeyama, a MITI man widely reviled by Americans as overbearing.
Mr. Cutter, whose great-great-grandfather fought in Stonewall Jackson's brigade, was so impressed that he nicknamed her after the resolute Southern general.
Then, a month later, she clashed with Mr. Okamatsu when the two countries were setting the broad outline for the framework accord.
Negotiators had agreed that Japan would use "quantitative" indicators to measure the openness of its market -- a critical goal from Washington's standpoint.
But Ms. Barshefsky had to quash a 1 a.m. effort by Mr. Okamatsu to ease the terms, especially as they related to quantitative measures.
Ms. Barshefsky honed her negotiating style at the Washington law firm Steptoe & Johnson, where she was co-head of the international law practice.
She advised Boeing Co. on how to attack subsidies to its European rival, Occidental Petroleum Corp. on how to fend off complaints about its imports from Russia and a Mexican business lobby on how to assess proposals during trade talks with the U.S.
But her Japan experience was paltry -- and in that respect she shares an all-too-common failing in American government: lack of institutional memory and knowledge of opponents.
Before taking the trade negotiator's post, she had never visited Japan and had little recent business experience with the country.
Chalmers Johnson, a Japan expert at the University of California, contends that even after the past eight months of negotiations, "Ms. Barshefsky is a lamb going to slaughter."
But she's a quick study.
She came into the administration not knowing much about China, either.
But she devised the administration's get-tough strategy over Chinese textile smuggling, and China agreed to concessions under threat of sanctions.
Mr. Okamatsu, by contrast, knows the U.S. well -- like most Japanese trade negotiators.
One of his first tasks upon joining MITI in 1960 was to try to ease trade frictions by overseeing restrictions on Japanese exports of low-priced silverware.
He lived in New York for three years in the mid-1970s and has warm memories of the way he and his family were received.
He has spent much of his time since then handling bilateral trade disputes in areas such as semiconductors and auto parts.
But Mr. Okamatsu is under fire, too, for the opposite reason that Ms. Barshefsky is.
Even some of his fans say he has the common flaws of a bureaucrat -- an overly conservative approach to problems and dogged loyalty to his ministry above all else.
During the early 1980s, he helped lead MITI's bitter war with the telecommunications ministry over control of information industries.
Mr. Okamatsu says he was drawn to MITI because "I could make lots of important decisions, and do important jobs, from my younger days."
That kind of attitude among the nation's powerful mandarins has spawned the country's woes, many Japanese believe.
"Bureaucrats are like cavities," Masao Ogura, the chairman of a major transportation company, wrote in a recent newspaper essay.
"The best service to the people is to pull them out completely."
After their tussle in Tokyo, Mr. Okamatsu and Ms. Barshefsky made up.
During a negotiating session in Hawaii in September, he sent flowers to her room.
She gave him a pewter paperweight with an engraved eagle.
He brought -- what else? -- a camera.
Aides snapped photos of the pair on a balcony overlooking the Pacific.
Ever after, the U.S. negotiating team called the photos "the honeymoon shots."
But the honeymoon didn't last long.
The next month, the Barshefsky team handed the Japanese a U.S. proposal calling for Japan to increase its manufacturing imports to the level of the biggest Western economies -- a feat that would require at least a doubling of imports.
She intentionally left blanks in the appendix, she says, so the two sides could come up with ways to measure Japan's progress.
But it wasn't so easy.
Instead of filling in the blanks, the two sides got into a nasty, four-month war of words over the use of quantitative measures -- the very commitment the U.S. thought it had secured in July.
What the July accord actually called for was "objective criteria" to measure Japan's progress in opening markets.
The two sides agreed to reach the first batch of agreements this Friday, covering autos and auto parts, insurance, and government procurement of medical and telecommunications equipment.
To the U.S., "objective criteria" meant specific import goals.
To Japan, any numerical measures should be used only as a means of studying past performance.
Mr. Okamatsu argues that rather than set specific targets in a trade agreement, the two sides can talk more about what is causing the problems.
"We call this the cooperative approach," he says.
Nonsense, Ms. Barshefsky snaps.
"That would analyze the past to death, with no link to future change."
Their philosophical breach reflects more than 10 years of trade tensions and mounting feelings of betrayal by both sides.
To the Americans, the U.S. is trying to break the pattern in which Japan would remove one trade barrier and a new one would pop up.
That's why the U.S. is turning to import goals and measurements.
To the Japanese, the U.S. is rejecting free-market principles and seeking to "manage" trade between the countries.
Twice before, Mr. Okamatsu haggled over numbers with the U.S. -- first, over setting a market-share target for foreign semiconductors, and later, a dollar-volume target for U.S. auto parts.
In both cases, the U.S. has regularly threatened Japan with new trade sanctions if it doesn't hit the numbers, which Mr. Okamatsu said he negotiated as voluntary goals.
"Lesson No. 1 and Lesson No. 2 taught me you shouldn't use numbers," he says ruefully.
The pleas of Mr. Okamatsu and others won adherents in Asia, where small countries worried that the U.S. would hit them next with demands, and in Europe, where big nations worried that the U.S. would get a leg up in Japan.
The Japanese campaign against managed trade seemed audacious to U.S. officials; MITI has been, perhaps, the world's most successful manipulator of markets.
Mr. Okamatsu has been involved in everything from promoting the domestic aircraft industry to launching the famous "Fifth Generation" advanced-computing project.
"We have promoted some industries," he concedes.
"But that was done in open-market situations."
Still, the two negotiators worked on their personal relationship, hoping that an amiable bond would help them reach a compromise.
When not in a business mode, both are warm and funny.
During long negotiating sessions, Ms. Barshefsky talked about her two young daughters' affection for origami and drew out Mr. Okamatsu about his family -- a topic he is so shy about that some of his colleagues learned he had a daughter only when she was seen from the office window.
But he endeared himself to the Barshefsky family by sending them a Japanese doll wearing a kimono.
"Since your daughters must have missed you in Tokyo," he told her, "this is something to cheer them up."
In early December, the U.S. launched its own offensive.
In talks with Mr. Okamatsu, cabinet secretaries and political power brokers, the Americans tried to explain that they weren't seeking market set-asides, as with semiconductors.
Rather, they wanted Japan to open its market broadly in a verifiable way.
But the press interpreted that to mean that the U.S. was backing off on its demands, and the U.S. found itself attacked as both protectionist and weak.
Shortly before Christmas, the U.S. intensified its attack, explicitly casting Mr. Okamatsu and his colleagues as the villains in the drama; the goal was to draw their political bosses into the fight.
Trade Representative Mickey Kantor wrote a letter to the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, a business newspaper, accusing Japan's bureaucrats of resisting trade liberalization "because they fear a loss of power."
Ms. Barshefsky and Mr. Okamatsu remained trapped in ritualistic negotiations, which exasperated the hard-charging lawyer.
Two weeks ago, in Washington, Mr. Okamatsu handed Ms. Barshefsky documents contending the U.S. had scored big gains in certain imports, which the U.S. deemed inflated.
"I told him, `We're not making progress; we're going to leave,'" she recalls.
He threw up his hands and said, "I can't do any more."
Later, Mr. Okamatsu said, "That is her negotiating tactic."
But in the end, both sides decided to re-examine the numbers rather than break off the talks.
Now, out of frustration, both sides hope to go over the negotiators' heads, in what might be called a Wizard of Oz strategy.
If they could only get beyond the deadlocked negotiators, both sides think, they may find someone hidden from view -- a wizard or a fixer -- willing to cut a deal.
A Japanese delegation recently asked Robert Rubin, director of the National Economic Council, to come to Japan, figuring that the former Goldman, Sachs & Co. co-chairman would be more sympathetic.
He declined, and Mr. Kantor, the blunt U.S. trade representative, showed up.
The U.S. search for a wizard is going just as poorly.
Last week, Messrs. Kantor and Cutter made the rounds in Tokyo of the top politicians in the government coalition and even the opposition, looking for somebody to plead their case.
But with the cabinet lurching from one political crisis to another, it's not clear who can help.
Meeting Mr. Kantor Thursday afternoon, Mr. Hosokawa felt he was finally ready to focus on the framework, having completed his economic package.
But by Thursday night, the package had unraveled in a dispute over taxes.
Mr. Hosokawa wasn't able to come up with a new plan until yesterday.
Back in Washington, Stonewall Barshefsky prepares for yet-another visit from Mr. Okamatsu, who arrived Sunday.
This time, she says, she will tell him about the time her TV set conked out, just before she was due to leave for Tokyo.
"Could you buy us another one in Japan," her 10-year-old asked, figuring that is where all TV sets come from.
Too expensive, her mother replied, explaining how a closed Japanese market boosts prices higher than they are in Washington.
Mr. Okamatsu is ready with a response: Japanese electronics companies, looking to cut the trade imbalance and raise U.S. employment, actually make lots of TVs in America.
Overall, Ms. Barshefsky's strategy is to hang tough but offer the Japanese a face-saving way out.
Mr. Okamatsu gently suggests he will make sure things work out.
"Our backgrounds are different," he says.
"But fortunately, I have had an experience to live in the U.S.
So I think I know how the American people think."
Says Stonewall Barshefsky: The Japanese will take "until the last nanosecond" before cutting a deal.
