As we in Congress examine President Clinton's health care reform plan in the wake of his State of the Union message, we would do well to recall what he told the nation about its fiscal health last July: Health care reform is key to reducing the federal deficit and keeping it down.
In fact, throughout last year's budget debate, the president made it clear that he was proposing a two-pronged attack on our nation's deficit.
The first step had been presented in his budget plan (primarily increased taxes); the second step would come in health care reform, which would, once and for all, control federal health care entitlements, and therefore, the federal deficit.
"We need to bring the deficit down to zero," President Clinton said.
"To do that, we have to pass health care reform."
By the time the president's health care proposal reached Congress in late October, however, money "saved" from reforming federal health care programs was being earmarked not for deficit reduction but for extending coverage to the uninsured.
The administration's plan is not unique in using whatever savings are achieved via health care reform to extend coverage.
This is true of other reform plans as well, including the GOP Task Force proposal I have co-sponsored.
An important distinction, however, is that the GOP Task Force plan at least recognizes that we cannot add to the current deficit with uncontrolled and open-ended health care entitlements.
It places a spending limit on any new health programs so that they cannot exceed the savings achieved from controlling current health program outlays.
No such mechanism exists in the administration's bill.
Consider the consequences.
The deficit, using the Congressional Budget Office's numbers, will dip slightly to below $200 billion in four years.
Then it begins rising again.
Without the administration's $300 billion in deficit reduction from health care reform, as promised back in July, the deficit will once again reach nearly $360 billion within seven or eight years.
In other words, most of the deficit reduction resulting from the $255 billion in taxes and user fees and further cuts in defense spending adopted last year will still not eliminate the long-term deficit projections.
Failing to control entitlement spending during last year's budget deliberations -- particularly the health care entitlement programs -- will go down in history as the great missed opportunity of the Clinton administration.
How, then, can Mr. Clinton make good on his stated desire to take the deficit "down to zero"?
The first option, obviously, is more taxes.
But, economic negatives aside, there clearly is little political support for more taxes.
Some will argue that we can cut more out of the defense budget.
But the defense budget, already on a downward path since 1985, will be reduced further under the Clinton defense plan.
In just a short four years we will be devoting less than 3.2% of our gross domestic product to national security, a level not seen since 1940.
How about more cuts in other domestic programs?
Not easy.
Just to stay within the spending limits established in the budget, discretionary spending will have to be reduced nearly $20 billion over the next five years -- not counting at least $25 billion for the president's investment initiatives he claims he didn't get last year.
Bob Reischauer, director of the Congressional Budget Office, recently observed: "All the numbers that will be generated for the health care reform debate will be highly uncertain and should be treated accordingly."
Unfortunately, health care estimates in the past have underestimated the costs and overestimate the savings.
Two examples: When the Medicare hospital insurance program was adopted in 1965, it was estimated to cost about $9 billion in 1990; the actual cost was $67 billion.
When the 1990 Budget Agreement was adopted, we thought we had cut the cost of federal health programs by more than $42 billion.
Since then, "technical reasons" have more than wiped out any real savings.
If we repeat history and our estimates are off by similar magnitudes, hold on.
Instead of helping to reduce the deficit, as the administration still asserts, the White House plan could increase the deficit by $400 billion.
National health care expenditures could be more than 19% of GDP.
Therefore we would go through a tremendous shake-up of the health care system, not reduce the federal deficit and not change the proportion of our national wealth devoted to health care.
It would behoove us all, regardless of political affiliation, to be humble in our ability to predict the fiscal impact of any proposal.
Let us hope that the administration, in an effort to guarantee health security to all Americans that can never be taken away, does not ignore our country's economic security, threatened by increasing federal debt.
Sen. Domenici (R., N.M.) is ranking minority member of the Budget Committee.
