The Rose Law Firm has decided to file a complaint with Arkansas ethics authorities about undocumented expenses incurred by former Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell.
According to a lawyer familiar with the Rose inquiry, the firm's partners agreed to send a letter to disciplinary officials of the Arkansas Supreme Court.
Mr. Hubbell failed to document roughly $100,000 in expenses, said a person at the Rose firm, and the firm is concerned that they were personal charges.
Mr. Hubbell, who announced his resignation from the Justice Department last week, wrote checks on the firm's bank account to cover these expenses.
Most of the checks were made out to credit card companies, said the lawyer familiar with the inquiry.
The ethics complaint focuses on expenses reimbursed to Mr. Hubbell by the Rose firm.
The charges weren't passed on to clients, according to the lawyer, but they were incurred while doing client work.
The lawyer said the Rose firm was concerned that Mr. Hubbell had violated an ethics rule barring misrepresentations by a lawyer and decided it had "an obligation to report" the possible breach.
John Nields, Mr. Hubbell's Washington lawyer, declined to comment.
Ronald Clark, the law firm's managing partner, didn't return phone calls.
Rose partners have also been mired in a dispute with Mr. Hubbell about his handling of an unsuccessful lawsuit for P.O.M. Inc., an Arkansas company owned by his brother-in-law.
The P.O.M. case isn't an issue in the ethics complaint.
The Rose firm is the target of investigations by Whitewater Special Counsel Robert Fiske and the Resolution Trust Corp., which is auditing the firm's bills.
Mr. Hubbell was one of several Rose lawyers who did RTC work.
Mr. Fiske isn't looking into questions involving Mr. Hubbell's expenses, but is likely to do so if asked by the Justice Department, according to a person familiar with his operation.
On another front in the Whitewater case, Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman told the Senate Banking Committee that his contacts with the White House over the Whitewater issue were more extensive than he had initially revealed.
In a March 11 letter to committee Chairman Donald Riegle (D., Mich.), Mr. Altman said he had talked briefly last month with Harold Ickes, President Clinton's deputy chief of staff, about recusing himself from dealing with any matters concerning Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan.
Madison Guaranty is a failed Arkansas thrift that has been linked to Mr. Clinton's political campaigns and his investment in Whitewater Development Co., a land venture.
Mr. Altman is acting chairman of the RTC, which last year recommended a criminal investigation of Madison's 1989 failure.
The referral mentioned Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton as possible beneficiaries of allegedly illegal acts.
The Clintons have denied any wrongdoing.
The March 11 letter, which was disclosed Friday by Sen. Alfonse D'Amato (R., N.Y.), marks the second time that Mr. Altman has written Mr. Riegle since his Feb. 24 testimony to report additional meetings between Treasury and White House officials.
"This has been nothing less than a pattern of deception," Mr. D'Amato said of the letter.
Mr. Altman has told associates that he didn't mention the Ickes meeting during the hearing because he didn't consider the five-minute discussion substantive.
"There was no discussion whatsoever of the case itself," Mr. Altman said in his letter.
News of a series of meetings has triggered concerns that the White House or the Treasury may have been trying to halt or stall the Madison investigation.
As a result, Mr. Fiske has called all the Treasury and White House officials involved to testify before a federal grand jury in Washington.
Mr. Altman has said he's confident that the grand jury will clear the Treasury and White House of suspicion that they attempted to manipulate the case.
Separately, Rep. James Leach (R., Iowa) has charged that officials in Washington may have "gagged" RTC officials in Kansas City, Mo., where the Madison investigation was taking place.
Last week the RTC's spokesman dismissed the charge, which Mr. Leach hasn't backed up.
"I don't know what Congressman Leach is talking about," Steve Katsanos said.
"If he would bring any specific examples or concerns to our attention, we would be happy to respond."
Mr. Leach may try to substantiate this and possibly other allegations at a House Banking Committee hearing scheduled for Thursday.
But the Chairman, Rep. Henry Gonzalez (D., Texas), is determined to prevent Madison from becoming an issue.
Mr. Gonzalez has told witnesses to deal only with such questions as the progress the RTC is making in selling the assets of failed thrifts.
The Gonzalez stance could hurt Mr. Altman, however.
The acting RTC chief has told associates that he's looking forward to the hearings to explain his White House meetings and brush away any appearance of impropriety.
On NBC News' "Meet the Press" yesterday, House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) said the House might be able to hold Madison-related hearings after Mr. Fiske completed the Washington portion of his inquiry.
"I think we're going to be talking to the Republican leadership early in the week; we'll be talking with Mr. Leach," Rep. Gephardt said.
"If there's a way to coordinate what they're doing, even in this RTC oversight hearing, with what Mr. Fiske is doing, that's what we ought to do."
