The Treasury Department announced a mandatory survey of U.S. residents' ownership or custody of selected financial claims on foreigners other than long-term debt or equity securities.
Reportable claims include deposits with foreign institutions, financial instruments with an original maturity of one year or less, and loans to foreigners, the Treasury said in announcing the survey in yesterday's Federal Register.
The Treasury said the data will be used to ensure the quality of international statistics, saying such data are essential in compiling the U.S.'s official balance-of-payments account and are important in formulating U.S. international financial and monetary policies.
Late last year, the Treasury announced a separate mandatory survey of foreign long-term securities owned by U.S. residents -- the first comprehensive survey of such holdings since 1943.
Excluded from the scope of the new survey, the Treasury said, are "direct investments, equity holdings, debt securities with an original maturity of more than one year, contingent claims, and off-balance sheet contracts, including unsettled spot and forward foreign-exchange contracts, options and warrants."
The Treasury described those who must respond as "all United States persons who, on a fully consolidated basis, hold for their own account and/or manage for domestic customers the custody or safekeeping of reportable foreign financial assets, if the total face value of such assets -- aggregated over all accounts -- is $10 million or more on an actual settlement basis as of March 31, 1994."
If the reportable foreign assets are less than $10 million, the Treasury said, "the report form must still be returned by the due date with the signature and initials of the authorized official in the places provided."
The Treasury said that those who receive survey forms are required to respond by June 30.
People who meet the reporting requirement and fail to comply may be subject to civil and/or criminal penalties.
Results from the previously announced survey also are due by June 30.
Survey reports are to be submitted to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, International Reports Division, 33 Liberty St., 4th Floor, New York, N.Y. 10045-0001.
