Belgium, citing a slide in business confidence in the country, will offer new tax breaks to multinational companies to stem declines in foreign investment.
The Economics Ministry also will seek to protect foreign companies' coordination centers in Belgium from changes in their tax status.
U.S. firms have set up 100 of the centers, which attract capital.
In a poll by the American Chamber of Commerce in Belgium, 86% of its 1,000 members worried about unstable government policies on taxes and labor.
Some firms perceived taxation as in perpetual upheaval.
Belgium gets only 4% of U.S. direct investment in Europe and in recent years had a net loss of U.S. operation.
So the government will let foreign companies conduct a wider range of low-taxed activities.
Tax breaks, now offered to distribution centers only for handling raw materials and procurement, will be expanded to cover products and services.
France tightened controls on fish imports to placate striking fishermen, who say they are being undercut by foreign rivals' cheaper prices.
The fishermen want price minimums and restrictions on imports from countries that aren't European Union members.
France intensified customs inspections of fish imports, prompting a U.S. Embassy protest that this caused tons of American shipments to rot.
France also will grant import licenses only to companies based in countries that apply production and marketing rules that meet or exceed EU standards.
The German cabinet approved a proposal to tax some foreign tractor-trailer trucks that use the autobahns, just as German haulers must pay to run on European expressways.
The legislation to go to parliament would take effect next Jan. 1.
The bill would cut the motor-vehicle tax on German operators, and assess between $850 and $1,415 a year for an autobahn sticker for trucks transporting goods out of and into Germany via Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg and Denmark.
As international credit-card companies campaign in China to expand in the huge and largely untapped market, fraud has become a serious problem in major cities.
The companies blamed poor communications and weak regulation for the increases in reported fraud.
They said major offenders are merchants who forge payment slips or overcharge.
Credit cards were introduced to China only in the early 1980s.
Credit-card transactions are dominated by foreign visitors.
The Russian government must take a more active role in regulating the economy, such as setting utility and transport prices, Economics Minister Alexander Shokhin said.
After meeting with economists who have proposed a fundamental shift in market reforms, Mr. Shokhin said he agreed with them on several issues.
Reformers in and out of the government have faulted the economists' report, saying it offers Soviet-era solutions to market problems.
The report called for fixing many prices and slowing privatizations, and blamed rising production costs, not monetary growth, for rampant inflation.
The European Parliament urged inclusion of labor laws in the liberalized world trade pact under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The European Union assembly also appealed for the global trade group to ensure protection of workers and their unions.
It approved a resolution demanding provisions barring child and forced labor.
But it rejected a proposal to block the EU from signing the GATT deal unless it allows restricting imports from a country that doesn't respect international labor standards.
The accord contains a loosely worded commitment to social protection.
A 16% holding in the United Electric Power System of Russia is on the auction block, a move toward privatizing what officials said is the world's biggest utility.
Founded in 1920, the Soviet power grid once stretched into East-bloc satellite states and was controlled from Moscow.
Almost all of the former U.S.S.R. is still linked to the grid, but only the part inside Russia is to be taken private.
In the sell-off through March 28, Russians may buy the 16% interest for privatization vouchers.
The government will hold 51% of United Electric until 1995, its workers will get 21%, and 12% is to be offered for sale to private investors.
United Electric, a joint stock company since 1992, values its assets at $40.15 billion, including 684 conventional power plants and 1.5 million miles of cable connecting 69 regional power systems.
While the utility's service is reliable, consumers including state-owned and private enterprises owe $1.78 billion to the company, which owes $223 million to nuclear plants that provide 12% of Russia's electricity but aren't part of United Electric.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
After some vodka workers were idled because of declining sales, Russia's cabinet agreed to cut the excise tax on vodka to 80% from 90% to help distillers compete with cheaper foreign brands.
Domestic prices could fall 5%. . . .
In Rome, 15,000 grape farmers blocked tracks at the main railway station and halted auto traffic in the Italian capital to protest moves to reduce Europe's wine surplus.
