The changing of the generational guard continued at Conde Nast, as incoming president Steven T. Florio promoted the highly successful publishers of Vogue and Glamour to new posts as senior vice presidents.
Anne Sutherland Fuchs, 45 years old, publisher of Vogue since 1990, was named senior vice president, international, working with foreign advertisers.
Jack Kliger, 47, Glamour's publisher since 1988, will be senior vice president, director of corporate advertising.
At the same time, Mr. Florio announced that Ronald A. Galotti, a veteran Conde Nast executive, is returning to Conde Nast to become publisher of Vogue, considered the company's flagship.
As reported, Mr. Galotti quit Hearst Corp.'s Esquire and Esquire Gentleman after six weeks as publishing director.
Conde Nast, the magazine unit of the Newhouse family's Advance Publications Inc., hasn't had anybody at the senior vice president level.
Mr. Kliger will assume some of the duties of Neil Jacobs, vice president, corporate advertising services, who is retiring.
The level directly under president at Conde Nast has been executive vice president, but two of the three people at that level are in their 60s and plan to retire in several years, said Mr. Florio.
"These are the folks Ms. Fuchs and Mr. Kliger who are being groomed to help me run the company for the next 20 years," said Mr. Florio, 44.
"This is a continuation of the generational change that started with me in January."
Mr. Florio was named to succeed 68-year-old Bernard Leser as of April 4.
Mr. Galotti is viewed as an ace salesman and aggressive publisher, but Conde Nast insiders say he rubbed Mr. Leser the wrong way.
Mr. Florio said he wanted Mr. Galotti back, and cleared his return with Conde Nast Chairman S.I. Newhouse Jr.
"We don't have to rehash that Ron had some problems, but he's past them," said Mr. Florio.
"I'm hiring the Ron Galotti who brought Mademoiselle to a new high in ad pages, and who was the founding publisher for the immensely successful Conde Nast Traveller."
