Rush Limbaugh always starts his radio show with a tongue-in-cheek countdown on "America Held Hostage: The Clinton Presidency."
Today, he will note is Day 428, except if you're well-off, own one of 1.25 million small businesses or inherited money last year.
For you, the Clinton years began 447 days ago on January 1, 1993, when you began owing the higher taxes that became law last August.
Retroactive taxation has been enacted before, but it remains highly controversial.
Congress raised minor taxes retroactively 10 times in the 1980s, but they were in the nature of closing loopholes.
Raising tax rates, as the Clinton bill did, has almost always been done in times of national emergency or war.
The last time was during the Vietnam War, when Lyndon Johnson imposed a surtax.
Resentment against Mr. Clinton's back-dated taxation persists.
Rep. Jim Ramstad of Minnesota has 136 co-sponsors on a bill to allow Members to raise a point of order against any bill with a retroactive tax increase.
But the House Rules Committee, that graveyard of legislation, has refused to release his bill.
He is now circulating a discharge petition to force a floor vote.
Georgia Senator Paul Coverdell and California Rep. Ed Royce are asking states to pass resolutions demanding Congress pass a constitutional amendment banning retroactive taxation.
They note that even Russia's new constitution stipulates that "laws introducing new taxes . . . are not retroactive."
A majority of the Georgia State Senate are already co-sponsors of a resolution favoring such an amendment.
The Supreme Court also appears ready to modify its 60-year tolerance of retroactive taxation.
Last month it heard arguments in an estate tax case in which a California tax attorney lost $630,000 for a client because he followed the law to secure a tax break.
The next year, Congress changed the law retroactively, causing the loss.
U.S. v.
Carlton began in October 1986, when Congress passed a sweeping tax reform act.
It allowed the executor of an estate to reduce its tax bill if it sold shares of stock to a company's employee stock ownership plan (ESOP).
That December, Jerry Carlton, a tax lawyer, bought $11.2 million of MCI stock and shortly afterward sold it at a $630,000 loss to the company's ESOP.
However, the tax advantages were such that the estate's tax liability was cut by $2.5 million.
Mr. Carlton's action aroused the IRS's ire, which sought a change in the law.
In early 1987, then Senator Lloyd Bentsen introduced a bill to repeal the deduction -- and make it retroactive.
That fall, Congress approved the repeal and the IRS promptly sent Mr. Carlton a notice demanding $2.5 million.
He paid up, but challenged the retroactive payment as unconstitutional.
The government was shocked when the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals agreed and threw out the back-dated provisions of the Bentsen law.
The court ruled that retroactive taxation can't pass constitutional muster if citizens have no "actual or constructive notice" of the change or rely to their "detriment" on the law as then written.
Many legal scholars say the Supreme Court has hinted it wants to rethink its rubber-stamp attitude toward Congressional tax bills, which have become increasingly complex and capricious, and may well agree with the Ninth Circuit.
Should that happen, the court may even decide to hear a National Taxpayers Union challenge to the Clinton retroactive taxes.
Using the Ninth Circuit's reasoning, NTU argues that no one affected by the Clinton taxes had any notice they would be raised retroactively from January 1 of last year until at least mid-February.
Many taxpayers are of course complying this month with Mr. Clinton's call for retroactive payments.
Setting aside any arguments about taxation levels, we continue to think that this retroactivity component is a truly awful and dangerous precedent to establish.
That the Clinton presidency would so easily reach for a generalized taxation on incomes backward in time is more than a little revealing.
