This is to express my outrage at your Feb. 24 page-one article "Helping Ourselves: U.S. Aid to Russia Is Quite a Windfall for Consultants."
My husband and I have been in Moscow since last summer when the program he heads -- to establish security market infrastructure for Russians to trade their share holdings -- got started.
Half of his team of 25 is made up of Western industry specialists; Russians make up the other half.
We do not fly in and out of the country.
In my husband's contract agreement, there is no provision for travel back home.
After lengthy negotiations, he succeeded in getting air fare for consultants to return home for Christmas.
Being a spouse, I wasn't included in the package.
We personally had to pay for my fare.
Since our arrival here my husband has been working seven days a week, often until late at night, to accommodate the time lapse with Washington, with the fax machine ringing past midnight.
Because of lack of office space, our apartment doubles as his office.
I have been for all intents and purposes his secretary for seven months at no pay.
We live on the fifth floor of a "better" apartment building, which by any stretch of the imagination cannot be considered luxurious: Hallways are filthy, mice have a field day in the kitchen, and it's a good day when the kitchen sink is not clogged or the appliances are not bursting in flames.
Outside our apartment building, in what is considered a good Moscow neighborhood, the courtyard is littered with garbage, rusting car skeletons, wild dogs and cats, and last week, a dead man.
Social life?
There is none because for the most part people we know are like my husband, working all the time.
There is no budget for entertaining in restaurants or at home.
This is a city where a Western-style dinner for two costs well over $100 and where a small iceberg lettuce at the supermarket costs $5.
After a successful career in Wall Street, my husband's current compensation is less in adjusted-infation dollars then he was making 20 years ago.
Money is not the motivation that brought us here.
Your article is downright harmful to me, to my husband, and to the many people I see everyday who are most dedicated to their tasks.
You argue that American aid to Russia has benefited American consultants more than it has benefited Russia and cites the Sawyer Miller Group and myself as a prime example of that: conveyers of American-style advertising about Russian privatization to skeptical Russian citizens who would have preferred to get American help in the form of aid dollars rather than clumsy ads.
However, privatization programs have nearly always been handicapped by the failure to sustain political support.
The Thatcher government in Britain was for a long time the only government to have understood the need for a permanent campaign to market the long-term benefits of privatization.
Share ownership creates new classes of winners and losers in society, and nowhere is the risk of backlash greater than in formerly Communist Russia.
As the voucher-based privatization program began, popular interest, let alone support, plunged.
We were invited by the Yeltsin government to design and implement a major program to reverse this and promote privatization.
We assembled a team of nearly 70 Russian nationals and seven Western communications specialists responsible for implementing the first nationwide communications campaign in post-Communist Russia.
Our efforts for privatization included in addition to intensive advertising: distributing 16 million educational brochures; conducting 35 educational/training seminars; publishing a national newspaper supplement; placing auction information across Russia; and forming functioning shareholders' rights associations.
It was this program, not our salaries, that consumed the majority of the funding.
U.S.A.I.D.'s good sense in financing a communications effort, involving a tiny fraction of its funds, helped salvage the Russian privatization program.
When our first team members arrived in Moscow, vouchers were literally being exchanged on the street for vodka money.
Now the privatization share voucher, despite its very limited real value, is regarded with some respect.
A success amidst the general failure of Russia reform.
From our perspective, the problem of the aid program is not really American consultants, or U.S.A.I.D., but, frankly, the Russian government.
The more the U.S. is able to direct its funding directly towards the emerging Russian private and nonprofit sectors and away from Moscow ministries, the more the assistance will reach those for whom it is intended.
