Nagano is getting ready.
At the train station, a big clock ticks down toward the opening of the XVIII Olympic Winter Games.
The official mascots -- four baby owls called the Snowlets -- beam from pins and posters around town.
Amid the din of cement mixers, the hockey arena is going up, and the ski jump was finished long ago.
Indeed, by some estimates, a fifth of the facilities for the next Winter Olympics already are finished.
Now, Nagano just has to wait another four years.
"We are on schedule," says Kazutami Yoshida, deputy director general of the Nagano Olympic Organizing Committee.
Of course.
This is Japan, a country that knows how to get ready for big projects.
And indeed, Nagano has been working on the Games since June 1991, when it won the right to host the final Olympiad of this century.
But Nagano's preparations have swung into high gear since the curtain went down on last month's Lillehammer Games, and the familiar five-ringed flag arrived here from Norway.
So, when Mr. Yoshida says everything is on schedule, he means he expects facilities to be ready a year early, in February 1997.
The schedule allows time for dry runs and testing, he explains.
However, everything isn't going smoothly.
A variety of problems -- cost overruns, the sharp fall in the dollar against the yen, growing environmental concerns and Japan's spreading construction bid-rigging scandal -- are causing major headaches.
None yet endangers the Nagano Games.
But some Olympic-related developments -- especially the construction of a high-speed rail line to Tokyo and several new expressways -- are controversial, and threaten to transform the rural landscape of this alpine region in the heart of Japan's main island.
While Nagano itself is a drab industrial city, beauty abounds in the surrounding mountains.
The area seems likely to emerge from the Olympics a very different -- and less alluring -- place.
"This is the construction workers' Olympics," laments Kaoru Iwata, a city councilman in the resort village of Karuizawa, which will host the curling events at the 1998 Games.
"It's going to make the quality of life around here worse."
In some respects, the Nagano Olympics mark a step backward from the environmentally friendly Lillehammer Games.
Unlike Lillehammer, the Nagano Olympics will once again be spread among half a dozen venues, posing a logistical nightmare and prompting an avalanche of concrete.
Several billion dollars will be spent on roads, railways and communications to crisscross these rustic hillsides.
The biggest single project is the so-called shinkansen rail project, which will halve the travel time from Tokyo to 90 minutes.
While the new rail link will make the region more accessible for tourists, many residents say the project's damaging environmental consequences will outweigh any benefits.
Until now, for instance, Karuizawa has managed to retain much of its sleepy charm as a turn of the century spa popularized by British missionaries.
A few miles outside of town, however, the rural tranquility is already being disturbed by railway construction noise.
Under current plans, the new high-speed line will divide Karuizawa while destroying a several-mile chunk of chestnut and maple forest.
With the snow crunching below his feet, Mr. Iwata takes a walk in Karuizawa's woods.
From hundreds of trees, small wooden signs dangle like Christmas ornaments, each one marked with a person's name.
The people -- 500 in all -- have each paid the equivalent of $15 to buy a tree on this land.
The idea is to make it harder for Japanese authorities to expropriate this property, which lies directly in the path of the proposed train line.
"We'll chain ourselves to the trees if we have to," says Mr. Iwata.
He says he believes that once the express line is built, the railroad will actually reduce service for locals and many tourists will go elsewhere because of the noise.
If the train must pass, he advocates tunneling under the forest -- which he concedes would add to the project's costs.
But, with the new line already estimated to cost about $40 million for every minute that the route shaves off the the trip to Tokyo, who's counting?
Mr. Yoshida is.
Back at Nagano Olympic headquarters, he is unmoved by environmental laments.
"We are not intending to damage the environment," he says.
"But when we think of the benefits for many people," the line is a plus, he adds.
And indeed, at Nagano's city hall, local-government officials say Olympic-related investment will bring huge benefits.
Already, statistics show employment in Nagano is more robust than in much of economically gloomy Japan.
Looking at figures on the economic impact of previous Olympics, Tomio Miyashita, vice director of the Nagano city's Olympics department, says the Games will mean a multibillion-dollar boost.
"We will build facilities we couldn't do in 10 or 20 years," he says.
Local businessmen can't wait.
They see the Games tranforming Nagano into a winter playground for hundreds of millions of Asian tourists.
"We can become a mecca for winter sports in Asia," says Nagato Mitsui, deputy general manager of Nagano's Royal Hotel.
But even if macroeconomic benefits eventually prove huge, the organizing committee's Mr. Yoshida concedes that current economic reality is blowing a big hole in the Games' budget forecast.
Revenues will be lower than expected, and costs higher.
The dollar has fallen more than 20% against the yen since Nagano set its operating budget for the Games.
And if the 16% cost overrun on the ski jump is any guide, there may be a significant deficit on the 76 billion yen ($723.4 million) operating plan.
Mr. Yoshida is looking for ways to cut costs to avoid turning what already looks like the most expensive Winter Games into a financial fiasco.
Although CBS Inc. recently agreed to pay a record $375 million for U.S. television rights, he says Nagano needs big sponsorship and marketing deals to compensate for the yen's surging value.
Meanwhile, Nagano is trying to hold the line on expenses and wants to make facilities simpler and cheaper.
Mr. Yoshida says the organizers are considering abandoning plans to build a broadcasting center.
They may put it in a disused textile mill instead.
There are signs as well that Nagano may back off from its unusual pledge to help athletes pay for some travel expenses.
There is one other Olympic-sized worry, a little more difficult to manage: how to top the hospitality and enthusiasm of the Norwegian hosts and fans, who helped make the Lillehammer Games such a success.
Over at City Hall, Mr. Miyashita says plans are already under way to boost foreign-language instruction and to attract English-speaking volunteers from across Japan.
But, he concedes that in contrast to Lillehammer, people in Nagano have less experience with foreigners -- and it will be a challenge to kindle as warm a welcome.
"We are going to have to make a big effort to do that here," he says.
