Microsoft Corp. founder Bill Gates is asking publishers to pay $2.5 million for a book he will write about the information superhighway.
Publishers have been sworn to secrecy about the project, but people who have seen the proposal say the book will explain the technology and Mr. Gates's vision for it to the average technophobic American.
The $2.5 million isn't a firm price, but what Microsoft "says it believes the book is worth," one publishing source said, and the price could go higher in a competitive auction.
Mr. Gates wouldn't write the book alone, but would get help from a journalist and another Microsoft executive.
The journalist is Peter Rinearson, formerly with the Seattle Times, and the executive is Nathan Myhrvold, a senior vice president of advanced technology at Microsoft.
Jonathan Lazarus, vice president of systems strategy at Microsoft, confirmed that the book proposal is being shopped to publishers.
He said Mr. Gates will be the principal writer, and both Mr. Gates and Mr. Myhrvold plan to donate their proceeds to charities to be named when a deal is set.
"We think this book can play a major role in influencing the view of what this superhighway can be," Mr. Lazarus said.
While some in publishing say they think the book would be a valuable service and Mr. Gates' interpretation would be especially worthwhile, others fear the exercise might be self-serving and wonder how far he would go in detailing his vision of the future to competitors.
"What he's really doing is promoting his agenda," said Bob Stein, co-founder of electronic publisher Voyager Inc.
"This is the equivalent of having Henry Ford write a book about the development of the highways.
I guess that's interesting if you want to know what to worry about."
But Mr. Lazarus said, "If people think the book is self-serving, than we will have failed.
If I were a competitor, I'd sure want to read it, because he Mr. Gates isn't planning to hold much back."
Mr. Lazarus said this book won't go the way of an autobiography for which Mr. Gates had been interviewing potential coauthors about four years ago.
"He never fully committed to that project, but for this, much of the work is already done," Mr. Lazarus said.
He said Microsoft hopes the book will be in stores by year end.
