Are the Biker Mice From Mars about to take over the planet?
If not, perhaps the stock price of Lewis Galoob Toys will retreat from outer space.
Big hopes for Galoob's latest toy, and a tie-in TV cartoon, have boosted the stock while generating a shower of upbeat Wall Street opinions on Galoob.
At 9 5/8, off 1/8 yesterday, the stock is more than triple the past year's low.
Galoob is right on track according to Chief Executive Officer Mark Goldman, having met its sales target of $2 million of Biker Mice in 1993.
And Galoob has consistently said it wouldn't really ramp up the line until 1994.
So what's the problem?
Some big retailers say they have no plans to carry Biker Mice at this time, perhaps because the much-admired mice are being overshadowed by a rival product, the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers from Bandai of Japan.
For Galoob, a lot is riding on Biker Mice.
The company is expected to report next month an annual loss of roughly $1 a share -- about 90 cents a share wider than some analysts estimated three months ago.
Galoob can't ride along forever on sales of its major products -- Micro Machines, a line of miniature vehicles, and Game Genie, a video-game accessory that makes it easier to score points.
"Galoob's share price makes sense only if Biker Mice is a huge hit," says Paul Valentine, toy analyst for Standard & Poor's Corp.
"But after the success of Power Rangers, you have to be skeptical that another male action figure is going to come in and control the category."
New England-based retailer Bradlees Inc., with 126 stores, has this to say about Biker Mice: "Based on sales trends this Christmas, Bradlees has made a decision not to carry it in 1994."
Some retailers say Biker Mice were slow getting to market.
They say they didn't get the toys until the second week of December -- at reduced allotments.
For instance, a group of 57 Toys "R" Us stores in Southern California ordered and were promised 16,000 units by Christmas, according to people familiar with the order.
But the stores got only 2,300 pieces.
In New England, Stephen Sandberg, a toy buyer for smaller stores, says he was to have received 4,800 pieces but got less than one-tenth of that -- two days after Christmas.
Some retailers suspected production problems, or even that Galoob might have been hoarding the muscular-looking mice.
Mr. Goldman denies both notions, saying, "We did not want to take Biker Mice and put it into the Christmas chaos."
Last week Galoob took the unusual and costly step of making Biker Mice deliveries to each of Melville's 1,200 Kaybee Toy & Hobby stores.
Did the move suggest that not every retailer was clamoring for the line?
Mr. Goldman says the goal was to ensure Kaybee had supplies when a Biker Mice TV ad campaign started this week.
At Kmart, "we're taking a look at the line and seeing what's happening with {Biker Mice} merchandise.
That's as much as I can say right now," a spokeswoman says.
Kmart doesn't currently carry the toy.
Biker Mice cartoons have slipped to a 2.1 rating from October's 2.5 peak, according to A.CC Nielsen.
(That means 2.1% of all households with TVs watched.)
Saban Entertainment's Mighty Morphin Power Rangers show has a 5.6 rating.
Mr. Goldman says early Biker Mice sales beat expectations.
"The challenge for us is to continue to market the line, {which} has the potential to generate $100 million in annual sales" sometime after 1994, he says.
Sean McGowan at Gerard Klauer Mattison recommends Galoob, but says he urges investors not to buy if they don't think Biker Mice will be a hit.
He envisions about $45 million in Biker Mice sales this year; Seidler Co.'s Laurie Smith expects $25 million at most.
By contrast, the year's sales for Power Rangers could top $100 million, Mr. McGowan figures.
The factory making Biker Mice in Guangzhou, China, is owned by Jetta Co. of Hong Kong.
"Galoob told me this is the next Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, so, make many Biker Mice," says Patrick Luke, Jetta's director of cost and appraisal.
"From what I hear, it's not selling that well."
By the skin of their teeth, professional bears posted an annual profit, their first in three years.
The bears known as short-sellers bet on selected stocks to decline.
Drops in Eagle Hardware, Dell Computer and Kendall Square Research, among others, helped the shorts' cause in 1993.
The Rockbridge short-sellers' index, which measures performance for 20 leading short-selling firms, inched up 0.2% for the year, thanks to a 2% gain in the fourth quarter.
The index is compiled by Rockbridge Partners in Charlotte, N.C.
