Juries in personal-injury cases appear to have had a significant change of heart: In recent years, they have been rejecting injury claims more often.
According to a study of more than 90,000 cases by Jury Verdict Research, a court-watching group, juries in 1992 sided with alleged personal-injury victims in about 52% of suits that went to trial, down from 61% in 1987.
Over the same period, plaintiffs' chances of winning product-liability suits declined to 43% from 54%.
In cases against consumer-products manufacturers, the drop was even sharper: Consumers won about 39% of these cases in 1992, down from 55% in 1987.
Jury specialists say the powerful and deep-pocketed advocates of reform have spread their message so successfully in the media that juries have changed their behavior.
"The publicity of the business and insurance groups has played a major role in shifting both public and judge opinion," says Theodore Eisenberg, a professor at Cornell Law School.
"Either there was a liability crisis or people got sold one, and attitudes changed in a way that led to more victories for defendants."
Take the 1992 case filed against Ford Motor Co. by a woman who was injured in a Bronco II.
Several jurors remarked during the discussions that people are too willing to "sue over the slightest little thing even though it might be their fault," says Paul Gillihan, a member of the jury.
"They even made comments that this is why things cost so much, because people sue and companies have to raise their prices," adds Mr. Gillihan, an accounting supervisor.
Ultimately, the Batesville, Ark., jury ruled against the woman.
Although many jurors believed that Ford had acted negligently in some ways, "we all agreed that the girl probably was driving too fast," Mr. Gillihan says.
About 75% of jurors interviewed by the consulting firm FTI Jury Analyst Group say they believe jury awards are too large, and more than two-thirds of the jurors say there are too many lawsuits, according to Arthur Patterson, director of the Annapolis, Md.-based firm.
Watchdog groups decry the shift.
"The enemies of the civil justice system are the entire medical establishment and the entire business and corporate establishment," says Pamela Gilbert, a lobbyist for Public Citizen, a consumer group in Washington.
"They have virtually unlimited funds."
In recent years, business coalitions have supplemented their legislative lobbying with a variety of tactics aimed at ordinary people, such as newspaper advertisements and billboards decrying lawsuit abuse.
Although such public relations strategies appear to be improving their record, business groups say they have no intention of dropping their legislative efforts.
For one thing, they say that damage awards are still too high.
And they are quick to discount their success, arguing that the pro-defendant trend doesn't reflect a change in jurors' attitudes as much as a refinement of defense strategies.
Victor Schwartz, a Washington lawyer and lobbyist for the defense bar, says the decline in jury awards is partly the result of escalating legal costs.
Companies are settling more cases and "going to full-scale war only on the cases where we are convinced . . . that we can win," he says.
"You know the old joke," Mr. Schwartz adds.
"`You won your case.
Here's a legal bill for $1 million.'"
Businesses aren't the only defendants having greater success with juries, according to the Jury Verdict study.
It found that doctors and hospitals are prevailing more often in jury trials of medical-malpractice cases.
In 1987, patients won 42% of malpractice cases against doctors and 59% of cases against hospitals; by 1992, those numbers declined to 25% and 50%, respectively.
While jury specialists cite clear evidence that publicity about the so-called litigation explosion has affected jurors' opinions, those beliefs don't necessarily affect jurors' votes in any particular case, of course.
Consider the experience of Don Keenan, an Atlanta plaintiffs' lawyer, who recently won a $2.5 million jury verdict in a malpractice suit against an obstetrician.
During jury selection, Mr. Keenan says one man who was chosen as a juror shouted at him, accusing lawyers of bringing too many such lawsuits.
"If this keeps up, you lawyers will have to deliver babies," the man said.
Three weeks later, the man voted along with the rest of the jury in favor of the plaintiff in the case.
"He was convinced that this case was the exception to the rule," says Mr. Keenan, who interviewed the jurors after the trial about the reasons for their decisions.
The results of the survey seem likely to influence the debate over pending proposals to alter state and federal liability laws.
Many business and insurance groups have lobbied for change by arguing that juries are biased in favor of plaintiffs and against doctors, hospitals and businesses.
Some states have passed legislation that makes it more difficult for juries to side with the plaintiff.
They have, for example, raised the standard of proof in product-liability cases, requiring juries to rule against plaintiffs unless they can prove that there was a reasonable alternative to the way the product at issue was manufactured.
A $20 million jury verdict was thrown out on appeal in a case alleging that the drug Bendectin caused birth defects.
The Texas jury in 1991 found that use of the antinausea prescription drug by a pregnant woman caused her baby to be born with no fingers on one hand.
The intermediate state appeals court in Corpus Christi, however, found that the evidence at trial wasn't sufficient to back the verdict.
Bendectin, which was taken off the market in 1983, has been the target of suits filed by at least 1,800 women who took the drug during pregnancy.
Other appeals courts have ruled similarly to the Texas court in cases against Bendectin's former maker, Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals Inc., a unit of Cincinnati-based Marion Merrell Dow Inc.
In the 36 cases in which a judgment has been reached, only one currently stands against the company, said W. Glenn Forrester, corporate counsel for Marion Merrell Dow.
That judgment, involving a case in the Washington, D.C., area, is on appeal.
The 36 cases include one in which more than 1,000 federal lawsuits were consolidated and dismissed.
In the Texas case, the appeals court criticized some of the expert testimony presented against Merrell Dow as being "wholly without any foundation or underlying scientific support."
The court said, "Having scrutinized the record, we hold that, despite the use of magic words by the plaintiffs' experts, there is no evidence of that causal link" between Bendectin and human birth defects
Bob Hilliard, a Corpus Christi attorney for the family who brought the suit, said the decision will be appealed to the state Supreme Court.
Barry Nace, a Washington attorney who also represented the family, said the court had unfairly criticized the plaintiffs' scientific witnesses.
He said the witnesses called by the family "testified that within a reasonable degree of certainty, based upon the data that are there, Bendectin did cause this defect."
Mr. Nace faulted the court for ignoring issues of credibility that he said were raised about the company's own witnesses.
Mr. Forrester said the company believes the drug is safe.
"The company voluntarily ceased marketing the product in 1983 because there was so much controversy," he said.
About 25 Bendectin lawsuits are pending, he said.
(Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals Inc. vs. Havner, Court of Appeals, Thirteenth District of Texas, Corpus Christi, No. 13-92-540-CV)
Wade Lambert contributed to this article.
