Q: Is there a company to which you sometimes liken the NBA?
A: Well, I often say, when I'm asked to describe what we do, that our aspiration -- our focus -- is like the Disney Co. . . .
Q: So you modestly admit you have 27 Magic Kingdoms, I take it?
A: Yes, or we try to make them into 27 Magic Kingdoms.
They don't have quite as many annual admissions as Disney World does, but they are getting close.
Thus did Commissioner David Stern recently define his National Basketball Association.
The exchange also defines his current predicament.
He really can now immodestly compare his league to the theme-park giant.
But he made the statement from a witness stand in Chicago, one of several fronts where business NBA-style is embattled.
As the NBA begins its All-Star Weekend today in Minneapolis, Mr. Stern stands upon a slippery pinnacle.
The extravaganza symbolizes everything he has accomplished as sport's top chief executive.
It is a sponsors' orgy, complete with the Schick Rookie Game, AT&T Long-Distance Shootout and Gatorade Slam-Dunk Championship.
The big game will be a major prime-time event for NBC and 16 foreign networks.
But off the court, the NBA is under stress from success.
The league's owners will no longer jump through hoops at Mr. Stern's every command.
The Portland Trail Blazers defied him last year to exploit a loophole in the league's salary cap.
Other teams have since stampeded through it, signing rookies to mega-deals and giving long-term contracts to established stars like Larry Johnson, who is getting $84 million over 12 years.
The Chicago Bulls have also defied Mr. Stern, refusing to reduce the number of their games carried on superstation WGN-TV and igniting a long, bitter legal battle.
And the players, when not jamming basketballs in Minneapolis, will be holding restive meetings.
Their union begins contract talks in March, and their new negotiator, Charles Grantham, will put forth a huge demand: The salary cap, the draft, the league's licensing agreement -- all must go.
The NBA's long era of good feeling may already be gone.
"Basketball has been in its golden age over the past 10 years," says David Falk, agent to Michael Jordan, Patrick Ewing and other stars.
"But the dynamics have changed substantially over the past 12 months."
The most obvious change is the retirement of Mr. Jordan, the league's top attraction.
But a bigger issue for the NBA is coping with the strains from its new riches.
As it has become a money-making machine, it has become prone to fractious scuffling for the rewards.
This means ever more frequent violations of Mr. Stern's cardinal rule: Keep the ugly side of the business out of the fans' sight.
That is an under-recognized reason for the turnaround of the NBA, which in the early 1980s had five teams on the verge of bankruptcy and 75% of its players, by some reports, on drugs.
"David had a philosophy," says Rick Welts, president of NBA Properties Inc., the league's merchandising arm.
"If everything we did focused on what happens between the four lines of the court and we could keep the intramural ownership issues out of sight, then people would discover this great game."
Mr. Stern got started down that path by creating a partnership between players and owners: a guaranteed 53% of ticket and TV receipts for the athletes.
That bought labor peace (pro basketball is the only major sport never to have had a strike) and stabilized league finances.
Then he turned the NBA's Fifth Avenue headquarters into a star-making factory, creating new demand for the game and developing products and programming to satisfy it.
The NBA hatched a videocassette business, produced its own youth-oriented TV show ("Inside Stuff"), put out its own basketball cards and made its teams' arenas like theme parks, with each game a slick show.
Mr. Stern's staff, numbering under 50 when he became commissioner in 1984, has grown to 450.
It dwarfs that of other leagues (Major League Baseball has 150), but the NBA isn't like other leagues.
Its approach grew out of its Valley Forge period, when it had to throw its own people at an opportunity or problem because nobody else would bother.
For instance, when the NBA's TV ratings were puny, staffers pitched in to help sell ad time for CBS, its network then.
They became masters at selling TV time in connection with numerous other sponsorship tie-ins, which is now the NBA's hallmark.
McDonald's Corp. buys time on NBA network games, hosts the McDonald's Open international tournament, puts out NBA trading cards and, in some cities, names sandwiches after NBA stars.
Mr. Stern convinced McDonald's that the NBA could project the image and reach the audience the fast-food chain desired.
"Basketball took away the all-American, apple-pie image from baseball," says David Green, a senior marketing executive at McDonald's.
"David Stern is one of the best brand managers there is."
Nothing displays Mr. Stern's ability to hype both his players -- as being good-guy supermen -- and his league -- as reaching a vast, desirable 18- to 34-year-old audience -- more than the advertising on this year's Super Bowl broadcast.
Five of the seven athletes featured in the commercials were pro basketball players.
The problem for Mr. Stern now is keeping control of the star machine he has created.
That task is evident in a long-running dispute with the Chicago Bulls.
Michael Jordan's ascendance made their local TV rights a hot property.
But the holder, Tribune Co.'s WGN, is a cable-TV superstation.
In 1990 the NBA ordered superstation telecasts cut.
It didn't want Mr. Jordan over-exposed, reducing his value as an attraction for network games.
The Bulls and WGN have battled the NBA in court ever since.
So far, the team has won every round.
The battle has cost the league millions of dollars in legal fees and a huge amount of Mr. Stern's energy.
In January alone, the latest trial chewed up 10 days of his time.
To some, it appears a personal test of wills between Mr. Stern and the canny Bulls owner Jerry Reinsdorf.
To the commissioner, however, what is at stake is the league's ability to hold reign over broadcast rights in the brave new world of television.
As he told one owner: "With a future of 500 channels and games on demand, I have to be in a position to control it."
No commissioner is more TV-conscious than Mr. Stern.
His league is involved in 80 international broadcast contracts, which take its games into 141 countries.
The globe is a vast new source of TV revenue, and from that exposure also flows a vast licensing business.
NBA-licensed products will generate $2.8 billion in sales during the 1993-94 season, $300 million of it from overseas.
Five years ago, the foreign total was only $16 million.
It was the NBA's 1992 Summer Olympics "Dream Team" that made the league's international TV and product business surge.
This summer, the league will field a sequel -- "Dream Team II" -- at the World Championship games in Toronto.
The tournament is nominally run by the International Basketball Federation, but it is really a David Stern production.
The NBA is lining up sponsors, running the event and handling TV rights.
Mr. Stern, contends Marc Fleisher, a player agent, "is looking to control basketball on a world-wide basis."
The attraction is clear.
As a global "brand," as NBA people sometimes call their product, the league can even more firmly hitch its wagon to global consumer-goods companies.
This week, it announced a major international sponsorship deal with Coca-Cola Co.
But the hazards of such alliances have also become clear, as conflicts begin to crop up.
In 1992, Nike Inc., the Beaverton, Ore., athletic-footwear company, balked at letting Michael Jordan appear at Olympics medal ceremonies in Reebok togs.
Shaquille O'Neal of the Orlando Magic was left off Dream Team II because he wouldn't renounce his commercial ties with Pepsi during the tournament.
(The NBA, which lined up Coca-Cola as a sponsor, insisted he and other players do so.)
"It's a negative, because it reminds people of the outrageous money involved," says David Burns, founder of Burns Sports Celebrity Service Chicago, which casts athletes for commercials.
For years, Mr. Stern was able to keep owners' spending in check through adroit handling of the salary cap -- letting it bend plenty but never break -- and through sheer force of will.
But that may have ended last summer when the Portland Trail Blazers signed a free-agent center named Chris Dudley.
The team's payroll limit wouldn't really accommodate the seven-year, $11 million contract offered.
But Portland gave Mr. Dudley an option to leave after one year, an arrangement that the team claimed, under the cap's arcane rules, made his salary fit.
The NBA disagreed and disallowed the contract.
A federal court overruled the league, and a raft of copycat deals soon dwarfed Mr. Dudley's, including a combined $163 million to the league's top three draft picks, Chris Webber of the Golden State Warriors, Shawn Bradley of the Philadelphia 76ers and Anfernee Hardaway of the Orlando Magic.
"The owners are enjoying so much prosperity they're beginning to assert their independence," says Mr. Falk, the agent.
"You're seeing a strain on the binds that have kept everybody in check.
The question is: Can David still hold them together?"
Mr. Stern must also try to hold onto labor peace.
The league's agreement with the players expires in June, and Mr. Grantham wants what is left of the salary cap to expire with it.
"It was never viewed that we'd have the cap forever," he says.
"Conditions required it in the early '80s, but they certainly don't now."
Mr. Grantham has been girding the players and their agents for battle, distributing economic data in a packet called "Countdown to 1994."
It says that the average player's salary has risen fivefold during the cap era, to $1.4 million, but team values have risen tenfold.
(The next new franchises will cost $125 million.)
It says that 22 of the 27 teams will be over the cap next season, severely limiting free-agent movement.
It also says that of the $2.8 billion in NBA-licensed merchandise to be sold this season, players will collect just $500,000 in royalties.
Scoffs Mr. Stern: "If you're a union whose players are earning $2 million a year and you need something to rally them, you say, `You're not getting enough T-shirt money.' " (Mr. Stern's contract pays him $27.5 million over five years.)
But the players have already been stirred by Mr. Grantham's discovery in Bulls-WGN court documents that the owners had underreported revenue for cap purposes.
That led to a $62 million settlement in 1992.
"The state of trust isn't what it was," says Isiah Thomas, the union president and Detroit Pistons guard.
"The players have a level of discomfort they didn't before."
Certainly the level of rapport between the principal negotiators has diminished.
Larry Fleisher, the union's chief of 25 years, and Mr. Stern, a league lawyer dating back to the 1960s, were familiar adversaries.
They had legendary screaming matches, but they worked out the salary cap and always preserved labor peace.
Mr. Fleisher died in 1989.
"You had two classic New York guys who were able to talk tough but, at the end, always come to an agreement," says one person familiar with the relationship.
"You don't have that common starting point with Charlie Grantham.
Charlie may feel he has to do something dramatic to make his mark."
Mr. Stern claims to be sanguine about this and just about any other potential peril on the horizon.
Only one thing can haunt him in the darkest hours of the night, he allows, in this era in which the NBA shines brightest.
"The worst fear I have," he says, "is that all the parties who were essential for our success forget how we got there in the first place."
