Researchers said they took a key first step toward creating electronic microchips that use living brain cells.
The researchers said they had learned how to place embryonic brain cells in desired spots on silicon or glass chips and then induce the brain cells to grow along desired paths.
The scientists hope to be able within the next six to 12 months to get the brain cells, or neurons, to grow connections to each other that will crudely mimic the circuitry that neurons form in the brain.
"I want to emphasize this is fundamental research," said biophysicist David L. Stenger of the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, worried that the research might be misinterpreted as a fledgling effort to make an artificial brain.
"We're working with systems where you can investigate how neurons work," he said.
As the researchers study how the biological neurons function and connect with each other on the chips, they should learn how to make better networks of artificial neurons that electronics and computer developers are currently trying to engineer, Dr. Stenger explained.
Nevertheless, their basic research could lead to some useful bioelectronic devices, said Dr. Stenger and his collaborator, chemist Jay Hickman of Science Applications International Corp. in McLean, Va., a "high-tech" contract-research company.
For example, the pair are collaborating with researchers at Stanford University to develop a sensor composed of nerve cells on a chip that would sound the alarm when it detected a nerve poison, such as nerve gas used in chemical warfare, a bioelectronic variation of the "canary-in-the-coal mine" idea, Dr. Stenger said.
It also may be possible to eventually make "biochips" that drug makers could use to see if new compounds might interfere with, or perhaps enhance, functions like memory or learning.
Drs. Stenger and Hickman, who are funded largely by the Office of Naval Research, are developing the biochips in collaborations with scientists at the National Institutes of Health and at the University of California-Irvine.
The scientists' progress toward biochips was disclosed in the February issue of Signal magazine, a publication of the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association, composed of electronics specialists in the military and its private contractors.
Drs. Stenger and Hickman said they found a way to get brain cells from a rat embryo to grow on exactly the right spots on a chip and then to get these neurons to send out connections along desired paths to neighboring neurons.
The pair have improved upon and greatly simplified a technique first described in 1988 by researchers at AT&T Bell Laboratories, a unit of American Telephone & Telegraph Co.
The two scientists said they take a chip of silicon or glass and coat it with a single layer of molecules of a chemical that promotes the growth of neurons.
They used one called DETA (for diethylenetriamine) in their experiments.
A microscopic "mask" is laid on the chip that shields both the spots where the scientists want the neurons to settle and the channels they want the neurons to follow to make connections.
An ultraviolet laser removes the unshielded DETA, and the cleared sections are filled with a layer of molecules that discourage neuron growth.
Embryonic rat neurons are more or less sprinkled on the chip with the hope that those landing on the DETA spots will "take" and grow.
"It's kind of like when you were a kid and you put glue on a piece of paper and sprinkled those sparkly things on it and then shook them off," Dr. Stenger explained.
The neurons then send out connecting "wires" called dendrites and axons following the paths of DETA.
The neurons can be kept alive and functioning for months for study and experimentation, Dr. Stenger noted.
At present, neuroscientists are able to study networks of brain cells outside the intact animal for only a matter of hours.
Although the researchers hope in the next few months to see neurons on a biochip begin to form circuits, "the day when you can get 100 or so neurons to form connections reliably may be 10 years or more away," said Dr. Hickman.
