I was saddened and outraged to read of Bruce Mark's successful extortion of $140 million from Fleet Financial Group, ("Banking on Publicity . . ." page one, Feb. 11).
Liberals such as Mr. Marks have employed race-baiting, with the help of sympathetic media outlets, to extend investment to a sector where the market has clearly identified investment best not go.
As with the centralized Soviet economy, tax dollars, and now extorted private dollars, are being sent to prop up a failed enterprise -- minority-owned inner-city housing.
Mr. Marks's socialist "idealism" blinds him to a fact your readers should know -- when failure occurs in a free market, it occurs for a reason, and like the tide, it cannot be held back.
In the three decades after World War II, low-income, minority residents were bequeathed inner-city housing.
The crushingly expensive maintenance of older buildings combined with the high cost of living in urban neighborhoods created a gross mismatch of income and living costs.
Under free circumstances, this would have resulted in rapid decline, population movement and bottoming out, followed by revitalization and renewal.
Instead of permitting failure, a battery of political interests have sought to preserve the racial and economic homogeneity of inner-city neighborhoods.
Government programs, including rent control, housing subsidies (such as HUD's Section 8) and, worst of all, public housing, have attempted to stop the decline of inner-city neighborhoods.
The interests who supported these programs are not all of the same stripe, but they have one thing in common: they are self-interested.
These political interests range from self-congratulatory liberals of tony suburbs (who could be construed as well-intended) to inner-city politicians whose "friends and supporters" are frequently on the receiving end of millions in housing subsidies.
Of one thing there should be no doubt, the purveyors of housing aid have fared well, while the intended recipients of housing aid have been decimated by social disintegration.
I don't think there is any hope for the minds of "urban terrorists" such as Mr. Marks, but it is time that thoughtful observers, and voters, realize that housing "aid" aimed at America's urban poor is aiding and abetting the destruction of urban neighborhoods.
Meanwhile, many politicians, "nonprofit" development organizations, and gadflies such as Bruce Marks make off with millions that could have contributed to real prospects for personal and economic growth.
Todd D. Zirkle
Bethesda, Md.
