Douglas Patton has a great government job.
He has a six-figure salary, a big office, a secretary and an assistant.
Just one thing is missing: For the past few months he has had relatively little to do.
Since 1976, Mr. Patton has served as Congress's nonvoting representative on the Federal Election Commission, the agency that oversees the campaign-finance laws.
Critics have long sneered at the position, arguing that it's absurd for a group that is being regulated to have a seat at the regulator's table.
Last October, the U.S. Court of Appeals here took essentially the same view.
It ruled that the inclusion of congressional employees on the FEC violates the constitutional separation of powers between the legislative and executive branches of government.
While the case is pending before the Supreme Court, Mr. Patton has been unable to participate in closed-door commission meetings and has been forced to turn back all confidential FEC documents in his possession.
That has left some wondering just what he does all day for a salary that in 1993, according to congressional payroll records, totaled $108,234.
"This guy is just sitting there . . . and taking up space," charges Rep. Bob Livingston of Louisiana, who is the ranking Republican on the House subcommittee on elections.
Only in Washington, it seems, could someone find himself in Mr. Patton's predicament: stuck in constitutional limbo, unable to carry out a job that is hard to justify in the first place.
Mr. Patton, who carries the title of special deputy, declined to comment.
Over the past few weeks, Mr. Patton's status has caused great consternation inside the FEC.
Mr. Patton's boss, Clerk-of-the-House Donald Anderson, asked the FEC to allow the special deputy to maintain his ninth-floor office at the agency's downtown headquarters until the Supreme Court resolves the matter.
After some hand-wringing, the FEC's six voting members -- three Democrats and three Republicans -- agreed to do so.
Meanwhile, some FEC officials are grumbling privately that Mr. Patton gets to keep his job while the FEC is slated to be squeezed by the Clinton budget released last week; under the president's plan, the FEC says it would be forced to cut 33 staff positions.
How Mr. Patton is earning his pay these days isn't clear.
Trevor Potter, the FEC chairman, notes that he hasn't seen Mr. Patton sitting in the audience at any of the agency's public meetings.
But FEC officials say Mr. Patton sends his assistant to keep an eye on things.
And some figure Mr. Patton can keep pretty busy fielding calls from members of Congress who have questions about the election laws.
Raymond Colley, the deputy clerk of the House, says he won't discuss Mr. Patton's situation, except to suggest that Mr. Patton continues to play an important liaison role at the FEC.
"He's still our eyes and ears there," Mr. Colley says.
Of course, to critics of the special deputy slot, that's precisely the problem.
Some, like Rep. Livingston, believe it's unfair that because the Democrats control both the House and Senate, it's the Democratic leaders who get to select two special deputies, while the GOP picks none.
The Senate special deputy retired last September and hasn't been replaced.
But others think the issue is more fundamental.
They contend that the special deputy -- no matter which party appoints him -- is nothing but a spy in the FEC's midst.
"There is no legitimate rationale" for the post, says Larry Sabato, a professor of government at the University of Virginia.
With such a setup, "this is a commission guaranteed to fail."
The special deputy positions have been around since the early days of the FEC, which was established in the aftermath of Watergate.
At first, the FEC had eight commissioners.
Six of them -- two picked by the president, two by the House and two by the Senate -- were voting members.
In addition, the Clerk of the House and the Secretary of the Senate each got to act as nonvoting members of the FEC.
But in 1976, the Supreme Court ruled that such an arrangement violated the separation-of-powers principle.
So Congress rewrote the rules: The president would appoint and the Senate confirm all six voting members of the FEC.
Yet despite a stern warning from Antonin Scalia -- who was then a senior Justice Department official and is now a Supreme Court justice -- that the presence of congressional representatives "perpetuates a serious constitutional issue," they remained part of the FEC.
"Congress was real nervous and I guess they wanted to keep an eye on the commission," says Rep. Al Swift, the Washington Democrat who heads the House subcommittee on elections.
"They're still not our favorite agency because they regulate us," he adds.
"But that high-level of paranoia has since abated into a simmering one."
Scott Thomas, an FEC commissioner who has been with the agency since 1975, says that having the special deputies around doesn't make things uncomfortable.
"I haven't really seen any kind of improper influence," says Mr. Thomas, a Democrat.
Republican Joan Aikens, who has been an FEC commissioner since the agency's creation, says that the special deputies often bring added perspective to deliberations.
"When questions arise on various issues, they can provide useful information," she says, noting that Mr. Patton, for example, is a director of First National Bank of Maryland/DC.
But such sanguine feelings haven't kept the special deputy post from becoming embroiled in controversy.
After he lost his Senate seat last year, Georgia Democrat Wyche Fowler was named a special deputy -- even though the FEC had gotten complaints alleging that Mr. Fowler and Paul Coverdell, his Republican opponent who won the election, had received excessive campaign contributions from their respective national parties.
Mr. Fowler, who has since left the FEC for a private law practice, insists that his sole mission at the agency was to help bring along campaign finance reform legislation.
"I'd like to think I made a contribution," he says.
Last fall's appeals court decision has led to its own difficulties.
The case involved a challenge by the National Rifle Association of an FEC ruling concerning a transfer of $416,000 from one branch of the NRA to the gun group's political action committee.
The appeals court agreed with the NRA that the FEC couldn't pursue the case because of the separation-of-powers problem.
Now, seven other FEC rulings are being challenged on the same grounds.
Among them are cases involving former presidential candidates Pat Robertson and Lyndon LaRouche.
As for Mr. Patton, he still has his share of defenders.
"Should he be laid off until the Supreme Court case is decided?"
Rep. Swift asks.
"Is that fair?"
Nonetheless, the congressman recently agreed with Rep. Livingston to consider abolishing the special deputies positions as part of a broader restructuring of the FEC.
In the meantime, Mr. Patton appears to be trying to fill his time the best he can.
"He's here when I leave, and I leave around 6 o'clock," says John Surina, the FEC staff director.
"He seems very busy.
But the assurance I can give you is that he's not busy on matters he ought not be busy on."
