St. Petersburg, Russia -- As stories go, Nicolai Rimsky-Korsakov's rarely staged "The Legend of the Invisible City of Kitezh" -- about a beleaguered town that sinks to the bottom of a lake -- is not one that keeps you at the edge of your seat.
If the composer's Sheherazade were telling it, she would be killed not far into the first act.
As the piece moseyed along the other night at the Mariinsky (Kirov) Theater, it sometimes seemed we had been sitting there for more than one and maybe a thousand.
But I doubt there were many malcontents among the large contingent of international visitors and members of the press who were gathered here for a week long Rimsky-Korsakov festival in one of the prettiest theaters in the world where the heat doesn't always work but most everything else seems to, in one strange way or another.
It hasn't been easy, but thanks to the Kirov Opera's vastly talented, globe-circling music director, Valery Gergiev, the company has transformed itself from the weak sister of the Kirov Ballet into one of the more interesting companies in the world.
While the once-legendary Bolshoi is literally falling down, its shaky building a sad symbol of parlous times, the Kirov Opera is scrappily moving forward into a new future.
It tours constantly, makes lots of records (with Philips, which was busily taping in St. P), looks for coproduction deals with other companies, and is learning how to pass the begging bowl in boardrooms around the world.
"Can't you find me a million-dollar corporate sponsor?"
Mr. Gergiev was asking half-seriously, seated in his office close to midnight after a hectic day that included a grindingly long dress rehearsal for "Kitezh," an hour's rehearsal for the evening's symphonic concert and then the two-hours-plus concert itself.
In another part of the world, his next meeting would be about overtime with the screaming head of the orchestra union.
But he's everybody's main meal ticket and hardly sparing of himself.
Holding a cigarette in one hand and a tie in the other, he looked so beat I thought he might confuse the two.
"But please.
Don't just say we're struggling.
Say we are planning," he added with the forthright charm that also marks his podium appearances.
Rimsky could not have asked for a better apostle during this epic tribute which celebrated the 150th anniversary of his birth in 1844 with three full-scale operas and several concerts that included works by contemporaries and his best student, Igor Stravinsky.
"Sadko," a fairy tale whose minstrel hero falls in love with the daughter of the ocean, started the festival; "The Maid of Pskov" (and, unluckily for her, long-lost daughter of Ivan the Terrible) appeared at the end; "Kitezh" -- all four hours of it -- filled any waking time left over in the middle.
Even at the premiere in 1907, a worn critic wondered whether it might not have been a more enjoyable evening minus one act.
Only one?
Those of us who had come only for "Kitezh" had to rely on energizing helpings of ice cream (weighed out during intermissions like sevruga on a tiny set of scales by a very careful server.
Some things still need changing at the Kirov).
Though Rimsky wrote an abundance of operas, they are not well-known outside Russia, although "The Tsar's Bride," with its ravishing aria for the gently expiring, fatally poisoned Marfa -- and "The Golden Cockerel," a typically overwrought comic fantasy, are heard now and again.
Mostly, Rimsky is famous for revising his friend Modeste Mussorgsky's "Boris Godunov" from the two troubled versions Mussorgsky left behind in a sea of booze.
Purists blame Rimsky for making the intentionally dank and clangorous score sound too bright and civilized, but were it not for him, "Boris" would have languished a lot longer.
Besides, you really have to be high-minded to prefer Mussorgsky's original Coronation Scene with less bells.
But now, as this outing to the Kirov did remind us, it is time for Rimsky's own reputation to be burnished anew.
He is not a composer of interesting characters and forceful drama.
But "May Night," "Snow Maiden" and "Sadko," just for example, all reveal the fantasy and shimmering lyrical fineness that are his main claim.
Even "Kitezh" had much lovely music which wove itself through a complexly uninteresting plot, in particular an early, epic love duet between the heroine Fevronia, an ecofriendly spirit, and her short-lived prince.
Galina Gorchakova and Yuri Mazurin both proved admirably long-winded.
The prince's next appearance is at the end, as a ghost in invisible Kitezh, which disappeared from earth to avoid the brutal Tartars who also harass Fevronia and her constant companion, an annoying drunken holy fool named Grishka.
Influenced by Wagner (unfortunately not by "Lohengrin" but by the endlessly pious "Parsifal"), Rimsky's "Kitezh" is essentially a static assortment of tableaux whose deepest meaning may be reserved for Russians.
Its religious overtones seem to account for "Kitezh's" long disappearance from the Kirov's stage.
But in another indication of changing times, St. Petersburg's Orthodox Metropolitan attended "Kitezh's" return, prominently seated in what was once the tsar's box and later probably contained Sergei Kirov, a powerful party leader Stalin is believed to have murdered though he wept big tears and blamed everybody else.
Kirov liked opera (but even so, the company is gradually divesting itself of the tainted association).
The name (Kirov) usually appears just so, in parentheses, next to the hall's original name, Mariinsky.
Somewhat disappointingly, the production by director Alexei Stepaniuk and set designer Mart Kitaev avoided the flamboyantly painted sets associated with traditional Russian stagecraft in favor of scrims and projections.
But there were mesmerizing moments, in particular Kitezh vanishing in a dreamy, silvery fog.
A capacity audience which paid the equivalent of $3 for an orchestra seat seemed pleased to have been there and equally pleased to go home, even if it meant braving St. Petersburg's five degree temperature and failing transportation system.
For American Rimskyphiliacs hoping to hear some of the festival's music on disk, it's slim pickings.
There are enough "Sheherazade" recordings to put you into a coma, but few opera sets and those mostly on smaller labels.
Chandos, for instance, recently released "Mozart and Salieri" -- an intriguing one-acter composed in 1898 for the legendary bass Chaliapin as the mirthless striver who pours poison into Mozart's champagne.
The libretto is essentially a setting of a poem by Pushkin who, in another era, might have challenged "Amadeus" author Peter Shaffer to a duel for appropriating so many of his ideas.
Famed Soviet songbird Galina Vishnevskaya (who staged "The Tsar's Bride" in Washington, D.C., a few years ago) sings Marfa with affecting pathos and thin tone on a Melodya set recorded in 1973 at the Bolshoi and now released by Le Chant du Monde.
Rimsky's first, very skillful opera, "The Maid of Pskov," is available in a 1969 live Italian performance conducted by Thomas Schippers with Boris Christoff as Ivan and Nicoletta Panni as La Pskovitana (Great Opera Performances).
The video selection includes a stunningly atmospheric black-and-white film of "The Tsar's Bride" made in the Soviet Union in the 1960s and now released on the Kultur label; and a colorful Harry Kupfer production of Rimsky's farcical "The Legend of Tsar Saltan" (View Video), complete with the Flight of the Bumblebee in its original setting.
