So you think Wall Street is worrying about bearish trends?
You wouldn't know it from Montgomery Securities' latest investors conference, ending today in New York.
In fact, the San Francisco securities firm, known for its underwriting of trendy new stocks, could have called it the "Highly Valued Retail Stock Convention."
Montgomery presented the bullish case for a host of stocks -- specialty retailers mostly -- that are already trading at high valuations.
Many of the stocks are Montgomery underwritings.
Montgomery is well-known for these conventions, in which chief executive officers promote their companies with the help of Montgomery analysts.
In the past, many stocks have risen sharply after Montgomery appearances, and it has happened again this time.
One big beneficiary: Sunglass Hut, which has jumped 8% this week in Nasdaq Stock Market trading following a presentation Monday morning.
After grabbing attention with slides of actors Tom Cruise and Sharon Stone in sunglasses, CEO Jack Chadsey vowed to triple the newly public company's size by convincing every American of the dangers of ultraviolet light.
He even distributed a pamphlet that includes depictions of an expanding ozone hole.
However, insisted Mr. Chadsey, "We don't want to scare" people.
Other stocks that rose after taking the stage at the Montgomery convention included PetsMart, which promotes itself as sort of a Home Depot for dogs (with a stock price 138 times the past year's per-share earnings).
It all proves there are people willing to invest in trendy retailing stocks even in uncertain economic times.
Many of the stocks featured at the convention trade for at least twice the overall market's price-to-earning multiple of 20.
Sunglass Hut, for instance, trades at 47 times the company's projected 1993 earnings of as much as 84 cents.
"It's not sane," says money manager Scott Black of Delphi Management in Boston.
Mr. Black is a "value" investor who focuses on beaten-down stocks, just the opposite of the Montgomery approach.
"There's a lot of `earnings momentum' investors still out there; nobody seems to care," says Mr. Black.
It isn't that the young Montgomery-backed companies aren't exciting.
But, as Mr. Black sees it, there are plenty of established stocks at much cheaper prices.
Among discount retailers, he has bought Caldor, Venture Stores and Shopko Stores, all selling at under 12 times the past year's earnings.
(Mr. Black says Delphi is up nearly 4% this year, which is isn't bad compared with a slight decline for the S&P-500 Stock index.)
"We're not allowed to short bet that a stock will decline, but I'd like to short some of them," Mr. Black says of the Montgomery-backed stocks.
Montgomery Warnings To be fair, Montgomery does warn investors in its research reports that stocks like Hollywood Entertainment, a video chain trading at 55 times earnings, are highly risky.
And its analysts don't always take the most bullish spin: On Friday, PetsMart shares fell in heavy trading after analyst Bo Cheadle lowered his earnings estimates.
Yesterday, Mr. Cheadle effectively apologized at the conference to PetsMart management for his downgrade.
"We caused a little flurry in the stock which we didn't intend to do," he said.
He added that he owns PetsMart stock himself and intends to do so for "many, many years to come."
PetsMart, in its first year as a public company, reported net income of $4.9 million, or 21 cents a share, on sales of $330.8 million.
The most popular phrases at the convention were: "unique" and "high growth."
Musicland Stores, in its first public appearance since selling stock in December, promoted the "visual excitement" of its Music Play chain, which includes a cappuccino bar.
Urban Outfitters talked of its "unique and compelling" shopping environment.
Men's Wearhouse called itself "truly unique."
(The stock symbol for the menswear chain certainly is: SUIT.)
Even a company that isn't quite public yet got the star treatment, but it fit right in to the spirit of things.
Just for Feet Inc. plans to go public through Montgomery Securities at between $12 and $14 a share, which would give it one of those 50-plus earnings ratios and a market capitalization for the 10-store sneaker chain of $69.6 million.
The stores not only sell sneakers, but provide a half-court basketball area for customers and a large-screen video to watch Sunday football games and other sporting events.
The company needs proceeds from the initial public offering to expand.
Said Harold Ruttenberg, the Birmingham, Ala., company's enthusiastic chairman: "We have a concept that works. . . .
We have only 10 stores in a country that could easly take 300."
Mr. Ruttenberg stirred up excitement by showing a slide of Michael Jordan wearing a Just for Feet T-shirt.
Cooler heads aren't necessarily walking on air.
A report from Charles Ronson's IPO Value Monitor newsletter cautions that while Just for Feet has an interesting concept, "we recommend extreme caution."
The company hasn't opened more than three company-operated stores in a fiscal year, and it now intends to open five to seven new stores in fiscal 1994, notes IPO Value Monitor.
"This is one stock we'll put on a list of possibilities to consider shorting.
We don't recommend purchase except for flippers," or investors who are able to buy the stock at its initial price and quickly sell it after it runs up.
GABELLI'S GLOOM: There are "many concerns" for the U.S. stock market, according to Mario Gabelli.
The well-known fund manager is one of many professionals who anticipate a decline in stock prices.
In the annual report for his Gabelli Equity Trust, Mr. Gabelli frets about political uncertainties globally, the flood of IPOs of "deteriorating" quality, and high stock-price valuations.
But his final concern is anecdotal.
"When I went to buy a newspaper recently, the hard-working individual behind the counter said, `I have never owned a stock before, but I want to buy one of your mutual funds.'
This is not the sign of a market bottom."
"In sum," writes Mr. Gabelli, "we think the chickens we worried about in 1993 will come home to roost in 1994."
How is Mr. Gabelli responding?
He says he is focusing on "pockets of value" in the U.S. market, and on certain foreign companies.
For example, he is impressed with the American dominance of the heavy-trucking industry globally.
Navistar International should perform well regardless of the stock market's strength, he says.
Mr. Gabelli calls gaming a global growth industry, and predicts that Hilton Hotels, with an increasing stake in gaming, will become "an institutional sweetheart in 1994."
He is also looking for smaller gaming companies that are expanding profitably as legalized gambling spreads.
