Time Inc., the publishing division of Time Warner Inc., named new publishers at two of its magazines, Fortune and Money.
At Fortune, Stuart Arnold, 42 years old, was promoted to publisher from his previous post of advertising sales director.
Mr. Arnold succeeds James B. Hayes, 55 years old, who is retiring after 35 years at Time Inc.
Mr. Hayes, who has been active in education issues, will be announcing a new education initiative next week that he will head, the company said.
The business magazine is considered quite healthy, having outperformed competing magazines in advertising gains last year, in a difficult advertising climate.
According to Publishers Information Bureau, Fortune sold 2,794 ad pages in 1993, a healthy 9.5% gain from the previous year.
The company's rate base, the number of subscribers guaranteed to advertisers, rose 11% in 1993, to 870,000.
In fact, the publication consistently delivers more than 900,000, says a spokeswoman.
The new publisher of Money is advertising sales director Betsy Martin, 50.
Ms. Martin succeeds William Myers, 59, who is retiring after 32 years at Time Inc.
Money isn't flourishing to the same degree as Fortune.
Although circulation rose modestly last year, Money's ad pages declined 7.5% in 1993, to 1,227 pages, reports Publishers Information Bureau.
"Money is still the leader of the personal finance category, with nearly two million subscribers," says magazine consultant Martin Walker, "but the category has become much more competitive in recent years.
At the middle-income end of the market, Kiplinger's Personal Finance was repositioned about a year and a half ago its ad pages rose nearly 11% in 1993, and at the upper-income end, SmartMoney and Worth are attracting readers."
A spokeswoman for Money said the fact that the two promotions occurred simultaneously is "coincidental," and has nothing to do with the restructuring announced last fall of Time Warner's publishing group.
MONEY MAGAZINE, which is part of Time Warner Inc.'s publishing unit, recorded a 3.3% drop in its advertising pages in 1993.
An article Thursday incorrectly stated that Money's ad pages declined 7.5% last year, based on figures from Publishers Information Bureau that didn't include Money's extra, year-end edition.
(WSJ Jan. 24, 1994)
