Japan's Kirin Brewery Co. will purchase beer and beer cans from Anheuser-Busch Cos., in a bold cost-cutting move that underscores the growing competitiveness of U.S. consumer goods in Japan.
Kirin, Japan's biggest brewer, said it will import a new brand of beer made at an Anheuser-Busch plant in Los Angeles for sale in Japan under the Kirin name.
The Japanese brewer will also purchase beer cans made at St. Louis-based Metal Container Corp., a unit of Anheuser-Busch, also based in St. Louis.
As part of the deal, the two companies agreed to a small equity swap, under which each will take 500 million yen ($4.7 million) of the other's stock.
The deal strengthens the increasingly cozy relationship between the two brewing giants.
In September, Anheuser-Busch scrapped a 12-year relationship with Kirin competitor Suntory Ltd. to set up a venture with Kirin that markets Anheuser-Busch's Budweiser beer in Japan.
For Anheuser-Busch, the new arrangement offers another way to participate in Japan's huge beer market, which has doubled in volume over the past 15 years.
For Kirin, the deal is a splashy cost-cutting move.
The company denied a local report that it will cut domestic production of beer cans after it begins procuring the U.S.-made containers.
But analysts said it is only a matter of time before Japan's inefficient food and beverage makers follow Kirin's lead in substituting a variety of less-expensive imports for costly local supplies.
Kirin declined to provide volume figures for its planned imports of cans and beer, other than to say that "if the venture is successful, we want to expand volume and types of imports."
Kirin said it will begin importing cans from Metal Container by about midyear.
It will use them to package Heineken beer, which Kirin produces and sells in Japan under license.
Anheuser-Busch's Los Angeles plant will produce beer for Kirin's new line of "ice beer," which is made through a freezing technology that brewers say creates a crisper, lighter taste.
The company hopes to sell four million cases of the beverage this year following its debut in May.
It wouldn't say how much of that beer will come from the U.S.
