Long before Invesco Funds Group fired star manager John Kaweske for allegedly failing to report personal stock trades, he was reaping personal rewards from a company in which his funds later invested, regulatory filings show.
He got in on the ground floor of tiny ID Biomedical Corp. of Vancouver, British Columbia, joining its board and buying cheap private stock for himself a year before this highflier went public and eventually wound up in Invesco mutual funds.
And in another sign of the overlap that often develops between fund managers and companies held in their funds, his son worked for a time at Ivax Corp., a Miami pharmaceutical company whose shares are still in Invesco mutual funds.
The ID Biomedical case shows how close ties between a fund manager and a company in the manager's realm of expertise can bring personal "perks" that a small investor wouldn't get.
And it illuminates the question haunting the fund industry now: Are the benefits to managers of personal dealings outweighed by potential conflict-of-interest problems?
ID Biomedical did ultimately prove profitable for Invesco funds, and it's not illegal for fund managers to trade for themselves or sit on corporate boards.
But it is illegal for them to accept personal compensation in return for making a fund buy a particular stock.
The SEC, as reported last week, is scrutinizing Mr. Kaweske's dealings to see if he violated federal securities laws.
Mr. Kaweske has long specialized in health and biotechnology companies, and his son has worked in the field.
John Kaweske Jr., 24 years old, was employed by Ivax from January 1990 to November 1992, holding a junior position at the company during a period when Invesco funds held a chunk of the stock, according to regulatory filings.
The son moved on from there to be a vice president of investments for New York's D. Blech & Co., where Chairman David Blech is a stock promoter specializing in biotech stocks, several of which wound up in Invesco portfolios.
The elder Mr. Kaweske previously suggested that Invesco may have fired him because it suspected he was about to quit.
Over the weekend, the fired manager's lawyer, Andrew Levander, said Mr. Kaweske couldn't be reached to comment because he had gone away "to get some rest."
Denver-based Invesco has distanced itself from Mr. Kaweske, who managed $4.6 billion of assets, nearly half of the $10 billion Invesco manages.
Its parent is Invesco PLC of the United Kingdom.
Invesco asserts it didn't even know Mr. Kaweske was a director of ID Biomedical.
John Zeschin, Invesco executive vice president, said in an interview Friday that Mr. Kaweske failed to report that he is a director of a public company, as required by Invesco's code of conduct.
Mr. Levander differs.
He said "one or more persons at Invesco" knew of the manager's position at ID Biomedical.
ID Biomedical said Invesco fund manager Barry Kurokawa did some work scrutinizing its ID Vaccine Corp. subsidiary before that subsidiary raised money in a June 1993 private placement.
The Kaweske-managed Global Health Sciences Fund invested in that offering.
"Barry did the due diligence on the vaccine," said David Hall, ID Biomedical's manager of corporate development.
He added that the due-diligence work was "about the science and technology -- not about Mr. Kaweske's personal position."
Mr. Kurokawa didn't return phone calls.
Last week he assumed expanded responsibility for the Global Health Sciences Fund and took on other duties in the wake of Mr. Kaweske's firing.
Mr. Kaweske's connection to the Canadian company arose after he heard about a probe-based test to diagnose tuberculosis that is being developed by scientists at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, Mr. Hall said.
"He was interested in the probe for business reasons and we were also interested. . . .
That's how we met, through mutual interests."
Mr. Kaweske became a director of ID Biomedical in March 1991 and in June of that year bought 20,000 shares for himself at 50 Canadian cents each, according to filings with the British Columbia Securities Commission.
The filings were noted in Canada Stockwatch, an industry newsletter based in Vancouver.
Less than a year later, Mr. Kaweske's C$10,000 (US$7,564) initial investment blossomed when the company went public in March 1992 at C$2.50 a share (US$1.89).
About six months after that, Mr. Kaweske pocketed his first gain on his ID Biomedical position, selling 10,000 shares in two separate trades at about $1.70 a share.
The stock went on to soar, getting as high as C$31 in November 1993 and emerging as one of the hottest stocks on the Vancouver exchange.
Although several major investors in the Vancouver stockbroker community say ID Biomedical is a high-tech company poised for growth, they doubt that a still-unprofitable fledgling company would have been as successful without Mr. Kaweske.
"There are some very real companies on the VSE, and ID Biomed is a case in point," Richard Groome, managing director of the Vancouver office of Marleau Lemire Securities Inc., said in an interview last year.
"You just have to look at ID Biomedical's close ties to Invesco and John Kaweske, a very respected Denver fund manager and investor."
ID Biomedical's Mr. Hall said that although Mr. Kaweske has contributed greatly to the company as a director, any "suggestion that the stock has been moved by promotion of John Kaweske is absurd."
The stock dropped C$2 in Canada last week to close at C$17. ID Biomedical started trading six months ago on the Nasdaq Stock Market at about US$4; it ended at $12.75 Friday.
In September, amid wild swings in ID Biomedical's stock price, Mr. Kaweske exercised options, buying 35,000 shares at $2.50 apiece when the stock was at about C$24.
His lawyer says other company insiders were also exercising options then.
At that time, Mr. Kaweske got options to buy 35,000 more shares, at C$20.15 each.
On Sept. 30, Mr. Kaweske sold 5,000 shares to his wife, Pam, at C$26 each, Canadian filings show.
This sale was considered a "gift transfer" for estate-planning purposes, according to Mr. Levander, who said none of the trades involve any improprieties.
Mr. Kaweske "acquired his stock years before any fund bought stockI don't believe he has committed any wrongdoing," the lawyer added.
Currently Mr. Kaweske holds 123,333 shares, ID Biomedical said.
Meanwhile, Mr. Kaweske was also buying the stock and making a profit for the funds he managed, according to SEC filings.
Admax Global Health Science Fund, managed by Invesco under contract and distributed in Canada, bought 25,000 shares of ID Biomedical between November 1992 and August 1993 at $5.50 to $7.875.
It sold 10,000 shares in late November at about 2 1/2 times that amount, keeping the rest.
Also, filings show, Invesco's Health Sciences Japan fund bought 50,000 shares at $7.55 each Aug. 20, selling some at a profit close to year end and retaining about 15,000 shares.
Mr. Kaweske's other links include California stock promoter Rafi Khan.
Funds managed by Mr. Kaweske were buyers of a number of stocks promoted by Mr. Khan, with whom Invesco has said it severed ties several months ago.
Mr. Kaweske invested personally in Cardiac Science Inc., which Mr. Khan was pushing, before it went public.
But that stock, unlike ID Biomedical, isn't in Invesco funds, according to recent 13F filings with the SEC.
