Alma Guillermoprieto's "The Heart That Bleeds" (Knopf, 345 pages, $24) is a collection of extraordinarily vivid portraits of the seamier side of life in Latin America.
Culled from 13 essays originally published in The New Yorker from 1989 to 1993, each story is a character sketch of one aspect of a Latin American city or region.
Her essays introduce the reader to hired assassins in Medellin, Colombia; to professional garbage pickers in Mexico City; to hopelessly corrupt politicians in Rio; to murderous guerrillas in Lima.
By delving deeply into a microcosmic aspect of one locale, Ms. Guillermoprieto attempts to provide us with a taste for an entire culture.
This is certainly an acceptable journalistic formula.
And her tireless and fearless reporting, as well as her eloquent descriptions and character sketches, hold the reader's attention rapt.
Even so, Ms. Guillermoprieto offers less of a clear, wide-angled vision of Latin America than a series of caricatures in which Latin Americans are divided into two classes: victims and exploiters.
Of course, there is plenty to support such a cynical vision of Latin American culture.
The number and variety of injustices in Latin America are shocking to those of us who have come to rely (though less and less) on the rule of law as a security blanket.
However, Ms. Guillermoprieto's incessant focus on the "exploit or be exploited" stories is ultimately wearying in its exaggeration.
There are far more appealing sides to the Latin character that deserve attention.
Occasionally Ms. Guillermoprieto acknowledges this, particularly as regards Latin Americans' almost fanatical devotion to family ties.
But even this compliment is usually attached to nasty characters -- for instance, the death-squad leader who's a great family man.
Most importantly, Ms. Guillermoprieto ignores one of the most revolutionary developments in the history of Latin American culture: the rise of individualism and economic competitiveness in a region that has for centuries been mired in the Third World quicksand of collectivism and mercantilism.
Much of what Ms. Guillermoprieto laments are the growing pains of a culture striving to break out of centuries of underdevelopment.
The Dickensonian message in Ms. Guillermoprieto's book is that progress is the enemy in Latin America, and her essays invariably serve as vehicles to condemn the encroachment of modernity.
Thus mountains of garbage discarded by Mexico's nouveau riche and fed upon by the poor become her metaphor for Mexico's monumental transition from a closed, protectionist market to an active participant in the global trading system.
Her barely concealed contempt for the region's newfound consumerism is condensed in her description of the emerging fast-food outlets in the region.
Even the North American Free Trade Agreement is described in foreboding terms as leading to a contamination of Latin culture:
"Perhaps it is also true," she writes, "that neither "nortenos" nor any other Mexicans have anything to fear from a treaty that allows foreign manufacturers to come pouring over the border, but whether the economic "apertura" {opening} will lead to a final drowning of Mexican culture in United States sauce is not an entirely idle question -- at least, not when one is sitting in a Kentucky Fried Chicken outlet and eating some of the first fast-food tacos that Taco Bell is hoping to find a mass market for in Mexico City."
Perhaps intellectuals, who can afford the best restaurants and products that Latin American culture has to offer, can turn up their noses at cheap imports and concepts that are flooding previously restricted markets.
But they allow Latin Americans to reverse their dependence on traditional power blocks.
Upper-class entrepreneurs can start their own businesses with previously prohibited computers and other electronic items.
Fishermen can finally afford a small Evinrude motor to break out of the monopolistic fishing guilds.
And housewives are no longer condemned to spend half their day hand washing clothes thanks to affordable washing machines.
Ms. Guillermoprieto's perspectives are not entirely limited by her Luddite perspective on progress.
She does, for example, provide interesting insights into the destructive effects of the "shock therapies" to which many Latin economies were exposed by IMF strategists.
However, she incorrectly lumps all "neoliberal" formulas together in the same free-market basket, even though some -- like Chile's -- obviously had greater success than others.
The book contains other valuable insights.
For example, we are presented with a clear explanation of why anyone might consider joining a psychotic outfit like the fanatical Sendero Luminoso in Peru.
"You have to realize that until the day we graduated from high school, all of us believed that the first man was Adam and the first woman was Eve.
Once we learned that the Bible could be wrong, everything was up for grabs," explains a student of Sendero founder Carlos Guzman.
An ear for such insights, superb interview skills and a willingness to get off the beaten journalistic track, make this book worthwhile.
Would that Ms. Guillermoprieto had strayed a little further to discover Latin America's rich beauty and tremendous potential.
Mr. Asman edits the Americas column.
