Stock mutual-fund sales hit a record in January but small investors are turning cautious, retreating from some bond mutual funds and choosing the least-risky types of stock funds.
"There was a notable slowdown in business in February, with investors being much more conservative," said Robert Leo, director of broker-dealer sales at Massachusetts Financial Services in Boston.
"It's nothing dire.
It's just a domino effect from the rise in interest rates."
Investors last month backed away from many long-term bond funds, according to mutual-fund executives.
Many bond investors are switching to shorter-term funds.
In January, by contrast, bond-fund inflows soared to $10.9 billion from $5.8 billion in December, a trade group reported.
Stock-fund sales in February appear to have been slightly lower than January's record level, according to several mutual-fund companies.
A record $18.3 billion flowed into stock funds in January, up from $14.7 billion in December, according to the Investment Company Institute, a mutualfund trade group.
In January, funds investing in foreign stocks pulled in more than half of stock-fund sales.
But some analysts report a recent slowing in the tidal wave of money going abroad.
The January cash-flow data from the Investment Company Institute measure new sales of funds, counting the effects of exchanges among funds and redemptions.
Reinvested dividends aren't included.
New Figures Included The latest cash-flow numbers include data for the College Retirement Equities Fund.
CREF, together with the companion Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association, or TIAA, constitutes the retirement system for 5,200 nonprofit institutions.
CREF has total assets of about $59 billion.
Mutual-fund sales are closely watched as an indicator of how much cash is going to support stock and bond market prices.
February's drop-off in bond sales has some analysts worried that mutual-fund companies may have to sell more bonds to cover redemptions, triggering further market declines.
But the drop in bond sales could also be seen as a healthy correction for the market, according to Avi Nachmany, an analyst at New York consulting firm Strategic Insight.
"This is going to be a gradual process of investors shifting toward more rationalized investing," Mr. Nachmany said.
"Even though right now there are so many declines, to some extent it is good, because a baseline is being established."
Inflows into taxable-bond funds are currently at half the level of mid-January, according to AMG Data Services, an Arcata, Calif., research firm.
In February, and especially last week, municipal-bond funds saw outflows in all areas, except for intermediate-term funds.
In February, some fund companies had small net outflows in bond funds.
Vanguard Group of Valley Forge, Pa., the second-largest mutual-fund company in the U.S., had slight net outflows of investor money in both taxable and tax-free bond funds.
There were also some small net outflows in bond funds at Boston-based Scudder Stevens & Clark Inc.
Baltimore-based T. Rowe Price had modest outflows in bond funds, mostly due to a redemption by one large institutional shareholder.
Stephen Gibson, a managing director at Marsh & McLennan Securities Corp.'s Putnam Investments says sales of taxable bond funds were down about 45% from January, while tax-free bond sales fell 25%.
But Boston-based Fidelity Investments, the nation's largest mutual-fund company, reports that February bond fund sales were about level with the January level.
However, there was a change in the "mix" of where the money is being placed, said Neal Litvack, Fidelity Investments executive vice president.
In February, more than 90% of Fidelity's bond-fund sales were in short-term funds, compared with January when two-thirds of bond-funds sales were in the short-term area, he said.
The movement of more cash into money-market funds is another sign of investors taking safety measures, analysts say.
Last week there was a large inflow into money-market funds for the first time in a month, according to AMG Data.
Stock-fund sales also reflect investor caution.
There was a small drop from January in the amount of cash moving into international funds, analysts say.
There also was a drop-off in aggressive-growth fund sales and a pickup in sales of "conservative" stock funds, according to several fund companies.
Fidelity's Mr. Litvack says less than 25% of February stock-fund sales were of international funds, compared with 40% in January.
Total stock-fund sales at Fidelity were about the same as in January, so the difference was made up by increased sales of more conservative stock funds, such as growth-and-income funds and asset-allocation funds like Fidelity Asset Manager.
Foreign stock-fund sales continue to be strong at Templeton Funds, the foreign-stock-fund division of Franklin Resources Inc., even though they are "slightly off from January, which was a phenomenal peak," said Gregory Johnson, a senior vice president at Franklin.
"The U.S. was slow to recognize the global side of investing," he says.
So, "there are still pension funds moving toward allocating a percentage of assets toward foreign funds, which will continue to support sales."
At Vanguard, inflows into stock funds were a little below the January level and sales of international stock funds were a tad slower than in January.
Some analysts say that although money keeps pouring into stock funds, February probably won't top January's record.
Scudder had its second-biggest month in terms of stock-fund sales, trailing only January.
"There is some queasiness in the U.S. equity markets," said Gavin Quill, a vice president in marketing.
T. Rowe Price continues to have a majority of its stock-fund sales in international funds.
The group had record stock-fund sales in January and was "ahead of that in February," a spokesman said.
Cash holdings at stock funds amounted to 8.3% of assets as January ended, up from 8% in December and just a little higher than 8.2% a year before.
Even though there was a slight dip in February, investor sentiment continues to be strong, according to a University of Michigan investor survey.
The survey, sponsored by Fidelity Investments said there was a significant increase in the intent to purchase stock funds among current mutual-fund owners.
