ONE TOP ADVISER to President Clinton, trying to explain how the Whitewater affair has spun so badly out of control, starts with this thought: "From the very beginning, this was handled by the lawyers."
He's got a point.
It's remarkable how many of the central players handling the fallout from Whitewater are lawyers, and remarkable how often their lawyerly instincts have been wrong.
The Clinton adviser sees a connection.
A lawyer's inclination normally is to guard information jealously, and to give access to it only grudgingly.
That is precisely the wrong approach for the Whitewater affair, or most any other political scandal, and it lies at the heart of the White House's troubles.
There's a deeper lesson in all of this, both for President Clinton and his successors.
The best defense in dealing with a political problem is almost always to overwhelm critics and the press with information.
Full disclosure of information also happens to be in the public's best interest.
This fact often is understood more instinctively by political advisers than by lawyers.
Yet it is lawyers who are all around the Whitewater affair.
President Clinton himself is a lawyer.
So is his wife Hillary.
So was Vincent Foster, the White House aide whose apparent suicide did so much to rekindle intrigue about the Whitewater real estate development and the failed Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan.
Bruce Lindsey, the White House aide handling damage control, is a lawyer.
Webster Hubbell, the associate attorney general who hovers around the edges of the affair, is a lawyer.
So, of course, was Bernard Nussbaum, the White House counsel forced out last weekend.
FROM THE TIME Whitewater reared its head during the 1992 campaign, Clintonites say, it has been a group of such lawyers that has handled the job of explaining the web connecting the Clintons, the real estate deal, the savings and loan and the Rose Law Firm in Little Rock.
But at many turns the inclination has been to guard rather than release information.
That led to the inadequate report during the campaign on Whitewater; the removal of Mr. Foster's Whitewater files after his death; the failure to show those files to investigators or the public; and the private briefings White House officials received about supposedly independent investigations.
And it was a lawyer who took a step that was, in sheer political and symbolic terms, perhaps the most harmful move of all.
When the White House decided late last year to turn the Clintons' files on Whitewater over to the Justice Department, the president's new personal lawyer, David Kendall, sought from Justice a subpoena to cover the documents.
Learning a subpoena was under way, he sought to broaden its scope to cover more material.
This was perfectly acceptable, even routine, legal behavior.
But politically it misfired.
Putting the documents under subpoena shielded them from public disclosure.
That seemed only to confirm the darkest accusation then being made by Republicans: that the Clintons would use the legal system not to clear the air but to keep Whitewater documentation out of the hands of members of Congress and reporters.
Republicans had telegraphed their political punch, and the Clinton team walked right into it anyway.
Instead of getting credit for turning over documents voluntarily, the Clinton team sowed the seeds of suspicions that have sprouted into today's cover-up charges.
IT'S STRIKING that Mr. Clinton's most deft political advisers have been largely absent from handling Whitewater.
There's been little sign of a substantial role for James Carville, Paul Begala or David Gergen -- all of whom, intriguingly enough, are lawyers by education but political operatives by trade.
And those arguing that it would be better to open up files and release more information and documents have been dismissed as overly naive.
Instead, the prevailing view has been that, because the Clintons' own documentation on the Whitewater affair is incomplete, releasing their fragmentary information would inevitably raise more questions than it could answer.
That's probably true.
But instead of just questions, the Clintons now face accusations of coverup.
Some Clintonites now wish they had followed the course set in last year's flap over the firing of the White House travel office staff.
In that case, after a period of flailing, the White House buried the story with an exhaustive report that overwhelmed the inquisitive with information.
For President Clinton, the tragedy of all this is that there is little so far to suggest that he should be in as much trouble over Whitewater as he is now.
The White House has been focused on bringing on board respected lawyer Lloyd Cutler as new presidential counsel.
Perhaps now it ought to focus on getting some more non-lawyer political advisers more directly involved in decisions about Whitewater fallout.
