Sipping a martini beside the sylvan campus of Colgate University, James Reynolds recalls searching for jobs from his kitchen table 30 years ago.
"I sat down and called a few schools that I'd sent letters to," says the 63-year-old psychology professor.
"Colgate offered me a job over the telephone.
Sight unseen."
His eldest son, James, remembers the scene just as vividly.
Then aged 11, he loved lecturing his siblings about rocks and dinosaurs.
It seemed only natural when he went on to Dartmouth, a Fulbright Fellowship and a career as a geology professor.
Like father, like son -- except that at 41, the younger Mr. Reynolds has logged 200 rejection letters.
After a recent stint collecting unemployment, he now teaches at an unheralded school in the Appalachian foothills.
He earns $32,000 a year, lacks the laboratory he needs for his research and lives in a modest house he bought with help from his parents.
"When I was growing up, being a professor looked like a haven from the `real world,'" says Mr. Reynolds, whose office at Western Carolina University is cluttered with volcanic ash and fossilized dinosaur droppings.
"Now, it's pretty much like any other job, which means you're lucky just to have steady work."
The Reynolds's family saga and dozens like it show how precarious one of America's most enviable professions has become in the space of a generation.
While never well paid, academics could once look forward to exceptional job security, generous benefits and long holidays.
Today, they still earn far less than most other professionals, yet confront the same grinding pressures afflicting the world outside the ivory tower: "downsizing," dwindling benefits, part-time work, and ever-ratcheting pressure on productivity.
"The senior faculty at 90% of institutions are far more advantaged than younger faculty are ever going to be," says Robert Zemsky, director of the University of Pennsylvania's Institute for Research on Higher Education.
This generational chasm carries an added sting; the young are paying, in part, for the unintended sins of their fathers -- and, less often, mothers.
Tenured faculty, like Supreme Court justices, enjoy lifetime jobs, with comfortable benefits accrued during decades of educational expansion.
Now, in hard times, schools must look elsewhere for cuts, usually punishing newcomers.
They also are raising teaching loads, largely in response to public pressure.
This creates contradictory pressures for young professors, whose advancement depends on published research rather than classroom skill.
"The public and the job market are pulling in different directions, and we're stretched on the rack in between," says Kevin Rask, a second-generation economist who spends six nights a week writing in his Colgate office.
Like others seeking tenure, he can't help hearing footsteps; his department received 700 applicants for a single opening last year.
Of course, not all Ph.D.s face grim prospects.
Stars in newer fields such as African-American studies, or in economic or scientific specialties where the private sector pays well, can command opportunities and research budgets that would have been the envy of their parents.
But in many areas, particularly the humanities, demand has been volatile for several decades -- with a severe downturn just in the past few years.
According to the Modern Language Association of America, the number of positions advertised in English was 45% lower for the 1992-93 academic year than for 1988-89.
The postwar period, when the older generation came of age, also represented a time of explosive growth in academia as in so many areas of American life.
James Reynolds, the psychology professor at Colgate, tells a typical story.
Educated on the GI Bill, he earned his Ph.D. in 1960 at the start of a decade when the baby boom and fast-growing universities helped to more than double the number of full-time faculty in America.
"There was a feeling that you could do whatever you wanted, pretty much wherever you wanted to do it," he says, seated beneath a bookshelf cluttered with texts on animal behavior and a baseball cap labeled "Freud."
He chose Colgate over two other offers, and though paid only $8,000 his first year, he soon felt secure enough to buy a rambling home on a shady street near campus.
Most other faculty lived in similar fashion, creating a stable, tight-knit community.
"There were faculty cocktail parties almost every weekend," recalls Shirley Reynolds, who also joined book and cooking groups with other faculty wives while raising three children.
Colgate paid half the college tuition of faculty children, at schools of their choosing, allowing the Reynoldses to send their two sons to Dartmouth and their daughter to Tufts.
Their eldest son, James, went on for a Ph.D. at Dartmouth, reassured by predictions that the market would open wide as his father's generation neared retirement.
Unfortunately, this anticipated "retirement bulge" has been pre-empted by severe retrenchment at most schools, because of falling enrollment and state grants, soaring financial-aid costs, and other factors.
Also, the end of mandatory retirement rules allows professors to keep teaching into their 70s.
The result, says Daniel Little, a Colgate administrator: For every three retirements, only one typically leads to a tenure-track hire.
The second position is eliminated.
And the third is plugged with a professor on a "term" (short for "terminal") appointment of a year or two, or by a part-timer hired for a specific course.
The migrant workers of academia, part-timers are paid as little as $1,000 per course, given few if any benefits, and let go as soon as their usefulness expires.
Their ranks grew rapidly in the 1980s and they now account for 38% of the nation's 800,000 faculty.
Many must commute between several part-time jobs to survive; in California, these peripatetic scholars are called "freeway flyers."
Administrators complain that senior faculty also continue to clog the job pipeline with new Ph.D.s, both as a mark of their prestige and as a source of cheap research labor.
"The reproductive role of a professor should be to produce one new professor for the next generation, not 15," says David Goodstein, vice provost of California Institute of Technology.
This logjam has turned junior faculty such as the younger Mr. Reynolds into living job applications.
An initial volley of 100 or so applications yielded one offer: from Norwich University, a small military school in Vermont.
"I didn't really want to wear a uniform and salute students," he says.
"But when the wolf's at the door, you do what you have to."
Then, in Mr. Reynolds's fifth year, Norwich faced a budget crunch and abruptly cut all nontenured positions, including his.
He had just won an award for outstanding teacher and was about to apply for tenure.
Instead, at 39, he began collecting unemployment checks and caring for his two children while his wife worked as a nurse.
Last year, after another 100 job letters, he beat out some 90 applicants for his current post in Cullowhee, N.C.
While happy to be working, he recognizes the school's limitations: an unsophisticated student body, outdated equipment and limited funding for research.
He spends his summers on small grants, doing field work and visiting distant universities that have the tools he needs to process his rock samples.
He and his wife have no savings and little security as long as Mr. Reynolds remains untenured.
Even so, Mr. Reynolds doesn't regret his career choice.
He loves teaching and the chance to pursue his childhood passion for dinosaurs and rocks.
"The world has changed, and I can't do anything about that," he says.
"But in dark moments, I can't help wishing that the change had come on someone else's watch."
The transformation of academia bewilders his parents back at Colgate.
During a recent stint as department head there, Mr. Reynolds dreamed of gathering faculty in much the way he had been welcomed 30 years before.
But these days, young faculty at Colgate tend to live far from campus, where housing is cheaper and working spouses can more easily commute to city jobs.
Between shared child-rearing, publishing and other pressures, young professors have little spare time.
The few younger faculty who did show for parties "would stay for 15 minutes, then say, `My wife's working so I have to go pick up the kids,'" he says.
He finds the same is true at meetings of many university committees: "It's just a bunch of old guys like me."
Not all the changes in academia are universally mourned.
While faculties may once have been more close-knit, they also were extremely homogeneous.
Now, schools are keen to redress their historic neglect of women and minorities.
But here, too, young academics often carry expectations that the market can no longer fulfill.
Caroline McAlister is in many ways representative.
The 33-year-old daughter of an English professor at California State University in Sacramento, she fondly recalls her father quoting Hamlet at the dinner table and taking her along with students to Shakespeare festivals.
At her high-school graduation, the bookish Ms. McAlister was voted most likely to become a teacher.
"I was the class nerd," she says with a laugh.
Later, at Yale, she found a passion for her father's favorite writer, John Milton.
She also felt that the sort of flexible schedule and long holidays her father enjoyed "would allow me to be a nurturing parent, like he was."
So she went to Emory University for a Ph.D. and a dissertation on Milton -- just like dad.
Ever since, she says, a comparison of their careers bears an uncomfortable resemblance to the title of Milton's most famous work: Paradise Lost.
Like Mr. Reynolds, Ms. McAlister soon found that 10 years of costly higher education didn't yield much in the job market: a $22,000-a-year job at Salem College, a small women's school in Winston-Salem, N.C.
Her arrival at Salem also coincided with a financial crunch at the school.
Her teaching load quickly increased, with no rise in pay.
And she found herself, with other faculty, being asked to staff a phone bank in the basement of the college library, calling high-school students in hopes of coaxing more applicants.
"I felt like a telemarketer," she says.
Salem's president, Julianne Still Thrift, explains such measures with the businessworld language that has become common among college administrators.
"It's the same here as at IBM or AT&T," she says.
"I've got to have a slimmer staff, I've got to produce more with what I have, and I've got to market aggressively."
Indeed, over a period of just three years, she has doubled enrollment and balanced a budget that was $1.1 million in the red.
She hopes now to boost faculty salaries, which she says are "awful, an embarrassment," and well below those of other women's schools in the South.
But like other administrators, she doesn't see a swift change in the fortunes for young faculty.
"They're an unlucky generation," she says.
"I just hope their passion exceeds their needs."
In Ms. McAlister's case, this is so, except that her passion for Renaissance literature isn't often shared by her students.
Even fellow faculty have steered her away from her favorite subject.
"Why have you got all that old stuff on there?"
Ms. McAlister recalls one colleague commenting on her reading list.
"It isn't just Milton.
I've gotten a lot of grief for teaching Homer, too."
Now in her fifth year at Salem, Ms. McAlister is eager to win tenure and has taken her colleagues' hints.
She has, for instance, nudged both her research and her courses toward more popular modern and women's literature; she recently attracted huge enrollment for a class on cross-dressing in film and literature.
But feeling a bit isolated from others in her field, and now paid $25,000 a year, she can't avoid a gnawing sense of inadequacy, even downward mobility, when she compares her career with her father's.
"He grew up in a small town in Arkansas in a house that didn't even have a phone," she says.
Educated at public schools, he was the first in his family to go to college.
She, by contrast, enjoyed a comfortable upbringing and the best private schools.
"I had so many advantages that he didn't have," she says.
"I feel I should have done more with them."
Ms. McAlister has an added strike against her.
Like many struggling academics, she is married to another -- Clint Corcoran, whom she met in the library at Emory.
With a Ph.D. in philosophy and a specialty in Aristotle, Mr. Corcoran occupies a field where jobs are perhaps even scarcer than in English.
At one point, he found himself commuting to part-time jobs on three separate campuses, often in the same day.
"Professors are paid to think and teach ideas," Mr. Corcoran says.
"But on that schedule, the deepest thought you can muster is whether you have time for a drive-through burger between classes."
Mr. Corcoran now has a full-time job at a small college near Winston-Salem, though like his wife he has little chance to teach the subject he spent the better part of a decade studying.
Also, he and his wife now recognize that it will be very hard for them to ever move.
Finding two jobs within commuting distance is rare and some of their former classmates travel across time zones to see each other, only during holidays.
Others split jobs so they can reside in the same town.
So the couple have settled in, buying a house beside a textile mill in a transitional neighborhood.
Ms. McAlister doubts she will ever duplicate her parents' lifestyle, which includes a swimming pool and tennis court, but what concerns her more is that she may never be able to say to her children, as her father said to her, "Go to the best schools you can."
Nor is she optimistic that she can one day be as attentive a parent as her father, who often molded his schedule around that of his wife, an elementary-school teacher.
"He was a super-dad, taking time out of his day to drive me to tennis lessons -- and lecturing me about literature on the way," she says.
At Salem, by contrast, Ms. McAlister has a heavy teaching load and feels pressured to publish as much as she can to win tenure (her father wrote a few articles before going to Sacramento but hasn't published in the 32 years since).
Also, Salem doesn't give paid maternity leave.
In Sacramento, her 66-year-old father, Floyd McAlister, faces a more secure future.
As part of an incentive program in California to encourage professors to retire, he is teaching every other semester for four years while receiving both full retirement benefits and partial pay.
In effect, he gets a 20% bonus for teaching half-time.
But extra money and leisure aren't the only reasons he is slowing down.
Though he still loves teaching, he wonders if his generation shouldn't step aside to make room for struggling young academics.
"My ego doesn't demand that I stay on," he says, after a morning of teaching medieval literature.
"Maybe it's time now for less Beowulf and more tennis."
