Buoyed by good weather, Granite Construction Inc. expects to report fourth-quarter earnings of between $2.8 million and $3 million; a more than fourfold increase from the year-earlier period, David H. Watts, president and chief executive officer, said.
The estimated profit of 20 cents a share to 25 cents a share compares with year-earlier net income of $688,000, or six cents a share.
Mr. Watts said it expects to report revenue increased to between $165 million and $170 million from $133.6 million.
Release of the quarterly results, originally set for today, has been postponed until Wednesday because of accounting changes, among other things.
Since analysts forecast net income between five cents a share and 10 cents a share, Mr. Watts's estimates indicate the quarter was better than expected.
He attributed the strong year-on-year growth partly to vastly improved weather conditions across Granite's primary markets in California and the Southwest that allowed the building contractor to conduct its work without excessive interruption.
Mr. Watts said business also was boosted by three new highway contracts valued at nearly $400 million, which helped increase Granite's year-end backlog of contracts to a record of between $650 million and $660 million from $245 million a year earlier.
"We are putting on some nice contracts," Mr. Watts said.
"It will give us an opportunity to improve our earnings quite a bit" in 1994.
For 1993, Mr. Watts said the company expects to report net income increased to between $4 million, or 34 cents a share, and $4.6 million, or 39 cents a share, from profit of $3.9 million, or 34 cents a share, in 1992.
Excluding an accounting change that added about nine cents a share, Mr. Watts said 1993 profit was lower than a year earlier at between 25 cents a share and 30 cents a share.
Although the company expects to report annual revenue rose to between $570 million and $575 million from 1992's revenue of $518.3 million, Mr. Watts said profit margins have been under pressure because of increased competition from private contractors who have turned to Granite's mainstay of civil construction during California's long real-estate slump.
Mr. Watts said the margin pressures are likely to ease, though, because an improving economy is creating more private-development jobs.
For the current year, Mr. Watts said the company doesn't expect to land as many big jobs as last year.
But he said he is optimistic that Granite will get more new infrastructure business, and he added that a possible upturn soon in California's long-declining housing market could yield opportunities in the company's other business of developing tract sites.
"We see little flickers of light that tell us the bottom in California's housing slump has passed, and we may see some upturn," Mr. Watts said.
Granite shares closed at $25, up 12.5 cents in trading on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
