A group of federal agencies signaled a stepped-up, concerted attack on lending discrimination.
The agencies -- which include the Federal Reserve Board, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Department of Housing Urban Development and the Justice Department -- unveiled a new "policy statement" designed to fashion a more organized approach to enforcing federal credit laws.
The statement doesn't lay out new policies, but rather attempts to describe the legal implications of previous court rulings and of settlements reached by the agencies.
It does, however, attempt to apply to all kinds of loans -- mortgages, auto loans, small-business and consumer borrowing and credit cards -- the law that is established in housing cases.
The statement, for example, puts new emphasis on combating the "disparate impact" that lender guidelines might have on racial minorities.
A bank's refusal to lend to people below certain income levels, for example, might have a greater adverse effect on minorities.
While disparate impact has been established in federal courts as a potential form of discrimination, the Reagan and Bush administrations backed away from using the principle as a basis for civil-rights complaints.
It goes beyond direct discrimination against minority applicants, such as requiring black mortgage applicants to meet requirements or to pay fees that aren't imposed on white applicants.
HUD Secretary Henry Cisneros called the statement "a clear definition of lending discrimination."
The American Bankers Association welcomed the declaration, saying it helps clarify what banking regulators are looking for in examinations for fair lending practices.
While banks are committed to eliminating "any vestiges of discrimination" in loans, "identifying lending discrimination is not an exact science," the ABA said.
"This is setting out a road map for how we'll proceed," said Lawrence Lindsey, a Fed governor who has helped lead the Clinton administration's attack on mortgage bias.
"It lets financial institutions know that we are all very serious about lending discrimination."
Right now, said Roberta Achtenberg, a HUD assistant secretary, companies that buy mortgages from lenders and that set the loan guidelines for those lenders "are in the process of furiously reviewing their own standards."
Lenders and congressional banking committees alike have been asking for clarification of the legal issues involved in loan-bias cases, so the policy statement is "sorely needed," said Christian White, acting director of the Federal Trade Commission's consumer protection bureau.
The statement "will go a long way toward putting an end to lending discrimination," said Rep. Joseph Kennedy (D., Mass.), chairman of a House consumer credit subcommittee.
The joint policy statement spells out the implications of issues such as what gives a regulator "reason to believe" that a lender is discriminating and what constitutes a "pattern or practice" of discrimination.
A regulator has reason to believe that discrimination has occurred when loan files, statistical analysis and other evidence would lead a reasonable person to conclude that bias is involved.
A pattern or practice could involve conduct grounded in a biased policy and instances of discriminatory decisions that are a significant percentage of a bank's total lending.
