Spectrum Information Technologies Inc.'s legal troubles led six board members to quit, including former chairman Peter Caserta.
The company said a seventh director will soon leave.
The little wireless technology company, which would be left with four board members, is struggling under a federal probe into possible stock hyping.
Last week federal postal inspectors raided an affiliated financial services firm, Paradigm Group Inc., and charged five employees with wire and mail fraud.
Paradigm was formerly run by Mr. Caserta and two of the four individuals arrested in the raid have close ties to Spectrum.
Yesterday Edward Maskaly, Spectrum's chairman, said the board will have seven members once replacements are named.
He said the directors who resigned "are motivated by the interests of our shareholders."
But a person close to Spectrum said "they resigned because they decided that with people taken out in handcuffs last week, they didn't want to be associated with the company anymore."
Paradigm shares a headquarters building with Spectrum.
Included in the resignations, which occurred last Friday, were outside directors Michael D. Madden, an executive managing director at Kidder Peabody & Co., and former astronaut Thomas P. Stafford.
The person close to Spectrum said General Electric Co., which owns Kidder, ordered Mr. Madden to quit the board in light of Spectrum's recent problems.
But Mr. Madden denied this.
"I have increasing responsibilities at Kidder, including work in Asia Pacific, and I couldn't get involved in Spectrum anymore," he said.
Another outside director, Joseph H. Allen, a former group president at McGraw-Hill Inc., plans to resign once a replacement has been found, Spectrum said.
Other Spectrum executives who have quit the board are Andrew Migliorini, president of Spectrum Cellular, a subsidiary; James L. Paterek, Mr. Caserta's nephew and the president of Spectrum unit Yield TechniGlobal Inc.; and A. Werner Pleus, the company's investor relations chief.
A company spokesman said the three executives will stay with Spectrum in their current jobs.
Mr. Caserta recently took a leave of absence from Spectrum to "clear his name," according to Spectrum.
Until January, Paradigm operated as Caserta Group Inc.
Five employees of Paradigm, including Mr. Caserta's son-in-law, were charged with wire and mail fraud.
All have pleaded not guilty.
While Mr. Madden denied being a member of Caserta Group's advisory board, its documents list him and Mr. Allen and Mr. Stafford as advisers.
The federal complaint filed in Brooklyn federal court states that Caserta Group/Paradigm bilked numerous small companies out of fees for financial services that were never delivered.
Spectrum was quoted at $2.8125, up 12.5 cents, in over-the-counter trading.
