Could gold race past $500 an ounce this year?
Most bullion dealers and analysts doubt it, and are expecting a 1994 trading range of $360 to $450.
But a few analysts contend that the precious metals market is misjudging the potential firepower of investors.
Gold for February delivery settled Friday at New York's Commodity Exchange at $390.10 an ounce, down 50 cents.
"Excess liquidity in world financial markets will continue to drive gold higher," predicts Michael Howell, head of the global strategy unit at Baring Securities.
Mr. Howell, who previously studied liquidity trends for Salomon Brothers, isn't a specialist on gold.
Instead, he analyzes global financial flows.
"Almost all the major central banks now have loose monetary policies," Mr. Howell says.
Swirling money first inflates the prices of stocks and bonds; then prices of goods follow suit, he says.
The gold price trend is determined by world inflation, but the extent of the cycle is determined by flows of funds, Mr. Howell says.
And excess liquidity is already driving gold higher, he says.
In previous gold bull-market cycles, buoyant liquidity pushed gold way above its "real worth," Mr. Howell says.
Other analysts contend that speculative flows into gold and other commodities can, at best, only drive prices up temporarily.
High prices then crimp purchases of manufacturers that use the commodities as raw materials.
Meanwhile, producers and holders of surplus inventories rapidly take advantage of higher prices by selling, analysts say.
And all this exerts downward pressure on prices.
"A massive gold price surge similar to the early '80s would damage the demand for physical gold from jewelers and hoarders," says Ted Arnold, metals analyst at Merrill Lynch.
And these buyers, he says, account for the bulk of gold purchases.
"Following the gold price rise of recent months, physical demand is already dropping like a stone," Mr. Arnold says.
Demand is slumping in China, Japan and the rest of the Far East, he says.
Higher prices and recession are also curbing orders of the huge Italian jewelry industry, a Swiss bullion manager says.
Moreover, currency weakness is making gold even more expensive for European consumers who are still caught in recession, he says.
Adds Fritz Plass, director in charge of Deutsche Bank AG's precious metals operations, "Producer inventories are high and if the price surged above $400, they would sell more gold."
Central banks are also likely to be sellers at higher prices, he says.
To be sure, a study by Gold Fields Minerals Services, a consultancy owned by U.S., South African and Australian mines estimates that net gold sales of central banks totaled 440 metric tons last year.
A metric ton is 2,204.62 pounds.
This is equivalent to 13% of total 1993 supplies, says the report.
Sales were below an exceptionally high 582 tons in 1992, but they illustrate that central banks remain active in the market, says the consultancy.
Nevertheless, the ability of gold consumers and investors to absorb more than 1,000 tons of central bank gold in the past two years "suggests that the market is robust," says Stewart Murray, chief executive of Gold Fields.
He says that gold's inflation-adjusted value since 1935 should be based on U.S. price figures.
On this basis, the real worth of gold is $377, below present prices of $389.
All the same, Mr. Murray agrees that the weight of funds from financial markets could easily push gold up.
"The price can move rapidly because the market is tiny when compared to bond and equity markets," Mr. Murray says.
Investment demand in 1993 was the highest since the Persian Gulf war, Mr. Murray says.
Yet gold products, such as warrants, must be developed to attract pension and mutual funds, he says.
Otherwise last year's investment buying might turn out to be just a "passing fashion" for short-term speculative cash, he says.
Until now, the larger pension and mutual funds preferred to limit their exposure to gold stocks, Mr. Murray says.
Yet gold stocks soared by a far greater extent than the metal last year, so on a relative basis, gold metal represents better value, he asserts.
