Despite protests from cable-television operators, the Federal Communications Commission yesterday voted unanimously to require what amounts to a 7% reduction in cable-TV rates in addition to a 10% cut the FCC ordered last year.
Last year's action, however, stirred up a storm among consumers and in Congress because it actually resulted in higher bills for some cable customers.
The commission estimates that this time about 90% of the 11,000 cable systems nationwide will be required to drop prices for the package of cable service that includes local broadcast channels.
The amount of the cut, however, will vary from system to system, and some systems won't be required to cut prices at all.
Cable operators reacted angrily to the FCC action.
Time Warner Inc., the nation's second-largest cable operator with 7.2 million subscribers, called the new rules "arbitrary, unfair and unacceptable."
Time Warner's chairman, Gerald Levin said, "This already outdated regulatory scheme will not help foster the necessary investment this country needs in new technologies."
Amos B. Hostetter Jr., chief executive of Continental Cablevision Inc., the third-largest cable operator, said about the FCC vote: "Coming as it does on top of a year-long rate freeze and a 10% slash in industry revenues, it is clearly punitive."
Reed Hundt, the FCC's new chairman, predicted the rate rules would save consumers about $3 billion a year.
In an interview, he rejected claims by many cable companies that the new rules would hamper their ability to build high-capacity networks that can compete with local phone companies to carry conversations as well as a wide range of interactive programming.
Cable operators' "opportunity to invest in broadband interactive services is just as great as it ever was," he said.
"In fact, we're encouraging them to look to these new products for greater profits."
The action by the three-member commission was triggered by thousands of consumer complaints as well as a commission survey that found nearly a third of cable subscribers were paying higher rates after the first round of rate cuts last April.
Shortly after being sworn in as chairman, Mr. Hundt launched a broad review of the cable rules.
Economists and other staff members studied price differences between cable systems that face competition and those that don't.
They came up with a 17% gap.
A less-rigorous exercise last April had turned up a 10% price differential between competitive and monopoly cable systems.
But that wasn't all.
The staff also put together a plan that would allow operators to file detailed cost data with the commission to justify rates above a benchmark rate that a company likely would charge if it faced actual competition.
In the end, the commission voted yesterday on a comprehensive package of cable rules that, at the least, lifts the cloud of uncertainty for cable operators, their bankers and investors.
In recent months, cable operators have lobbied fiercely against rate cuts, arguing that last year's federal regulations have already cost them $2 billion in lost revenue.
Nonetheless, revenue for most big cable operators has continued to rise, and many cable operators are in a better position financially since refinancing heavy debt in recent months.
The Commerce Department has predicted continued growth in cable industry revenue, to an estimated $28.8 billion this year from $26.3 billion last year.
And cable stock values have risen over the past year.
"This is not an industry that's going to go out of business because they now have to charge competitive rates," said Bradley Stillman, legislative counsel of the Consumer Federation of America.
"This is reforming some seven years of anticompetitive price abuse."
Analysts took a cautious view of the new rate cuts.
"The bigger cable companies will survive this," but may lose some cash-flow growth, said Alvin Mirman, an analyst with Gruntal & Co.
Other analysts predicted that the FCC action would likely accelerate consolidation in the cable industry, as smaller cable operators cash out of the business, selling to better-heeled players.
The FCC's decision generally played well in Congress, which voted overwhelmingly for the 1992 law and was burned when last year's rules didn't work as expected.
Democratic Sen. Ernest Hollings of South Carolina, chairman of the Commerce Committee, praised the FCC action but added that he would be watching "to see just how this works out."
Some of the cable industry's supporters were incensed, however.
Republican Sen. Conrad Burns of Montana said the FCC "clearly has gone beyond what Congress intended."
The new rules require cable systems that face no competition to cut basic rates 17% from their September 1992 level or to the benchmark price, whichever is less.
The agency said it would study cost data before requiring further cuts from certain cable systems.
Those systems include those that will have to cut rates less than 17% to reach the benchmark, those whose prices already fall below the new benchmark, and cable systems with 15,000 or fewer subscribers.
"This is strong medicine for the cable industry, but it isn't poison," said Nicholas Allard, a former law partner of Mr. Hundt who has closely followed cable issues.
"Some big winners, in addition to consumers, are competitors," added Mr. Allard, who has represented companies that offer cable-TV fare via microwave systems.
The decisions give satellite and microwave competitors incentives to offer smaller and lower-priced packages, he said.
The FCC has a major job ahead: explaining its new rules to consumers, cable operators and local and state governments.
To do that, it has scheduled seminars around the country over the next few weeks and has set up information lines to assist callers in obtaining and completing a variety of forms required under the new rules.
Though the rules pare rates, they give cable companies a way to make more money by adding new channels and services.
"Over time, we're going to see new services, and costs will rise.
No doubt about it," said Sandy Wilson, acting head of the FCC's cable division.
But the point, she emphasized, is to offer consumers more choices and new types of services.
The new rules, required by the 1992 Cable Act, are expected to go into effect in mid-May.
The 1992 law lets communities regulate rates for the basic service package, which includes local broadcast stations, if they follow the FCC rules.
The FCC can regulate packages of service that include such cable programming as Discovery Channel, MTV, CNN and ESPN when customers file complaints.
Premium channels such as HBO and Showtime and pay-per-view fare are free of regulation.
