The bond market sell-off turned into a rout yesterday as prices of Treasury securities suffered their biggest losses in months on worrisome inflation news.
The violent downdraft left investors unwilling to take advantage of the higher yields resulting from the sell-off.
Traders are looking to the Federal Reserve to signal its resolve against inflation by raising short-term interest rates a second time.
"Until we get the market to stabilize . . . customers won't buy," said Mead Briggs, head of risk trading at Deutsche Bank Securities Corp.
"And you won't get some stability until the Fed does what it has to do."
The Fed raised short-term rates in early February.
The collapse in prices briefly took the yield on the 6 1/4% 30-year bond to 6.81%, its highest level since June.
The yield on the 10-year note reached a 12-month high.
For short-term yields, one has to look even further back.
The yield on the new two-year note reached 4.82%, its loftiest perch since early December 1992.
Prices managed to creep back from their worst levels, however.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dropped 1 1/2 points, or $15 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to yield 6.77%, up from 6.65% on Monday.
The bulk of yesterday's selling was caused by troublesome data on inflation contained in a National Association of Purchasing Management report released at midmorning.
The association said its prices-paid index jumped to 67 in February from 59.8 in January.
The overall NAPM index slipped to 56.6 in February from 57.7, depressed by harsh winter weather.
Also troubling for the bond market was a rise in the NAPM employment index to an almost five-year high of 50 from 48.3.
"The story of the day was the price index and a little bit the employment index," said Mr. Briggs.
A reading above 50 on the price index reflects rising prices -- the higher the index level, the faster the increase in prices.
Bond investors fear inflation because it reduces the value of investments with a fixed rate of return.
Earlier in the day, the Commerce Department revised fourth-quarter gross-domestic-product growth up sharply to a 7.5% rate from an originally reported 5.9% pace.
Analysts said the fourth-quarter data indicate the economy began the current year with a great deal of momentum.
In addition to the economic news, market watchers also reported widespread nervousness over weakness in other major bond markets around the world.
Many of those declines were actually sparked by concerns over what was happening with U.S. interest rates.
Participants also say the market has reached a stage where selling only breeds more selling, especially by traders who end up making short sales of Treasurys as a hedge against losses on holdings of other securities.
A trader executes a short sale by selling a borrowed security in hopes of buying it back at a later date at a lower price and pocketing the difference.
By the time the NAPM report was released yesterday, the market had already given up a portion of the gains it eked out Monday.
And once traders and investors saw the details of the report, the floor fell out from underneath the bond market.
Although traders reported some liquidation of holdings by institutional investors, the bulk of the selling was by dealers and speculative accounts.
"There was more professional, leveraged selling than portfolio selling," Deutsche Bank's Mr. Briggs said.
Most money managers have pulled their flak jackets up over their heads and are keeping out of the fray.
Even though yields are substantially higher than they were just a few weeks, ago, the violent nature of the sell-off has left them paralyzed.
"It's like Bambi stuck in the headlights," said Steve Wood, director of financial markets research at BA Securities Inc.
"You look at the market and ask `have we passed appropriate levels,' and the answer is probably yes.
But we could go down a lot harder before we come back to what value should be."
John Kallis, a portfolio manager at State Street Research & Management Co., agreed.
"The bond market has probably gone far enough, but there's nothing to stop it from going further," he said.
The notion of relative value has taken a back seat to emotion, and that requires a different way of approaching the market, according to Paul Denoon, a portfolio manager at Alliance Capital Management.
"In this market, I don't set levels where I'm going to buy or sell," Mr. Denoon said.
"It's a bear market that has no ranges," he said.
Mr. Denoon added that the market is behaving the same "on the way down that it did on the way up."
When bonds were rallying to record low yields, "you had this spiralling effect where higher prices dragged in more buying," he said.
Until the bond market has displayed convincing signs of stabilizing, portfolio managers said they preferred to remain on the sidelines -- even if it means missing out on a portion of a rebound.
"It really has to stabilize and build a base," Mr. Denoon said.
Prices in the secondary junk-bond market fell nearly two points in active trading.
That represents $20 for a bond with a $1,000 face value.
Hardest hit were recently issued junk bonds priced with aggressive 8% to 9% yields, traders said.
"The blood was heavy," one trader said.
Last week's issue by the Beazer Homes USA Inc. unit of Hanson PLC -- priced at par to yield 9% -- fell 1.5 points to 96.5 for a 9.55% yield, according to one trader.
Including that decline, the price of the bonds since their pricing is down 3.5 points.
Other bonds with yields in the 10% to 11% area were less affected.
The investment-grade market also was hit.
The difference between yields of Treasurys and noncallable bonds -- or the spread -- widened by 0.03-0.05 percentage point yesterday.
However, spreads on callable paper were unchanged.
As interest rates rise it becomes less likely that debt will be called and refinanced.
The new-issue market remained mostly quiet during the day's turmoil, although nearly $2 billion of debt was offered -- including Republic National Bank of New York's $1 billion offering of one-year bank notes, federal-agency debt and a $425 million junk-bond offering from Bally's Park Place Funding Inc., a unit of Bally Manufacturing Corp.
Republic National is a unit of Republic New York Corp.
Despite plunging muni prices and rising yields, issuers proceeded with competitive sales totaling more than $600 million.
Traders said munis registered maximum losses in the area of 1 1/2 point in secondary dealings, primarily on news of the jump in the purchasers' index.
Amid all the selling, the yield for the New York State Medical Care Facilities Finance Agency's 5.25% of 2019 bonds climbed to about 6.1% from 5.97% Monday afternoon, muni specialists said.
As for the primary market, one of the new issues was Georgia's $215.9 million Series 1994B improvement bonds.
A Merrill Lynch & Co. group won the securities with a bid setting the net interest cost at 5.1165% and gave them yields ranging from 3.6% in 1996 to 5.45% in 2013 and 2014.
Despite an unsold balance of $57.2 million yesterday afternoon, a Merrill Lynch underwriting specialist said "we're pretty pleased," considering the weakness of the market.
He attributed demand largely to the bonds' noncallable status, and he noted a hearty appetite for bonds with maturities in 10 years or longer.
In other primary market action, Merrill Lynch won the Norfolk, Va., $182.7 million Series 1994 improvement and refunding bonds with a bid setting the true interest cost at 5.1422%.
PaineWebber Inc. won New York State's $224.1 million general obligation improvement bonds with a bid setting the true interest cost at 5.15791%.
