What makes art collectors tick?
Are they really happy after they've spent all that money on all those things?
Why do they buy what they buy?
Do they all know what they're doing?
Werner Muensterberger, a psychoanalyst in New York, has bent himself to the task of finding out and produced in "Collecting: An Unruly Passion" (Princeton University Press, 295 pages, $24.95) a book that seeks to revise our understanding of what the acquisition of objects is all about.
It is a fascinating, occasionally unsettling book.
Most previous books on collecting have focused on art collectors and, in some cases, the commercial dealers who made their purchases possible.
But it is collecting in the broadest sense of the term that lies at the heart of Dr. Muensterberger's study.
Fine and decorative art is involved, to be sure, but so is just about anything else individuals have been squirreling away over the centuries: books, skulls, tulips, shells, teddy bears, travel guides and maps, apothecary jars.
As he looks into these troves, Dr. Muensterberger also describes their owners, running the gamut of collector types.
We read about collectors who want only the best; those who want everything they can get their hands on; collectors who continually trade up until the finest example is in their hands; collectors who love potpourris.
And unlike most previous books on collecting which so often focus on personalities, Dr. Muensterberger delves deeper, searching for the inner impulse that prompts individuals -- sometimes quite late in life -- to troll auctions, private houses, dealers, even the homes of the newly deceased, to satisfy their taste for certain objects.
He wants to know what bond could be uniting such diverse people.
Early on, the author provides something of an answer when he writes of collectors: "The roots of their passion can almost always be traced back to their formative years, often hidden from their conscious awareness."
Collecting, he continues, is "an almost magical means for undoing the strains and stresses of early life and achieving the promise of goodness."
Depending on your opinion of psychoanalysis, this interpretation is likely to sound either far-fetched or facile.
But Dr. Muensterberger often overcomes the reader's skepticism both by the volume and variety of evidence he introduces to bolster his case.
One example he cites is the 19th-century English eccentric Sir Thomas Phillips.
Today his fame rests on his activities as a book and manuscript collector.
But he started out acquiring church records, deeds and gravestones, evidence of a fascination with genealogy that Dr. Muensterberger traces to his shame over being an illegitimate child.
Then there is the collector whose interest in travel and guidebooks grew out of his childhood experiences map-reading for his performer parents as they drove around the country from one engagement to the next.
Knowing where he was going and helping the family get there, he explained to the author, relieved the anxieties of rootlessness.
In the course of his discussion, Dr. Muensterberger manages to overturn a number of fundamental assumptions about the activity of collecting.
The most obvious of these is the notion that collectors are motivated by intellectual curiosity, an appreciation of beauty, or both.
Not so, insists the author.
These are ancillary, rather than central factors, he claims.
The main impulse is compensatory, a way of making up for some early hurt.
To read Dr. Muensterberger, in fact, the appreciation of beauty doesn't enter into collecting at all.
Does this mean that Giovanni Bellini's magnificent "Saint Francis in Ecstasy" hangs in the Frick collection today only because of some deep rupture in childhood psyche of Henry Clay Frick?
If that's the case, maybe neurosis isn't such a bad thing after all.
At least it can provide pleasure to a lot of people.
Another of the book's casualties is the idea of collecting as a refined, discriminating activity practiced only by gentlemen (and a few gentlewomen).
In his book, Dr. Muensterberger draws comparisons between collecting and less socially acceptable pursuits, such as drug addiction and sexual libertinism.
He quotes from J. Paul Getty's diary, in which the billionaire oddball described himself as "an incurably hooked" collector, one who "was once again (in 1960) determined to reform. . . .
My mind is set.
I am not going to change it."
But he fell off the wagon when a painting by Pierre Bonnard came up for sale.
"Set mind or not," he wrote, "I was unable to resist."
Then there was the collector who likened the discovery of an object he wanted to buy to seeing a beautiful body he simply had to make love to, and Dr. Muensterberger points out that like the typical Don Juan, who is more interested in conquest than a long-term relationship, ownership for some collectors offers only momentary satisfactions.
What they really live for is the chase and capture.
Sometimes, the all-consuming will to possess overwhelms every other consideration, turning the collector into a monster.
Once he got started, Sir Thomas Phillips's determination to own a copy of every book in existence was so great it made him neglect his creditors and his family, driving his wife to an early grave.
Mr. Gibson is a free-lance art critic.
