Drink your plutonium, it's good for you.
A Japanese nuclear-power lobby is spreading the word that, when used properly, plutonium isn't dangerous but downright friendly.
The Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development Corp. has decided to tell its story through a cartoon mascot, "Reliable Friend Little Pluto."
A rosy-cheeked little guy, wearing a snug helmet with the initials "Pu" (plutonium's unfortunate periodic symbol), Pluto stars in a promotional video intended to allay fears about dangerous, unstable elements.
Like a lot of people, little Pluto is scared of nuclear weapons.
"I was used for bombs, which was very regrettable" he concedes, like a politician discussing his college years.
"I really hate war!"
Pluto adds.
"I'd like to work for peace.
Dynamite is dangerous, but it's useful for humans.
I'd like to be like that."
Little Pluto wants to talk turkey about the dangers of plutonium exposure.
"It's a misunderstanding," says the diminutive particle emitter.
"People think I'm a cause of cancer.
Plutonium isn't like cyanide, where just a little bit can kill you."
The video shows a cartoon man who's bloated from downing six mugs of plutonium cocktail.
"Even if you swallow it," says Pluto, "it goes right out your body."
A toilet flushes, and the man emerges slim.
"I feel so fresh!" he exults.
Pluto's bosses are, not surprisingly, pro-Pu.
"We want people to understand that plutonium isn't threatening if we treat it carefully," says Takashi Daimon, a spokesman at Power Reactor and Nuclear Development, which hopes to operate a fast-breeder reactor in the city of Tsuruga, in northern Japan.
Little Pluto is certainly generating a lot of heat among Japan's antinuclear activists.
"The video is absurd; plutonium is a deadly poison," says Kiyoshi Yoshimura, of the Tsuruga Citizen's Group That Protests Against Construction of the FastBreeder Reactor.
He cites Japanese government reports that say ingesting plutonium can be fatal.
"The video is cute, but misleading," Mr. Yoshimura says.
No matter; Mr. Daimon says little Pluto has a long half-life ahead of him.
"He says, `Trust Me.'"
Mr. Yoshimura doesn't.
"Very unscientific," says the protester.
"I think a lot more people will be suspicious about plutonium after this."
