Chances that home sales and mortgage refinancings will put additional zip into the economy this year are fading in the wake of higher interest rates.
Data released yesterday by the Mortgage Bankers Association show that applications for mortgages on new and existing homes dropped sharply for the second week in a row and that mortgage refinancings are running at only half the level seen last fall.
Last week, the Commerce Department said new single-home building permits fell in February, the second decline in a row.
"Higher interest rates are taking a bite out of housing," says Michael Evans of the Evans Group.
The Boca Raton, Fla., economist is lowering his estimate for growth later this year because of the ripple effect he sees coming from the falloff in mortgage refinancing and home sales.
The Federal Reserve Board's move this week to raise short-term rates for the second time in two months will "not restart the housing market," says Mr. Evans.
David Lereah, chief economist of the Mortgage Bankers group, has his doubts as well.
Although the Fed's latest move caused long-term rates to drop slightly initially, Mr. Lereah expects the strong economy to push mortgage rates above 8% later this year.
The rise in rates has taken conventional 30-year mortgages to nearly 7.7%, compared with 6.7% last October.
Even at the new levels though, rates are still relatively low and home sales are still expected to top last year's level.
Housing and mortgage financing just won't be as much of a catalyst for growth as they were.
Refinancing and lower rates on adjustable-rate mortgages last year saved homeowners more than $1 billion a month, which they used for travel, clothes, new cars and entertainment.
Shelia Runkle of Bahama, N.C., saw her monthly mortgage payments drop to $580, from $860, last year after she refinanced her home.
She said she used the savings to fix up antique cars, dine out occasionally and plan for a trip to Europe this year with her family.
"It gave us extra breathing room," she says.
The 20-year lows that mortgage rates hit last year also helped consumers buy larger homes, and still have enough left over to buy appliances, rugs and other furnishings.
Such durable goods spending was one of the principal reasons the economy perked up last year.
Today's interest rates, however, would make Bryan Nickel think twice about taking out a new mortgage.
The Costa Mesa, Calif., resident had locked in a mortgage in January to buy a new home.
But if he were faced with that decision today, the mortgage would cost an extra $200 a month.
"I don't know if we'd go ahead," he says.
"My wife would have to go back to work."
Mr. Lereah of the Mortgage Bankers group considers the recent dropoff in mortgages to be a "yellow warning flag that interest rates may now be high enough to have a negative impact."
After the Federal Reserve Board raised rates in early February, many prospective homeowners rushed to lock in mortgages, he noted.
Mr. Lereah said he also is "nervous about coming months" because of the drop in building permits.
Contractors usually take out permits for new homes within a month or two of breaking ground.
Thus, bad weather in February should not have had much of an impact on their decisions.
Another sign that builders have become less bullish showed up in a National Association of Home Builders survey last week.
Of the more than 400 builders responding, only 48% felt the outlook is "good" for seasonally adjusted sales of new single-family homes in the next six months, down from 72% in November.
Michael Carliner, an economist with the association, remains optimistic, however.
Builders' comments do not indicate "widespread alarm" about higher rates, he says.
And building permits, he believes, will pick up when the unusually harsh winter is over.
Higher rates are having a bigger impact on refinancing activity.
Refinancing volume at Countrywide Funding Corp., the nation's largest mortgage banking company, is down to 20% of mortgage activity, from 50% late last year.
Mr. Lereah sees the possibility that any money that would flow into the economy as a result of consumers refinancing their mortgages this year might well be offset by the extra cost of adjustable-rate mortgages resulting from the rise in rates.
Similarly, Nancy Lazaar, an economist with International Strategy & Investment Group, said in a commentary last week that because refinancings are off, "retail sales growth is likely to slow further" because consumers won't be enjoying additional windfalls on their mortgages.
