For Human Genome Sciences Inc., this week's reports of the discovery of a colon-cancer gene provide proof that being the world's biggest gene collector will pay off.
HGS is a fledgling but well-heeled company with no products yet but more than 40,000 complete or partial human genes in its biological files.
This number is growing rapidly and soon may include the vast majority of, and possibly all, human genes, HGS asserts.
The company claims that this huge inventory gives it first crack over competitors, including universities and governments, at the discovery and patenting of hundreds or even thousands of useful genes.
And, it says, the first published evidence of how it intends to exploit its gene collection came this week with a report from researchers at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in the journal Science.
In their report, the Johns Hopkins geneticists said that HGS played a pivotal role in their discovery of a gene that causes an inherited form of colon cancer, called hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer.
Geneticist Bert Vogelstein and his colleagues at Johns Hopkins knew last December that the defective gene they were seeking was similar to certain bacterial and yeast genes that were already known.
Several weeks ago, Dr. Vogelstein called HGS asking if any human genes in its files were similar to the known bacterial genes, recalls HGS's chairman and chief executive officer, William Haseltine.
"I said we had three such genes," Dr. Haseltine says.
"Bert said, `Super, I'm coming right down.'
By midnight, we had the gene he was looking for."
With the gene from HGS in hand, the Johns Hopkins geneticists were able to show that a mutant version was causing colon cancer in 10 different families known to suffer an inherited form of the disease.
The cancer gene is the first gene that HGS has come up with that meets the criterion of usefulness for a patent.
The gene and its mutants have a potential use in diagnosing colon cancer and possibly other cancers.
Sometime in the future it might also be useful in devising therapies for cancer.
The company has applied for a patent on the new-found cancer gene.
Dr. Haseltine, the former Harvard virologist who founded HGS, believes the episode should erase much of the skepticism that has greeted the company's claims about its ability to exploit its huge library of human genes.
Those genes aren't, in and of themselves, patentable.
The scientists know the fragments of human DNA in the library are genes, but they don't yet know what biological purpose they serve or which ones have a usefulness that patent law requires.
Dr. Haseltine says HGS expects to find many more genes with a patentable usefulness.
For instance, HGS scientists recently have found a gene from heart and lung tissue that digests DNA, he says.
This makes it a potential treatment for the lung congestion that threatens the lives of patients with cystic fibrosis.
The HGS gene and its enzyme, if parlayed into such a treatment, would compete with an enzyme already being sold by Genentech Inc.
The difference would be that the Genentech enzyme comes from a gene that functions in the pancreas while HGS's comes from a gene that functions in the lungs, Dr. Haseltine says.
"No matter which way you turn in the medicine of the future you run into genes," whether it be for diagnostic, therapeutic or scientific use, he adds.
But many other scientists are still skeptical that HGS has found the secret for commercially exploiting the human genome.
Discovery of the same colon-cancer gene was reported yesterday by a second, competing research team that used a different route to finding the gene.
"We got the same result and got it faster" than the Johns Hopkins-HGS team, says Richard Fishel, a molecular biologist at the University of Vermont who was one of the key members of the multiuniversity team of scientists who found the colon-cancer gene.
Moreover, Dr. Fishel adds, it's by no means certain that HGS will get a patent on the gene, since the universities of the scientists on the team also have applied for a patent on the same gene.
Word of HGS's role in discovering the cancer gene apparently leaked out early and caused the price of the company's stock to jump to $17.25 from $15 on Tuesday afternoon, according to the Dow Jones News Service.
(The stock rose 75 cents, or 4.2%, to close at $18.50 a share in Nasdaq Stock Market trading yesterday.)
The issue of the journal Science including the gene discovery wasn't supposed to be made public until Wednesday evening.
Officials of HGS and Science said they didn't know how the information might have leaked out.
However, a wide range of scientists, university information officials and reporters were aware of the research days before publication.
The experiment in which HGS played a part, for instance, involved 20 scientists at seven institutions.
The second, competing team that found the same gene involved 18 scientists and six institutions.
Also, copies of the reports were available to the news media as early as Monday on an embargoed basis.
One major drug maker is betting millions on the HGS approach to gene exploitation: SmithKline Beecham PLC, the big Anglo-American drug company.
SmithKline has committed a total of $125 million for an equity interest in HGS and for a first option on HGS's gene discoveries.
Last year, HGS's revenue of $22 million came entirely from payments by SmithKline.
(SmithKline hasn't yet decided whether it will exercise its option on the cancer gene, a spokesman said.)
HGS's strategy is based on a gene-finding technique worked out by molecular biologist Craig Venter when he was at the National Institutes of Health.
The technique lets Dr. Venter find genes without knowing what their function is in the cell.
"We're finding 300 to 400 new genes per day," Dr. Haseltine says.
These fragments are all transplanted to bacteria, yeasts and other test-tube-grown cells for storage.
But, he explains, the company's most valuable asset is the sequence of the molecules in a gene, which is the blueprint for a protein.
So HGS has a room full of automated machines "sequencing" about 750,000 molecules a day.
Once the molecular sequence of part of each gene is stored in the company's private data bank, HGS scientists begin searching through gene and protein data banks round the world to see if the gene has been found by others.
They are particularly on the watch for new genes that are similar to but not identical with genes already discovered.
When such similarities pop up, the scientists can then start making educated guesses as to what the function of the new-found gene is.
HGS has been criticized for keeping this vast store of sequence data secret.
But, Dr. Haseltine says, "we're committed to making this information available to scientists world-wide in not-for-profit institutions for scientific purposes in a way that preserves our proprietary rights."
The details, however, haven't been worked out, he says.
