Baking-soda toothpastes, shower gels and home-diagnostic products continue to top the list of fast-growing health and beauty-care products today.
New products, backed by hefty ad budgets, contributed to the growth of many bestsellers in the fourth quarter.
Quarterly sales of baking-soda toothpastes in supermarkets and drugstores grew 80% from a year earlier, according to Towne-Oller & Associates, a unit of Information Resources Inc.
That growth largely reflects the introduction of Procter & Gamble Co.'s Crest with Baking Soda and Unilever Group's Mentadent.
New products such as Nivea, made by the U.S. unit of Germany's Beiersdorf AG, also spurred sales of shower gels, or liquid bath soaps.
Sales in the category increased 47% for the quarter.
Americans' growing desire to take more control of their own health care kept sales of several home-diagnostic products strong.
New to the list this quarter: digital thermometers, whose sales increased 72%.
Driving that growth was the Thermoscan Instant Thermometer, which sells for about $100.
Inserted in the ear, the gadget, made by Thermoscan Inc. of San Diego, measures the emission of infrared radiation from the eardrum and converts it into a conventional temperature reading.
A company spokesman said the product, which gives a reading in one second, is popular among parents of small children.
Each quarter, Towne-Oller compiles lists of the fastest-growing and fastest-declining health and beauty-care products exclusively for The Wall Street Journal.
The rosters are based on product shipments received by 30,400 supermarkets and 12,900 drugstores.
Towne-Oller ranks 350 product categories, each with quarterly sales of at least $6 million, by percentage change from the year-earlier period.
Over-the-counter contraceptives aimed at women, including contraceptive sponges and spermicides, were among the fastest-declining products.
Quarterly sales of contraceptives fell 20%, as women continue to switch to prescription methods of birth control.
Sales of over-the-counter yeast-infection treaments declined 11%, as growing numbers of women find them inconvenient to use.
Meanwhile, the rise of the "natural look" hurt sales of hairstyling spritzes and nail polishes, which fell 18% and 16%, respectively.
NovaCare Inc. said it completed its merger with RehabClinics Inc.
Friday after stockholders of both rehabilitation services companies approved a stock swap, valued at about $200 million.
Each share outstanding of RehabClinics common stock was exchanged for 1.6 shares of NovaCare common stock.
NovaCare, which had about 50 million shares outstanding, also issued about 14 million new shares.
The new company will use the NovaCare name.
