General Electric Co.'s fourth-quarter earnings rose 10% to $1.48 billion, and analysts saw signs of a recovering economy in the improved sales pace of certain GE businesses.
Fourth-quarter revenue jumped 12% to $18.09 billion from $16.2 billion a year earlier.
The increase was significantly greater than the 3% to 4% increases GE posted in the prior three periods.
"That's a favorable trend," said Russell Leavitt, an analyst at Salomon Brothers.
"This suggests good sales and earnings improvements this year," he said, declaring the company's latest results a "very good performance."
GE's fourth-quarter earnings, which amounted to $1.73 a share, were slightly better than Wall Street analysts' consensus estimate of $1.69, compiled by Zacks Investment Research.
GE's profit in the year-earlier period was $1.34 billion, or $1.57 a share.
GE said two of the company's economy-sensitive businesses, plastics and appliances, had "good growth" compared with a year ago.
A spokesman said the "pretty good momentum" in the so-called "short cycle" businesses "signals a strengthening economy."
Based in Fairfield, Conn., GE's other businesses include medical equipment, lighting, financial services, and broadcasting.
In the first three quarters of this year much of GE's sales and earnings gains came from the so-called "long cycle" business, such as power systems, where the time between order and delivery is long, and thus the businesses aren't easily affected by the vagaries of the economy.
The latest results brought full year net income to $5.18 billion, or $6.06 a share, before the effects of certain accounting changes.
That was up 10% from the 1992 profit of $4.73 billion, or $5.51 a share.
Without the restructuring charges related to the company's divestiture of its aerospace business last year, net income rose 16% from 1992.
Revenue rose 6% to $60.56 billion from $57.07 billion.
Eleven of GE's 12 businesses posted higher earnings from continuing operations compared with a year ago.
Ten of them posted double-digit increases, led by financial services, broadcasting and plastics.
GE said that as it expected, the aircraft-engine business posted "much lower" earnings than a year ago.
GE said all businesses except aircraft engine posted increased operating-profit margin, bringing the overall operating margin to a record 12.5%, up from 1992's comparable 11.5%.
GE's stock closed at $108.50 a share, down 25 cents in late trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
