New York -- With "Three Tall Women," Edward Albee has finally written another great play.
After years of indifferent efforts, the enfant terrible of the '60s has turned out a dazzler worthy of mention in the same breath as "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf" (1962) and "A Delicate Balance" (1966).
In a theatrical season as wintry as New York's arctic weather, "Three Tall Women" blazes as bright as a midsummer day.
The three tall women are identified only as A, B and C. A (Myra Carter) is an ailing 92-year-old matriarch who, in Act I, floats in and out of senility but never out of command.
B (Marian Seldes) is her sharp-tongued middle-aged companion, and C (Jordan Baker) is her catty young attorney.
The play takes place in A's bedroom, from which A, with the uncertain kidneys of the elderly, occasionally flees for the bathroom.
The well-appointed room clearly is that of a rich woman, but it has a five-star-hotel look about it; the only personal possessions are A's memories.
"I think you remember everything," says B in a gentle moment.
"You just can't bring it to mind all the time."
Memories are what Act II is about.
While A's body lies in a coma in the huge bed that dominates the stage, the three tall women play A at different stages of her life.
It is a brilliant dramatic device, stunningly executed.
Together, the three incarnations of the same woman examine their shared life.
The young C is radiant and sensual and more than a tad calculating as she enthuses about her various gentlemen admirers.
Middle-aged B has more sharp edges; she is shrewd and weary and occasionally hovers near despair.
It is left to A, with her mind restored to its full capacity, to complete the picture.
Cackling with wit and brandishing her cane as a monarch might wield a scepter, she refines her younger selves' recollections with dry-eyed realism.
"He was wonderful," A recalls of a young lover, "but then there was life."
Life included a penguin-shaped husband, an alcoholic sister and a homosexual son.
The play's most electrifying moment is the women's recounting of A's break with her son decades before the time of the play.
As they are telling that story, a young man appears at A's bedside and takes her hand.
He says nothing, but his mute devotion is heart-rending.
It is also, for Mr. Albee, a somewhat autobiographical moment, as he too suffered rejection by his mother for his homosexuality.
Each of Mr. Albee's women is memorable, and each of the actresses is exceptional.
As directed by Lawrence Sacharow, they work seamlessly together.
But it is Ms. Carter, as A, who is astonishing.
She plays A as a woman full of life on the verge of death, with a frail body that can barely contain her exuberance.
She has the clarity and the lack of inhibition of the very old with none of the self-pity.
The production history of "Three Tall Women," which is playing off-Broadway at the Vineyard Theatre, reflects in no small measure the changes in the American theater since Mr. Albee first burst on the scene some 30 years ago.
In the '60s, Broadway was still hospitable to serious plays such as "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf."
Today most plays originate off-Broadway or in regional theaters.
The original production of "Three Tall Women," was way, way off-Broadway at Vienna's English Theater in 1992; the American premiere was last summer at the River Arts Theatre in Woodstock, N.Y.
If the truth be told, there is another reason Mr. Albee's plays haven't made it to Broadway -- or even to off-Broadway in some cases -- in recent years.
And that is that critics haven't liked them much.
The general opinion is that they have become increasingly abstract and cerebral, that their talkiness and undramatic formats make them inaccessible to most audiences.
And so perhaps it's understandable that Mr. Albee is said to loathe both critics and Broadway.
Neither have been kind to him in recent years.
He has tended to stay away from New York, teaching playwriting at the University of Houston and other academic institutions, and directing his own plays in such favorite spots as Houston's Alley Theater and Vienna's English Theater.
New Yorkers can see more Albee than usual this year.
The Signature Theater, off-off-Broadway, is doing a season of his plays; the current offering is three one-acts.
It is with "Three Tall Women," though, that he makes a triumphant return to the town that feted and lionized the young playwright three decades ago.
Welcome back, Mr. Albee.
If I knew David Ives, author of the hit off-Broadway comedy "All in the Timing," I'd make a point of staying away from him on April Fool's Day.
Judging from the antics that he's orchestrated at the John Houseman Theatre, he's capable of some innovative pranks.
Most of "All in the Timing's" six sketches originated at a Manhattan comedy club and here are strung together in no discernible order, except that each is funnier than the last.
In No. 5, Philip Glass goes to buy a loaf of bread and everyone in the bakery is chattering in staccato tones that parody one of Mr. Glass's repetitive compositions.
In No. 3 (my favorite), three quarreling monkeys named Swift, Milton and Kafka are locked in a cage with typewriters to see how long it will take them to write "Hamlet."
None of this buffoonery adds up to anything that really deserves to be called a play.
It's a string of skits like those Sid Caesar used to put on television before it was dumbed down for the masses.
But who's bothering with definitions?
Whatever you call it, this highbrow horseplay is delectable.
