Seattle -- The Druids must have put a curse on the Seattle Opera's new production of Bellini's "Norma."
First, soprano Carol Vaness, the show's star and reason for being, hurt her back and pulled out of the production a few days into rehearsals.
A frantic search around the opera globe produced a replacement, English soprano Jane Eaglen.
She arrived a week later to take on the role of the Druid priestess, and was promptly felled by the flu.
So Ms. Eaglen made her American opera debut in one of the most demanding roles of the repertoire with no stage or orchestra rehearsals.
It would be nice to report that this much-jinxed "Norma" turned out to be an unqualified triumph, but alas, to paraphrase Bertolt Brecht, this is life, not opera.
First, however, the good news: Ms. Eaglen can certainly sing Norma, and not many people can.
She has the necessary range and vocal control, the power for the role's stentorian parts and the stamina for its length.
Her sound is round, full and handsome, her coloratura flexible, if a little weightier than is desirable, and she sings very beautiful pianissimos.
Her voice showed some strain in Act II -- occasional pitch problems, clipped, out-of-breath phrases and a pinched high note -- but she did some of her best singing in the difficult soprano-tenor duet of the opera's home stretch.
But Ms. Eaglen had more to contend with than just the last-minute circumstances of her debut.
Director Nicholas Muni apparently had other things on his mind than helping his leading lady inhabit Norma's emotional roller coaster in a believable way.
Instead, Mr. Muni and his designer, John Conklin, staged a "Norma" stuffed with unconvincing ideas and bizarre gestures and left Ms. Eaglen, who is a big woman, high and dry.
There wasn't much sparkle to this Norma: Even her first big showpiece, the death-defying cabaletta to "Casta diva," just lay there.
It was clear we were in trouble when the curtain went up on a pile of broken statuary with the Roman eagle planted in its midst.
No sign of the Druids' sacred forest.
That only showed up at the end, as a projection of burnt tree trunks.
Even more ominous were the Druids themselves, looking like a bunch of malnourished Hare Krishnas complete with orange robes, shaved pates and unkempt fringes of hair.
Norma, monumental in a trailing black gown that she kept nervously flicking away, had clearly been getting most of the rations, not that it was doing her much good.
The Druids kept falling down, no doubt to demonstrate their total subjugation at the hands of the Romans.
During the sacred rites, they lay on their backs and waved their legs in the air, as though attacked by roach spray, and during the "Guerra, guerra!" chorus of Act II they indulged in an orgy of self- and mutual flagellation, blood and all.
This bunch of Druids wouldn't get far in a fight with the Romans, which was probably the point -- but beating the audience members over the head with a concept is not necessarily the way to make them feel it.
The lighting, by Duane Schuler, was equally obvious.
Guess what color it turned when Norma started in on "My burning fury . . ." after she found out that her lover, Pollione, had betrayed her with novice priestess Adalgisa?
All eyes are supposed to be on Norma when she appears, but Mr. Muni kept upstaging her, first by giving Pollione visitation rights before Norma's first scene with their children, and later, in the finale, by having second banana soprano Adalgisa (Susanne Mentzer) reach up and take the sacred sickle out of Norma's hand as the head priestess confesses that she has broken her vows.
Ms. Eaglen seemed perplexed: Norma's outbursts and lightning shifts from tenderness to rage came out of nowhere.
When she did let loose, it was sometimes just right, as when she practically spit at Pollione, "Now you are begging!"
Sometimes she went over the top, as in her scenery-chewing plea to Oroveso to rescue her children.
Among Ms. Eaglen's best moments were her duets with Ms. Mentzer, who made a passionate case for Adalgisa with her attractive mezzo voice.
She and Ms. Eaglen may have succeeded as a twosome in part because they were allowed to stand still, albeit in the same face-to-face profile pose both times.
Unfortunately, Ms. Mentzer's Adalgisa became ever more turbulently, flailingly demented.
First she hacked off her hair with Norma's dagger in a gesture of sisterhood, then she offered herself, zombielike, as the war sacrifice, and finally she collapsed front and center like the Bride of Frankenstein run out of juice.
As Pollione, the Roman proconsul with a taste for young Druid priestesses, tenor Craig Sirianni looked too callow to seduce anybody.
He bellowed his way through the music and, when he needed to show emotion, inserted a few sobs.
When he wasn't collapsing, bass Kenneth Cox did solid work as Oroveso, the head male Druid and Norma's dad.
The conductor, Eduardo Muller, set the tone for the show with his breakneck rendition of its prelude, and thereafter couldn't or didn't do much to pull together the dramatic line so brutally fractured by the production.
Ms. Eaglen is scheduled to sing Brunnhilde in Chicago's "Ring" cycle in a few seasons' time.
Perhaps a midwestern Valhalla will be a happier showcase for her than this Pacific Rim Gaul.
Ms. Waleson is a music writer in New York.
