Fuji Photo Film Co. said it will begin producing color photographic paper in the U.S., a bold move challenging Eastman Kodak Co.'s dominant position in that market.
The move also adds a new twist to an anti-dumping petition filed by rival Kodak, which claims Tokyo's Fuji sold its paper in the U.S. at "below fair market value."
Should Fuji become a U.S. producer, it could freely set its paper prices without risking charges that it was dumping, or selling imports at unfairly low prices in the U.S.
Kodak's petition claims that Fuji currently uses profits from "monopoly-like" sales in Japan to subsidize the selling of its paper in the U.S. for prices as low as one-fourth of what Fuji charges in Japan and the Netherlands.
Kodak is asking for tariffs as steep as 300% to be placed on imported photographic paper and related chemicals.
Should Kodak prevail, "Fuji's range of options would be small," said Michael Ellmann, an analyst with Wertheim Schroder & Co.
The International Trade Commission has already issued a preliminary ruling that Kodak was "materially injured" by Fuji imports.
The next step is for the Commerce Department to decide the margin of tariffs to levy on Fuji, depending on what price discrepancies exist between Fuji's U.S. paper and Japan and Netherlands paper.
A preliminary decision is expected March 29.
If, however, Kodak were to withdraw the petition before the end of March, it is possible Fuji wouldn't build the plant, said Tom Shay, Fuji spokesman.
Kodak said it "had no plans to drop the petition" and declined further comment on Fuji's announcement.
Analysts weren't overly concerned about the impact on Kodak.
"The building of a U.S. plant would of course allow Fuji to charge whatever they want," said Kimberly Ritrievi, an analyst with Shearson Lehman.
"But the expense associated with building the plant will definitely raise Fuji's cost structure -- so the extent to which they could push prices down is low."
The U.S. market for color photographic paper is growing and therefore important to both companies.
If it establishes a domestic plant and offers lower paper prices, Fuji could become a more enticing option to photo-finishers and ignite a price war.
"I would welcome them having a plant here," said Rick Bachelder, president of Filmet Color Laboratories Inc. in Pittsburgh.
