USAir slashed fares commonly used by business travelers by as much as 50% on many East Coast routes, a risky response to Continental Airlines' plan to expand its low-fare service in the East.
The USAir Group Inc. unit, the nation's sixth-largest airline, said it also is cutting more restricted leisure fares by as much as 70% in the same 96 markets.
The money-losing carrier said the new fares are part of a permanent price restructuring effort, not just special, limited-time discounts.
Continental Airlines, which recently announced a major expansion of its low-priced CALite service in short-haul markets, said it would match USAir in those markets.
Dallas-based Southwest Airlines, which also is encroaching -- albeit more slowly -- on USAir "territory" in the East, said it also would match on competitive routes.
Delta Air Lines, AMR Corp.'s American Airlines, Northwest Airlines and the other majors said they probably would cut fares on competitive routes.
Most analysts agreed USAir could do little but lower fares, but they wondered how the high-cost airline would sustain such deep fare cuts.
"How long can they survive doing this?" said Dean Sparkman, an aviation consultant with Sparkman, Cole & Harris in Washington.
"Obviously, they don't have any choice.
They're not going to give up the East, but they're going to have to lose money while they restructure internally."
Since last year, the Arlington, Va.-based carrier has been plagued by a crippling price war in California with UAL Corp.'s United Airlines.
It has also faced increasing pressure from Southwest and Continental along the East Coast.
Southwest has only a few destinations in the East, but it has said it wants to expand.
But the biggest problem is Continental's new, low-priced CALite program.
Continental has said it plans to expand CALite service in March to more than 800 flights a day from about 300 today.
The fares aimed at business travelers are for one-way, unrestricted flights with no advanced purchase or stayover requirements.
Effective yesterday, the 50% reductions affect routes in 96 markets, including the Carolinas, Florida, Virginia and major destinations in the Northeast.
USAir said in many of these markets, free companion fares are available, although some restrictions apply.
Leisure round-trip ticket prices in the same markets were cut by 70%, but those fares require stayovers, seven-day advance purchase, and are nonrefundable.
While most of the affected routes are short-haul, such as Charlotte, N.C., to Baltimore, the price reductions also include some selected medium-range routes such as Orlando, Fla., to Buffalo, N.Y. USAir said the fare reductions affect nearly one-quarter, or 600, of its 2,500 daily flights.
A USAir spokesman described the cuts as "very dramatic."
For instance, a nonrestricted, refundable one-way fare from Charlotte, to Baltimore, previously $354, is now $169.
"The East is the heart of USAir," he said, "and we're making it clear that we're going to defend our turf."
On a broader level, analysts called USAir's announcement yet another signal that smaller, low-cost airlines, such as Southwest and Continental, have driven down the cost of doing business and seriously wounded the majors.
"It's just a byproduct of the marketplace," said Mr. Sparkman, the Washington consultant.
"And it's going to continue."
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, USAir Group was down 25 cents, closing at $14.125.
USAir said the lower fares aren't part of its previously announced plan to change flight schedules on its routes of less than 500 miles -- more than two-thirds of its route network.
That plan, called "Project High Ground," is aimed at lowering expenses on those routes by boosting productivity and operating efficiencies.
The carrier earlier said it would begin changing flight schedules on some of those routes starting next week, with the program gradually phased in this year.
