CLINTONITES FIGHT to regain momentum on health-care reform.
Aiming to bypass the national media, the White House will seek more local coverage of Clinton's plan by having him phone and visit average folks with health-care worries.
It moves to organize a coalition of supportive small firms to counter the small-business lobby.
Democrats plan a new ad, "Stacked Deck," that says insurance companies stack the deck against ordinary people.
Finger-pointing begins as poll ratings slide for Clinton's plan.
Kansas Rep. Glickman, a Democrat, faults the White House "blame game" against insurers, drug firms and doctors.
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Clinton aide Ickes keep White House counselor Gergen off the health-care team as too ready to compromise.
Gergen is just as happy to be left out and is expected to leave the White House before long.
West Virginia Sen. Rockefeller urges Clinton to focus solely on selling healthcare reform.
WORRIES GROW that rising long-term interest rates will impede the recovery.
The nearly half-percentage-point spurt in long-term rates recently could damp the boom in housing and equipment purchases that has cheered Clinton aides.
If sustained, the rise could slow the economy as much as a $30 billion tax increase, administration economists figure.
Bentsen argues that investors are pushing up rates because the economy is heartier than was expected.
Morgan Stanley economist Stephen Roach blames the surge in long-term rates on "inflation mania" stirred by the Fed's move to raise short-term rates.
Financial markets seem to think the Fed sees an imminent inflation problem, which Fed chief Greenspan protests isn't the case.
But "I somehow don't seem to get it across as well as I think I would like to," he says.
SPY FALLOUT: CIA chief Woolsey faces criticism in Ames case.
Critics within the agency say his grasp on the helm has been shaken by his low profile in the wake of the Ames charges.
One CIA veteran says Woolsey doesn't know much about what goes on inside the agency.
In his defense, the CIA says Woolsey is forbidden by the federal court handling the Ames case from talking about it.
The scandal further demoralizes agency veterans who feel Woolsey spends too much time cultivating Congress and too little on the problems of the shrinking CIA.
They also fear that pressure will increase to get the FBI more involved in security work at the agency -- especially because Ames had managed to pass two CIA-run polygraphs.
Congressional defenders praise Woolsey's independence, saying that CIA estimates on Haiti and Bosnia differed significantly from administration policy.
WHITEWATER HEARINGS?
A Democratic senator's aide says he hears "nibbles in the halls" about Democrats joining GOP calls for Senate hearings on the Whitewater flap.
"Democrats on the Banking and Judiciary committees are worried that the pressures are going to be so great that Democrats won't have any choice," he says.
BYE, BYE BOREN?
Sen. Boren intends to resign by year end to become president of the University of Oklahoma, friends say.
Clinton aides cheer the prospect because of the Democrat's frequent opposition to the president on such issues as health care.
Oklahoma Rep. Brewster already begins fund raising to run for the seat.
MAC THE EAR: White House Chief of Staff McLarty becomes Clinton's sounding board, meeting in recent weeks with Jesse Jackson, Ralph Nader and GOP Rep. Armey.
On Clinton's trip to Chicago, McLarty rode in the motorcade with Mayor Daley, who pushed for the windy city to host the 1996 Democratic convention.
MOVING TARGET: The National Rifle Association, long a fixture in its posh, but cramped, downtown Washington headquarters, has decamped -- lock, stock and barrel -- to a faceless new building in suburban Virginia.
In a shake-up, chief lobbyist James Jay Baker is being replaced by grass-roots organizer Tonya Metaska.
CLINTON GIRDS for a bitter fight with Congress over Bosnia peacekeepers.
The White House plans to stress that the U.S. commitment to police a possible peace would be "proportional" to limited U.S. interests there.
But that puts Clinton on a collision course with Pentagon and NATO planners, who want to go in "semi-heavy" with armored vehicles.
Lawmakers also will flinch at the troop numbers the military wants and the multibillion-dollar annual cost.
Planners see the need for thousands of military engineers, logicians and intelligence officers -- and thousands more troops to protect them.
The Somalia experience and tales of corruption and poor intelligence make them fear leaving such duties to the U.N.
"The president will have to come on hard" to get what he wants, warns House Foreign Affairs Chairman Hamilton, who backs a U.S. role in Bosnia peacekeeping.
MINOR MEMOS: Seoul brother?
South Korea sounds out the U.S. and Canada about becoming an "associate member" of the North American Free Trade Agreement. . . .
When CIA director Woolsey held a meeting to brief employees about the spy case, the first question from the audience was about the agency's health plan. . . .
Noting that his replacement hip was made in Germany and France, Labor Secretary Reich quips: "I do not even fulfill the domestic-content requirements for being a cabinet secretary."
