Robin Lorey didn't even know what arbitration was when she agreed to waive her right to a jury trial as a member of the Kaiser Permanente health maintenance organization.
But like more than five million others who belong to the country's biggest HMO, Ms. Lorey had no choice.
Kaiser requires all of its members in California, Colorado, Hawaii and Massachusetts to agree to arbitrate medical malpractice claims and other disputes rather than take them to court.
So when Ms. Lorey claimed that a spinal procedure done during the delivery of her third child in 1991 caused back problems, she had to take her case against Kaiser not to a judge and jury, but to three private arbitrators seated in a small conference room.
And when the arbitrators last month ruled against Ms. Lorey, a 33-year-old nurse from Sun City, Calif., she had no right to appeal.
As Congress considers a variety of medical malpractice reforms, Kaiser's track record -- and the experience of people such as Ms. Lorey -- are certain to come under scrutiny.
That record suggests that, like almost every other issue in the health-care debate, arbitration involves some difficult trade-offs.
Kaiser has asked patients to forfeit some of their rights.
But in so doing, it has managed both to cut its legal costs and to compensate a significant percentage of injured people.
More than a dozen states already have passed laws making it easier for health plans to use arbitration -- a method that is common in a variety of securities, construction and contract disputes.
Consequently, a growing number of hospitals and HMOs are allowing their patients to choose arbitration, though very few require them to do so.
The Clinton health plan proposes more use of mediation and arbitration in medical malpractice suits but would guarantee court appeals of the results.
So far, only a proposal by Sen. Pete Domenici (R., N.M.) would mandate that most Americans submit to the kind of binding arbitration that Kaiser requires.
The Kaiser approach certainly deserves praise for speedy resolutions: The cases the HMO arbitrates are typically resolved in about 19 months, compared with an average of 33 months for malpractice lawsuits handled by the court system, according to a 1992 U.S. General Accounting Office report based on information provided by Kaiser.
Arbitration "reduces the cost of litigation pretty substantially, and therefore we're able to offer our members a better deal in terms of the cost of care overall," says Trisha O'Hanlon, senior counsel for Kaiser's Southern California region.
Kaiser also credits arbitration with compensating a larger percentage of injured patients than juries do, though usually in more modest amounts.
The HMO estimates that plaintiffs win about half its arbitrations, compared with about a third of all malpractice cases in the court system.
And with arbitration, "you don't have $100 million verdicts on a bad-baby case," says Ms. O'Hanlon.
Kaiser declined, however, to provide data on the size of the average arbitration award.
"It's typically faster than a trial because it's less formalized," says Paul Weiler, a Harvard Law School malpractice specialist.
"There is an expert who's making the decision, which will give you more predictable and more rational results."
But many patients, such as Ms. Lorey, haven't read all the fine print in their employer-provided health plans, including the provision about arbitration.
Ms. Lorey says she didn't learn about the arbitration agreement until the day she was admitted to the hospital for the delivery of her child.
Ms. Lorey's case was heard in a conference room near San Diego, where the plaintiff sat surrounded by six lawyers and arbitrators in the case.
"It's such a closed setting," Ms. Lorey says.
"I felt pretty ganged up on, pretty intimidated."
Kaiser dropped its arbitration requirement in 1991 in Oregon and Washington, partly because it was under pressure from companies there that thought their employees might object to the provision.
But in general Kaiser defends the arbitration process, saying one benefit is its lack of formality.
It is "difficult to believe that someone would find it more intimidating to sit in a room with . . . people sitting around a table than to go into a courtroom with a box full of people that you don't know and a judge sitting up in a throne-like seat," says Ms. O'Hanlon, the Kaiser lawyer.
She also says Kaiser is trying to "make patients more aware" of the arbitration requirement in publications sent to members.
In a Kaiser hearing, the patient and the HMO each select one arbitrator -- typically a lawyer or a retired judge -- and a third is chosen with the consent of both sides to serve as a neutral tie-breaker.
Each party has its own legal representation and pays its own arbitrator an hourly fee.
The two sides split the neutral arbitrator's bill, which can run as high as $350 an hour.
Evidence, such as that provided by medical experts, is presented much the way it would be in a courtroom.
The need for a neutral arbitrator in every case has raised another practical problem for Kaiser: finding enough of them who don't have conflicts of interest.
That was the issue highlighted in the case of the late Freya Neaman, whose family sued Kaiser for allegedly failing to promptly diagnose her lung cancer.
Ms. Neaman's family lost the arbitration.
But last year they got the California Supreme Court to throw out the ruling because the neutral arbitrator, a retired judge, hadn't disclosed that he had served as Kaiser's own arbitrator in five previous cases.
(The ban on appealing arbitrations generally can be lifted if there is evidence of bias or fraud.)
The judge's "relationship with Kaiser was a substantial business relationship and should have been fully disclosed," the court said.
Kaiser says it is making more efforts to ensure that neutral arbitrators are truly unbiased.
But with a limited pool of experienced arbitrators, some lawyers believe it will be increasingly difficult to find people without ties to Kaiser.
"It's bad enough that I lost my mother," says Blythe Leiderman, Ms. Neaman's daughter, who is now trying to get a court hearing for the case.
"Then to find out that the person who was supposed to be objective and neutral really wasn't.
That really hurts."
A federal court ruling that would force General Motors Corp. to reinstate full health-care benefits for 50,000 early retirees could cost GM tens of millions of dollars.
U.S. District Judge John Feikens of Detroit ruled Wednesday that GM broke a contract with early retirees by imposing health-care deductibles and copayments, beginning in 1988.
The 119-page ruling covers GM employees who took early retirements from 1974 to 1988.
"I find that . . .
GM entered into contracts with its early retirees which vested in the retirees and their spouses certain health-care benefits for their lifetimes at no cost to them," Judge Feikens wrote.
The ruling may push the limits of what retirees in other companies can demand under employee-benefits law, though the fact that this was a lower-court ruling lessens the immediate impact of the decision beyond the facts of the case.
GM is considering an appeal.
GM said it was "premature to speculate" how much money it might have to pay as a result of the ruling or whether GM would require a charge to cover it.
Until 1988, GM retirees had enjoyed almost free health-care benefits.
But in that year, as part of a cost-cutting move, GM told families they would be responsible for as much as $750 a year in out-of-pocket medical expenses if they remained in traditional insurance plans.
The class-action lawsuit, initiated by GM retirees in the Flint, Mich., area, was filed shortly afterward by 84,000 retirees.
In 1991, Judge Feikens ruled that GM had acted within its rights in slashing benefits for 34,000 retirees who had taken normal retirement.
His ruling Wednesday applies to the 50,000 GM salaried workers who retired under various early-retirement plans before 1988.
The ruling doesn't affect GM's retired hourly employees, who still enjoy full medical benefits.
In some employee handbooks, the judge concluded in the latest ruling, GM didn't clearly state that it might cut off the benefits.
And some internal GM memos assured retirees that they would have health benefits for life.
In addition, the judge said, some employees didn't believe the handbooks applied to them, and some thought that language permitting GM to change health benefits meant only that benefits might be upgraded.
Judge Feikens also said releases that employees signed when they retired were, in effect, contracts with GM.
(Sprague vs. GM, U.S. District Court, Eastern District of Michigan, 90-CV-70010)
Neal Templin and Junda Woo contributed to this article.
