As President Clinton's upbeat entourage pulled out of town, the rift in Russia's government suddenly broke into the open as economic-reform czar Yegor Gaidar announced his resignation.
Following two days of meetings with top Russian officials, Mr. Clinton had waxed confident that Russia's team of free-market reformers would steam forward.
But Mr. Gaidar's announcement yesterday that he won't serve in Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin's cabinet reveals the frustration Russia's radical reformers are feeling as the government pursues a more centrist tack.
"Gaidar didn't want to serve as window dressing for the Chernomyrdin government," says a foreign adviser who works closely with Mr. Gaidar.
"It's a tragedy for Russia's reforms."
In a resignation letter to Russian President Boris Yeltsin, the text of which was published by Russia's Interfax news agency, Mr. Gaidar complained of "unceasing pressure on the part of conservative political circles" against reforms.
"I cannot be responsible for reforms without having . . . levers for implementing an economic policy which I am sure is correct," he wrote.
Mr. Gaidar singled out two recent government decisions that he particularly opposes.
One was the potentially inflationary agreement to allow the newly independent republic of Belarus to use and even issue Russian rubles.
The other was a decision to spend $500 million on a new parliament center.
Since theatrics are a part of Russian political life, it is possible that Mr. Gaidar, who is currently a vice premier, will reconsider his decision and stay on, especially if his economic portfolio is strengthened.
At the same time, even if Mr. Gaidar sticks to his decision to quit, it won't mean an end to Russia's reforms or that the economy will return to state control.
Even without Mr. Gaidar, there appears to be a consensus in favor of both privatization and the move to a market economy.
But the pace of that shift is critical.
With Mr. Gaidar out, reforms are likely to proceed more gradually.
Inflation, which fell to 12% a month in December from 30% a month earlier last year, could spurt upward again.
In short, Russia's government seems to have lost its way.
Mr. Yeltsin continues to call for free-market reform.
But he is surrounded by a cabinet made up of an unwieldy coalition of radical reformers and cautious state technocrats.
There was speculation yesterday that two other radical reformers would also resign: Boris Fyodorov, the finance minister, and Anatoly Chubais, Russia's privatization czar.
That was tempered somewhat by counterspeculation that Messrs. Yeltsin and Chernomyrdin might decline to accept the resignations of Mr. Gaidar or any other reformers.
Mr. Chernomyrdin is scheduled to name a new cabinet tomorrow .
The government reshuffling is taking place as Russia's newly elected parliament begins to find its place in the political order.
The legislature, which convened last week, is certain to give Mr. Yeltsin fits.
On Friday, the State Duma, parliament's more powerful lower house, elected as its chairman Ivan Rybkin, a 47-year-old engineer and former Communist bureaucrat from Volgograd.
Parliament's upper house, the Federation Council, appears more supportive of Mr. Yeltsin's reforms.
Its newly elected chairman is a Yeltsin ally, Vladimir Shumeiko.
But the gap between the two houses and splits within the government are likely to mean long-term political paralysis.
Some deputies already are wondering aloud when Mr. Yeltsin will try to dissolve the legislature.
(He dissolved the previous one in September but needed the military to back up the action.)
Turmoil in the government complicates the Clinton administration's efforts to provide tangible assistance to Russia.
Mr. Clinton announced that he plans to ask Congress for $900 million in aid for Russia in the budget he will send to Congress for fiscal 1995, which will begin Oct. 1.
This would be on top of the roughly $3 billion that Congress has already voted to help Russia and other former Soviet republics finance the transition to a free-market economy this year.
Mr. Clinton and his aides also revealed a series of other initiatives involving energy, trade and debt restructuring to help Russia cushion the unemployment and other pain that the transition to a modern economy is causing.
For example, in a televised address and question-and-answer period with Russian people Friday, Mr. Clinton revealed that "we are working hard to get assistance to the nations which buy your energy because so many of them cannot afford to pay for it."
Under communism, Moscow sold oil and coal to Soviet Bloc countries at less than market prices.
Now that Moscow is selling resources at market prices, the formerly subsidized customers can't afford the fuel.
One way the West helped Russia last year was to restructure $15 billion of required debt payments so that Moscow didn't have to divert money from domestic purposes.
It's almost certain that the nations that have lent Russia billions of dollars will again agree to delayed payments, although Moscow's current $1.9 billion payment of interest and principal may rise.
The Group of Seven industrialized nations may begin to work out the terms of a restructuring next month.
Mr. Clinton and his aides stressed that they want to launch programs that provide relatively quick concrete evidence of the benefits of market reform.
In a rapid follow-up to Mr. Clinton's visit, the U.S. will announce today the inauguration of the Russian-American Enterprise Fund.
The private, nonprofit fund plans to directly invest in and raise financing for small and medium-sized Russian enterprises that have recently been privatized.
Based on similar funds set up in central Europe, the agency has initial capital of $340 million, provided by the U.S. government, and hopes to raise additional private-sector funding.
Heading the fund is Robert Towbin, an investment banker and a managing director of Lehman Brothers Inc., who will look for profitable long-term investments, especially in Russian producers who are able to export.
"Our objective is to prove to the outside world, which is rather cautious, that investment can be done effectively in Russia," Mr. Towbin said in an interview in Moscow.
