Thieves selling off Russia's natural wealth are better organized than ever, running sophisticated production and export networks.
Legal proceedings were started against more than 8,000 people accused of smuggling last year; 5,000 of them were workers at state enterprises such as mines, smelters, shipyards and refineries, police and customs officials said.
Besides exporting stolen materials, smugglers also sell mysterious items such as "red mercury," supposedly a radioactive material used in nuclear arms.
The Interior Ministry said 9,477 cases of illegal exports of resources were uncovered last year, a 50% jump from 1992.
The cases involved 19,580 tons of metals, 107,690 tons of oil products and 204,620 cubic yards of timber.
Peru's state oil company, Petroperu, will be broken up and sold off between August and September as part of a government program to shed all 200 of its overstaffed state companies before mid-1995.
Petroperu's refineries, storage facilities, lubricant factory, ports, blocks of jungle land for exploration and jungle pipeline will be sold off separately.
The company, which posted a profit of $80 million last year, produces 36,000 barrels a day of mainly heavy crude and plans to boost this year's production to 40,000 barrels a day.
Vietnam's central bank introduced measures to raise badly needed capital for economic development.
The bank plans to loosen controls on interest rates, sharply expand commercial lending and encourage the general public to put more money into savings accounts.
Over the next two to three years, Vietnam also plans to set up bond, foreign-exchange and money markets.
The country needs more than $40 billion through the end of the decade to keep its economy growing at an annual rate of 8% to 10%.
Kazakhstan's president called on members of the Commonwealth of Independent States to form an organization similar to the 12-nation European Union.
Nursultan Nazarbayev said the group of former Soviet republics should create a "Euro-Asian Union" with a single currency and freedom of movement across national borders.
Russia and Kazakhstan might forge such a union themselves if other CIS members aren't interested.
Most ex-Soviet republics have rejected other proposals for creating supranational bodies, fearing a resurgence of Russian imperialism.
It wasn't clear whether the proposed Euro-Asian Union would completely replace the CIS.
The number of airline passengers to Latin America grew 7% last year, while European airports reported a 4% increase, the Airports Council International said.
London Heathrow was Europe's busiest airport based on passenger traffic in 1993 and trailed only Chicago O'Hare and Dallas/Fort Worth world-wide.
After Heathrow, which handled 47.8 million passengers last year, the busiest European airports were Frankfurt, Paris-Charles de Gaulle and Paris-Orly, Amsterdam and London Gatwick.
The World Health Oganization unveiled plans to step up the fight against a worsening global epidemic of tuberculosis.
The United Nations agency urged industrialized countries to provide an extra $100 million a year to help developing nations fight the disease, which kills more people than AIDS, malaria, cholera and typhoid together.
Tuberculosis, which was virtually wiped out in industrialized countries by the 1960s, has resurfaced despite a cheap and effective cure.
Drug-resistant strains also have developed.
Readily available drugs could cure most cases, saving 12 million lives over the next 10 years.
The European Union's plan to take in four new member countries next year got back on course when Britain and Spain accepted a compromise on voting rules in the enlarged union.
The compromise raises to 27 the number of votes needed to block legislation, but a vote may be delayed if a measure is opposed by 23 or more votes.
The dispute over voting rules threatened to delay expansion of the EU to 16 members from 12.
Finland, Sweden, Austria and Norway are to join on Jan. 1, 1995, although they first must obtain approval from the European Parliament and their own voters.
The enlargement pact will be formally endorsed today by EU ambassadors and representatives of the four applicant countries.
The deal then goes to the European Parliament for approval and the four applicants for ratification.
Separately, Poland said it will apply next month for full EU membership in hopes of joining the trade bloc by the year 2000.
The Eastern European nation currently is an associate member.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Spanish fishermen blocked two ports in southwestern France to protest overfishing of anchovies by large French boats.
Sympathetic French fishermen who operate small boats destroyed 20 tons of anchovies. . . .
Power blackouts in Havana have doubled this week to about 10 hours a day because of breakdowns and fuel shortages at several of Cuba's power plants.
