Researchers forged another tentative link in a theory implicating meat fat in prostate cancer.
Men who ate beef, pork or lamb as a main dish five to six times a week were 2.5 times more likely to have prostate cancer than men who ate such red meats less than once a week, the latest analysis of a long-running study of 22,000 male physicians showed.
The same analysis found that men with high blood levels of alpha-linolenic acid, a fatty acid that researchers said comes from meat, ran two to three times the risk of developing prostate cancer as men with low blood levels of this acid.
The new study, called the Physicians' Health Study, wasn't designed to prove or disprove that eating meat causes or aggravates prostate cancer.
Reporting the finding in this week's Journal of the National Cancer Institute, or NCI, the scientists declared: "We emphasize that the results should be viewed as tentative and preliminary."
The study was challenged by a nutritionist for the meat industry.
It is, however, the second population study in a year to link meat consumption to prostate cancer.
In October, researchers monitoring the health of more than 51,000 dentists, veterinarians, optometrists, osteopaths, podiatrists and pharamacists -- in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study -- reported that men who ate the most meat were 2.6 times more likely to develop advanced prostate cancer than men who ate the least amount of meat.
The two studies are being conducted by different research teams, both associated with the Harvard Medical School and the Harvard School of Public Health in Boston.
"We're baffled," said Eric Hentges, director of nutrition research for the National Livestock and Meat Board in Chicago.
He noted that both studies emphasized a link between prostate cancer and the levels of linolenic fatty acid in the blood of the men.
Linolenic acid is also a component of vegetable oils, Dr. Hentges said.
"The levels of linolenic acid in soybean oil is seven times higher than in meat," he said.
Yet, neither study looked into any relationship between consumption of vegetable oils and prostate cancer, Dr. Hentges said.
"How they can make a meat story out of this is beyond me; it is really a linolenic acid story."
The Harvard scientists who carried out the study of the physicians did, in fact, suggest that the alpha-linolenic acid levels may be the key to the link between diet and prostate cancer.
They noted that the risk of prostate cancer in the physicians seemed to jump when levels of alpha-linolenic acid in the blood topped a certain threshhold.
This suggests that lowering linolenic acid levels below a certain threshhold "could result in favorable effects on prostate cancer risk," they said.
"We presume that our study population is one in which alpha-linolenic levels are fairly high, due to consumption of animal fats and processed foods containing linolenic acid," according to Peter H. Gann, who has moved to the Northwestern University medical school, and his colleagues at Harvard.
Two California scientists, in an editorial in the same NCI journal, said the lastest findings bolster their theory that fat in the diet -- especially animal fat -- is linked to prostate cancer.
Those scientists speculated that dietary fat can affect the body's levels of sex hormones, possibly raising levels of testosterone, the male sex hormone, thereby boosting the risk of prostate cancer.
"There is some evidence that reduction in dietary fat in adulthood will reduce circulating testosterone levels," noted Donald K. Ross of the USC/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center in Los Angeles, and Brian E. Henderson of the Salk Institute in La Jolla.
They added that "dietary interventions early and continuously in life may well hold the greatest hope for reducing the risk of prostate cancer."
