Damage assessments surged from the century's worst earthquake here, as emergency teams studied the weakened state of highways, buildings and other structures that survived Monday morning's initial jolt.
The human toll also crept up to 34 dead, after rescue workers finished combing one particularly devastated apartment building near the suburban Northridge epicenter.
More than 2,600 were injured.
The quake, which measured 6.6 on the Richter scale, wreaked havoc at hundreds of businesses and thousands of apartments and homes across a wide area of the nation's second-most-populous city.
Though government agencies and insurance authorities said it was still too early for meaningful loss estimates -- especially with potentially damaging aftershocks continuing in the area -- some early estimates by insurance experts sharply escalated from the about $1 billion suggested on the day of the disaster.
Insurance companies will pay between $1.5 billion and $2 billion in claims on the earthquake, Kidder, Peabody & Co. stock analyst Steven Gavios said, and the total economic loss might be perhaps 10 times the amount of claims.
The figures, he said, reflect studies by private consulting firms that use computer models to make their estimates.
Claims after the 1989 San Francisco quake were about $960 million, and total damage there was about $7 billion.
"There are a significant number of structures that have suffered serious damage," said Dick Andrews, director of Gov. Pete Wilson's Office of Emergency Services.
"But we don't know yet whether that means they can be repaired with some time, or whether they are a total loss."
While the worst devastation was to shopping centers, commercial buildings and apartments concentrated within a few miles of Northridge, a San Fernando Valley community about 30 miles northwest of downtown, severe damage extended into Santa Monica, Hollywood and the eastern and western edges of the Valley.
In the Valley and its outer reaches, regional power switching stations, water pumping stations and other important structures were knocked out.
Thousands of Valley apartment-dwellers feared re-entering their buildings, worried that a seemingly relentless succession of aftershocks would send weakened concrete crashing down on them.
About 3,000 people spent Monday night in 22 Red Cross shelters, with thousands more camped outside and in city parks.
Local authorities said they didn't know how long it would take building inspectors to determine the habitability of damaged residential buildings.
"Many of these people are staying in our shelters because their buildings are cracked, and they are waiting for an official to determine whether it will be safe to go back in," said Carol Miller, a spokeswoman for the American Red Cross.
She couldn't predict how many would be back last night.
Water and power were being restored to most parts of the city as the day passed.
Most large businesses and schools heeded Mayor Richard Riordan's request that they stay closed yesterday, which took pressure off crippled freeways and city services.
It wasn't clear how soon a sense of normalcy would return; city officials extended the dusk-to-dawn curfew at least through last night.
Scattered instances of looting resulted in 73 arrests during a Monday night characterized by a police spokesman as "relatively uneventful."
More than 2,000 National Guard soldiers patrolled the streets yesterday.
At Los Angeles County's emergency operations center, squads of engineers and other staffers were deployed to inspect hundreds of structures, red-tagging those that are unsafe to enter.
So far, officials have identified 40 county facilities sustaining some structural damage, although the assessment is far from complete, said Bob Garrott, assistant manager of the office of emergency management.
The giant Los Angeles Unified School District said that at least 100 of its 650 schools sustained "significant structural damage."
Some facilities may be a total loss and repairs are expected to cost hundreds of millions of dollars, a spokesman said.
Damage to a state courthouse in Van Nuys forced suspension of deliberations in Lyle Menendez's highly publicized murder trial there.
Atlantic Richfield Co., the big Los Angeles oil company, said 20 of its 27 service stations located within a 10-mile radius of the epicenter sustained some damage.
The oil company also said two pipelines were affected, while others were temporarily shut down as a precaution.
At one location, about 3,500 barrels of crude oil leaked from a pipeline.
A cleanup effort is under way, said Al Greenstein, an Arco spokesman, but no cost estimates were immediately available.
Many other businesses and government agencies reported problems.
Kenfil Inc., a Van Nuys software concern, said it sustained "major damage" to its local warehouses.
Newhall Land & Farming Co. said a four-story office building in nearby Valencia was heavily damaged.
Royce Hall, a concert hall at the University of California, Los Angeles, was also hit.
Nearly two dozen post offices, mostly in the San Fernando Valley, were closed for repairs.
Operations of the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, which provides much of the region's water and electrical service, were hit especially hard.
As many as 82,000 electric and 40,000 water customers of DWP remained without service yesterday, and trouble ranged from scattered water-main breaks to ruptures in other major city water lines and damage to two aqueducts in the San Gabriel Mountains.
"We just haven't had time to assess the dollar amount of the damage, because we're focusing on restoring service," said spokeswoman Lucia Alvelais, adding that repair-work costs would clearly run high into the millions.
Utilities said that even after service is restored, major repairs will be needed through their systems.
SCEcorp's Southern California Edison electric utility, for instance, said a major switching station at the Valley's north end sustained considerable damage.
"We expect our expenses to be less than $100 million, but it really will be some time before we know," said Kevin Kelley, an Edison spokesman.
Between 30% and 35% of California homeowners carry earthquake insurance, an insurance-industry spokeswoman said.
She estimated that it would take at least a week to gather estimates on the total insured residential and commercial loss, adding that most carriers will suspend writing new earthquake policies until damage from Monday's quake and aftershocks is tallied.
Greg Steinmetz in New York contributed to this article.
