Sugar and artificial sweeteners have no effect on young children's behavior or thinking, according to a rigorous study published in today's New England Journal of Medicine.
The new study, funded in part by the federal government, is expected to draw much attention because researchers, doctors and parents have argued for years over claims that certain children can be adversely affected by consuming foods containing sugar or the artificial sweetener aspartame.
The debate has flared unabated despite several recent studies that failed to link sugar use and hyperactivity in young children.
The research -- conducted by medical investigators at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tenn., and the University of Iowa College of Medicine in Iowa City -- wasn't designed to address transient increases in energy levels or irritability that may result soon after children eat an ice-cream cone or chocolate cake.
Instead, the study closely monitored a group of 48 children during a nine-week period to measure whether they behaved or performed mental tasks differently depending on whether they ate food with or without sugar or aspartame.
The results were resoundingly definitive.
"Even when intake exceeds typical dietary levels, neither dietary sucrose nor aspartame affects children's behavior or cognitive function," said the report, which was headed by Mark L. Wolraich of Vanderbilt's Child Development Center.
In the study, the researchers recruited the families of 25 preschool children aged three to five who agreed to adhere rigidly to specific diets for their children during the nine-week period.
At the beginning of each week, the families were provided with specially designed foods and drinks.
For three weeks at a time, the children ate a diet containing sugar, aspartame or sugar-free saccharin, though the parents and the researchers didn't know which diet the children were consuming.
None of the children in this group were described by their parents as being especially sensitive to the effects of sugar.
The researchers also recruited a separate group of 23 children aged six to 10 whose families did believe sugar affected their children's actions, ability to concentrate or perform mental activities.
Both sets of children underwent extensive tests for mental performance and behavior, with evaluations conducted once a week at the children's homes.
In almost every category, the children's cumulative results varied little no matter what their diet.
Indeed, the only statistically significant difference occurred among the preschool-age children who actually performed better in cognitive tests conducted by their parents during the weeks they consumed a diet containing sugar than they did during the three weeks when their diet contained aspartame or saccharin.
Dr. Wolraich, who treats and studies children diagnosed as being hyperactive, said parents who believe sugar causes problems for their children should investigate other possible causes instead.
He said the children's problems might result from genetic factors, from problems in school or with their peers, issues at home "or any number of a broad range of things."
The research received 10% of its funding from the Nutrition Foundation-International Life Science Institute of Washington, which represents the interests of various food companies.
Dr. Wolraich said the institute's grant "had no effect on the study's design or outcome," which was largely funded and overseen by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development in Bethesda, Md.
In a commentary accompanying the study, Marcel Kinsbourne, a researcher at Tufts University outside Boston, praised the new research's design.
Dr. Kinsbourne noted that while previous reports have discounted the effect of sugar on children's behavior, many parents, teachers and doctors continue to attribute problems to sugar or other food additives.
Dr. Kinsbourne said that taken together, the research suggests that "any adverse effect of sugar is by no means as severe or prevalent as uncontrolled observations and opinion would suggest.
Specifically, there is no evidence that sugar alone can turn a child with normal attention into a hyperactive child."
