WHITE HOUSE DAMPS expectations for next week's global jobs conference.
The two-day Detroit meeting features labor, commerce, economic and trade ministers from the Group of Seven industrialized nations.
But no official communique is planned after the countries discuss unemployment and ways to create jobs.
Alan Blinder of the U.S. Council of Economic Advisers calls the meeting "an intellectual discussion" of such issues as training, technology, productivity and trade.
Still, the U.S. wants to see European nations and Japan take bolder steps to create jobs and strengthen their economies.
Unemployment remains in double digits in many European nations, hampering their imports of American goods.
Meanwhile, despite a jump in U.S. employment, American officials acknowledge that many of the jobs are low paying, widening a "wage gap" within this country.
Playing down the meeting's importance, a White House fact sheet urges reporters not to use "summit," but instead refer to a "conference."
NEW NLRB CHAIRMAN William Gould IV comes out swinging, signaling change.
After a nine-month wait for Senate confirmation, the former Stanford law professor blasts critics who worked to stymie his post at the labor board.
He calls his 58-38 Senate-approval vote last week "a victory over a determined campaign of cynical character assassination . . . by right-wing ideologues."
He calls tactics by the Republicans and business groups "anti-democratic."
He vows "to return the board to the center, to promote balance" between labor and management.
Mr. Gould says he will try "to let workers, union officials and business people know that they will be treated with respect, civility and fairness."
Labor leaders believe the NLRB tilted in favor of management in the 1980s, hurting workers and unions.
NO PITCH NEEDED: Baseball parks have little trouble finding workers.
The minor-league Hickory, N.C., Crawdads have a waiting list for their 200 tickettakers, ushers and stadium workers.
The Pawtucket, R.I., Red Sox plan to rehire about two-thirds of last year's crewlargely teachers and students.
Despite boosting hiring 25%, the Rancho Cucamonga Quakes, a San Diego Padres Single-A affiliate, are crushed with applicants after posting fliers at local high schools and colleges.
ARA Services, Philadelphia, which hires about 4,500 seasonal employees for five major-league stadiums, finds most workers at job fairs.
The Los Angeles Dodgers, who are still hiring, bank on word of mouth to find their 450 workers; parking and concessions are contracted out.
Lean times in Boston: The Red Sox plan to bring aboard "slightly" fewer workers than last year.
The Michael factor: The Nashville Sounds in Tennessee hope for a "Jordan scenario," in which the former basketball star makes the White Sox affiliate, letting the club fill more slots after filling more seats.
THE CHANGING conference room (pun intended): Accounting firm Ernst & Young offers Saturday child care at 30 of its U.S. offices through April 16 so its tax preparers can burn the weekend oil.
A pilot program in six cities last year encouraged the firm to expand the service, usually run out of office conference rooms.
Other accounting firms have similar programs in peak season.
MOONLIGHTING: The Bureau of Labor Statistics begins a monthly tally of people with second jobs.
In February, it reports, seven million people -- 5.8% of all those employed -- had more than one job.
Most work one full-time job and one part-time job; some work two part-time jobs.
The real grind: 195,000 men and 53,000 women say they work two full-time jobs.
WHAT PRICE health benefits?
Here's one employer's estimate.
Hartford Dispensary, an outpatient health-care facility in Hartford, Conn., advertises in the local newspaper for part-time nurses.
The salary: $12.45 an hour with benefits, or $15-an-hour without.
WOMEN EXECUTIVES see gains in job promotions -- but pay the price socially.
Female officials on average received their most recent promotions 2.6 years ago, compared with 3.3 years for their male counterparts, according to a study of 3,581 executives by search firm Paul Ray Berndtson and Cornell University.
Manchester Inc. in Parsippany, N.J., notes that women found jobs six weeks faster than men -- twice as big a gap as a year ago.
But women executives also feel more job stress, says Timothy Judge of Cornell's Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies.
A third of the surveyed women aren't married, compared with only 6% of the men.
Men are twice as likely to have children.
"In the push to the top, it seems that female executives are willing to absorb significant work/family stress in return for holding executive positions," Dr. Judge says.
Women officials are nearly 20% more likely to job hunt than men.
"Female executives are growing restless with the pace of their career track," concludes Paul Ray Jr., CEO of the search firm.
THE CHECKOFF: Head-on Gender Collision?
A moving van spotted in the Washington, D.C., suburbs sports the motto, "Manly men moving manly things in a manly way." . . .
Meanwhile, a Teamsters women's conference runs a session titled "A Woman's Place is in Her Truck, at Her Desk, at Her Machine."
