Despite White House efforts to dispel the controversy over the Clintons' Whitewater losses and tax deductions, some accountants contend that the first couple still may owe back taxes.
President Clinton -- while asserting at last week's news conference he doesn't think he and his wife owe any back taxes related to Whitewater Development Co. -- hasn't yet managed to put to rest questions regarding a variety of tax write-offs.
On Friday, the Clintons released their tax returns and other documents from the late 1970s to bolster their contention that Whitewater was a money-loser.
Steven Bankler, a certified public accountant from San Antonio, Texas, said he is "absolutely" convinced that the Clintons underpaid their taxes since 1978, primarily because of improper personal and Whitewater-related deductions.
The Clintons, for example, made a 1978 interest payment of $10,130 to a company owned by their Whitewater partner, James McDougal, rather than to the bank that held a Whitewater note, said Mr. Bankler.
Because the payment wasn't made directly to the bank, he said, it wasn't deductible under Internal Revenue Service rules.
Mr. Bankler, who is the Texas CPA association's liaison to the IRS, was asked by this newspaper to review the Clintons' tax returns.
Ronald Pearlman, a Covington & Burling tax lawyer who was asked by the Clintons' personal lawyer David Kendall to review their returns, disagreed.
"The mere fact that the company was a funnel for the interest payment doesn't mean it isn't deductible," he said, "provided there's adequate documentation that the Clintons were reimbursing the company for making the payment."
But Mr. Pearlman said he hadn't seen such documentation.
As reported, the Clintons in the 1980s took an additional $19,598 in questionable interest deductions on Whitewater-related loans that several tax experts said could be challenged by IRS auditors.
By one expert's calculation, those deductions alone saved them more than $8,700 in taxes.
But yesterday, Marvin Chirelstein, a Columbia University tax law professor, maintained that the Clintons, as personal "obligors" of the Whitewater-related loans, were entitled to the interest deductions.
What's more, he disputed the conclusion of the other experts that Whitewater had assumed liability for the loans.
What strikes some tax accountants as remarkable about the Clinton tax returns is how aggressively the tax preparers claimed a variety of deductions.
During most of the 1980s, Mrs. Clinton reported that she drove her auto for business 40% of the time.
In 1986, a tax code change required using a car on business 50% of the time to qualify for the most favorable tax treatment.
For the next three years, Mrs. Clinton reported driving for business precisely 52% of the time.
Mr. Bankler said he found several mistakes in tax preparation.
One involved the Clintons' failure to report about $800 in 1987 interest income from the sale of their Little Rock house in December 1983.
The owner, Raymond Whittier, said he made three mortgage payments totaling $825, most of which was interest, to then-Gov.
Clinton before paying off a second mortgage in April 1987.
The Clintons' tax preparer, in the meantime, used the wrong depreciation rate on a house they owned in Fayetteville, Ark., from 1975 to 1983, according to Mr. Bankler.
As a result, they saved a total of $2,216 in taxes on their 1981 and 1982 returns, he said.
The error was partly rectified in 1983, Mr. Bankler added.
One White House explanation for mistakes is the Whitewater venture's "degree of informality," which resulted in poor record-keeping.
The tax returns appear to bear out as technically true the Clintons' claims that they lost money on Whitewater, but upon further examination, the size of the loss shrinks.
First, their investment was $46,635, not the $68,900 the Clinton campaign reported in 1992.
President Clinton said that most of the difference represents a loan he obtained for his mother.
Accountants reconstructing the history of Whitewater during the campaign observed that the checks on the loan for his mother's house said "repayment of note," and wrongly assumed that they were for a Whitewater loan.
Second, of the $46,635 the Clintons put into Whitewater, almost all was for interest payments.
That means fully $43,452 of his "investment" was deductible from their income taxes.
The returns released on Friday are also noteworthy for what they show -- and what they don't -- of Mrs. Clinton's spectacularly successful trading in risky cattle futures.
The 1978 tax return, for instance, lists the dates and prices of the purchase and sale of five acres that netted the Clintons a $2,150 gain.
But the same schedule is blank in the spaces for the dates, as well as the purchase and sales prices, of her commodities trades, merely listing gains of $26,541 in 1978 and $72,436 in 1979.
While President Clinton likes to note that he was the nation's lowest paid governor, the Clintons' combined salaries in 1979 was $74,236, which would be about twice that amount in 1994 dollars.
