Predictions of a boom in Asian orders for corporate jets have produced more air than aircraft in the past.
But now, the idea of buying a private plane to ferry the boss around the Pacific Rim looks like it finally is ready to fly.
Governments are easing some of the rules that hobble private flying in the region.
Breakthrough orders in several countries are setting an example for future buyers and perhaps inspiring a little envy.
The spreading geographical reach of Asian companies is making aircraft makers' traditional sales pitch that private jets save valuable executive time more compelling.
"Internationally, especially here in Asia and in Mexico and South America, I think there are tremendous opportunities," said Theodore J. Forstmann, chairman of Savannah, Ga.-based Gulfstream Aerospace Corp.
"China could be a huge market," said Mr. Forstmann, who was attending the Asian Aerospace '94 trade show in Singapore.
Charles N. Coppi, senior vice president, engineering and technology, at Gulfstream, said, "We've been in the business long enough to know what's coming, and this part of the world is it.
The geography of business is shifting."
Asian demand for business aircraft is one of the main reasons Gulfstream and diversified Montreal transportation concern Bombardier Inc. are developing long-range planes that can fly from New York to Tokyo nonstop.
When Bombardier's Canadair unit first sketched plans for its Global Express jet, the design called for a maximum range of 5,600 nautical miles -- too short for New York to Tokyo.
After talking with potential customers, Canadair decided to aim for 6,500 nautical miles, said John Lawson, vice president, international marketing and sales, at Canadair's business-aircraft division.
"It wasn't just this region, it was also the Middle East," Mr. Lawson said.
Middle Eastern buyers want a plane that can fly nonstop to Washington.
The Global Express is designed to fly eight passengers and four crew members nonstop from Hong Kong to Los Angeles, Tokyo to New York, or Singapore to London.
The smaller Gulfstream V will have a similar range.
Both planes will use the same engine but each company said it will have the better jet.
Bombardier formally launched the Global Express program in December with 30 firm orders for the $28 million (in January 1994 dollars) jet.
Mr. Lawson said "slightly over 50%" of the firm orders for the Global Express are from outside North America; six are from Asian concerns.
The market for Canadair's existing Challenger jets is about 70% North American, Mr. Lawson said.
Gulfstream went through a similar shift to a higher target nonstop flying range as it drew plans for the Gulfstream V, said Mr. Forstmann, a senior partner at New York buyout firm Forstmann Little & Co., which acquired Gulfstream three years ago.
"Asia is going to be a very big market" for the Gulfstream V, Mr. Forstmann said.
Currently, the company sells more planes in North America than outside it.
He added that in the next 60 days, the company will announce a board of advisers "strategically placed around the world" to help Gulfstream cash in on international demand for business jets.
Gulfstream won't reveal total orders for the Gulfstream V, successor to the company's successful Gulfstream IV, but Fred A. Breidenbach, president and chief operating officer, said seven are from Asia.
Aviation analyst Wolfgang Demisch, managing director of BT Securities Corp. in New York, said: "I tend to agree with the idea that Asia is going to be a major market" for the new class of big, longrange business jets.
"There are enough centers of financial and economic power there that a very large, long-range airplane would be sensible."
Likely buyers of such planes include large Asian trading companies and global natural-resource concerns, Mr. Demisch said.
The aircraft also will appeal to U.S. companies with substantial operations, major customers or key suppliers in Asia.
Buyers of the Gulfstream V won't be able to start flying the plane until 1996.
Buyers of Canadair's Global Express will have to wait until around 1998.
In the meantime, business-jet manufacturers are hustling for orders in Asia for their existing models and reporting some important breakthroughs.
Learjet Inc. of Wichita, Kan., another Bombardier unit, said it delivered last year the first private business jet based in Taiwan.
The Learjet is fitted as an executive jet but can tow targets for the armed forces to practice shooting.
That dual use may have helped the buyer get around Taiwan's long-standing prohibition on privately owned jets.
Canadair sold a Challenger to a South Korean concern 18 months ago, which it said is the first corporate aircraft in that country.
In Malaysia, owning a private jet seems to be an emerging status symbol for tycoons.
The latest corporate chieftain to join this elite air force is Sarawak-based construction and timber magnate Ting Pek Khiing.
Datuk Halim Saad, executive chairman of Malaysian conglomerate Renong Bhd., regularly uses a Citation jet made by Cessna Aircraft Co., Wichita, a unit of aerospace, commercial-products and financial-services concern Textron Inc.
"I think values are changing," said Canadair's Mr. Lawson.
The flaunting of wealth traditionally has been frowned upon in many Asian cultures.
"Southeast Asia is a burgeoning market" for business jets, said Robert C. Williams, vice president for international marketing at Learjet.
Although business-jet purchases outside Australia in the region are counted in ones and twos, "we're convinced that will change in the near term," Mr. Williams said.
"The reason it hasn't happened yet is because of government restrictions."
Those restrictions are easing gradually.
Along with Taiwan's apparent relaxing of its prohibition on business jets, Thailand is lifting its ban on private ownership of jets, Mr. Williams said.
One big potential market, however, remains difficult to crack.
Until Hong Kong finishes its new airport sometime this decade, traffic jams at the colony's existing airport make operating a private jet there all but impossible.
