Ekrem Handzic sits by a rack of postcards picturing a bridge that no longer exists, waiting for tourists he knows aren't coming.
"Is it necessary to have customers?
It is enough just to be here," says the merchant, tilting a pale face to the early spring sunshine.
Like most citizens of East Mostar, he has lived day and night in a cellar for much of the last nine months as a barrage of shells and sniper fire destroyed everything above ground.
When a cease-fire between Muslims and Croats went into effect here 12 days ago, Mr. Handzic's tourist agency was the first business to reopen.
The reason lies just down the cobbled street, where a few stones rise into the air like a ragged apostrophe, ending abruptly in space.
It is all that is left of the Old Bridge, the Stari Most, that gave this city its name.
Mr. Handzic sits in range of still-active snipers to bear witness to what was, and what he believes will be again.
For more than four centuries, the bridge's slender, soaring arch bore the weight of pedestrians ambling across the Neretva River dividing the city.
Then, last May, when Croats in the west began shelling the predominantly Muslim east, the bridge came to carry an even heavier load as a symbol of a united city for those who didn't want to see Mostar sundered into ethnically cleansed ghettos.
During the worst of the fighting, 120 shells a day and a rain of sniper fire turned the city into a bloodier killing ground than Sarajevo.
But in a war where human pain has become almost banal, the crashing of the Stari Most's ancient stones seemed to speak louder than the screams.
In the end, the Stari Most was a bridge too far for the Bosnian Croat forces, setting off a tide of international disapprobation that may finally have forced last month's cease-fire agreement.
Even within neighboring Croatia, the destruction of the bridge produced revulsion.
Hrvoje Grgic, a Croatian photographer, recalls the dismay in the Croatian capital, Zagreb, when the news emerged.
At first, official media reported only that the bridge had "collapsed."
But soon, callers to Zagreb's iconoclastic Youth Radio began telling a different story, of a Bosnian Croat tank perched on the west side of the river, firing repeatedly over 2 1/2 days to bring the bridge down.
"Callers were swearing at the filthy scum who'd done it," Mr. Grgic recalls.
The bridge fell Nov 8.
By the end of the month, United Nations officials based in the Croat-controlled region noticed a real difference in the demeanor and actions of both civilian and military officials.
The area commander responsible for the Mostar battle was removed from his post.
So-called "uncontrolled elements" in paramilitary squads suddenly seemed more controlled, and moderates replaced extremists in civilian posts.
The current cease-fire came about after an international threat of sanctions on Croatia similar to the one in force on the Serbian government in Belgrade.
On Sunday, a tank that may well have been the instrument of the Stari Most's destruction headed out of west Mostar to meet a U.N. deadline for the removal of heavy weapons from the city.
By Monday, the road into east Mostar had been cleared of mines, and joint checkpoints established for the first time between Bosnian Croat forces and the Spanish battalion responsible for U.N. peacekeeping in the region.
For the first time, Jerrie Hulme, a former British army general who now heads the U.N. High Commission for Refugees office in the region, risks the drive into east Mostar without his bulletproof vest and armored personnel carrier.
"It might give them a bit more confidence to see me like this," he explains.
The city he enters hasn't a single unscathed building.
Every one of 20 mosques, some of them six centuries old, has either had its dome gouged by shelling or its minaret toppled.
Apartment blocks gape with blackened mortar holes; graceful Austro-Hungarian facades have been peeled away, exposing rooms and pillars within as though they were dollhouses.
The people, too, bear the scars of the city's ordeal.
Wan, emaciated figures creep gingerly along streets that have been no-go areas for months.
As Mr. Hulme stops to chat with a grandmother carrying a six-month-old baby, the woman describes the infant's uncontrollable trembling during the shelling.
Suddenly, her eyes fill with tears and she turns away, embarrassed.
In a waterless, lightless cellar, 30 people struggle to prepare the day's main meal from U.N. rations.
It is meager fare of tinned meat patties and potatoes, but luxurious compared with what they sometimes existed on.
"They make `war pie,' " Mr. Hulme explains, thin sheets of flour-and-water pastry "filled with whatever they could get, literally grass at the worst times."
During the "worst times" some 88 people huddled in this one-time supermarket storage area.
Those who remain do so either because their homes have been destroyed or because they are "ethnically cleansed" Muslims who once lived in west Mostar before being evicted by Croats.
As the women prepare lunch on a stove fueled by timber from ruined buildings, the sudden thump of a U.N. helicopter overhead terrorizes five-year-old Zlatco Omanovic, who begins yelling in fear.
In January, the boy was standing just outside the cellar, talking to a group of Italian journalists, when a rocket-propelled grenade landed, killing the three men.
Zlatco wasn't hurt, but he has been plagued by fear ever since.
"He wakes in the night screaming, `His camera is falling!'
He sees the deaths of the journalists over and over," says 19-year-old Vanja Bujina, who sleeps on a nearby mattress in the cellar.
For her, the months of confinement have been most difficult because of the crowding.
"There is no private life, and I miss that, because I'm young," she says.
Since the cease-fire, she has been able to escape what she calls "the endless boring politics talk" of the cellar's adults in long walks with her boyfriend, a radio operator in the Bosnian army.
With their friends, they pass the time playing guitars and singing songs people have composed about the war.
One of her favorites is about the old bridge.
"Under the bridge of love, our dreams had lived," she sings. " . . .
With you everything is gone but we still go on . . . "
Now, with the cease-fire, she hopes that the bridge can be rebuilt and, eventually, the city reunited.
"My Croat friends on the west side tried hard to stay in contact with me," she says, getting messages to her through the Red Cross.
"I don't want to live in a so-called `Muslim city of Mostar' " she says.
"We used to live together, and that's what I want."
