Gitano Group Inc. said it signed a contract to sell its assets to Fruit of the Loom Inc. for $100 million in cash.
The amount is higher than some analysts had expected, but is lower than the $130 million Gitano owes its secured lenders.
In order to facilitate the sale of the company, Gitano, as expected, filed a voluntary petition seeking protection under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
Gitano also reported a fourth-quarter profit, compared with a net loss a year earlier.
Fruit of the Loom's proposed acquisition of Gitano is subject to approval of the bankruptcy court in New York.
A Gitano spokesman said the company has petitioned the court to hold a hearing on the sale this month.
Gitano said Chicago-based Fruit of the Loom submitted the highest offer in a bidding process that began in January.
The apparel maker was put up for sale after its largest customer, Wal-Mart Stores Inc., said it would stop buying from Gitano, which pleaded guilty to customs violations in December.
Wal-Mart has indicated that it would be willing to do business with Gitano after it was sold.
Fruit of the Loom's bid surprised some in the industry, who had speculated that Gitano wouldn't fetch more than about $60 million.
But Fruit of the Loom, which makes underwear and other apparel, was seeking a high-profile brand to enhance its current line of women's budget apparel.
"Gitano is an excellent brand, associated with fashion at a reasonable price in the mass channels, the Wal-Marts and the Kmarts, where we principally sell our products," said a Fruit of the Loom spokesman.
Fruit of the Loom plans to manufacture Gitano apparel through its factories and outside contractors, he said.
Wal-Mart is already Fruit of the Loom's "No. 1 customer," the spokesman said, adding that Fruit of the Loom executives have already spoken with Wal-Mart about the planned Gitano acquisition.
"We have good relations with Wal-Mart," he said.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Fruit of the Loom shares rose 50 cents to $30.625.
Gitano said fourth-quarter net income rose to $3.8 million, or 24 cents a share.
A year earlier, it had a net loss of $140 million, or $8.75 a share, which included a $90.3 million restructuring charge.
Reflecting management's downsizing of Gitano last year, Gitano's sales for the quarter fell 68%, to $46.8 million from $146.2 million.
A Gitano spokesman said the company's bankruptcy filing lists as Gitano's largest secured creditors: Metropolitan Life Insurance, to which Gitano owes about $23.1 million; Chemical Bank, which is owed $22.8 million; Chase Manhattan Bank, $14.8 million; and Citibank, about $12.5 million.
