Blockbuster Entertainment Corp.'s agreement to merge with Viacom Inc. is a clever exit strategy for its chairman and chief executive officer, H. Wayne Huizenga, from what may be a dying business, many entertainment executives say.
It is a "beautiful bailout," said one executive, who knows the company and Mr. Huizenga well.
Says another person with close ties to the Blockbuster executive: "Maybe he knows he's hit a plateau."
Blockbuster has tremendous momentum.
Largely through its 3,593-store video chain, it generates cash flow of nearly $500 million a year.
Its balance sheet is nearly debt free.
Its earnings growth is stunning: It has posted quarterly increases ranging from 40% to 64% in the last two years.
And its management has remained steadfastly upbeat about the company's future.
Mr. Huizenga denies that the merger with Viacom is related to concerns about how to keep the growth going, dismissing the idea with an expletive.
"This gives our shareholders a much better stock to hold," he says of the deal, which would combine Blockbuster's video and music chains and stakes in two small movie studios with Viacom's MTV, VH-1, Nickelodeon and Showtime cable networks.
But a lot of communications experts don't see how Blockbuster can preserve its earnings record in the face of the imminent threat from pay-per-view television.
Until recently, many media executives believed that in-home video service was at least a decade away.
With technological advances and industry consolidation, the prospect is a lot closer.
Time Warner Inc. is planning a spring rollout of a prototype cable system in Orlando, Fla., that will feature video on demand.
And the phone companies like Bell Atlantic Corp. are racing to implement technology to deliver movies on demand over phone lines.
Despite diversification attempts, the majority of Blockbuster's revenue comes from video rental.
Mr. Huizenga insists that's nothing to worry about.
Blockbuster's share of the U.S. video rental market is only 15%, he says, and will be bolstered by gobbling up mom-and-pop outlets, even after interactive pay-per-view comes on line.
"We will still be in a better position in video rental revenue in the year 2000 than we are today," he says.
But it will be a shrinking market.
As early as 1996, the video-rental business will be eroding at a rate of about 10% a year, according to Roger Siboni, managing partner of KPMG Peat Marwick's communications practice.
Indeed, Blockbuster has been aggressively pursuing diversification strategies for three years.
In late 1992, it began buying music retailers; it has since acquired Sound Warehouse, Music Plus, Turtle's and Record Bar.
A year ago, Blockbuster agreed to buy a minority interest in Republic Pictures, known for having produced John Wayne movies and other classic Westerns.
In March, it bought a controlling stake in Spelling Entertainment Group Inc., which produces the hit TV show "Beverly Hills 90210" and owns the rights to such shows as "Dynasty" and "The Love Boat."
In the last year, Mr. Huizenga has talked about building a vertically integrated family-entertainment company with theme parks and megastores marketing CDs, videos and interactive games.
And beginning in April, he had secretly begun talking to Viacom about joint ventures, and about merging the companies beginning last fall.
For Blockbuster, going it alone would be costly and time-consuming.
Even in the shorter-term, the new record and movie production businesses couldn't match the gross profit margins of video rentals, which can be as high as 70% compared with about 10% for record stores, according to analysts.
Some industry executives believed that Blockbuster's move into nonrental areas would eventually hurt both the company's earnings and its cachet as a high-growth stock.
Which is why some Blockbuster shareholders, who were initially put off by the Viacom deal, appeared to be warming to it by late yesterday.
"This is an insurance policy against Blockbuster going extinct," says Larry Haverty, a money manager for State Street Research in Boston, one of Blockbuster's largest shareholders.
And Blockbuster has been such a growth stock -- cleverly using its high stock price to further expansion through acquisitions partially paid for with stock -- that almost any slowdown in its main business could cause big problems for its shares.
Its stock price soared last year, from about $18 a share in January to about $30 by year's end, as the company reported earnings gains of more than 50% in each of the first three quarters.
Earnings momentum "is how that company has been sold to the Street," says Paul Marsh, a securities analyst with NatWest Securities Corp.
Mr. Huizenga "is a master at keeping his stock price propped up," says an entertainment industry executive.
"That the stock didn't take a long-term hit on the basis of technological obsolesence is a wonder in itself."
Still, many Blockbuster shareholders shared Mr. Huizenga's optimism about Blockbuster's prospects as a stand-alone company.
So much so that, initially, many were angry about the merger.
"I'm shocked, just totally shocked," said one large shareholder, who believed Blockbuster's stock would reach $50 a share on its own.
The merger proposal values Blockbuster stock at about $31 a share, a modest 10% premium to its Friday close of $28.375.
(Some shareholders believed the deal may attract rival bidders for Blockbuster.)
The plan has been approved by both companies' boards and is subject to shareholder approval.
Mr. Huizenga defends the merger's terms by arguing that Blockbuster's shares have been trading near an all-time high while Viacom's stock is depressed because of its bid for Paramount Communications Inc.
If Viacom's class A and B shares return to their pre-Paramount levels, Blockbuster's stock value could be more than $40, Mr. Huizenga says.
"That is a big, big premium," he adds.
He says that, during the latest round of discussions, the two companies examined "15 to 20 scenarios," including making Viacom a loan, buying stock convertibles, buying selected Viacom assets and making a joint bid for Paramount.
"Everything led back to the strengths of the companies together," Mr. Huizenga says.
Even if it doesn't get Paramount, Mr. Huizenga sees Viacom-Blockbuster one day producing feature films that will be distributed first through movie theaters owned by Viacom Chairman Sumner Redstone, then through Blockbuster's video stores and then on Viacom's Showtime cable network.
One of Blockbuster's biggest assets is a database filled with more than 30 million customer names and information about their preferences in actors, directors and movie genres that would be helpful in marketing films.
Blockbuster also could promote its music chain on Viacom's MTV and VH-1 networks.
In addition, Mr. Huizenga says, Viacom-Blockbuster can shed redundant operations and save about $200 million a year.
In addition to his new position as vice chairman of Viacom-Blockbuster, Mr. Huizenga says he will remain CEO at the Blockbuster subsidary.
He has no employment contract, however.
He says he expects to have a much bigger management role if the company wins Paramount.
