Lloyd's U.S. Counsel,
THE Lloyd's of London crisis has crossed the Atlantic and washed up on the doorstep of a prestigious New York law firm.
First, a group of American underwriters of the giant British insurer sued LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene & MacRae, claiming the law firm betrayed their interests, because it was representing them and Lloyd's without disclosing conflicts of interest.
Now a federal judge has ruled that the case can proceed in a U.S. court.
Apart from potentially forcing open a new window into Lloyd's financial woes, the case shows the possible perils for a law firm that makes use of a relationship with a big client to reach out to others connected with it.
For years, LeBoeuf had a good thing going with Lloyd's: As its U.S. general counsel, the firm not only handled a variety of matters for the insurer, but it also offered tax advice to Lloyd's individual U.S. underwriters, known in Lloyd's parlance as "names."
There wasn't any trouble with this arrangement until the insurance consortium ran into financial trouble a few years ago.
After Lloyd's started to pursue some of its individual underwriters to recoup its massive losses from risky asbestos and pollution policies, some have sought to sue the insurer, even though Parliament has granted it immunity from lawsuits.
Evidence is emerging from investor groups that newer Lloyd's names -- including those in the U.S., who were barred from the consortium until 1969 -- were purposely kept in the dark about the risks they were assuming.
Lloyd's says the names were aware of the extra risks and accepted unlimited liability.
MEANWHILE, a number of U.S. names turned their attention to Lloyd's U.S. law firm.
Twenty-six of them sued LeBoeuf and five of its partners in Cincinnati federal court in 1992, alleging that the firm was privy to auditors' reports and other documents indicating that losses were imminent, but didn't inform the names.
About two dozen other names then sued the firm in other state and federal courts.
All are seeking to escape liability for Lloyd's losses or at least to have LeBoeuf cover their losses -- for amounts that could run into the millions of dollars.
Cases against Lloyd's itself haven't gotten very far in this country.
At least four have been tossed out of U.S. courts on the grounds that names had agreed that the insurer must be sued on its British turf.
One case, however, has been allowed to proceed against Lloyd's in Houston federal court.
The law firm is another matter: Despite LeBoeuf's protestations that the cases against it were "sham" suits really aimed at Lloyd's, Judge Herman Weber of Cincinnati ruled last month that LeBoeuf couldn't hide under the Lloyd's umbrella and must face trial here.
The opinion is likely to be influential in the other cases against LeBoeuf in other courts.
"This is a simple, basic, run-of-the-mill legal malpractice case," says Paul DeMarco, a lawyer at Cincinnati's Waite, Schneider, Bayless & Chesley, which represents the names suing LeBoeuf in Cincinnati.
In dismissing the notion that suits by U.S. citizens against a U.S. law firm belong in British courts, he adds: "What lawyer wouldn't want to consign a client to a foreign forum for purposes of litigating?
How convenient to say, `Feel free to sue me for malpractice, but you have to sue me in Mogadishu.'"
LeBoeuf declines to comment on the case.
The lawsuit is still at a very early stage, and proving claims that LeBoeuf had damaging information may be very difficult.
For one thing, the law firm is refusing to provide the names with communications between it and the insurer.
STILL, lawyers for the underwriters claim they have gathered some evidence that LeBoeuf was trying to protect Lloyd's without regard for them.
"This is a situation where a law firm attempted to represent two clients whose interests at some point diverged," Mr. DeMarco says.
"One of the clients, Lloyd's, knew things that that the other clients didn't.
When push came to shove, LeBoeuf honored Lloyd's requests and served its interests to the detriment of the names."
In its court papers, the law firm has argued that such a conflict never arose because it didn't serve as the names' legal counsel.
It called any suggestion otherwise a "feckless contention."
But Judge Weber, in letting the suit go forward, cited evidence that the law firm led the names to believe they had lawyers at LeBoeuf.
For example, a tax manual drafted by LeBoeuf for U.S. names said the firm's lawyers "are available to . . .
United States names . . . for advice and assistance as needed," and that "the resources of LeBoeuf, including advice, assistance in dealing with revenue agents and legal memoranda prepared on many Lloyd's-related issues, are available to all United States names."
Moreover, in a transcript of a meeting at the Cincinnati Country Club in May 1990, LeBoeuf partner Jeffrey Mace told a group of names: "If you do get picked up by a local agent on a Lloyd's question, I strongly advise you to give us a call right away. . . .
We've been very successful."
LeBoeuf also lists "underwriters at Lloyd's" among its representative clients in brochures designed to attract new clients.
The court ruling serves as a reminder to firms that might solicit clients and live to regret it: Formal contracts and the payment of fees aren't required for the establishment of a lawyer-client relationship (though one U.S. name says LeBoeuf charged him for some tax work after the case was filed).
Monroe Freedman, a Hofstra University Law School ethics expert retained by the names in the Cincinnati case, says the key is whether the lawyers "led the clients to reasonably believe" such a relationship existed.
"There is overwhelming evidence here that the lawyers caused the names to understand that LeBoeuf was representing them as their lawyers, and that's what counts," he says.
