San Francisco -- Just about the same time Officer Bob Geary of the San Francisco Police Department won the right to walk his beat with a ventriloquist's dummy, the police in my hometown of Portland, Ore., introduced a pot-bellied pig named Harley to the crime squad.
I was torn between the pig and the dummy, but opted to interview Brendan O'Smarty, the little wooden police officer.
He at least could communicate, as long as he stood real close to Officer Geary.
The Portland pig, on the other hand, could only grunt and snort as he went about his business of sniffing out illegal drugs.
But Officer Geary, a 24-year San Francisco Police veteran, had trouble fitting me into his and Brendan's schedule.
A trip to Chicago for an appearance on "The Jerry Springer Show" would take priority over a Wall Street Journal interview.
"You understand," he said.
I understood.
Since the November election, when San Francisco voters said "yes" to Proposition BB ("Shall it be the policy of the people of San Francisco to allow Police Officer Bob Geary to decide when he may use his puppet Brendan O'Smarty while on duty?"), Officers Geary and O'Smarty have become media celebs.
By the time I got to them, they already had sat through a surfeit of newspaper, magazine, TV and radio interviews.
And there were more to come.
In fact, our original plan to walk Officer Geary's North Beach beat together was scrapped at the last minute because that would have cut into the time he and his dummy needed for a TV interview later in the day.
"You understand," he said.
I understood.
Officer Geary hugged me when we met, squeezing me with enormous biceps that bulged from his short-sleeved uniform.
Speaking earnestly and looking me straight in the eye, he told me he was skinny as a kid but, "Now I do underwear ads."
A lifelong bachelor, he said he is regularly pursued by women who view him as a kind of Renaissance man, ". . . able to defend myself, having boxing skills and having a puppet."
Brendan O'Smarty is a big part of his life, though Officer Geary stops short of tucking his whittled partner in at night.
Brendan sleeps in a locker at Central Station, but during my visit to the precinct the puppet played sentry on a desktop.
Real-live cops passed to and fro, sometimes with handcuffed citizens in tow.
Brendan, in full uniform and packing a plastic sidearm, never twitched.
Brendan's flesh-and-blood counterpart explained their partnership and how it has made them famous.
It's all rooted in the concept of community policing, and the chief's call to devise "creative and ingenious" methods for positive interaction with the community.
However, Officer Geary's supervisors decided that walking the beat with a dummy and talking to people in a nasal, whiny voice while making the dummy's mouth move was not creative and ingenious but was . . . well, dumb.
Officer Geary already had invested hours of practice in front of the mirror, with a stick held between his lips so he wouldn't move them.
The dummy itself had set him back $1,750, not to mention the $250 price tag on a custom-made miniature San Francisco Police uniform, as well as a badge (No. 1/2) and a tiny gun, held in a leather handcuffs case.
Everybody on his beat seemed to like Brendan, and Officer Geary had found several occasions to use the dummy as a nonlethal police tool.
Once he broke up a barroom brawl by thrusting the dummy into the combatants' faces and having Brendan whine, "Freeze -- like a Popsicle!"
There was a moment of hesitation, so Brendan seized the opportunity to urge them to "take a chill pill."
When the drunken brutes began to snicker, Officer Geary realized that once again he and his sidekick had disarmed people with laughter.
On another occasion, Brendan came to a drug bust and, his little legs dangling from Officer Geary's arm, read a suspect his Miranda rights.
It mattered not a whit that the arrested man understood no English.
"Brendan's my wooden Esperanto," explains Officer Geary.
In spite of the fact that Brendan was a big hit with the citizens, who actually lined up for samples of puppet penmanship scrawled with Officer Geary's left hand, the police brass were not amused.
They felt that, besides being silly, carrying a puppet would hinder an appropriate police response to crime, although Officer Geary counters: "I would set him aside a lot faster than another officer would abandon a coffee and a doughnut."
Officer Geary was ordered to submit a written request well in advance of whenever he wanted to pound the pavement with the puppet.
He protested.
Push came to shove and, fueled by Officer Geary's own investment of $12,000, the issue found its way onto the November ballot.
Victory was sweet.
Reporters from all over the world suddenly appeared at Central Station's doorstep.
Officer Geary got tongue-tied.
"When we found out we had won, Brendan was talking with my lips moving and I was talking with his lips moving.
They didn't know who was who."
But by now Officer Geary has regained his on-air eloquence; he reminded me that he had to cut our interview short because he was expected at a television station.
I asked him at least for a moment to pretend we and Brendan O'Smarty were walking the beat so I could try to imagine it.
So, while his fellow officers smirked and made gagging gestures in the background, Officer Geary paraded his puppet around the room while talking to imaginary people in Brendan's whiny voice.
I assured Officer Geary I understood as he packed up Brendan and rushed off to the TV studio, but to be honest I felt shortchanged by the diminutive dummy.
Brendan O'Smarty may have been pint-sized, but I guess he was just too big a star for me.
I wonder if that pig still has his feet on the ground or if he is now scheming to succeed Tonya Harding as Portland's media star.
Perhaps he still does interviews with people who don't have their own talk show.
I think I'll have my people call the pig's people and maybe we can do lunch.
Ms. Hauser is a writer in Portland.
