When Morihiro Hosokawa dies, according to an adviser, the Japanese prime minister expects to go to heaven and join the men who founded the nation's government centuries ago.
"Why are you here?"
Japan's patriarchs will ask.
Mr. Hosokawa's response, according to the aide: "Because I changed Japan."
Mr. Hosokawa has made a great leap forward in changing Japan.
By winning provisional approval this weekend for sweeping electoral reform, Mr. Hosokawa is presiding over the start of the most radical shake-up in Japanese politics in four decades.
The victory capped an intense week of negotiations in which Mr. Hosokawa put his political future at risk.
The reward: A weekend television poll gave the premier a 79% public approval rating.
Buoyed by such popularity, Mr. Hosokawa now has a stronger mandate to focus on other matters, including next month's summit with President Clinton and long-delayed action to stimulate Japan's sluggish economy.
Mr. Hosokawa's victory boosted the Nikkei Stock Average which, on Monday, soared 964.69 points, or 5%, to close the morning session at 19722.57.
The market sank last week in fear of failure.
Mr. Hosokawa's cabinet had put economic policy on hold during the reform battle.
Japanese newspapers reported the cabinet would approve as soon as this week an economic package valued at between 14 trillion yen and 16 trillion yen, or roughly between $120 billion and $150 billion.
The reports, which couldn't be confirmed, said the package would include income-tax and other tax cuts of between six trillion yen and seven trillion yen.
The Nihon Keizai Shimbun said the government was considering paying for the income-tax cut by raising the consumption tax but that such an increase might be delayed until 1996.
Measures to spur business activity can't come too soon.
Peter Morgan, an economist at Merrill Lynch in Tokyo, estimates that Japan's gross domestic product shrank at an annual rate of 4.2% in the October-to-December quarter.
He thinks a 10 trillion yen stimulus package would add as much as 1.8 percentage points of growth to the economy.
"The sooner the government announces the package, the more impact it will have," said Yoshio Nakamura, an economist with Keidanren, Japan's leading big-business lobby.
U.S. officials, meanwhile, privately cheered Mr. Hosokawa's victory, hoping he now can turn his attention to stalled U.S.-Japan trade talks.
Japanese government officials say that Mr. Hosokawa has so far virtually ignored the preparations for the Feb. 11 Washington summit, leaving the negotiations to Japan's bureaucrats.
U.S. officials hope Mr. Hosokawa will start twisting the arms of Japan's negotiators, making them more receptive to U.S. demands.
But Mr. Hosokawa and other leaders are hardly striking a conciliatory tone.
"We'd like to take measures that are as bold as possible to cooperate with the U.S. on the macro level," Mr. Hosokawa said at a news conference Saturday.
"On the micro level . . . there are still conflicts on basic points."
Mr. Hosokawa added that on such points "we have to tell the U.S. firmly where our country stands."
Mr. Hosokawa may need every bit of his bolstered strength as he tackles these issues, as well as the details of political reform.
The laws -- aimed at cleaning up Japan's notorious money politics -- were adopted only after a last-minute bargain with the reluctant opposition.
And even such measures as an income-tax cut could prove troublesome for his fragile coalition, because of sharp disagreements over how to make up for the lost revenue.
Still, this weekend's victory is considerable.
Mr. Hosokawa took office in August pledging to change the basic rules of Japanese politics, but the reform bills seemed to hit a dead end when rejected by the upper house of parliament on Jan. 21.
Mr. Hosokawa revived the bills by striking a compromise with the opposition Liberal Democratic Party late Friday.
The date of implementation hasn't yet been set, however, with formal legislative approval of the compromise plan still required in the next session of parliament, which opens Monday.
Parliament also will have to approve the new electoral map.
While the original impetus for the five-year reform movement was to end political corruption, it isn't clear the new laws will achieve that.
According to one television poll, only 14% of the respondents said they thought the anticorruption measures went far enough.
"The bill doesn't answer at all public calls for an immediate end to the close ties between business and politics . . . that have become such a hotbed of corrupt money politics," complained an editorial in the Mainichi Shimbun, a major Japanese daily.
Mr. Hosokawa's original proposal was to ban corporate contributions to politicians.
Under the compromise with the LDP, the ban will take effect after five years.
In the meantime, corporations' donations will be limited to one political organization per politician.
The laws also provide public financing for parties.
But to many of the reformers, the real point wasn't to curb graft, but to end the outmoded party structure, which they said stifled economic and foreign policy.
The new system gives more emphasis to long-underrepresented urban areas.
It also replaces Japan's system of multiseat districts with a combination of single-seat districts and seats chosen by regional proportional representation votes.
Until its collapse last summer, the LDP had run Japan for 38 years.
By changing the nature of elections, "we are going to have something more like a two-party system," said Ikuo Kabashima, a professor of political science at Tsukuba University.
"Competition will become much more keen."
Most politicians expect a transitional period of political instability, as the new parties and alliances emerge.
"This could take two or three elections," Mr. Kabashima added.
In their crusade to create a new political order, Mr. Hosokawa and his strategists succeeded by manipulating the fears and ambitions of the biggest opponents of reform -- the LDP and the Socialists, the two poles of the old political structure.
Mr. Hosokawa wooed the Socialists during the summer by taking them into his government, giving them cabinet posts for the first time in decades, and proposing a new electoral system that would favor that party.
But the bills stalled because the hard-core Socialists opposed them.
So Mr. Hosokawa last week reversed course and rewrote the package, making it more beneficial to the LDP.
Still the LDP, which built itself around the old rules, faces a difficult restructuring under any sort of electoral change.
Indeed, the future of both the LDP and the Socialists remains in question, with both parties split between reformers and antireformers.
Right now, the convulsions within the Socialist Party are more serious.
The Socialists are expected to expel their antireform dissidents soon, an act that would rob the coalition government of its majority in parliament's upper house.
The Socialists also are expected to cause trouble over Mr. Hosokawa's next big decision: the tax cut.
The powerful finance ministry is demanding a consumption tax increase to make up for lost revenues, but the Socialists are staunchly opposed.
If, as most observers expect, Mr. Hosokawa agrees to some sort of tax increase, "the possibility is quite high that the Socialists will leave the coalition," said Minoru Morita, a political commentator.
That would, in the short term at least, make Mr. Hosokawa dependent on cooperation from the opposition LDP.
Some critics already were expressing worry that Mr. Hosokawa and the LDP were becoming too close.
"If it becomes a common practice" for Mr. Hosokawa and LDP leaders to meet, Mr. Morita said, "it will, in effect, constitute" a return to Japan's wartime politics, when all parties united.
"That would be dangerous."
