Microsoft Corp., the world's largest supplier of computer software, posted sharply higher profit for its second quarter ended Dec. 31, slightly beating expectations by earning $289 million, or 95 cents a share, on sales of $1.13 billion.
Net income for the quarter rose 22% from $236 million, or 78 cents a share, in the year-ago period.
Revenue for the period rose 20%, from $938 million in the year-ago period.
Analysts cheered the results, which come amid concern over Microsoft's slowing growth.
"This is an impressive feat," said David Readerman, an analyst at Lehman Brothers.
Separately, Microsoft said the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office has opened the way for the company to gain a trademark on the word "Windows" when used to describe personal-computer software products.
The ruling reversed a decision last year denying Microsoft the possibility of a trademark on Windows.
The world's premier growth company over the past decade, Microsoft is now so dominant in the personal-computer software field that achieving its historic gains of 50% or more appear impossible.
Yet, as yesterday's report showed, Microsoft continues to earn better than 25 cents on every dollar of sales, a stunning net-profit margin by any industry's standards.
In a statement, Microsoft attributed the solid performance to "the ongoing adoption" of its Windows operating program and applications software.
The company also credited "the great response" given to its Office package, which contains a suite of basic business applications.
The results were announced after the market close.
Microsoft shares closed down $1.375 at $83.25 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
Trademark officials were not available for comment, but Microsoft said the federal office will publish a notice of its intent to issue a Windows trademark in the coming months.
Opponents of such a move, who in the past have expressed fears that the trademark would be used by Microsoft to bludgeon rivals, can criticize the proposed action before it takes effect.
Industry executives, who asked not to be named, said it appears unlikely that they will convince the trademark office to once again reverse its decision.
They say that Microsoft's garnering of a Windows trademark seems inevitable.
In recent months, Microsoft has painstakingly obtained affidavits from rival software companies that support Microsoft's contention that Windows is not a generic software term but specifically refers to its proprietary operating program.
In high-tech industries, battles over trademarks have taken on increasing importance as companies seek to capitalize in the marketplace on their innovations.
Microsoft argues that it wants "the Windows trademark to protect customers, so people can't claim things are Windows compatible when they aren't," said Jonathan Lazarus, the company's vice president of system strategy.
But Mr. Lazarus said the trademark also will boost Microsoft's efforts to promote Windows as a standard for personal computers.
The rising tide of Windows as a software standard remains the key to Microsoft's robust health.
As of Dec. 31, the company held a whopping $2.8 billion in cash or short-term investments.
Profit for the six months ended Dec. 31 totaled $528 million, or $1.74 a share, compared with $445 million, or $1.48 a share, in the year-ago period.
Revenue totaled $2.1 billion for the six months ended Dec. 31, compared with $1.76 billion in the year-ago period.
