For decades, the recliner has been the cherished throne of the man of the house, a refuge for dozing in front of the television -- and, for the woman of the house, a cumbersome eyesore.
But now that aging baby boomers are turning their homes from showplaces into comfort zones, recliners are becoming respectable, moving out of the den and into living rooms.
The new recliner models bear little resemblance to their big boxy ancestors.
Barcalounger Co. in Rocky Mount, N.C., still markets a line of hefty macho models with names like "Titan" and "Nitro."
But it has also introduced a sleek wood-and-leather Mission-style recliner, as well as daintier models for women, like "Tiara" and "Crystal," which feature tufted backs and skirted bottoms.
For children, New York toy retailer FAO Schwarz markets a $130 "kiddie lounger," advertised as "a comfortable, scaled-down recliner that will hold up to 90 pounds of tired tot."
Furniture makers are also adding new gimmicks and gadgets to recliners.
Many now feature vibrators, telephones hidden in armrests, reading lights and storage drawers for magazines and the television remote control.
In the trade, recliners are known as "motion furniture" -- chairs, love seats and sofas that may swivel, rock and glide as well as recline.
Furniture-industry experts estimate that there is at least one recliner in every four or five households.
And a growing number of homes have two or three.
"People want to come home from work and address the reality of their lives, not the half-dozen times they may entertain in a year," says Donna Warner, editor of Metropolitan Home Magazine.
Art Van Co., a Detroit-based furniture chain with annual sales of more than $300 million, says that 38% of its sales of upholstered furniture in 1993 consisted of reclining chairs and sofas, up from 25% in 1992.
At La-Z-Boy Chair Co., which patented the first reclining chair in 1928, sales have grown 45% over the past five years.
Recliners have made "the wooden rocking chair practically extinct," says Patrick Norton, senior vice president of marketing at La-Z-Boy.
A growing number of women use recliners to rock their babies to sleep, he adds.
In Portland, Ore., Robin Gladieux decorated her living room last year with Oriental rugs, a camelback tapestry sofa and -- at her husband's insistence -- a recliner.
She found an appropriately elegant one: a slim leather wing chair with mahogany ball-and-claw feet.
When not in use, its footrest tucks unobtrusively beneath the seat.
But many people look for more than elegance in their recliners.
At the very top of the line are the "shake and bake" recliners.
Equipped with vibrators and heating elements, these function as mechanical masseuses.
Panasonic's leather version, priced at $2,500 and up, is a strong seller at the Brookstone retail chain.
In the High Point, N.C., wholesale showroom of furniture maker Berkline Corp., sectional reclining sofas carry signs that beckon retail buyers to test them: "Squeeze me, pull me out.
I'm a bed," one coaxes.
Or "Psst.
Pull me down, I have a hidden table."
Silver Oaks Inc. in New Albany, Miss., makes a reclining sectional sofa with a built-in refrigerator that retails for about $1,700.
Retailers say the gadgetry spurs more impulse buying.
While shoppers browse among recliners, "our salesmen have something to do besides just point," says Tom DeCorte, a furniture buyer at Art Van.
"We can show them the features, we can educate them about what's new."
And when they discover that a couch contains two recliners, he adds, "people feel like they are getting a real value."
Demand for reclining furniture is expected to rise with the growth of home-entertainment centers -- the big-screen TVs with stereo speakers and VCR, all housed in a wall system.
"Furniture stores are starting to sell more TVs and electronics to the same people who are buying reclining sofas," says Britt Beemer, president of America's Research Group, furniture-industry consultants.
Recliners date back to the summer of 1928, when two Monroe, Mich., cousins, Edward Knabusch and Edwin Shoemaker, devised a wood-slat folding porch chair.
They upholstered it that fall, and it became a year-round bestseller for their company, Floral City Furniture Co., later renamed La-Z-Boy Chair Co.
Through the years, La-Z-Boy made its name virtually synonymous with recliners, helped by TV commercials starring celebrities such as Bing Crosby, Joe Namath and Alex Karas.
Barcalounger will get a big plug of its own in the movie "The Flintstones," scheduled for release this summer.
Rick Goodman, Barcalounger's national sales manager, says the movie's script calls for John Goodman, who plays Fred Flintstone, to refer to his Stone Age wood-and-rock easy chair as a "Bark-a-lounger."
