Albert R. Hunt, in his Jan. 13 Politics & People column "Clinton's Russia Policy Is No Shining Success," addresses several important aspects of U.S. policy toward Russia.
As Mr. Hunt points out, more than 25,000 nuclear weapons are still deployed in Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan.
This administration is committed to facilitating their dismantlement and destruction.
Furthermore, it shares Mr. Hunt's view that the U.S. should help fund and launch new businesses in Russia.
Since Sens. Nunn and Lugar sponsored the 1991 legislative act that provides dollars to assist former Soviet nuclear and chemical weapons dismantlement, they have exhorted their colleagues, the public and two administrations to stay committed to this task.
The Nunn-Lugar initiative has been an essential stimulus for progress to date.
The recent Kiev-Moscow agreement to dismantle Ukraine's nuclear warheads over the next several years would have been unlikely without the unrelenting diplomatic efforts of key administration officials and Sens. Nunn and Lugar.
Complementing the diplomatic efforts are tangible signs of U.S. financial support.
To date, almost $120 million have been committed under contract and nearly 5,000 items delivered in accordance with about 30 different bilateral agreements.
Another $350 million in support is anticipated for 1994, and more than $400 million for 1995.
Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan are making substantial progress deactivating their nuclear weapons.
And President Clinton and President Yeltsin just signed a chemical weapons dismantlement agreement.
With regard to defense conversion and new-business creation, this administration has endorsed a fast-track approach.
Projects are about to begin in Belarus.
Also, Secretary of Defense William Perry, with a team of experts from several agencies, recently visited a number of Russian defense firms with high potential for rapid transformation to nondefense production.
Some of these firms have been carved out from larger enterprises.
Some are new businesses with promising commercial products and services.
All of them need U.S. firms as partners.
The American companies involved all achieve access to new technologies, potential new markets and economic production capability.
Recently committed U.S. financial assistance is the last link to a fast running start for these Russian companies.
Harold P. Smith Jr.
