Time Warner Inc., in a move aimed at keeping its big new investor Seagram Co. at bay, reinstituted a poison-pill provision that effectively limits an outside investor's ownership to 15% of Time Warner's stock.
The move, approved at a board meeting, comes just a day after Seagram became Time Warner's largest share holder, raising its stake to 11.7% from 10.4%.
The Canadian spirits giant, which made an initial 5.7% investment in Time Warner in May, has said it intends to buy as much as 15% through open-market purchases.
Seagram has been adding to its stake since then.
Its total investment is valued at about $1.76 billion.
Montreal-based Seagram criticized the move by Time Warner, the New York-based entertainment, cable and publishing conglomerate.
"We believe that such plans aren't in the best interests of public shareholders," and "can interfere with shareholder choice and adversely affect shareholder values," the company said.
The pill makes it prohibitively expensive for a hostile acquirer to take over Time Warner.
Though Seagram said yesterday it doesn't plan to exceed 15%, people close to Seagram said it views the Time Warner action as antagonistic; Time Warner should be making an effort to embrace Edgar Bronfman Jr., Seagram's president, these people contend.
But Time Warner has the support of a number of its other shareholders who are concerned that Seagram might try to grab control without paying a premium for their shares.
Yesterday, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Time Warner shares closed at $40, up 87.5 cents.
Jessica Reif, an analyst at Oppenheimer & Co., said the market's reaction shows holders view the poison-pill move as a positive one that will protect Seagram from gaining "creeping control" over Time Warner.
While large institutional investors are typically opposed to poison pills, in Time Warner's case some of the company's largest shareholders, including Capital Group Inc., with an 11% stake, endorsed the plan.
A number of large shareholders cited the Tisch family's investment in CBS Inc. in 1986, when Laurence Tisch, Loews Corp. chairman, obtained de facto control of the broadcaster by buying 24.9% of its stock in the open market, then became chairman of CBS with the board's approval.
Mario Gabelli, whose Gabelli funds own shares in Time Warner and Seagram, said that normally, he would "philosophically be against a poison pill."
In the Time Warner case, however, he said Seagram's Mr. Bronfman "could march up to 25% without anyone knowing where he was going, and shareholders could lose the chance of a premium."
Mr. Gabelli said he believes Mr. Bronfman "has shown only the first card of a five-card deck."
Richard Koppes, general counsel at the California Public Employees Retirement System, a big Time Warner holder, said "we aren't concerned" about the pill.
He said that Gerald Levin, Time Warner's chairman, and his management team "have done a good job over the last two years," boosting the stock price from about $29 a share a year ago.
Time Warner's move "is a way of preventing Seagram from moving from 15% to 25% and gaining effective control," as in the CBS takeover, contends Lisbeth R. Barron of S.G. Warburg & Co.
But another Wall Street executive said the poison pill "prevents anyone from issuing a good security for Time and eliminates 90% of the possibility of getting a premium for the stock."
Time Warner has been saying for the past year that it wouldn't adopt a pill.
But in the wake of the takeover battle for rival entertainment concern Paramount Communications Inc., it has changed its tune.
While it dropped a similar poison pill, or shareholder-rights plan, three years ago, the company said it decided to adopt a new one after "concerns" were raised by "several institutional investors and Time Warner's strategic partners" that the company might be vulnerable to "abusive takeover tactics, including acquisition of control without paying all shareholders a fair premium."
Under terms of the plan, Time Warner would issue one preferred stock-purchase right for each Time Warner common share outstanding as of yesterday or issued thereafter until the rights become exercisable.
Each right would entitle the holder to buy 1/1,000 of a share of preferred stock at $150 if any group acquires more than 15% of Time Warner in other than a "qualifying" tender offer.
Time Warner said the rights offering doesn't preclude a "bona fide all-cash offer for Time Warner's stock which treats all shareholders equally."
Of course, such an offer would be prohibitively expensive for all but a few companies.
"Given the size of its market capitalization and the amount of leverage, it's highly unlikely that Time Warner would be the subject of an outright takeover," Ms. Barron said.
Time Warner has about $16 billion in debt and 375 million shares outstanding.
Ms. Barron calculates that buying Time Warner, including stakes held by its strategic investors, would cost $20 billion, plus the assumption of Time Warner debt.
Time Warner said the pill wouldn't preclude it from a friendly merger.
Time Warner officials have privately indicated that the company may one day consider a friendly merger with U S West Inc.
Last May, the Denver-based regional telephone company bought a 25.5% stake in Time Warner Entertainment for $2.5 billion.
That unit, which includes Time Warner's movie and cable operations, also is 11.2%-owned by two Japanese concerns, Itochu Corp. and Toshiba Corp.
Jay W. Chai, executive vice president of Itochu, said that company also supports the pill decision.
Toshiba couldn't be reached.
U S West declined to discuss whether it had pushed Time Warner to adopt the poison pill to protect its own interests, or whether it might consider a merger with Time Warner.
In a statement, U S West said the Time Warner moves "address our concerns and we support the action."
Some on Wall Street speculated that, if Seagram wants to boost its stake beyond 15%, it could mount a legal challenge to the poison pill.
But people close to the company said such a legal challenge isn't currently under consideration.
Seagram said yesterday that Time Warner management has welcomed its investment.
And Mr. Levin, Time Warner's chairman, said in the company's statement that "we are appreciative that Seagram's investment . . . is an affirmation of our strategic direction and performance."
But people close to Time Warner say Mr. Levin has been suspicious since Seagram made the initial investment without alerting Time Warner, and is concerned about protecting his management.
Mr. Bronfman was advised by investment banker Allen & Co., a longtime force in the entertainment industry.
Currently, Allen is advising QVC Network Inc. in its hostile bid for Paramount.
Seagram also was advised by Michael Ovitz, chairman of Hollywood's Creative Artists Agency.
Many in Hollywood speculate that Mr. Bronfman and his advisers ultimately aim to seek board representation, or a voice in management.
Mr. Ovitz and Allen declined to comment.
Both Messrs. Ovitz and Bronfman have met separately with Mr. Levin to reassure him that their intentions are friendly.
But Time Warner has remained cool to those overtures, and with the poison pill they have now "drawn a line in the sand," said one Wall Street executive.
Johnnie L. Roberts contributed to this article.
