China's spurting growth has vaulted the Asian giant near the top of the world trade charts.
But a key global measure of competitiveness, productivity, lags far behind, economists say.
And the price of Beijing's long inattention to worker output will be a choppy economic slowdown, maybe later this year, as factories come under pressure to start long-overdue restructurings.
In the long run, the revamp will produce higher worker output, but the immediate effect will be millions of laid-off workers and higher social-welfare costs.
"China's economy has always grown by increasing the number of people working and increasing the capital used," says Benny Chiu, an economist at Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corp.
Yet much of the capital that has been invested in China has been poured into so-called nonproductive areas -- real-estate or standard-of-living improvements -- rather than industrial efficiency.
During the hectic growth period from 1985 to 1990, higher output-per-worker accounted for less than a fifth of growth; the economy grew about the same amount just from the addition of new workers to the labor force.
By contrast, nearly two-thirds of the average 7.5% annual growth during that period came from China's increasingly addictive appetite for capital investment.
"There has been too little productivity growth," declares Miron Mushkat, a senior vice president and chief economist for Lehman Brothers Inc. in Asia.
"But we've come to the end of the road.
The easy part is over."
The bumpier part will begin with the advent of restructurings already announced by Beijing.
The government plans to list a score of state-owned companies on international stock exchanges this year, a step that inevitably will require restructuring their businesses to accommodate tight international accounting standards.
It also has said other large state enterprises will be made responsible this year for their own profits and losses.
That will free Beijing from losses that now soak up a third of its deficit-ridden budget.
But it also will impose a heavy toll on the companies, which will have to shed workers, probably by the millions.
Until now, China's labor market has tarried behind reforms in other sectors.
Labor costs remain high -- and even have risen, to compensate for inflation caused by price reforms and other liberalizations.
"Abundant labor really should have meant lower wages," says Mr. Chiu.
That it didn't makes layoffs imperative for companies that want to compete internationally.
Mr. Mushkat estimates as many as 30 million workers could be idled by this year's restructuring, bringing the ranks of China's unemployed to 160 million.
Beijing already is crafting unemployment programs and other costly social-welfare nets that economists say will impair the fiscally beleaguered government's ability to invest in new infrastructure and other productivity-enhancing areas, such as education.
Major projects, including some badly needed power plants, are on hold.
"The restructuring," warns Jan C. Lee, chief regional economist for Goldman, Sachs & Co., "will result in an economic contraction, not an expansion."
The earliest the economy will start benefiting by structural change, he says, would be late 1995.
The rough period could present problems, says Hongkong Bank's Mr. Chiu.
"The fear is that maybe they're liberalizing too fast," he says.
"If the pace is too fast, it can destabilize the whole system."
The biggest worry is inflation.
Prices were rising at an alarming annualized rate of 23.9% in major cities last December.
Mr. Lee notes that a government plan to spend roughly 1.3 trillion yuan (about $150 billion) this year would be "very expansionary."
Moreover, many economists fear Beijing will try to soften industrial restructuring by spending more money on social programs.
On the other hand, if the government sticks to the restructuring without resorting to massive new subsidies, it could have positive consequences for inflation.
"The reform ultimately removes subsidies," says Michael Taylor, an analyst at Morgan Stanley Group's Hong Kong office.
"It's deflationary."
Though the exact timing of productivity-boosting reforms may be in question, their importance to the economy isn't.
"China's economic performance in the initial state of economic reforms is no small achievement," wrote Hong Kong economist K.C. Yeh, who identified the productivity gap as a problem in an article last year in the China Quarterly.
"But the basic problems have not yet been resolved, and they will undoubtedly surface again in the 1990s."
