Markus Wegner, clad in a tweed jacket, French cuffs and signet ring, looks more like a typical Euro-Yuppie than a menace to Germany's political establishment.
Yet the antiparty program of his infant Statt Partei -- the Instead Party -- is part of a phenomenon that is changing the political landscape.
Since the party's surprise success in Hamburg's elections last September, which catapulted it into the state's governing coalition, interest nationwide has snowballed.
Mr. Wegner crows that there are "numerous Instead Party groups, grouplets and associations that have been founded, along with interested individuals -- 2,000 to 3,000 of them have turned to us."
Pollsters estimate that 20% of the German electorate might be sympathetic to the Instead Party.
Peering through his tortoise-shell glasses, Mr. Wegner says earnestly, "I think there is a certain responsibility not to disappoint these people."
By persuading his supporters at a weekend meeting to break out of the confines of Hamburg and establish a national party, Mr. Wegner has started fulfilling those hopes.
Not bad for a seven-month-old party that, as he freely admits, has little program beyond its slogan promoting "citizen responsibility against party power."
Although it is the largest, Mr. Wegner's organization is only one of a passel of new parties now being launched into the surf of Germany's "Super Election Year," which will include 18 elections for state and local assemblies, as well as the European Parliament and the Federal Bundestag.
The sudden vogue for antiestablishment politics appears to be another sign that the country is in the grip of what might be called G-7 disease, the post-Cold War malady that has put the major parties in the industrialized world under enormous pressure and claimed such victims as Margaret Thatcher, George Bush and Japan's Liberal Democrats.
So far, Germany's affliction has been visible in the plummeting popularity of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrats and, to a lesser extent, the low approval ratings for the opposition Social Democrats.
Both parties have been seen as incapable of dealing with the economic and social problems brought by German unity and recession.
A recent poll by the Allensbach Institute shows a record two-thirds of Germans are disappointed with the major parties, up from 41% in 1992.
That has translated into a surge in popularity for smaller parties at the extremes of the political spectrum, including a clutch of far-right parties, the environmental Greens and the PDS, the reformed Communists in eastern Germany.
Approval for the Communists has risen sharply, with 22% in the eastern states supporting them.
Most of the new political groups, which experts say number in the three figures, are fueled by a common revulsion at the spate of scandals that has forced numerous officials at the state and federal level into retirement and by a sense that the major parties are ossified.
They are widely criticized as being closed off to new blood and unresponsive to the concerns of ordinary citizens.
Mr. Wegner, for example, decries the fact that Germany is ruled "by a tiny little sector of society," and that being a reliable party hack counts for more in politics than expertise.
His own rise to stardom began when the 40-year-old publisher successfully sued to have Hamburg's 1991 state election overturned because he had been snubbed by undemocratic candidate-selection procedures in the party to which he then belonged, the Christian Democrats.
It was in the rerun in September that the Instead Party scored its success.
When it entered a coalition with the dominant Social Democrats, the party was true to its promises, selecting experts who were not party members for the two cabinet posts it was allotted.
Mr. Wegner's is not the only party with national ambitions and formidable potential.
The League of Free Citizens also was launched over the weekend in Wiesbaden by Manfred Brunner, a former European Community official who became famous for unsuccessfully suing the German government to prevent ratification of the Maastricht treaty for European Union.
Mr. Brunner paints himself as being both more market-oriented and closer to popular opinion than the major parties.
"In Germany," he complains, "2,000 politicians and 2,000 journalists enjoy a monopoly" in political life.
"People from the bourgeois center feel unrepresented."
His reputation among political insiders as a shrewd tactician seems to be confirmed by his choice of issues: By making discontent with the Maastricht treaty a central theme, Mr. Brunner plans to capitalize on the fact that there was little debate and no referendum on the issue.
He says that "85% of all Germans are against the ECU," the currency that would come into circulation after monetary union, and for holding onto the mark.
Talk like that causes discomfort in an already-beleaguered chancellory.
Although the competing reformists might knock each other out before October's federal election, Mr. Kohl could for the first time find himself facing a protest party on the right that isn't stigmatized by the racism and xenophobia of outcast parties such as the Republicans.
"We have a saying in German," says one Kohl aide.
"`Many dogs are the death of the rabbit.'
The more little parties you have, the more voters will vote for them.
This is a problem" for Mr. Kohl's Christian Democrats.
