The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office has overturned a software patent that appeared to give a subsidiary of Tribune Co. a sweeping monopoly over a technique essential to combining sound, images, and text with a computer.
The patent, awarded last August to Compton New Media, a unit of Tribune, had sparked intense protests by large and small software and computer companies, alike.
They contended that the technique was in common commercial use.
Their protests prompted an extremely rare review of the patent by Patent Commissioner Bruce Lehman, which culminated in a decision this week to reverse the patent.
The Patent Office hasn't publicly announced its decision, but a Tribune Co. spokesman confirmed that the government had rejected the patent.
The company said it has two months to decide whether to contest the rejection or file an application for a narrower patent.
The spokesman declined to comment on how Tribune Co. would proceed.
Observers hailed the decision, saying the government had taken a big step toward establishing a sane policy toward software patents.
"This is the Patent Office's way of saying that the system isn't totally broken," said Ronald Laurie, a Menlo Park, Calif., attorney who specializes in software issues.
"It's saying that there are ways to get bad patents taken care of."
Until the early 1980s, the government never awarded patents on the code that directs the computer's actions on the ground that such programs could only be protected by copyright law, which covers the expression of ideas but not the ideas themselves.
Since then, however, the government has issued a growing number of patents to inventors of computer code.
Codewriters and software companies have increasingly complained about the government's seemingly liberal attitude toward software patents, asserting that too many obvious techniques had been granted patent protection.
This, the critics said, had stifled innovation because programmers spent too much time worrying about how to avoid infringing on dubious patents or fighting off allegations.
The Compton patent seemed to substantiate these criticisms, because it covered a commonplace way of storing and retrieving text, audio, and images stored on compact disks that were formated to be understood by a computer.
"The patent was so breathtaking in its sweep that for people in the industry it was like trying to patent sunlight," said Paul Saffo, who follows trends in information technology for the Institute of the Future, Menlo Park, Calif.
With hundreds of companies developing programs that take advantage of the computer's ability to mix and match media forms, many people worried that the Compton patent essentially might place a tax on all makers of these emerging products.
While asserting that the Patent Office hadn't any choice but to reverse its decision, "it is astounding" that the reversal has come so quickly, said Christopher Sherman, editor of Multimedia Week, a newsletter.
