Richard Fisher has a professional reputation as a risk-averse money manager, his philosophy best summed up by the "rules" that snake across his computer screen when the machine is idle: "Rule No. 1: Never lose money.
Rule No. 2: Never forget Rule No. 1."
It now seems that Mr. Fisher handles his own money exactly the same way.
Mr. Fisher, as a Democratic candidate for the U.S. Senate, detailed his stock and bond portfolio in filings with the Senate Ethics Committee.
The holdings, which a source close to Mr. Fisher says exceed $20 million, display an affection for European government bonds, money-market funds and U.S. Treasury notes -- and almost an aversion to the stock market.
"You can tell a lot by looking at someone's portfolio," says Frederick "Shad" Rowe, a Dallas money manager, who, at the request of Texas Journal, analyzed Mr. Fisher's investments.
His conclusion: The portfolio "is not what you'd call a Merrill-Lynch, we're-bullish-on-America stance.
It's a very batten-down-the-hatches outlook on the world."
Still, it probably has been a profitable one.
Although his small stock holdings missed the bull market, falling interest rates have sent bond prices soaring.
Mr. Fisher agrees that he is "one of the more `plain vanilla' investors."
But he insists that he and his company's clients have thrived from his conservative approach.
"The only way to make money with money is to take long-term positions," Mr. Fisher says.
"I'm a dinosaur in the industry and I'm proud of it."
Mr. Fisher, 44 years old, learned his investment philosophy at Brown Brothers Harriman & Co. in New York.
He opened a Dallas office for the firm in 1980, breaking away to start his own company, Fisher Capital Management, in 1987.
Fisher Capital manages nearly $300 million for about 50 wealthy individuals; the firm also has a $68 million hedge fund, Value Partners Ltd.
"Every penny I personally invest reflects how we invest our clients' money," he says.
"We don't trade separately."
The exception: Mr. Fisher's large holdings in liquid investments -- money to pay for his Senate campaign, which he is primarily financing himself.
He also owns more than $1 million in Texas municipal bonds, purchased in the bleak late '80s.
"The Texas bonds were so underpriced, because of concerns about the state's bond rating," Mr. Fisher says.
"So we scooped them up."
Mr. Fisher's penchant for European government bonds meshes nicely with his obvious passion for foreign affairs: Pictures of foreign leaders cover one wall in his office, and he spent six months working in Japan in 1990.
Beginning in about 1990, he purchased German treasury notes and other Eurobonds, cashing out of many in the past few months and taking advantage of interest rates that in the case of a seven-year German note had fallen as much as four percentage points in three years.
Since 1991, Mr. Fisher has shied away from the stock market, and his equity holdings remain meager.
He bought a handful of medical-industry stocks after President Clinton's health-care proposal sparked a widespread selling frenzy.
One holding, however, stands out: International Business Machines Corp.
"IBM has been a dog," Mr. Rowe says.
It depends, counters Mr. Fisher.
He says his firm dumped IBM stock in mid-1987, at more than $160 a share.
He bought again at about $105, and took a small profit at $120.
He now owns more than $100,000 of IBM stock, purchased for about $41 a share; it has been trading at about $54.
Fisher's personal portfolio, as of Nov. 30, 1993:
