Conde Nast Publications Inc. has given its most important editorial job to a 35-year-old British editor, James Truman.
Mr. Truman, the editor in chief of Details, the company's hip magazine for young men, will succeed Conde Nast's legendary 81-year-old editorial director, Alexander Liberman.
Mr. Truman's job will be to trouble-shoot at the Conde Nast magazines that need special attention.
The company publishes 13 magazines, including Vogue, Glamour, GQ, Vanity Fair, Bride's and Gourmet.
Mr. Liberman has been expected to retire for several years, but speculation about his successor had centered on the editors of better-known magazines in the empire, such as Anna Wintour at Vogue or Tina Brown at the New Yorker.
Mr. Truman, named editor of Details in 1990 after a stint as a feature editor at Vogue starting in 1988, is credited with quadrupling the circulation of Details to more than 400,000, but he has never headed another magazine and doesn't have Mr. Liberman's design background.
Just two weeks ago, Conde Nast announced that its 68-year-old president, Bernard Leser, would be succeeded by Steven Florio, the 44-year-old president of the New Yorker.
In one swoop, S.I. "Si" Newhouse Jr. has replaced both the top editorial and the top advertising managers of Conde Nast with a new generation.
"This is a changing of the guard," says Mr. Newhouse, chairman of both Conde Nast and its parent, Advance Publications Inc., who nevertheless insists he doesn't want the magazines pushed in a new direction.
Nobody expects Mr. Truman to carry anywhere near Mr. Liberman's clout.
"I wouldn't say that the editors will report to James," says Mr. Newhouse.
"He will be there to help editors and magazines that need help and ask for it."
Mr. Truman himself acknowledges his role will be largely advisory.
"This is like going on stage after Laurence Olivier," says Mr. Truman.
"He was a legendary performer and I don't think that on day one, I'll magically become Alex Liberman.
The job was an expression of his talent and personality.
I hope, over time, that the job evolves as an expression of what I know, which is more editorially driven than visually driven."
And which magazines will Mr. Truman be likely to advise?
Insiders say the magazines that most need help include Mademoiselle, Vanity Fair and Bon Appetit.
Mademoiselle just installed a new editor last fall, after the previous editor, Gabe Doppelt, made changes in the young woman's magazine that were deemed too cutting-edge for advertisers.
Bon Appetit's ad pages dropped nearly 30% last year.
And Vanity Fair, while its circulation has gained under its new editor, Graydon Carter, isn't attracting as many advertisers as it was when Ms. Brown ran it.
Mr. Truman's talents may not be needed-or wanted-at such reputed Conde Nast performers as Glamour, Self, GQ and Allure.
Says Art Cooper, editor of men's magazine GQ, "I haven't worked with anybody for eight years.
Ruth Whitney editor of Glamour has a similar independence.
The magazines that work successfully independently will continue to do so."
The changes come at a time when Conde Nast, whose well-known magazines are some of the industry's leaders, is nonetheless suffering from the weak advertising market.
Indeed, some Conde Nast insiders say that fewer than half the company's magazines currently are profitable.
While Messrs. Florio and Truman aren't expected to take the company in a drastically new direction, they are expected to help push the company faster toward the multimedia future.
Advance also owns one of the nation's largest cable TV systems, a chain of newspapers and the book publisher Random House Inc.
Mr. Newhouse has already agreed to invest $500 million in QVC Networks Inc.'s bid for entertainment and publishing giant Paramount Communications Inc.
"There is no strategy we have in mind about redefining the magazines," says Mr. Newhouse.
But, he adds, "We face a future full of technological challenges and readers with different backgrounds and interests.
Also, we see different problems in marketing we didn't begin to think of a few years ago."
While Mr. Liberman's tenure at Conde Nast has been long -- 31 years so far -- and illustrious, even he knew it was time for a change, says Mr. Newhouse.
As of April 1, when Mr. Truman becomes editorial director, Mr. Liberman will assume the new post of deputy chairman-editorial, presumably spending less time in the office but continuing to be a trusted adviser to Mr. Newhouse.
Mr. Truman wasn't Mr. Newhouse's first choice for the job; he initially offered it to Ms. Brown in 1992, giving her the choice between the editorial director post and the editorship of the New Yorker.
Ms. Brown, then editor of Conde Nast's Vanity Fair, chose the New Yorker.
But Mr. Liberman said he personally recommended Mr. Truman to succeed him.
"Yes he's young, but so was I when I started," says Mr. Liberman.
He joined the art department of Vogue in 1941 and two years later, at age 31, was named Vogue's art director.
Mr. Liberman became famous for creating the magazine's dramatic style in the '40s and '50s, and his influence was so strong at Conde Nast that for years, insiders say, he even dictated who became editor of each publication.
After the Newhouse family bought Conde Nast in 1959, Mr. Liberman continued to be powerful as a taste-maker, reviewing each issue of almost every magazine for years.
To succeed Mr. Truman at Details, Conde Nast named John Leland, 34, currently a senior editor at Newsweek.
