If ever there was a company that could use a little "information-superhighway" hoopla, Texas Instruments Inc. is it.
The engineer-dominated defense and electronics giant has over the years suffered a reputation as a technology innovator with little marketing panache.
Though TI is credited with co-inventing the integrated circuit, it long ago fumbled its lead in the computer-chip market, and also stumbled on early stabs at home computers and artificial-intelligence software.
Now, the company is convinced it has found its calling and can greatly benefit from the vaunted information superhighway.
At a news conference in San Francisco today, TI is expected to unveil a super-fast new version of a computer chip that executives hope will position the company as a leading parts supplier for the next generation of interactive television sets and souped-up computers.
The device, an advanced version of so-called digital-signal processors, handles analog signals -- such as audio and video -- as if they were digital bits, and can process huge chunks of those signals that are expected to form the core of the information superhighway.
Analysts say the device, capable of crunching a record two billion operations a second, is part of a larger set of technology tools that has put TI in the middle of the debate over advanced technology.
-- High-resolution displays.
TI, using tiny, movable mirrors etched on the face of computer chips, has developed a video projection system for use in high-definition television sets.
A prototype of the ultra-clear screen was demonstrated at a trade show last year, and TI is now aggressively marketing the system to TV manufacturers.
-- Compression.
The company is a big supplier of chips used to compress audio and video data into smaller packets.
The technology -- a key component of teleconferencing systems and interactive video games -- makes it possible to squeeze more information through smaller pipelines such as phone or cable lines.
In-Stat, a market research concern, says sales of products that use audio or video compression will reach 40 million units by 1997, a 12-fold increase from 1993.
-- Networking tools.
TI has spent millions of dollars developing chips for local and wide-area computer networks.
One set of devices, based on a bewildering technology called asynchronous transfer mode, enables companies to send voice, video and data over small, campus-wide networks as well as global computer systems.
-- Software.
The company is hoping it can recast its software business, a perennial financial disappointment, to help cable and phone companies track traffic on the digital highway, an as-yet unsolved billing problem.
While TI executives concede they didn't foresee the information-superhighway tie-in when they first began developing some of these products more than a decade ago, they're more than willing to ride the technology wave today.
"The digitization of audio and video is going to be a dominant theme," says Rich Templeton, a senior vice president in TI's semiconductor group.
Mr. Templeton is particularly excited about the digital-signal processor business, which TI executives view as the cornerstone of the company's advanced-technology strategy.
Sales of DSPs, as they are called, are expected to reach $990 million this year, up 36% from 1993, according to Tempe, Ariz., chip analyst Will Strauss.
Most analysts expect similar growth -- double the chip industry's growth rate in general -- at least through 1997.
Because DSP chips can handle all kinds of different data -- as opposed to just digital commands -- analysts expect their use to expand broadly from the video conferencing and answering-machine systems that now form the core of the DSP business.
Indeed, TI today will announce a host of customers for its new megachip -- including Sony Corp., which will use the DSP in a set-top television device, and Printrak International Inc., a maker of fingerprint-ID systems used by law-enforcement agencies.
Other applications, TI executives say, include motor-control systems in cars, three-dimensional-graphics workstations, digital radio and cordless phones.
"I'm convinced that DSPs will do to electronics what the microprocessor did for the computer industry," says Mr. Templeton, referring to the Intel Corp. processors that form the core of most of today's personal computers.
Intel, of course, doesn't agree.
The chip giant believes that most of the work done by a DSP can be handled by a high-speed microprocessor such as the Pentium, Intel's current top-of-the-line chip.
An Intel spokesman predicts that DSPs will work as complements to Intel chips for specific, narrow applications, rather than as replacements.
Intel, though, is only part of TI's problem.
The company, which brags that it invented the single-chip DSP a decade ago, nevertheless has watched its market share slide from 60% four years ago to 40% today, and it's still slipping.
It is competing against companies such as American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and Motorola Inc. that have huge internal markets for their own chips.
Motorola, for instance, is the biggest manufacturer of cellular phones (among the most popular uses of DSPs) and AT&T uses the devices in its own computer modems.
Because TI doesn't make the end equipment, analysts say the company has had a tough time competing for customers who want suppliers with a proven track record in their business.
And then there is the matter of marketing.
The company in recent years has been sharply criticized for missing the computer microprocessor market -- it began selling its own version of Intel's 486 chip only last year -- and its notebook computer line has been almost invisible despite glowing technical reports in the computer trade press.
TI executives insist that the success of its advanced technology products won't depend on the average consumer's buying habits, but on whether the companies that make the products that the consumers buy will pick TI.
Still, the pot-shots against TI have begun.
Elliot Gold, editor of TeleSpan, a newsletter that covers the video conferencing market, notes that the latest, high-powered DSP from TI has been delayed for months.
"Their newest chip is already late," he says.
"I gave up on them."
TI officials counter that earlier scuttlebutt about when the chip would be released was based on speculation they never even confirmed.
So far, the company appears to be putting as much muscle as possible behind the new launch, with a rare newsconference and weeks of early briefings before industry pundits and analysts.
Mr. Strauss, the chip analyst, gives the company good reviews for its handling of the new technology so far.
"This could be the thing that reverses TI's trend," he says.
SONY Corp. said it plans to use a chip made by Texas Instruments Inc. in Trinitron video monitors that will have video-conferencing capabilities.
The company said it has no plans to use the chip in a set-top television device as was reported in Wednesday's Corporate Focus article.
