In an unusual move, the comptroller of the currency asked for public comment on proposals by Mellon Bank Corp. and First Union Corp. to purchase mutual fund companies.
The proposals by Mellon to purchase Dreyfus Corp. and by First Union to purchase Lieber & Co. present no new legal issues, but Mellon's proposed $1.7 billion transaction has attracted considerable political attention.
Two powerful House Democrats, Rep. John Dingell of Michigan and Rep. Henry Gonzalez of Texas, have warned that the Mellon transaction raises significant issues involving bank safety and the protection of bank customers who purchase mutual funds.
Unlike bank deposits, mutual fund shares purchased through banks aren't covered by federal deposit insurance.
Mr. Gonzalez, chairman of the House Banking Committee, worries that banks don't sufficiently warn depositors about the risks of mutual fund investments.
Mr. Dingell, chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, is concerned that bank regulators aren't properly equipped to supervise mutual funds.
In particular, Mr. Dingell is worried about Mellon's plan to make Dreyfus an operating subsidiary of Mellon Bank, a move that would enable Mellon to consolidate more than $700 million of Dreyfus capital into the bank's capital base.
This could weaken the financial strength of Dreyfus, Mr. Dingell says.
His committee plans to hold hearings next week on some of the regulatory issues posed by the Mellon purchase.
The comptroller of the currency, who regulates national banks, has the authority to approve the Mellon and First Union transactions.
But the hearings are important because they could provide insight into whether Messrs. Dingell and Gonzalez will push for legislation that could slow the move of banks into mutual fund management.
If the deals go through, other banks are expected to acquire mutual fund advisory firms.
Messrs. Dingell and Gonzalez had urged the public comment period, which will run for 30 days.
The agency's request for public comment points out that both companies are seeking clearance for activities that have been previously approved for national banks.
"The magnitude of the Mellon transaction, however, is significant," the comptroller's notice said.
Dreyfus provides investment advice and services to more than 130 mutual funds with about $80 billion in assets.
Lieber advises and services 15 mutual funds in the Evergreen group with assets of about $3.6 billion.
