Chrysler Corp. said fourth-quarter earnings more than doubled to their highest level ever for the period, surpassing analysts' estimates and sending the auto maker's stock to an all-time high.
Chrysler, which is leading the auto-industry recovery by selling more cars and trucks at higher prices while cutting costs, had net income of $777 million, or $2.11 a share, up from $356 million, or $1.12 a share, a year earlier.
That exceeded the estimates of even the most optimistic analysts, who had expected Chrysler to earn $750 million.
Revenue for the quarter rose 18% to $12 billion from $10.2 billion a year earlier.
Chrysler shares jumped 75 cents to close at $62.50 in composite New York Stock Exchange trading, after rising Monday on expectations of strong earnings.
Shares of General Motors Corp. and Ford Motor Co. also rose, driven by investor expectations of additional earnings surprises as rising domestic vehicle sales and higher prices promise solid profits in Detroit.
GM closed at $62.125, up 37.5 cents, and Ford closed at 68.625, up 25 cents, also in composite New York Stock Exchange trading.
With price increases and an array of more-attractive new products such as the Dodge Ram pickup and the Chrysler Concorde sedan, Chrysler boosted the average revenue generated from the sale of a vehicle by 6.3% to about $17,000 in the fourth quarter from about $16,000 a year ago.
The increase includes a steep cut in rebates or sales incentives, which averaged $650, down from $1,020 a year earlier.
In its automotive operations, Chrysler's per-vehicle profit for the quarter hit $1,727 before taxes, up from $1,059 a year earlier.
That means the one time sick-dog of the auto industry is the most profitable auto maker in the world on a per-vehicle basis, said John V. Kirnan, an analyst with Salomon Brothers.
"These guys are ahead of the rest of the industry by a country mile," Mr. Kirnan said.
To be sure, Chrysler is benefiting from both an industry rebound and Japanese price increases, which have enabled the No. 3 U.S. auto maker to raise prices repeatedly over the past year.
But Chrysler also is doing a good job of controlling costs and building products that people are willing to pay full price to buy.
In a sign that the company thinks demand for its products will strengthen further, Chrysler's board authorized spending $1 billion to increase capacity to 3.2 million units a year from the current level of about 2.6 million.
That increase alone could enable Chrysler to raise its 14% share of the U.S. vehicle market by four percentage points.
For the year, Chrysler posted a loss of $2.5 billion, or $7.62 a share, compared with 1992 earnings of $723 million, or $2.21 a share.
Its performance was dragged down by a $4.7 billion accounting charge for retiree health care and a $283 million charge for other retirement benefits.
The big noncash charges masked what otherwise was Chrysler's best year ever.
On a pretax operating basis, Chrysler earned $3.8 billion for the year, up sharply from 1992 pretax earnings of $934 million and from its previous record of $2.4 billion in 1984.
Revenue for the year rose 18% to $43.6 billion from $36.9 billion in 1992.
Gary Valade, Chrysler's chief financial officer, said the company was able to reduce the volume at which it could break even in North America to 1.6 million vehicles a year from 1.7 million vehicles in 1992 by cutting costs.
"This isn't a high-margin industry, so just incredible things happen to the bottom line if you can raise prices at the same time costs fall," says Ronald Glantz, an analyst with Dean Witter.
"It was an exceptional year," said Robert J. Eaton, Chrysler's chairman, who nonetheless sounded his usual cautionary note and sought to emphasize Chrysler's commitment to continuous improvement.
Chrysler finished the year with $4 billion of cash on hand, up sharply from $2.3 billion last year.
The improvement in its cash position came even as Chrysler contributed $3.5 billion to reduce its unfunded pension liability, which stood at $2.2 billion at year end.
The liability was $3.9 billion at the beginning of 1993.
A generous union contract and lower interest rates offset much of Chrysler's contributions during the year.
Analysts say Chrysler could fully fund its pension plan in about 1 1/2 years, ahead of the two years Chrysler has said it could take.
Despite the tremendous increase in Chrysler's profitability, many analysts expect the company to continue to do better as it updates its lineup and increases capacity.
The company's balance sheet also improved when it redeemed $769 million in debt in November.
Debt outstanding was $2.8 billion at the end of the year, down from $3.8 billion a year earlier.
Chrysler's finance arm, Chrysler Financial Corp., reported net income of $129 million for the year compared with $231 million in 1992.
Because of its solid operating performance in 1993, Chrysler will make profit-sharing payments to each of its United Auto Workers employees this year and pay bonuses to executives.
In calculating the payments, the company won't include the accounting loss.
