The bulls are running in Tokyo.
Triggered by an agreement aimed at reforming Japan's political system, Japanese stock prices rocketed 7.8% Monday, the fourth-largest gain ever in percentage terms.
The Nikkei 225-stock index closed at 20229.12, up 1471.24, on volume of about 800 million shares, the heaviest in nine months.
In trading Tuesday, the Nikkei rose 224.13 points to close the morning session at 20453.25.
Monday's gainers swamped decliners, 1,109 to 3.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues jumped 101.40, or 6.6%, to 1629.22.
Monday's big rally may be more than another flash in the pan.
So far this year the Nikkei has gained 16.1%, leading many Japanese traders to conclude that Japan's four-year bear market is over.
"The trend has reversed," said Shunichi Hari, general manager for international administration at Yamaichi Securities Co.
The market could be at 25000 by the end of the year, he predicted.
His view is significant, because Japanese investors tend to be more critical of their own market than foreigners are.
Certainly there's plenty of optimism outside Japan.
"We have been bullish on the market for some time; we are still positive," said Simon Fraser, a portfolio manager for Fidelity Investments in London.
He agrees that a Nikkei of "25000 from these levels over the next 12 months is doable."
Fidelity is so positive that it is about to launch a new Japanese closed-end fund for European investors.
Patrick Gifford, a director at Fleming Investment Management Ltd. in London, numbers himself among the bulls, too.
Last December, Fleming set a 12-month target for the Nikkei of 24000.
"We don't see any hard evidence that we should change that," said Mr. Gifford.
Political reform by itself isn't enough to spur stocks sharply higher.
Rather, it sets the stage for the government to turn its attention to a major spending package and tax cuts aimed at stimulating Japan's moribund economy.
Such a stimulus package, valued at more than 14 trillion yen ($127.2 billion), is expected to be announced Thursday.
But even amid the rally, some skeptics warn that the planned stimulus isn't likely to translate quickly into higher corporate earnings.
And they suggest that the Tokyo market may be hard-pressed to sustain the pace of recent gains.
"There are no negative factors in the market -- except the economy and corporate earnings," said Shigeru Akiba, director of yen equity trading at UBS Securities Ltd.
There's still plenty of bad economic news ahead for Japan.
The nation's economy is expected to see less than 1% growth for the fiscal year ending March 31, and corporate earnings are expected to decline for the fourth-straight year.
And earlier efforts to stimulate the economy have been less than successful.
The package to be announced this week will be the fourth of its kind in 20 months, with little discernable improvement in the Japanese economy from the previous three.
Worse, from the market's perspective, many Japanese companies, particularly Japan's battered banks, badly need profits, so they're likely to disgorge some of their massive stock holdings before the end of the fiscal year.
Then there's the question of who will buy into this rally.
Foreign investors, with an estimated $9 billion in net purchases in January, have led the buying so far, including on Monday.
Now some are ready to take a break.
"We think 17000 to 20000 is the range" for the Nikkei for the next few months, said John Alkire, president of Morgan Stanley Asset Management in Tokyo.
Some money managers are even more pessimistic.
"I can't see why anybody is getting overly excited about Japan right now," said Fermin Da Costa Gomez, a portfolio manager at Pacific Asset Management NV in Amsterdam.
"Economic fundamentals as far as we are concerned haven't changed."
Noting the reluctance of many Japanese investors to invest in their own stock market, he said: "The Japanese will keep selling, and it will reach a point where the foreigners are unwilling or unable to commit any more money to Japanese stocks."
At that point, he predicted: "You could get a real tumble."
But others argue that there's still plenty of foreign cash waiting to get into the Japanese market.
Most U.S., British and European institutions are underweighted in Japanese shares compared with major industry benchmarks.
The greatest potential for a sustained rally rests with Japanese investors themselves.
"There's $6.75 trillion of cash on the sidelines in Japan," said Michael Howell, head global strategist for Baring Securities Ltd. in London.
Foreign buyers were joined Monday by Japanese retail customers and mutual funds.
But traders said Japanese corporations and financial institutions held back.
Those big stockholders are likely to be sellers before they're buyers, said Mr. Alkire.
"After the market closes they'll meet and decide what to sell," he said.
Optimists count on the package to solve the bad-debt problems in Japan's financial sector and revive a moribund real-estate market.
People are also looking for a tax cut of as much as $73 billion as part of the package.
But it isn't clear how much new money the tax cut will put in the pockets of the average Japanese, or whether the money would be spent rather than saved.
Furthermore, there's little sign the package will contain any real structural changes for the financial system.
"People wonder if 20000 is sustainable" for the Nikkei, said Yasufumi Ohigashi, deputy general manager of equity sales at Nomura Securities Co.
"The business forecasts are still negative.
But expectations are starting to come out that maybe next year won't be so bad."
As equity markets rallied world-wide, London shares gained 1.3% to a record finish after a powerful push from a combination of British and global factors.
Frankfurt stocks jumped 2.1%, propelled by the auto sector.
Equities also logged new highs in Paris, Sydney, Madrid, Stockholm, Brussels and Mexico City.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 118.60, up 3.47, reflecting higher markets in all regions.
Securities brokers stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 157.74, up 14.44, or 10%, with Daiwa Securities of Japan posting a 19% gain in its local currency.
Plantations stocks trailed at 218.72, down 1.04, or 0.5%, with Kumpulan Guthrie of Malaysia sliding 4.3% in local currency.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index raced up 44.4 points to 3491.8, a new high and the session's peak.
The FT 30-stock index soared 37.4 points, or 1.4%, to 2677.3.
Volume was 989.2 million shares, compared with 1.14 billion shares in the previous session.
Strong gains in Asian markets and a Wall Street rally Friday ignited stocks in London, where investors were relieved that positive U.S. inflation data indicated removal of a potential drag on the global economy.
News of a takeover by Bayerische Motoren Werke of Germany of Rover Cars from British Aerospace for #800 million ($1.12 billion) lifted hopes for more mergers and acquisitions.
Other positive factors included a German central bank meeting this week, when interest rates could be lowered.
A cut in Belgian rates yesterday also helped focus attention on the European rate outlook.
And the London stock and bond markets were cheered by a smaller-than-expected increase in British money-supply growth.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index rallied 43.98 points to 2177.45, also the intraday high, with advancing issues outnumbering retreating issues 28 to 1.
The index chalked up about half the day's gain in late trading on the news of BMW's Rover takeover, which analysts said would lead to a doubling of the German auto maker's European market share.
BMW shares rocketed up 56.50 marks, or 8.3%, to 739.50 marks ($424.55).
Banking shares also outpaced the market, attributed to the German central bank's lowering of banks' minimum reserve requirement, which amounted in effect to an interest-rate cut.
In Paris, stocks hit a new record, surpassing the mark set Jan. 11.
The exchange was swept along by options expirations, New York stocks' surge Friday, and reaction to a French economic stimulus plan, including measures to help the auto industry by stimulating consumer and corporate car purchases.
In Amsterdam, shares rallied broadly on bargain hunting and covering of short, or oversold, positions, sparked by advances in overseas markets, a stronger U.S. dollar in currency dealings, and expectations that interest rates in the Netherlands and Germany may drop soon.
In Milan, the index that includes all electronically traded shares soared 3.5% as sellers couldn't be found and enormous liquidity poured into the market, stimulated by lots of cash in mutual funds, low rates on government securities, and confidence about Italy's political situation.
In Zurich, the market climbed 1.2%, as blue chips spurred a resumed rally, helped by prospects for lower Swiss inflation.
In Madrid, stocks rose to the second record in a row, boosted by other exchanges' sharp gains and by expectations of interest-rate reductions, as well as late covering of borrowed positions sold short on bets of profiting by replacing the stock following price declines.
In Stockholm, passing the all-time high of the previous session, stocks jumped 2.1% in extremely heavy trading, partly on expectations of auto-sector strength.
In Brussels, shares rose to a record for the third-consecutive session, driven by a stronger Belgian franc and the Belgian rate cuts.
In Mexico City, stocks rallied 1.4% to a third consecutive record as foreign investors continued to invest fresh cash, especially in telecommunications shares.
In Sydney, share prices soared 2.3% to a new closing high, breaking the record set Sept. 21, 1987, on buying by overseas investors, the Tokyo market's surge, and positive news Friday about strong U.S. economic growth and lower-than-expected Australian inflation.
In Hong Kong, the benchmark index shook off news that big banks would make residential property investment more expensive, and ended with a gain of almost 1% in light turnover.
After trading ended Friday, Hong Kong banks unveiled tougher restrictions in mortgage-lending policies, but the terms were as expected and already built into share prices, heading off bearish reaction Monday.
Stocks initially jumped, buoyed by buying by overseas investors and by Tokyo's market surge, then fell on profit-taking before rising again.
In Singapore, shares climbed 1.7% on steady buying, despite some profit-taking by individuals and some selling by Japanese institutions ahead of their March 31 fiscal year end.
In Kuala Lumpur, prices advanced 1.6% but trading was moderate as retail investors reduced their exposure ahead of market closures for the lunar new year holiday.
In Taipei, equities rocketed up from the opening and ended 1.6% higher in moderate turnover, as investors' confidence was boosted by news that the Taiwan government plans to increase the limit on foreign investment funds and by the governing party's solid victory in Saturday's elections, signaling further economic growth.
In Wellington, stocks surged 2.6%, paced by foreign investors; the market was buoyed by news of strong U.S. growth, a booming Australian market and positive sentiment about the New Zealand economy.
But in Manila, shares slumped 1.9%, declining for the second straight session, with some blue chips under pressure.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
Source: Morgan Stanley Capital Intl.
