In the budget to be released Monday, Mr. Clinton will propose sharp cuts in next year's spending for public housing, Army Corps of Engineers construction projects, Rural Electrification Administration loan subsidies, operating subsidies for local transit systems and aid to help poor people pay heating bills, officials said.
Forced by Congress to live with tight caps on annually appropriated spending, Mr. Clinton had to identify tens of billions of dollars in spending cuts to make room for increased spending on priorities such as the Headstart program for preschoolers, worker training, highway construction and programs for the homeless.
Clinton administration officials are now calling attention to some of the cuts to demonstrate that the president made some hard choices.
The president will also ask Congress to rescind about $5 billion, or slightly less than 1%, of the spending it approved for the current fiscal year, including money for local highway projects that reflect the clout of particular congressmen.
At the same time, the president already has asked for $10.5 billion in added spending for California earthquake victims and Pentagon peacekeeping efforts.
Using last year's appropriations as a base, Mr. Clinton's budget will seek to spend $448 million, or 74%, less on public-housing development and $275 million, or 20%, less on what are called HOME grants to state and local governments for construction, rehabilitation and rental assistance, a program Mr. Clinton sought to increase last year.
The cuts are smaller than those initially contemplated by the administration and don't affect billions of dollars already in the pipeline, but reflect a decision that public-housing construction isn't one of Mr. Clinton's priorities.
Mr. Clinton also proposes to spend $51 million, or 70%, less on REA loan subsidies; $345 million, or 25%, less on Army Corps of Engineers construction projects; $85 million, or 70%, less on the Next Generation Weather Radar project, which is to provide earlier warnings of tornados and hurricanes; and $13 million, or 4%, less on public broadcasting.
Energy Department spending to produce and stockpile nuclear materials also is slated for big cuts.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration is another loser in the Clinton budget.
The president will propose spending $230 million less, a small cut from last year, but, if approved by Congress, it would be the first reduction for NASA in 21 years.
Among the programs that Mr. Clinton will seek to terminate altogether are aid to public schools with dependents of military personnel (for which Congress appropriated $123 million last year); federal contributions to Perkins revolving loan funds, which provide low-interest student loans ($158 million); and the Energy Department's atomic vapor laser-isotope-separation program to develop new techniques for enriching uranium ($177 million), a program deemed obsolete because so much Russian uranium is now available.
Mr. Clinton also seeks to close the Pentagon's medical school, a recommendation from Vice President Al Gore's report on "reinventing government."
Smaller programs that Mr. Clinton would eliminate include Small Business Association grants for tree planting; the Federal Railroad Administration's local-rail freight assistance; the Commerce Department's Columbia River hatcheries and its Wind Profiler Demonstration Network; a $50 million annual export subsidy for sunflower and cottonseed oil; and a program that pays law students to work in clinics for the poor.
The budget projects that the number of civilian workers, measured in full-time equivalents, on the federal payroll will be 118,000 lower by Sept. 30, 1995, than when Mr. Clinton took office; the savings are used to comply with the spending caps set by Congress in last year's deficit-reduction law.
Mr. Clinton vows to eliminate an additional 134,000 slots by the end of the decade.
The budget law limits Mr. Clinton's total request for congressional appropriations -- both for defense and nondefense programs -- to $517 billion for fiscal 1995, which begins Oct. 1, or roughly the same as in 1994.
The law no longer sets separate floors for defense spending, but Senate Armed Services Chairman Sam Nunn (D., Ga.) said yesterday that he and Sen. Pete Domenici (R., N.M.) will again seek to reimpose the separate limits.
Defense Secretary-designate William Perry said at his confirmation hearing yesterday that the defense budget that will be unveiled next week makes "substantial tradeoffs" between readiness and procurement, with the loser being procurement, or modernization, of equipment.
"Even though we have a smaller force projected for '95 than for '94," he said, "we have asked for . . . substantially greater funds for the operation and maintenance account . . . the account which is the principal driver of near-term readiness."
