The U.S.-Japan trade conflict -- should it spiral out of control -- would be the first showdown between economic superpowers in the post-Cold War era.
Both sides say they want to keep today's brinkmanship from becoming tomorrow's trade war.
Indeed, in the past few days, officials from both sides have been trying to come up with ways to defuse the tensions.
Moreover, the U.S. and Japan have squared off in the past and managed to work things out.
Nevertheless, there is something worrisome in the current tension between the world's two biggest economies.
The collapse of the Soviet menace removed one of the elements that linked the U.S. and Japan and contained frictions over economic matters.
Japan's Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa is politically weak and Tokyo's trade team is led by bureaucrats ready to stand up to the U.S.
The Clinton team, bristling with former business people who take a hard-line view toward Japan, is determined to make its mark by prying open long-closed Japanese markets.
"Sometimes you have to go to the brink to be credible," says Julius Katz, who retired last year as Washington's most experienced trade negotiator.
"But wars start by people miscalculating and backing themselves into corners."
In the standoff with Japan, eight months of earnest negotiating ended in a bitter stalemate, with both sides issuing threats.
"Japan and the U.S. can't even have a common perception of the causes of the bilateral trade imbalance, says Koichiro Matsuura, Japan's chief trade diplomat.
He says the fight with the U.S. leaves him "depressed and miserable."
Washington launched its trade offensive this week, confident that the U.S., whose economy is expanding, could better withstand a confrontation than Japan, whose economy is in the dumps.
In the past, the U.S. has worried that offending Japan could prompt the Asian powerhouse to dump its vast holdings of U.S. Treasury securities.
These days, the strapped Japanese banks buy less than 10% of the securities offered at a typical auction, down from a peak of about 25% in 1988.
A prolonged fight between the U.S. and Japan could saddle consumers and businesses in both countries -- and probably elsewhere -- with higher prices and slower growth.
Even now, the tension that has followed the breakdown of last week's trade talks reveals a scary level of misunderstanding between Washington and Tokyo that has damaged relations and may leave a lasting legacy.
U.S. and Japanese leaders say they are aware of the risks, especially of harming the broader diplomatic and security ties.
"Obviously things are interrelated if we're not careful about them," Walter F. Mondale, U.S. Ambassador to Japan said today in Tokyo.
"That's what makes this dispute serious."
But for each leader, backing down is fraught with difficulties.
That only increases the opportunities for missteps and miscalculations.
A further surge in the yen could deepen Japan's recession and pull down financial markets on both sides of the Pacific.
U.S. trade sanctions could be met head-on by Japanese curbs, and trade would spiral downward.
Companies in the U.S. could take matters into their own hands by filing antidumping suits against Japan that drive prices higher.
Nationalism could rise in both nations.
In the U.S., a Japan-bashing Congress could pass legislation limiting imports.
In Japan, a powerful bureaucracy, more worried about protecting its turf than preserving world economic harmony, could impose its will on a weak political leadership.
Both sides are actively trying to head off such scenarios.
"Efforts are needed to remedy damage which was, I think inevitably, caused by disagreement," Kunihiko Saito, Japan's vice foreign minister and the man charged with trying to put things back together again, said in an interview yesterday.
"I hope it is not insurmountable damage, and I believe it is not.
But I think mutual distrust was created."
Just as the U.S. Commerce Department announced yesterday that the trade deficit with Japan hit $59.32 billion last year, its highest level ever, Prime Minister Hosokawa directed his government to draft a "voluntary" plan aimed at cutting Japan's record trade surplus.
Although he continued to resist the U.S. demand for numerical import goals, he vowed to come up with a program to accelerate deregulation, promote new policies to boost imports and foreign investment in Japan, enforce antitrust laws more vigorously and make government procurement procedures more open.
Those policies not only will make Japan's economy accessible to outsiders but also "will benefit the Japanese economy and the Japanese people," Mr. Saito said.
Tokyo also may dispatch a special envoy to Washington to discuss the plan.
Those moves follow an unpublicized meeting Tuesday night near the White House between five top Japanese business executive and five top Clinton economic aides.
"We wanted the senior businessmen going back to Tokyo with the message that we don't have any intention of sparking an action-reaction confrontation," says a U.S. official.
The U.S. participants included White House National Economic Council Director Robert Rubin and his deputy Bowman Cutter, Treasury Deputy Secretary Roger Altman, White House Counselor David Gergen and White House economist Alan Blinder.
No one thinks these various moves will end the fundamental disagreements that cloud the U.S.-Japanese relationship any time soon.
By the same token, a worsening of relations into a true trade war wouldn't erupt in a few weeks, either.
Such a confrontation would take months to build, since sanctions take that long to play out.
But here is how, over time, things could go badly wrong:
Over the next six months, the U.S. and Japan will be faced with a series of decisions that if handled improperly could lead to a lasting rift.
Next month, the U.S. is scheduled to decide on how to respond to U.S. industry complaints over semiconductors and supercomputers and, the following month, Japanese procurement of telecommunications and medical equipment.
Already, says Alan Wolff, a lawyer for the semiconductor industry, the administration has asked whether his clients favor sanctions over Japan's alleged failure to live up to a semiconductor agreement.
Under that deal, Japan pledged to buy 20% of its semiconductors from foreign firms.
But after hitting that number once in 1992, Tokyo hasn't matched it again.
"The U.S. is sliding toward potential retaliation," Mr. Wolff says, adding that the Semiconductor Industry Association hasn't yet taken a position on sanctions.
Trade sanctions would come in the form of prohibitively high tariffs placed on Japanese imports.
Earlier this week, U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor threatened to levy about $300 million in sanctions over Japan's failure to give Motorola Inc. fair access to the Tokyo-area cellular-telephone market.
Gary Hufbauer, a trade specialist at the Institute for International Economics, a think tank in Washington, calculates that if sanction follows sanction, and tops the $500 million mark, Japan would find the pressure intolerable and be forced to retaliate -- leading to calls in the U.S. to redouble the pressure.
Japan says it wouldn't retaliate immediately, but instead would likely complain about the U.S. at the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which adjudicates trade disputes but has no power to enforce its rulings.
If the Americans refused to back down, Japanese officials say they might then strike back.
Separately, U.S. companies could use the trade rift to take matters into their own hands.
Mr. Wolff, who used to be a U.S. trade negotiator, sees it playing out this way: The stronger yen could force Japanese companies to raise prices in the U.S.
But some, to maintain market share, would avoid doing so.
Then U.S. companies hurt by Japanese competition would file antidumping actions.
The antidumping laws, which are supposed to protect U.S. companies from "unfair" pricing, invariably push foreign competitors to increase prices rather than face lengthy showdowns with the U.S. trade bureaucracy.
The effect on Japanese companies is as powerful as a trade sanction: Their prices go up and market share falls.
Mr. Wolff says he expects electronics and auto companies, among others, to closely track Japanese pricing patterns in the next few months and to consider bringing antidumping complaints.
As White House officials run through the "war games," they concede that when it comes to a possible proliferation of corporate dumping actions, the administration "doesn't control it," officials say.
Nor does the administration control the next moves by a Congress that has become increasingly hostile to Japan.
Later this month, House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt plans to introduce legislation that would empower the Commerce Department to set goals for how many American goods and services the Japanese should import.
Failure to meet those goals could lead to sanctions.
Rep. Gephardt not only plans to include sectors involved in the failed "framework" negotiationsautos, auto parts, insurance, medical equipment and telecommunications -- but also any sector deemed a critical technology.
During the talks, U.S. negotiators privately disparaged the Gephardt approach as too restrictive and too frightening to the Japanese.
But since then, several have said they wouldn't "discourage" the effort.
And even before then, the Clinton administration said it backed another tough new trade law working its way through Congress that would let the U.S. block the expansion plans of Japanese financial-services companies if Japan didn't liberalize its markets for foreign financial concerns.
The current trade battle follows a decade of on-again, off-again trade feuds between the two countries.
In 1989, President Bush invoked the Super 301 law, threatening sanctions over Japan's barriers to markets for satellites, supercomputers and wood products.
Like the Clinton administration, Mr. Hosokawa doesn't have complete control over the process, either.
The ideas Mr. Hosokawa outlined at his emergency meeting aren't new.
Japanese leaders have made similar promises since the mid1980s, but they had little impact, because powerful interests watered them down.
So far, Mr. Hosokawa's deregulation efforts have drawn much derision for focusing on tiny items like the rules for emergency lighting at movie theaters.
"I don't know whether Mr. Hosokawa will be able to show a good enough policy alternative in such a short period of time," frets Iwao Nakatani, an adviser and a professor at Hitotsubashi University.
"Without political leadership, the bureaucrats are able to do what they want."
Even now, Japanese officials hint their new plan will be contingent on Washington easing its pressure.
"There is a feeling among us that we have to see the outcome of the consideration within the U.S. administration of the possible retaliatory or sanction measures," Mr. Saito said.
Indeed, instead of appeasing Washington, some Americans in Tokyo, hardened by years of jousting with Japan's shadowy system of informal rules and powers, say the Japanese government and businesses have countless subtle ways to strike back.
"You don't have laws here that require the government to maintain an administrative record as to why they denied something," says John Stern, head of the American Electronics Association's Tokyo office.
In past trade disputes, Japan has kept a tight lid on computer memory chips, driving up the prices and pocketing $4 billion in extra profits, according to studies by U.S. trade experts.
Japan now controls the world's supply of advanced color flat screens, components essential for portable computers and other devices, stirring fears of U.S. vulnerability to similar hardball tactics.
Most analysts, however, doubt Japan's ability to withhold technologies.
Besides, Japan's recession-battered electronics companies aren't likely to turn away any customers these days.
Meanwhile, the U.S. is weighing similar types of harassment, including the drawing out of inspections of Japanese imports and making other regulatory changes that put Tokyo at a disadvantage.
"Maybe we're already in a trade war," says Clyde Prestowitz, a former trade negotiator who advises the administration.
"We're responding in a different way to a war we've been involved in for a long time."
The best reason to expect that the two sides will find a way out of the current impasse is the degree of interconnectedness between the two economies.
Take, for example, Motorola and Japan's IDO Corp., the two companies in the center of cellular phone dispute.
"In terms of our seller and vendor relationship, there's almost no problem" between the companies, says IDO's chief executive, Takeo Tsukada.
Texas Instruments Inc. and Hitachi Ltd. are jointly developing the next generation of memory chips.
"The pressure would have to be enormous on Hitachi for them to abandon their investment and that commitment," says Norman Neureiter, director of TI's Japanese division.
"It's not likely we'd do it on our own."
Many forms of retaliation by the U.S. would harm American workers and communities as much as Japanese.
During one White House strategy session, the participants talked about -- and rejected -- the idea of limiting free-trade zones used by Japanese auto makers to import products dutyfree that are used in auto manufacturing.
The losers, the advisers realized, would be towns in the South that set up the trade zones to attract needed investment.
That's why many on both sides of the Pacific believe that cooler heads will prevail.
"We can't hurt the other without shooting ourselves," says Kenichi Ohmae, director of McKinsey & Co.
Japanese businesses have watched the yen's recent rise with worry, since it makes their products more expensive in the U.S.
Under a sign at a downtown Tokyo bank that shows the yen-dollar relationship, businessman Kenji Yokota says, "Even now the economy is bad.
This will make it worse."
To a large extent, the White House is counting on Japanese businesses to press their government to make concessions.
The bureaucrats charged with negotiations during the framework talks are impervious to U.S. pressure, the Clinton administration feels.
Many U.S. businesses also are urging the administration to be cautious.
"Businessmen in both countries will go to their governments and say there must be a solution," believes William E. Franklin, head of Japan operations for Weyerhaeuser Co., the U.S. paper and lumber concern.
Some trade experts hope the U.S.-Japan impasse will be eased by GATT, the 45-year-old trade referee.
Like the United Nations, GATT is able to focus world opinion and perhaps defuse emotionalism.
It is a place where nations can back off from extreme positions and say that they did so to honor international commitments.
Mr. Katz, the former trade negotiator, figures the U.S. could bring a case that would highlight the closed nature of the Japanese system.
In the glass industry, for instance, three Japanese companies have divided the local market for years, trade experts say, blocking imports.
Other nations could join the case as well.
And the U.S. could quietly soften its demands in other areas.
During the Reagan years, Mr. Katz says, the U.S. was ready to bring a GATT case.
Japan agreed to a broader set of talks instead.
Most agree that reliance on the GATT is better than an all-out trade fight that the U.S. might not win.
Mr. Blinder, the White House economist, argued in a 1987 book that "it would be imprudent to bet that the United States would be a big winner from a policy of international brinksmanship on trade policy."
"I still believe what I wrote then," Mr. Blinder says.
"But I've come to have a greater appreciation for a trade policy focused on results vis-a-vis Japan."
