India's banking industry, dominated by sluggish, bloated state-owned institutions, is about to make way for the nation's first new private commercial banks in 25 years.
Nine privately owned banks have been given the go-ahead to open for business, starting early next month with UTI Bank Ltd., which is backed by Unit Trust of India, the country's largest mutual-fund company.
Dozens more potential applicants are waiting in line.
As part of its broad economic-reform program, the government of Prime Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao last year decided to grant the new banking licenses to inject competition into the industry and thus improve efficiency and service.
Executives involved in setting up the new banks appear happy to oblige.
"What we'll offer is the latest in technology and quality of service, and we're not going to have the disadvantages of a nationalized bank, such as too many branches, too much staff," says P.V. Maiya, managing director-designate of Icici Banking Corp., which plans to start operations, based in Vadodara, by midyear.
Though some of the institutions licensed to set up banks are state-owned, including Unit Trust of India, the Reserve Bank, India's central bank, has said that 60% of each new bank's equity must be held by private investors within a year of opening.
Significantly, the banks are expected to operate independently of their backers -- state-owned or otherwise.
"The important thing is to evolve a different corporate culture altogether," says A.C. Shah, a former chairman of state-owned Bank of Baroda, who is helping Unit Trust set up UTI Bank, based in Ahmedabad, Gujarat state.
"We have to put the customer at the center and put professionalism in charge."
Such changes would reverse the stasis of 25 years of state dominance of the industry.
The decision to allow new private-sector banks broke a freeze on licenses imposed in 1969, when 14 of the nation's largest banks were nationalized.
The public-sector banks now hold about 87% of total bank deposits in the country.
(The rest of the market is shared by foreign banks and several small private and cooperative banks that weren't nationalized.)
Among other things, nationalization was meant to answer criticism that India's private banks gave favorable treatment to associated businesses.
But it also spawned lumbering giants burdened with unionized labor forces, overstaffing, antiquated working methods and bureaucratic and political interference.
The new private banks expect to operate largely free of such disadvantages.
Many also plan to seek foreign partners.
For example, Housing Development Finance Corp., or HDFC, a private finance company based in Bombay, says that it is talking to several candidates, which it declined to identify, and that it is willing to sell to a foreign partner a 20% stake in the bank it's setting up.
IndusInd Bank Ltd., based in Pune, Maharashtra, and backed by the diversified Bombay-based Hinduja Group, says 40% of its equity will be held by Indians overseas or Hinduja-associated companies overseas.
"The main advantage of our business will be the strength of nonresident Indians," says Ashok Hinduja, president of Hinduja Group, referring to the growing flow of expatriate funds into India.
Still, the government won't allow for unbridled expansion of private-sector banking.
Ravi Vira Gupta, the ranking civil servant in the Finance Ministry's banking department, says the number of banking licenses granted will increase very slowly.
"We don't want a situation like in some countries where there was a flood and several went bust," he says.
The ministry also will likely turn down applicants involved in manufacturing.
Once approval is in hand, the new banks face stringent financial requirements, as well as prodding from the central bank to take their business to areas of the country where access to banking is limited.
Start-up capital is set at a minimum of one billion rupees ($32.1 million), and most of the banks plan to raise additional capital through public share offerings, which will let them meet the 60% public-shareholding requirement.
The banks also will have to satisfy an 8% capital-adequacy requirement (equity capital as a percentage of total risk-bearing assets) and adhere to international accounting norms.
And while most of the new banks intend to concentrate on relatively high-profit areas such as foreign-exchange trading, merchant banking and fee-based services like loan syndications, the Reserve Bank insists that they establish large chunks of their business outside major commercial centers.
To meet the requirement that they set up their registered offices in cities and towns where no banks are currently registered, most of the new banks are basing themselves in satellite towns close to big cities.
The banks also will be required to direct part of their lending to so-called priority sectors, such as agriculture and small-scale industry.
Nationalized banks have found such lending a drain on their profits -- largely because they have been compelled for political reasons to make some loans of dubious quality -- but the new banks think they can cope.
"There's a lot of small-scale, especially export-oriented industry, which is growing fast," says Mr. Shah of UTI Bank.
"Then we'll go for plantations, agro-processing and self-employed people who've done well."
Adds Mr. Maiya of Icici Bank: "We'll aim at quality lending wherever we are, including the rural areas.
Our aim is to coordinate financial services with increased production and productivity."
The bank plans to have 60 branches nationwide within three years.
Many of the new banks expect their links to powerful backers will help them build their businesses.
Executives at Icici Bank, for instance, believe that their bank has a natural client base among the nearly 4,000 long-term corporate borrowers of Icici Ltd., the Bombay investment bank backing it.
Likewise, Mr. Shah says UTI Bank should have little trouble luring clients since its backer, Unit Trust of India, has lent about 100 billion rupees of long-term investment funds to Indian companies through state-owned banks.
UTI Bank also plans to offer retail banking services to potential clients among the millions of investors in mutual funds managed by Unit Trust of India.
Meanwhile, India's public-sector banks, most of them operating in the red and receiving government aid to bolster their capital, appear too preoccupied with their own problems to worry about private-sector encroachments.
However, labor unions at the public-sector banks, fearful that increased competition could cost jobs, don't welcome the newcomers.
"Our feeling is that private-sector banking did nothing to inspire the economy before nationalization," says D.P. Chadha, president of the All India Bank Employees Association.
"The belief that private-sector banks will be more solid now isn't valid."
True, private banks before nationalization were conservatively run and failed to provide adequate banking services, particularly outside major cities.
But conditions have changed since then; in addition to reducing bureaucratic interference in business, reform has encouraged competition and the play of market forces.
And the unions, though powerful in the public-sector, know they're in no position to influence the fate of the new banks.
