The Clinton administration, as part of President Clinton's Moscow summit with Russian President Boris Yeltsin, plans to press Russia to limit its exports of aluminum.
Trade negotiators from the U.S., Russia and Europe have haggled for months over charges that Russian companies are "dumping" aluminum in the world marketplace at unfairly low prices.
This trade dispute is being raised at the summit level partly because aluminum has become a huge Russian export -- and the source of hard currency.
Russian aluminum exports of about 1.6 million metric tons last year were more than six times the 1989 level.
Critics of the move contend that twisting Russia's arm to accept export restrictions would send the wrong message: that government control, and not free market, should guide economic policy.
In a briefing with reporters, U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor said the administration is considering so-called voluntary export-restraint agreements as "one instrument" to curb the flood of Russian aluminum into the world market.
Under such arrangements, Russia would impose maximum export quotas on its aluminum producers.
U.S. industry officials are hoping for an annual limit of about 500,000 metric tons, with annual increases held to 10% in succeeding years.
Privately, a U.S. official said the administration has opted to press for the export-restraint agreements because "it was decided this was the approach that had the greatest possibility of achieving that flexible balance between Russia's need to earn hard currency and the equal right of U.S. companies not to bear all the burden" of competing with the flood of low-priced Russian aluminum exports.
Russia and other members of the former Soviet Union have relied on aluminum exports as a source of revenue since the collapse of the Soviet empire.
By some estimates, aluminum has become Russia's biggest export behind only oil, because much of the aluminum previously diverted toward defense work is sold overseas.
Aluminum exports from Russia were estimated at more than 1.6 million metric tons in 1993, up from about 250,000 metric tons in 1989.
Mr. Kantor said the U.S. will raise the issue during Mr. Clinton's stay in Moscow, although a resolution of the dispute isn't expected until after the Clinton-Yeltsin meeting, when multilateral aluminum negotiations resume.
"It's a difficult and serious subject," Mr. Kantor said.
"Russian exports to the rest of the world increased dramatically.
Aluminum prices have dropped like a rock from $1 a pound to 47 cents a pound.
We're trying to fashion a common solution."
Critics of export restraints contend that such restrictions represent a type of protectionism that would contradict the Clinton administration's attempts to promote a free market in Russia.
Moreover, they assert that such restrictions would raise costs for aluminum users, such as auto companies.
Many U.S. and European aluminum companies, meanwhile, argue that such restraints are necessary to avert production closedowns and job losses in their struggling industry.
Last month, for example, the European Union extended its quotas on aluminum imports from the former Soviet republics to Feb. 28.
Those quotas were originally imposed in August.
The dispute has escalated to the current stage following failed multilateral negotiations by the U.S., Russia and the European Union, previously known as the European Community.
The U.S. and EU are scheduled to discuss the trade dispute again next Tuesday and Wednesday in Brussels, at the trade-bureaucrat level.
U.S. and EU officials have been trying to persuade Russia to accept a multipronged solution, including an immediate production cut, a restructuring of the Russian aluminum industry and a strategy for boosting Russian domestic demand for aluminum products.
Paul O'Neill, chairman of Aluminum Co. of America, the world's biggest aluminum maker, said Mr. Kantor's statement is "good news" that indicates "the president is personally knowledgeable and involved."
If the Brussels talks fail, Mr. O'Neill said U.S. aluminum producers are poised to file antidumping complaints "to close the borders of the United States to aluminum at below full-cost prices."
Low aluminum prices -- a result of the world-wide glut -- are socking producers across the nation, including Reynolds Metals Co., Alumax Inc., Kaiser Aluminum Corp. and Southwire Co.
Stewart Spector, an industry analyst who writes the Spector Report, figures the world's producers will enter into what he calls a "voluntary production cutback agreement" that would include the type of export limits the Clinton administration is seeking.
Producers in the former Soviet republics would cut production and temporarily limit exports to the West, and producers elsewhere would cut capacity on a voluntary, individual basis.
In exchange, Western aluminum makers would help restructure and modernize the industry in the former Soviet republics.
