Today Congress will resume debate over the lapsed independent counsel law, and the arguments no doubt will be colored by President and Mrs. Clinton's controversial financial dealings in Whitewater Development Corp.
I am against reauthorization of the statute in any form, but since it soon may be reauthorized, Congress might as well ensure that the statute fulfills its asserted purposes and applies in a fair and consistent manner.
Congress thus ought to resolve a question of increasingly pressing importance: Should a president's spouse be covered by the independent counsel statute?
In light of Whitewater, and Hillary Rodham Clinton's deep involvement in the politics and policy of her husband's presidency, the answer to that question is clearly yes.
Everyone now seems to agree that special procedures are necessary in cases involving possible claims of high-level, executive-branch wrongdoing.
Whitewater is such a case.
Republicans, led by Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole and joined by numerous Senate Democrats, persuaded the White House to request that Attorney General Janet Reno appoint an outside "special counsel" -- who will be insulated by Justice Department regulations from political pressures -- to investigate the Whitewater affair.
Even as she announced the appointment of Robert Fiske, however, Ms. Reno reiterated her position that only a truly independent counsel appointed by the courts pursuant to the statute would instill public confidence in the Whitewater investigation.
But this preference poses a problem that goes beyond Whitewater.
The independent counsel statute has never explicitly covered the president's spouse, and neither the House nor the Senate proposals pending in Congress would do so either.
The statutory mandate for an independent counsel has always applied only to certain specifically identified high-ranking executive-branch officials, including the president.
Neither the first lady nor any other executive-branch spouse has ever been included.
Whitewater shows why this makes no sense.
As virtually everyone must know by now, the Whitewater controversy, fairly or unfairly, focuses as much on Mrs. Clinton as on the president.
According to Time magazine, "compared with the President, the First Lady was a central player."
Both were investors in the failed land deal.
Mrs. Clinton's conduct also allegedly included: her securing of a $30,000 loan to purchase a model home for the development property and the subsequent sale of the home; her legal representation of Madison Guaranty S&L; the involvement of her law partners in various other Whitewater events; and her 1988 letter asking for power of attorney for the company.
The position of first lady no longer can be characterized as simply ceremonial -- particularly since the office's policy-making function has now been made explicit.
In its recent decision concerning the legal status of Mrs. Clinton and the Health Care Task Force over which she presided, the federal appeals court in Washington had little trouble concluding that the "President's spouse acts as the functional equivalent of an assistant to the President" and that the first lady is a "full-time officer or employee of the government."
Mrs. Clinton has been repeatedly characterized as the president's closest adviser.
She was charged by the president with the responsibility of formulating and implementing the most far-reaching policy initiative of his administration, health care reform, and she recently testified before five congressional committees on the president's plan.
The first lady also reportedly played a key role in choosing the president's cabinet, including Attorney General Reno.
During the recent Senate hearings concerning reauthorization of the independent counsel statute, Ms. Reno testified: "The reason I support the concept of an Independent Counsel, with statutory independence, is that there is an inherent conflict whenever senior Executive Branch officials are to be investigated by the Department of Justice and its appointed head, the Attorney General. . . .
The Independent Counsel Act was designed to avoid even the appearance of impropriety in the consideration of allegations of misconduct by high-level Executive Branch officials."
I believe that the Justice Department special-counsel process is fully adequate to address these concerns.
But if one agrees with the attorney general's assertions, I do not see any way to dispute that the president's spouse should be subjected to mandatory coverage under any new independent counsel statute.
The "inherent conflict" and appearance problems identified by Ms. Reno would exist just as clearly if the attorney general and her subordinates retained responsibility for investigating allegations of misconduct against a first lady.
Moreover, investigation and prosecution of a first lady would, in many ways, raise far more sensitive issues than cases involving other top presidential aides and advisers.
In fact, an attorney general would likely recoil in horror from the idea of targeting and pursuing the boss's spouse in connection with a criminal inquiry.
Members of Congress (and some members of the press) cannot even bring themselves to ask Mrs. Clinton tough policy questions.
This makes it especially difficult to imagine the attorney general and career prosecutors tenaciously investigating or bringing charges against a first lady.
Except in the most extreme circumstances, such factors would also create enormous political and practical obstacles for the attorney general that would rule out the discretionary appointment of an independent counsel to prosecute a first lady.
Only mandatory coverage will fulfill the purposes offered to justify the independent counsel law.
As a matter of principle, any new independent counsel law should apply to presidential spouses (and Congress), or it should not be passed at all.
Mrs. Clinton's role as policy and political adviser to the president is not likely to be an isolated incident in the history of the presidency.
Nor can mandatory application of the independent counsel law to presidential spouses be challenged by the Democrats as a partisan issue.
Sen. Dole has fully endorsed Mrs. Clinton's policy activities as entirely appropriate.
He often remarks amiably that he plans to fulfill a similar role when his wife, Elizabeth, is elected president.
What better reason could there be for the Democratic Congress to vote to ensure that the president's spouse is covered by the independent counsel law?
Mr. Boutrous is an attorney in Washington who has represented parties in independent counsel matters.
