A special prosecutor's report alleges that members of Ronald Reagan's cabinet protected the president and themselves by withholding information on the Iran-Contra affair and portraying the scandal as only a rogue operation by White House aides.
Former Attorney General Edwin Meese is accused of leading a "damage control" effort in late 1986, when the controversy first broke and Donald Regan, then White House chief of staff, feared the president risked impeachment.
And while former Secretary of State George Shultz is credited with resisting the alleged coverup, he is accused of misleading Congress about his own knowledge of arms-for-hostage deals with Iran in the mid-80s.
Prepared by Independent Counsel Lawrence Walsh, the report caps a seven-year investigation of the arms shipments and diversion of profits to anti-communist guerrillas in Nicaragua, thereby circumventing a congressional ban on U.S. aid for the so-called Contras.
While his criminal prosecutions focused on those who were most involved in the operation, Mr. Walsh used his final report now to assign some larger responsibility to those highest in the Reagan administration.
Mr. Walsh said he found no criminal violations by either President Reagan or George Bush, then vice president.
Still, he said, "regardless of criminality, President Reagan, the secretary of state, the secretary of defense, and director of central intelligence and their necessary assistants committed themselves, however reluctantly, to two programs contrary to congressional policy and contrary to national policy.
They skirted the law, some of them broke the law, and almost all of them tried to cover up the president's willful activities."
To make his case, the prosecutor drew on a wealth of previously undisclosed grand jury testimony and contemporaneous notes kept by government aides.
But the report has provoked angry denials from scores of former officials, whose written responses fill an accompanying 1,150-page volume twice the size of the one summarizing Mr. Walsh's findings.
At a news conference yesterday, Mr. Walsh was more restrained, saying he had never come near to charging either Mr. Reagan or Mr. Bush for their parts in the Iran-Contra affair.
And while bitter still over Mr. Bush's sweeping pardon of many of those involved, Mr. Walsh was even kindly toward Mr. Reagan.
"He may have been willful," the former judge said.
"But he at least . . . thought he was serving the country in what he did."
Mr. Reagan was harsher yesterday, describing the report as a vehicle for "baseless accusations that he {Mr. Walsh} could never have proven in court."
The former president's comments set the tone for a day of sharp attacks on the prosecutor, including an angry blast from Mr. Meese who likened the findings to "the old Soviet model of justice: You're guilty because I say you're guilty."
The criticism of Mr. Meese centers on his role in the first days after the scandal broke in 1986.
In grand jury testimony, Mr. Regan told the prosecutor that impeachment was a real concern in the White House in those first weeks.
And Mr. Walsh uses the notes and grand jury testimony of former State Department and White House aides, Charles Hill and Peter Wallison, to describe deliberations over what to say about President Reagan's knowledge of an early shipment of arms in 1985 that raised questions of violating arms export laws.
Mr. Meese was leading the "fact-finding" inquiry, but the report suggests he instead signaled to other senior advisers that the "official position" should be to hide that the president knew of the 1985 shipment.
When Mr. Shultz said the president had known, there followed an exchange with Mr. Meese in which Mr. Hill apparently saw the attorney general as trying to get the secretary to back off.
"Hill described Meese's style of questioning as `leading,' and said Meese stood over Shultz during the interview in a `back on your heels' manner," the prosecutor's report reads.
Elsewhere in the report, Mr. Hill's notes haunt Mr. Shultz as well and show the State Department kept abreast of the Iran arms deals, even as officials disparagingly referred to the chief operative, Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North, as "Polecat."
Though the secretary denies having misled Congress, the prosecutor says Mr. Shultz knew "significantly more about arms shipments to Iran" than his early testimony reflects.
"Shultz's testimony was incorrect, if not false, in significant respects and misleading, if literally true, in others," the report reads.
Former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, who escaped prosecution under Mr. Bush's pardon, is flatly described as having "lied" to investigators.
And the report alleges that two Weinberger assistants, Richard Armitage and Gen. Colin Powell, were less than forthright in some cases.
The criticism of Gen. Powell, who accused the prosecutor in turn of using "innuendo" to impugn his character, is politically significant since the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff could well return to the national stage.
But the more detailed and extensive evidence focuses on Mr. Armitage, who was part of an informal network of intelligence and defense officials tapped on occasion by Col. North.
Mr. Walsh's report marks the end of his duties as special prosecutor, and its release comes almost precisely 10 years after two events that shaped Iran-Contra.
One was the secret mining of Nicaraguan harbors, begun in January 1984, an operation that fractured bipartisan support for the Contra war and forced the White House into a money chase that led to the diversion scheme.
The mining operation coincided with a toughness toward Iran on terrorism and a policy of discouraging arms shipments to Tehran, which was linked soon after to the kidnapping of the CIA's Beirut station chief in March 1984.
In total, Mr. Walsh estimates that at least $3.6 million -- and probably $1.1 million more -- in arms profits were ultimately diverted into the Contra supply network run from the White House.
The money moved through an elaborate corporate scheme based in Switzerland, and the report details how a New York bank officer and her husband and son were used to circumvent currency laws, sometimes making cash drops as large as $100,000 at city hotels.
Similarly, the report fleshes out the role of former and current Central Intelligence Agency operatives in support of the network -- and how rival arms dealers tied to the Honduran military ran their own weapons "supermarket" in that country.
Mr. Walsh devotes a full chapter to a senior CIA officer in Central America from 1984 to 1987 who had contacts with the supply network, even when the congressional ban was in effect.
And the report details how a former CIA operative turned mercenary, Luis Posada, was used to dismantle the air operation when it was exposed in October 1986.
Aircraft were flown to Aguacate air base in Honduras where the military there took possession, and housing was cleaned out and equipment disposed of in El Salvador.
In his investigation, Mr. Walsh, unlike any independent counsel before him, was forced to deal with national security issues that made prosecution more difficult.
His costs are estimated at nearly $37 million, and though he won convictions or guilty pleas from 11 defendants, four of them were among those subsequently pardoned by Mr. Bush.
Two others, including Mr. North, who is now running for the Senate in Virginia, had their verdicts overturned on appeal.
Mr. Walsh declined yesterday to comment on Mr. North's candidacy.
"A jury of plain, ordinary people returned their verdicts of guilty on three felony counts, and the Court of Appeals reversed it," he said.
"And under the law, there is no barrier to his pursuing whatever career he may seek."
