The medical condition is well-known: When light is dim, the unfortunate people who suffer from night blindness lose all ability to see.
The economic analogue is, perhaps, less well-known, but it is far more serious because it is so contagious.
In the broad daylight of media attention, trade negotiators often prove unable to see, let alone understand, the facts of modern, cross-border economic activity.
Daily headlines notwithstanding, the trade problem between the U.S. and Japan is not the American trade deficit.
The flows of economic activity measured by official trade statistics represent a tiny and steadily decreasing share of the economic linkages between the two countries.
These data, remember, do not count the revenues from services or from licenses or from intellectual property or from goods manufactured by U.S. firms in third countries but sold in Japan or from goods both manufactured and sold by U.S. firms in Japan.
All they count is that relatively small universe of things physically produced in the U.S., crated, loaded onto ships or planes, passed through customs, and then uncrated and sold in Japan.
When a U.S. software house sells its leading-edge program in Tokyo, the trade data capture little, if any, of the value added.
When a U.S. chip manufacturer sells its products in Osaka, the sales may count toward the 20% of the market earmarked for U.S. firms, but -- if the chips were, as likely, fabricated in Malaysia -- they do not show up in the trade data.
When a U.S. sportswear manufacturer retails in Hokkaido garments sewn in Indonesia or Taiwan, the sales do not matter to those who count bilateral trade flows.
When Japanese consumers see a U.S. movie or use their U.S.-originated credit cards, trade watchers essentially ignore their activities.
As a result, the data that attract so much political attention are unreliable.
They are not an accurate reflection of general flows of economic activity.
They are not an accurate reflection of anything.
Moreover, they are the result not of government policies but of strategic choices made by individual companies operating in the global marketplace.
It is the U.S. chip manufacturer, not MITI, that decides where to site its plants and, thus, whether its products will show up in the public statistics on trade.
In industries like these, the talk about "closed" Japanese markets has far more to do with managerial decisions made in American boardrooms than with protectionist plots orchestrated in Tokyo.
In the mid-1980s, if you included in the trade figures all the sales in Japan of "American" (as consumers perceive them) goods and services, the numbers would show that the Japanese bought -- per capita -- four times as much "American" stuff as Americans bought "Japanese" stuff.
Since then, the ratio has only grown larger.
No real problem here.
Trade blindness also leads policy makers to focus on the denial of access to such Japanese industries as construction, housing and the provision of health care.
This emphasis is odd, since no one -- on either side -- pretends that these industries are, by any reasonable standard, anything but closed.
But they are closed not only to U.S. firms but to new Japanese firms as well.
Domestic consumers pay outrageously high prices for the small selection that these industries provide.
Efforts to open up these industries would win the public's ready support.
It is not well-honed policy that keeps them shut, but habit, entrenched special interests and corruption.
How can a trading partner reasonably hope to "fix" these distortions of economic activity when domestic leaders cannot?
For U.S. negotiators, moreover, this is tricky ground.
Their irritation has a legitimate object, but their case is one-sided.
For many Japanese companies, trying to sell products in the U.S. market is an exercise in frustration.
Regulations are far from consistent, and the standards that one city or state or federal agency requires a product to meet are often substantially different from those required by the next.
Even where there is a single, nationwide standard -- as, say, with drug approvals by the Food and Drug Administration -- the hurdles to be leaped are significantly different from those already cleared in Japan.
There is no purposeful creation of obstacles here.
But the result is a crazy quilt of demands that can easily become as much of an informal, nontariff barrier as any of the cozy "old boys" arrangements still in place in Japan.
If left untreated, trade blindness is progressive.
In its later stages, it leads policy makers to hang on for dear life to the news-bite-sized problems of individual companies.
This, of course, has recently happened with the Clinton team's decision to link its arguments to the experiences in Japan of seven well-known U.S. multinationals, each headed by a chief executive with considerable political influence in Washington.
This is bad economics and worse policy.
Each of these cases is a complicated story in its own right: industry overcapacity, government cutbacks, production decisions, technological changes.
For example, who knows where trade-negotiated products will be made -- in the U.S. or some place like Malaysia?
In none of these cases is the problem purely -- or even primarily -- Japanese obstructionism.
More to the point, are these really the kinds of issues that an American president should address in his personal dealings with the head of another government?
We should know by now that when clear-eyed vision on trade is lacking, the result is to raise political temperatures and antagonize bureaucrats into defensiveness.
You'd never know it from all the recent shouting in the dark, but the economic relationship between the U.S. and Japan is healthier than it has ever been -- and their mutual dependence greater.
Even in the midst of a painful recession, more than 2,000 U.S. companies are successfully doing business in Japan.
This is not, of course, to say that real problems do not exist.
They do -- on both sides.
My point is simply that when the hands on the tiller of economic policy belong to those who suffer from trade blindness, no change is possible and no course is safe.
Mr. Ohmae is a partner in McKinsey & Co.'s Tokyo office.
