Eli Lilly & Co. said it will take a $1.2 billion pretax fourth-quarter charge, mostly to streamline foreign operations and fund previously announced early retirements of some 2,600 workers.
The Indianapolis pharmaceutical concern also said it would, as reported, sell or spin off its entire $1.2 billion-a-year medical-device business.
The move, expected to take place this year, would significantly revamp Lilly and could alter competition in the medical-device field.
The charge, of which about $540 million will go toward Lilly's previously announced early retirement plan, will produce a fourth-quarter loss.
Aside from restructuring charges, however, Lilly said per-share earnings for all of 1993 would fall within analysts' expectations -- $4.30 a share to $4.80 a share.
Lilly shares yesterday traded above their 52-week high of $61 and closed at $61.50, up $1.625, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Lilly's second major restructuring charge in two years likely will include office and plant closings in Europe and Puerto Rico, company officials said.
The move also will pay to end contracts under which outside distributors sell Lilly medical devices in Europe.
That equipment will be sold by company employees in the future, said James M. Cornelius, chief financial officer.
In 1992's third quarter, Lilly took a $245 million pretax charge to write down assets.
Yesterday , Lilly Chairman and Chief Executive Randall L. Tobias pledged he would try to transfer workers to other jobs instead of firing them.
He said in an interview that he "cannot guarantee" there will be no layoffs, but insisted that "every possible consideration" would be given to avoiding them.
The assurance is expected to bolster worker morale and loyalty at the tradition-bound company.
As part of its move to leave the medical-device business, Lilly said it intends to sell its Physio-Control Corp. unit in Redmond, Wash., along with Hybritech Inc. and Pacific Biotech Inc. in San Diego.
Hybritech sales reached $143 million in 1992 but fell about 20% last year in the face of competition from Abbott Laboratories, which makes a competing prostate-cancer blood test.
Physio-Control once had $150 million in annual sales but now is mired in regulatory difficulties with the Food and Drug Administration.
Pacific Biotech, which makes diagnostic tests, including one for pregnancy, has an estimated $20 million in annual sales.
Lilly's six other medical-device companies, led in sales by Cardiac Pacemakers Inc., will be grouped together into a separate holding company and could be sold off as a whole or in pieces, Lilly said.
But Lilly added that it is considering other options for the holding company, including spinning it off to current Lilly holders.
Or, Lilly executives told Wall Street analysts yesterday, the company may make an initial public offering of stock in some of the new concern as early as this year's third quarter.
Other parts of the holding company could then be sold to other medical-care companies.
Mr. Tobias, the chairman, said one function of such an IPO would be to "place a value on these shares in the marketplace" before negotiating further sales of the device companies.
"We feel the true value of these companies has been masked because people see us as a pharmaceutical company," he said.
Regardless of which option the company picks, it said it expects a "divestiture of the new company in the next year."
