Eastman Kodak Co. will seek alliances with major computer companies and recruit new talent as it restructures its core imaging business to emphasize electronic technology.
The expected reorganization, announced yesterday, will separate Kodak's film business from its newer electronic technology.
But the Rochester, N.Y., company's push to expand products such as digital filmless cameras, Photo CD and photographic software could prove difficult.
For one thing, Kodak must learn to play ball in Silicon Valley, where there's a different culture and way of doing business.
And it must relax its traditional vise-like grip on products and cultivate a marketing staff that instead of insisting on royalties is willing to trade technologies.
"This has been difficult for us in the past," said Jack Thomas, who for now will oversee both the digital and traditional film sides of Kodak's imaging.
"That's one reason we are forming this unit -- to put a team including marketers into place to function by the rules of the electronic industry we are moving into."
Kodak is searching for a general manager to oversee its new digital and applied imaging unit.
The reorganization marks the first major imprint of Kodak's new chief executive officer, George Fisher, on the company's structure.
He said that although film will continue to be Kodak's chief money-maker for years, electronics offers far more substantial growth opportunities.
In a recent interview, Mr. Fisher said he will depend on joint ventures, particularly with the computer companies he hopes to woo with Kodak's imaging reputation.
Already Kodak has developed a digital camera with Apple Computer Inc. and it continues expanding its copier alliance with Canon Inc.'s Canon Copiers U.S.A.
Moreover, with Mr. Fisher's talk of "communicating images" around the world, potential alliances with cable and telephone companies seem inevitable, industry-watchers say.
As Mr. Fisher notes: "Our competitors and our partners are the same."
Still, Kodak isn't without its own technological know-how.
In the 1980s, the company spent hundreds of millions of dollars developing digital technology to ward off the Sonys of the world.
But both the fear of cannibalizing its film sales and a lack of marketing and commercial experience for digital products paralyzed the company when it came time to go to market.
"Kodak needs to get somebody in there who recognizes the way business works in electronics," said Scott Brownstein, who, frustrated with Kodak's digital paralysis, left to join media mogul Mortimer Zuckerman's Applied Graphics Technologies Inc. last year.
"It's not about corporate loyalty, which is what Kodak knows.
It's about having the same philosophy as someone else that makes deals work."
Cost is of concern.
Kodak's digital technology hasn't been a money-maker and probably won't be for several years, Mr. Thomas said.
In addition, Kodak's imaging group, led by its cash-cow film division, had profit margins of around 18% in 1993, down from 23% in 1990.
"I wouldn't predict that we'd see a higher margin in the next few years," Mr. Thomas said.
In fact, Kodak's earnings peaked in 1988, when its biggest competitor, Fuji Photo Film Co. of Tokyo, had only a small foothold in the U.S.
But now, Fuji and private-label film makers have become fierce competitors, and Kodak can no longer rely on double-digit growth in its film business.
But if Mr. Fisher can control costs, make this restructuring work and boost Kodak's stock, he himself stands to profit handsomely.
In addition to an annual base salary of $2 million (the highest ever for a Kodak CEO), a signing bonus of $5 million and minimum incentive bonus of $1 million for each of the next two years, Mr. Fisher received options on 1,323,000 shares of Kodak.
The options package potentially could net him $106.5 million in profit if Kodak's stock price increased an average of 10% a year for 10 years from the options' issuing price of $50.47.
Kodak shares closed yesterday at $45, up 25 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Additionally, Mr. Fisher has the company plane available for personal use, a car and driver, a residential security system and Rochester country club dues paid by the company.
All this comes at a time when Kodak is slashing nearly 10,000 jobs to cut costs and battling tenuous morale within the rank and file.
"Is this excessive compensation?" asked Jack Kelly, an analyst with Goldman Sachs.
"I would say if he turns this company around, realizes its earnings power and gets the stock up -- then the shareholders won't begrudge him the money . . . and the employees will feel like their feet are on the ground."
Kodak also announced that it would streamline its U.S. and Canadian business structure -- a move long called for by analysts and industry watchers.
Now U.S. regional business general managers will report directly to the world-wide business general managers.
The role of U.S. and Canada general manager, held by Bob Hamilton, will be discontinued and Mr. Hamilton will be moved to another position.
