If the U.S. ever ends up looking like the Sahara Desert I am sure the cause will be the ceaseless publication of management books.
Every year there's another few dozen, brightly packaged and brimming, of course, with new ideas.
These days, the management topic du jour seems to be "total quality management."
Total quality management is a way of managing built around customer satisfaction.
How radical!
What a concept!
Not that you might instantly understand the essence of TQM should you pick up "Total Quality Management" (Wiley, 286 pages, $27.95) by Stephen George and Arnold Weimerskirch.
TQM, they write, means "integrating initiatives into a systematic quality improvement process."
Clear communication does not seem part of these goals.
Consider: "People worry that a corporate measurement system will impede ownership by and empowerment of operating units."
Or: "Rather than fall into the trap of assuming it knows who its customers are, it searches for needs that it is well-suited to meet, then verifies the validity of those needs and the promise of the market as it talks and listens to its potential customers."
Management books written without either management or psychobabble are rare, but I found a few.
"Taking the Mystery out of TQM" (Career Press, 290 pages, $16.95) by Peter Capezio and Debra Morehouse generally avoids the genre's pitfalls, particularly in the chapter called "The Quality Gurus."
The short portraits of four Americans and two Japanese begin with W. Edward Deming, who took his management concepts to Japan in the 1950s.
He promised the Japanese the "methods he taught would not only help it rebuild its industries at home after the war but would enable it to compete in world markets in the future."
I am sure that some of Mr. Deming's ideas will still sound revolutionary to those who are managing in the traditional ways.
For example, he suggested that manufacturers should abandon mass inspection because it has negative overtones and occurs in isolation after the work is done.
Instead, Mr. Deming advised companies to eliminate inspectors and reward employees for finding errors.
But are errors even inevitable?
Another one of the six gurus, Philip Crosby, insisted that zero defects could be achieved, rejecting Mr. Deming's notion that defects are inevitable because something will always go wrong.
In a heroic refutation of Murphy's Law, Crosby spearheaded the Zero Defect Movement at Martin Marietta Corp. in the '60s.
"The Five Pillars of TQM" (Dutton, 549 pages, $26.95) by Bill Creech makes the point, repeatedly, that getting American industry to change from autocratic management to decentralized leadership (as TQM requires) isn't easy.
He notes that the two-sided class system that evolved in this country lead to a management style based on isolation and confrontation rather than integration and cooperation.
One union leader said, "What the company wants is for us to work like the Japanese . . .
You work as a team, rat on each other, and lose control of your destiny.
That's not going to work in this country."
But management's determination to effect change has often been lagging as well.
General Motors Corp., for instance, suffered a strike at its Lordstown assembly plant over "job security" issues, immediately idling nine other plants that were dependent on Lordstown for "just-in-time" supply.
The strike was settled when GM agreed to add new workers, cancel some layoffs and promised not to use "out-sourcing" as a means of getting work done outside the plant.
By caving in, GM gave up the benefits of continuing competition on quality and value, something a company that was losing money hand over fist could ill afford to do.
And the workers may have helped doom Lordstown.
The way the author sees it, if the balance of American industry doesn't embrace TQM principles soon, the rest of the world will simply eat our lunch.
But how much success have companies actually had with TQM?
"Quality Wars" (Free Press, 363 pages, $29.95) by Jeremy Mains reports that the euphoria about TQM is being replaced with a certain degree of disenchantment.
One reason, he suggests, is that it does not guarantee immediate and everlasting success.
But Mr. Mains does detail some success stories.
Among the most notable is Motorola Inc. with its Six Sigma Program (after the statistical symbol), which proclaimed that by 1992, whatever it did, whether it was making pagers or writing invoices, the company would have a rate of defects not exceeding 3.4 per million.
(By way of comparison, the average large corporation operates today in the vicinity of four sigmas or 3,000 defects per million opportunities).
Motorola did get defects down to about 150 per million, which is somewhere between five and six sigmas.
Mr. Mains knows how to keep the reader interested in a subject as inherently boring as quality programs.
He begins this book with the story of a Southern Pacific Rail Corp. train that lost its brakes, resulting in a fatal accident.
It was caused by a number of failures in quality.
