Subpoenas notwithstanding, Independent Counsel Robert Fiske's investigation into Whitewater/Madison is beginning to look less like an effort to get the facts and more like a sophisticated exercise in political damage control.
In a word, like a coverup.
Mr. Fiske may not intend this to be the case, but on his record so far we wonder if Americans are ever going to get the Whitewater accounting they deserve.
For contrary to White House spin that there exists not "a shred of evidence" of wrong-doing, the charges and the facts known so far are serious.
There is the suspicion that the president of the United States benefited from illegal actions, perhaps by trading political favors for campaign contributions or for a sweetheart investment deal.
There is at least one allegation, made by former Judge David Hale, that Mr. Clinton himself personally encouraged a fraudulent loan.
And there is by now also a trail of suspicious actions and meetings that suggest that Clinton administration officials have tried to interfere with investigation into these charges.
More broadly, the issue is character; how much can we trust this president and this administration?
The Clintonites who appointed Mr. Fiske to investigate themselves now assure us that he will finally clear away all doubt.
But our own doubts have grown as we've watched Mr. Fiske get in the way of legitimate inquiries by the press and the Congress.
One immediate concern is our own lawsuit, Dow Jones v.
Department of Justice, to obtain reports about the death of Vincent Foster under the Freedom of Information Act.
Mr. Fiske's response has been an across-the-board stonewall.
In his meeting last week with Republican Sen. Al D'Amato, Mr. Fiske explained that it is simply easier for him to deny all documents under a FOIA request than to figure out which ones would really interfere with his own probe.
This is why he's even blocking release of a photocopy of the Foster suicide note whose text has already been reported on everywhere.
But the FOIA statute requires what lawyers call redaction, vetting individual documents and even parts of them.
So what Mr. Fiske is saying is that he feels entitled to ignore requirements of the law.
This does not exactly build confidence.
It also seems odd that Mr. Fiske's first act has been to prosecute Judge Hale, the one person who says he has first-hand knowledge of President Clinton's encouragement of illegal acts.
The next act of this unelected counsel has been to shout that no one else should ask questions about Whitewater/Madison, especially not an elected Congress.
As Congressman Jim Leach's nearby letter argues, this is an amazing attempt to interfere with Congress's clear constitutional duties of oversight.
No less a prosecutorial zealot than Iran-Contra's Mr. Lawrence Walsh has concluded that when Congress and prosecutors clash "the law is clear that it is Congress that must prevail."
In practical terms, Mr. Fiske's crusade against Congressional hearings has even become an all-purpose political shield for all the president's men.
When the subject was raised at a House subcommittee hearing last week, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen replied, "On the advice of Mr. Fiske, the special counsel, I refuse to answer."
So the same Robert Fiske who was appointed by the president to investigate himself is now serving as a kind of backstop Fifth Amendment for the people he is supposed to be investigating.
Too bad Tricky Dick never thought of this one.
The latest White House gambit is to suggest that Mr. Fiske issue an "interim" report on the various improper White House and Treasury meetings.
Since Senate Republicans have generously, and we think prematurely, decided to postpone their hearing demands until after Mr. Fiske finishes this part of his investigation, the White House will then argue that there's no need for any such hearings because Mr. Fiske has already looked into it.
And if Mr. Fiske comes down with a decision saying there's insufficient credible evidence of actual criminal violations, we can expect the White House to ask that the records be sealed, denying voters a record on which they might make judgment on character.
But as we've argued before, the main public interest here is not in putting the likes of Roger Altman in jail but in finding out what the Clinton/Little Rock/Rose presidency is all about.
Especially since Mr. Leach has now discerned a potential Keating Five-type twist to the Whitewater/Madison deal.
His letter to Mr. Fiske says he is "concerned" that officials from the Resolution Trust Corp. in Washington "gagged and possibly coerced" RTC officials in Kansas City who were looking into the deal.
Yet House Banking Chairman Henry Gonzalez, who didn't shrink from probing the Keating Five, is now also citing Mr. Fiske to block any such questions from an upcoming RTC hearing.
In practice if not intent, all of this adds up to a coverup.
It amounts to one political faction manipulating all of the levers of government -- executive, legislative and prosecutorial -- in order to prevent public scrutiny.
In some countries they'd call that a coup.
