Alan Pottasch is almost whispering as he speaks.
The man who spent almost 35 years shaping the ads for PepsiCo's flagship Pepsi-Cola brand is offering a candid assessment of its current "Be Young.
Have Fun.
Drink Pepsi" campaign.
"It targets kids 15-years-old and younger," says Mr. Pottasch.
"As a major soft-drink product, you shouldn't alienate anybody."
What makes his comment especially noteworthy is the fact that Mr. Pottasch isn't a former executive with a vendetta against PepsiCo.
Rather, Mr. Pottasch is on the inside and says he has "the greatest job in the entire world."
Two years after a voluntary retirement, the man who approved the much lauded "Pepsi Generation" campaign in 1963 and led years of subsequent memorable commercials, is back at Pepsi in Somers, N.Y.
His new responsibilities include advertising for Pepsi-Cola International, international advertising for Kentucky Fried Chicken and domestic advertising for the Frito-Lay division.
He was part of the team that worked on the Wavy Lay's chip ad featuring former Vice President Dan Quayle that was shown on the Super Bowl.
But it is the domestic advertising that causes Mr. Pottasch, an affable 67-year-old, to shake his head.
The soft-drink manufacturer is "turning off people 40-years-old and up," he says, referring to the very large first wave of baby boomers.
Some of Pepsi's ads strike Mr. Pottasch as just plain curious.
One ad shown during the Super Bowl featured model Cindy Crawford being deprived of Pepsi for a month, and as a result, turning into Rodney Dangerfield.
"That ended on a downer," he says.
"It might have been more effective to have Rodney Dangerfield drink nothing but Pepsi, and after a time, turn into Cindy Crawford.
That is uplifting," he says.
Pepsi declines to comment on Mr. Pottasch's assessment, referring calls to Philip B. Dusenberry, chairman and chief executive officer of Omnicom Group's BBDO New York, Pepsi's ad agency.
"Alan and I have worked together for a great many years," Mr. Dusenberry says.
"We're in the midst of breaking new ground on our global marketing for Pepsi-Cola.
And we just recently completed some terrific spots for Frito-Lay."
Mr. Dusenberry, one of Mr. Pottasch's close friends, declines to comment further.
Mr. Pottasch is taking some satisfaction that one of the ads he was involved with was originally supposed to be shown only in foreign countries.
But the ad, starring a chimp who drinks Pepsi as part of a laboratory experiment and winds up escaping to cavort with young female humans on a beach, appeared during the Super Bowl and has become part of Pepsi's domestic rotation.
By all accounts, Mr. Pottasch should be enjoying retirement.
He has a house in the Cayman Islands.
He is a scuba-diving instructor.
He flies an antique 1946 J-3 cub airplane near his home in rural Connecticut.
And he has a four-year-old daughter, as well as three grown children.
Yet, one gets the sense that he loves the bare-knuckles ad war between Pepsi and archrival Coca-Cola.
It was Chris Sinclair, president and chief executive of PepsiCo's foods and beverages international, who called to coax Mr. Pottasch back to work.
Mr. Pottasch takes a very basic view of advertising his product.
"We don't have a complicated message," he says.
"Too often, marketing executives want to get too cerebral with a message, instead of appealing emotionally.
My philosophy is simply: Show me someone with a mouth, and I'll show you a customer."
Ads, he says, should consist of the selling message and "some entertainment to pay the guy off for listening."
Mr. Pottasch has been appealing to U.S. consumers since he joined Pepsi in 1959 after a stint as a vice president of Kenyon & Eckhardt, the ad agency that is now part of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon & Eckhardt.
Mr. Pottasch had been a director at ABC and in the late 1940s worked at a Dallas television station as a producer and director.
It was in his early days at Pepsi that the company realized it could never compete with Coke's all-American image, says Mr. Pottasch.
So "we chose to have a focus where the advertising was the consumer, not the product."
Such a philosophy led to campaigns for Pepsi, including "Now It's Pepsi for Those Who Think Young" in 1960, which resembles the 1994 slogan; "Come Alive.
You're in the Pepsi Generation"; "You've Got a Lot to Live.
And Pepsi's Got a Lot to Give"; and "Pepsi.
The Choice of a New Generation."
In fact, one of Pepsi's few misfires during its golden advertising era came when Pepsi dispatched Mr. Pottasch to Japan to head its operations in the Far East in the late 1960s.
Then, Pepsi changed its campaign to "Taste that Beats the Others Cold.
Pepsi Pours It On."
Mr. Pottasch declines to criticize the campaign, but other executives close to the situation say that research showed consumers preferred the Pepsi Generation ads.
He says he is glad he has nothing to do with Pepsi's current domestic advertising and wants to emphasize that his criticism is not meant to cause resentment or ill feelings within the company he clearly loves.
But Mr. Pottasch almost can't help talking about the current Pepsi ads in the U.S. During a 90-minute breakfast conversation yesterday, he often had to force himself to stop in mid-sentence when discussing Pepsi's ads.
As for Coke's ads, produced by Creative Artists Agency, Mr. Pottasch is unimpressed.
"All those headlines and all that publicity," he says, "and all they have left is the polar bears.
Coke has gotten away from the Americana that made it so popular for decades."
Coke declined to comment on his view.
Mr. Pottasch says he is gratified that his new international spot with the chimp is already causing waves.
In Greece, a television network pulled the spot.
Comparative advertising is banned or restricted in some overseas countries.
"This is great," says Mr. Pottasch.
"A few years ago, Japan pulled an ad featuring rap singer MC Hammer because it featured Coke as well.
Well, we told people to write to us and we would send them the banned ad."
The response? 100,000 videotapes were sent.
"I love this," he says.
"To me, living is doing."
Radio ad revenue rebounded 9% to $9.57 billion in 1993 from $8.76 billion in 1992, according to the Radio Advertising Bureau, an industry group made up of radio stations, networks and sales companies.
The increase marks the radio business's best year since 1985, when growth was almost 12%.
It was a flat market in 1992, when revenues inched up just 2%; in 1991, industry revenues declined 2.8%, the first decline since 1961.
The bureau said revenue growth in 1994 is matching growth in 1993.
Local radio ads, which make up about three-fourths of all radio ad revenue, were up about 9% in 1993.
National spot ads, or those local ads purchased by national advertisers, grew 10%.
And ad revenues on radio networks grew 8%.
Saatchi Sells U.K. Shop
Saatchi & Saatchi Co., the British agency holding company, sold its Hall Harrison Cowley Group agency for 1.5 million ($2.3 million) in stock and cash to a company formed by the management of Hall Harrison.
Saatchi said it will receive 900,000 in redeemable preference shares in the new company and 600,000 in cash.
Hall Harrison, a regional U.K. advertising and public-relations agency, is "well-established and profitable," Saatchi said.
"It is not, however, considered by Saatchi to be within the compass of its core business," Saatchi said.
Ad Notes. . . .
OLYMPIC SPONSORSHIP: Bausch & Lomb, Rochester, N.Y., has joined the crowd of sponsors of U.S. figure skater Nancy Kerrigan: The company's Ray-Ban sunglasses unit said it signed a two-year agreement with Ms. Kerrigan under which she will wear Ray-Bans during appearances off the ice.
Norm Salik, vice president of Bausch & Lomb's eyewear division, said her role in advertising would be limited to a congratulatory print ad if she wins a medal at the Lillehammer Games.
ACCOUNT: The Dallas office of Bloom FCA, a unit of French agency Publicis, said it won an ad assignment for a new wood-finish product acquired by Armor All Products Corp., an Aliso Viejo, Calif., unit of McKesson Corp.
Foote, Cone & Belding continues to handle Armor All's big car-product account.
