Goldman, Sachs & Co. announced the return of its star syndicate manager and said it is reorganizing its London-based Eurobond team.
Michael Sherwood, 28 years old, the former head of bond syndication at Goldman Sachs International Ltd., is to rejoin the firm today, a spokesman confirmed.
Mr. Sherwood left at the end of January along with senior bond trader Shaun Church, 29, to manage fixed-income funds in London for Union Bancaire Privee, a Geneva-based private bank.
Mr. Sherwood, who changed his mind shortly before he was to begin his new job last week, wasn't available to comment.
An official at Union Bancaire Privee said the bank was disappointed that Mr. Sherwood wouldn't be joining them.
Goldman has been hit by a number of high-profile departures in the past three months, and partners are said to be concerned about the erosion of the firm's image as one that cultivates talent and engenders intense loyalty.
"They've started to look like any other investment bank where the stars quickly jump ship if they don't get enough respect or money," said an executive at a rival firm.
Outside experts familiar with Goldman Sachs pay policies estimate that Mr. Sherwood was paid a bonus in 1993 between $2 million and $3.5 million.
Goldman officials declined to discuss compensation.
Mr. Sherwood will return to Goldman in London as an executive director and will work closely on the fixed-rate debt syndicate with Noel Dunn, another executive director at Goldman Sachs.
It is believed senior Goldman Sachs management enticed Mr. Sherwood back with promises that he would be made an executive partner by the end of the year.
There are currently 148 such partners world-wide.
Goldman has 27 partners in London.
The firm's pretax profit for the fiscal year ended Oct. 31 was $2.3 billion, according to independent estimates.
(Goldman doesn't make its results public.)
Joining Mr. Sherwood on the debt syndicate will be Robert van der Putten, currently a Goldman associate with responsibility for medium-term note programs.
Sion Kearsey and Chris Pigden, a senior trader, will become co-heads of the firm's Eurobond trading department.
Late last month, the Goldman Eurobond team lost Jonathan Greenwood, 31, who left the syndication desk to work in Amsterdam for ABN-Amro Bank NV.
Mr. Greenwood said he left Goldman in order to spend more time with his new wife, a Dutch citizen.
Two of Goldman's leading economists in London -- David Morrison and Jeremy Hale -- left last late year to join Tiger Fund, a U.S. money-management firm.
Mr. Morrison had been a Goldman executive partner.
Also Monday, Merrill Lynch International Ltd., a unit of Merrill Lynch & Co., said it would begin making markets in U.K. government bonds, or gilts, on Feb. 28.
The firm announced it had recently received approval from the Bank of England, the London Stock Exchange and the Securities and Futures Authority.
Michael R. Sesit contributed to this article.
