Canada's new Liberal Party government, in its first budget, boosted annual taxes by 1.4 billion Canadian dollars (US$1.04 billion) and forecast another near-record deficit.
The projected deficit, totaling C$39.7 billion for the 1995 fiscal year starting April 1, is proportionately larger than the U.S. budget deficit.
Adjusted for U.S. budget accounting, the forecast Canadian deficit amounts to 4.2% of gross domestic product, compared with a projected U.S. deficit-to-GDP ratio of 3.5% for fiscal 1995.
GDP is the total value of a country's output of goods and services.
The government's deficit is expected to push the public debt to a net C$551 billion in the coming year, adding to the already heavy debt-service burden on taxpayers.
The government predicted that 33 cents of every tax dollar will go to pay public debt charges in the 1995 fiscal year.
In the U.S. 14 cents of every U.S. tax dollar is for debt service.
The heavy debt burden has severely limited the new government's scope for new initiatives.
Finance Minister Paul Martin reaffirmed the Liberal Party's pledge to reduce the budget deficit to about C$25 billion within three years.
"It is now time for the government to get its fiscal house in order," he told the House of Commons in a speech introducing the budget.
The government, however, failed to meet the spending-restraint demands of business groups and others.
Sherry Cooper, chief economist at Toronto-based securities company Burns Fry Ltd., said she was disappointed that the Liberal government, which took office in November, didn't take advantage of the "honeymoon" phase of its mandate to tackle spending more aggressively.
The government estimated its budget revenue will rise 8% to C$123.9 billion in the coming year, partly on the strength of economic growth, which is forecast at 3%.
The new tax measures included a budget provision eliminating a tax exemption for the first C$25,000 of life-insurance benefits provided by employers.
The measure will mean an additional cost of as much as C$50 a year in taxes for an employee.
The government also announced that a C$100,000 capital-gains exemption would be eliminated for gains accruing from today on.
The government predicted that its spending will rise 2% in fiscal 1995 to C$163.6 billion.
The budget includes new funding for housing, unemployed fishermen, natives and women's groups.
The government said spending on foreign aid will be cut 2% in the coming year and then frozen.
Defense spending will be cut by C$1.9 billion over the next three years.
This comes in addition to substantial defense cuts announced by the previous Progressive Conservative Party government.
The government said it also intends to negotiate a revised role in the international space-station program to save C$500 million over the next 10 years.
