Cash-strapped Figgie International Inc. eliminated its quarterly dividend and received a temporary cash infusion from a new lender.
The Willoughby, Ohio, industrial company also named a longtime outside director as a new vice chairman, although it stopped short of bringing in a total outsider to bolster management.
Meanwhile, Figgie signaled that its 1993 operating losses and year-end adjustments would be greater than previously expected when reported in two to three weeks.
The company's Class A share fell $1.875, or 15%, to $10.875 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
The conglomerate said it received a new $40 million, one-year renewable loan from CIT Group, which is secured by receivables.
That eliminated the need to ask its other banks, which have extended a $150 million credit line, for more funds.
"With CIT's support, we have addressed our near-term cash flow needs while we continue to put into place the elements of a more comprehensive deleveraging of the balance sheet," Chairman Harry E. Figgie Jr. said in a statement.
Nevertheless, Figgie sought to calm its syndicate of bankers at a meeting yesterday.
The bankers expressed concerns about the company's financial plight and the need for new management, according to a person who attended the meeting.
A company spokesman confirmed that those issues were discussed, but said they were "not representative of the whole meeting."
Wall Street was hoping for stronger outside management to help Figgie.
Instead, the company named a director, 66-year-old Walter M. Vannoy, who has been on the board since 1981.
Although the current vice chairman, Harry E. Figgie III, 40, will continue to hold that title, Mr. Vannoy will be second in command, the company said.
Mr. Vannoy formerly served as vice chairman of McDermott International Inc. and as president and chief operating officer of Babcock & Wilcox.
The company said suspension of the six-cents-a-share quarterly dividend, which would have been payable in March on both Class A and Class B common stock, will save it about $4 million a year.
"The board felt the dividend suspension was prudent until we effect a profitability turnaround."
The actions, coupled with the company's previously announced plan to sell its Rawlings Sporting Goods division and two other divisions, are the first phase of a turnaround plan to be disclosed within the next two weeks, Figgie said.
Among other things, the company wants to lop $200 million off its $450 million of debt this year.
