The industry coalition putting together the proposed system for high-definition TV made its final major technical decision, choosing Zenith Electronics Corp.'s signal-transmission system over a rival General Instrument Corp. methodology.
In May, the three groups that had been trying independently to develop a system to serve as the U.S. standard for HDTV formed a "grand alliance" that would pool their technology and share the ensuing royalty payments.
Since then, the alliance has been testing its members' various technologies, and deciding which maker's design will be incorporated into the final prototype package to be presented to the Federal Communications Commission for approval as the single standard.
The alliance's testing and selection process is being done in cooperation with the FCC's advisory committee on advanced television service.
This arrangement is expected to make the FCC's final approval process, expected to begin in early 1995, relatively free of surprises.
Late last year, the alliance selected its video-compression technology and a digital-data "packeting" system based on proposed international standards, as well as the audio technology it plans to use.
The last remaining question was the digital transmission technology by which broadcasters and cable operators will send the high-quality TV pictures and sound to individual sets.
The consortium said that after extensive testing, it had chosen Zenith's "vestigial sideband" or VSB, technology, rather than the system developed by General Instrument.
The alliance said it chose the Zenith technology because of the broader geographic coverage it provided, as well as the minimal interference the signal gives to current television transmissions.
The VSB technology will be fine-tuned to incorporate certain technical components from the General Instruments system.
While Zenith's selection no doubt sparked back-slapping among its technical development team, a spokesman conceded that under the alliance's royalty-sharing arrangement, the financial impact of its victory isn't significantly different than if the Glenview, Ill., company's design had lost the competition.
"The spinoff benefit of this decision today," the spokesman said, "is that it can help establish Zenith's VSB system as a transmission standard for non-HDTV applications."
Those would include digital cable transmission, video-on-demand and interactive television, he said.
There are various competing approaches for sending digital signals for cable, and the spokesman noted that Zenith is working to license its VSB technology for such applications to cable-TV and telecommunications industry players.
The first HDTV sets are expected to be on the market in the U.S. in the second half of 1996.
