Corporate warfare is dawning in Mexico.
Although the Mexican business landscape is known more for its monopolies than for its competition, not long from now two of Mexico's corporate titans are likely to do battle for banking and telephone clients.
On one side is Carlos Slim Helu, the proprietor of telephone monopoly Telefonos de Mexico, who was also awarded a banking license last fall.
On the other is Roberto Hernandez, chief executive officer at Grupo Financiero Banamex-Accival, known as Banacci.
He plans to launch a long-distance network here with MCI Communications Corp. in late 1996, assuming the government awards the venture a license.
With two such big names going after each other on the two different fronts of telephones and banks, the MCI-Banacci announcement marks Mexico's move into competitive capitalism, executives say.
They say this could be the year of the joint venture in Mexico, as companies team up with technologically proficient partners to steal market share and profits from competitors.
"We will see dramatic changes in the configurations of major conglomerates in Mexico" as companies streamline businesses and team up with foreign partners, predicts Manuel Pena-Morros, head of Chase Manhattan Bank's office here.
Chase itself, he says, is looking for both U.S. and European partners for several Mexican companies.
Mexico is "coming into a new era of more competition," adds Carrie Schloss, co-manager of the Kemper International Fund.
The looming battle between Messrs. Hernandez and Slim is particularly intriguing because both men have their eyes on the potentially huge market for electronic banking in Mexico.
Financial services -- everything from mortgage lending to pension funds -- are in an infantile stage here.
Years of hyperinflation and devaluation destroyed the concept of saving money in a bank.
Mexico is still very much a cash economy.
Opening bank accounts and organizing a direct-deposit system for employees can be a huge chore for companies here, bankers say.
Even though cash cards are available, many Mexicans still stand in line at teller windows.
Both Messrs. Slim and Hernandez appear to be aiming to offer corporations the convenience of one-stop shopping for both telecommunications and credit services.
For example, Banamex -- the name of Banacci's big bank -- could offer a corporation a data highway to ship phone messages or financial and corporate information around the country.
Employees could have electronic accounts where they receive their checks and pay their bills.
Jorge Hierro, a Banacci vice president, says: "We want to move from a cash economy to an electronic economy, skipping checks or the paper stage."
The careers of Messrs. Slim and Hernandez have crossed in ways that make their new rivalry interesting.
Both men have appeared on Forbes magazine's list of Mexican billionaires.
Both have easy access to Mexico's political leaders and corporate chieftains.
And in 1990, they faced off in a bidding contest for the grand prize of Mexico's privatizations -- Telefonos de Mexico.
Mr. Slim won.
A year later, Mr. Hernandez launched a winning $3.2 billion bid for Banco Nacional de Mexico, Mexico's largest banking group.
Both Telmex and Banamex came with their problems.
But Mr. Slim won a monopoly concession from the government, protecting his investment for seven years from competition, giving him time to rebuild the inefficient phone giant.
Mr. Hernandez had his own restructuring to do: He paid a hefty 2.62 times book value for a bank that had millions of dollars in loans that were "dead bodies," as one Banacci official calls them.
At the end of 1992, Banamex found that 6.1% of all loans on their books were past due.
Unlike Mr. Slim, though, Mr. Hernandez had to compete with more than a dozen other Mexican banks while reorganizing and now faces a bunch of foreign banks due to arrive here around midyear.
Then, last fall, when Mexican bankers were complaining the loudest about the onslaught of competition, the government stunned them all by awarding a banking license to Mr. Slim.
The implications were huge.
Through Telmex, Mr. Slim has a virtual credit profile on every Mexican with a phone.
"He knows exactly who spends money in Mexico because people spend money on phone bills more regularly than they spend on anything else," says Pablo Mancera, treasurer of investment firm Grupo Santander Mexico.
Fernando Chico Pardo, the head of Grupo Financiero Inbursa, the incubator for Mr. Slim's banking foray, didn't return phone calls inquiring about his plans.
But every Mexican banker fears some combination of Telmex and financial services is in the works.
"It would be silly not to use Telmex in this venture.
Slim is developing a bank for the next century," says Sergio Sanchez Garcia, head of research at Mexican broker Inverlat.
Until this week, Mr. Slim was potentially Banacci's most threatening competitor.
Newspapers here are full of rumors that Telmex will soon seal a long-distance joint venture with American Telephone & Telegraph Co.
But for now, Banacci has the largest bank in Mexico and also has as a partner MCI, which has made a fortune poaching on troubled monopolies like Telmex.
Mr. Slim has a small brokerage firm, a piece of paper that says he can operate as a bank, Mr. Pardo and Telmex.
"Hernandez has always had the gusano, or worm," eating at him about losing Telmex, one U.S. banker opines.
"Hernandez is after Slim" now.
