A rapidly growing industry has out-of-state companies flocking to Texas, and in-state firms sprouting to get in on the action.
The hot business: prisons.
At stake is one of the biggest prison expansions this country has ever seen.
On Friday, the state will consider proposals from private companies to build and operate space for as many as 8,000 prisoners -- eventually doling out some $156 million for construction costs, as well as $94 million in annual operating revenue.
And that may be just the beginning.
The state is planning to add a total of 70,000 prison beds over the next two years, roughly doubling the system's capacity, and there's no end to the construction in sight.
If the private-sector program succeeds, advocates of the concept say, more prison business could be thrown into the private pot.
But it's a big if.
For one thing, it isn't yet clear whether the private facilities save the state money, one of their main selling points.
In addition, Texans living in urban areas have been less than enamored of many of the companies' plans to build prisons closer to where they live.
And some experts worry that inexperienced entrepreneurs will jump into the business -- and build poorly run institutions that could ultimately cost the taxpayers bundles of money and jeopardize public safety.
Already, a few private companies are planning to put up prisons on speculation, hoping the state will tap them once the buildings are up.
"The risk is some fly-by-night company that's never done anything in corrections will be able to secure financing and build a facility that will appeal to the state," says Charles W. Thomas, professor of the private corrections project at the University of Florida, Gainesville.
"People in the private corrections industry are anxious about what the possible outcome would be of an undercapitalized, inexperienced company trying to run such a facility."
Despite the concerns, private prisons are booming, and for a simple reason: The state system is strapped for space, and Texas is being fined thousands of dollars a day by a federal court for prison crowding.
"We're in a terrible crisis," says Ellen Halbert of Austin, a member of the Texas prison board.
"Our plate is very full with what we're building on our own."
Private prison contractors claim they can deliver the goods more quickly and economically than the state prison system.
On the surface, that appears to be the case: The state has allotted $19,455 per bed for construction, and state officials say two private proposals already have come in at $17,000 per bed -- which would translate into a saving of $14.7 million for a 6,000-bed project that constitutes the bulk of the private building.
In addition, operating costs for the private facilities are expected to be 10% to 33% cheaper than for traditional state prisons.
But privatization critics say those numbers are misleading.
For one thing, they say, private prisons generally get prisoners who are less dangerous or on the verge of release, and therefore are cheaper to maintain.
In addition, medical costs of sick inmates after the first 48 hours are covered by the state, not the private companies.
These and other factors, including the higher cost of state psychiatric facilities and women's prisons, inflate the state's average cost.
Another problem facing the private prisons is location.
While most state-run prisons are built in rural areas, where they are embraced for their economic-development potential, the latest facilities are planned for urban areas.
It's a test that lawmakers wanted of so-called community-based corrections.
The theory behind it: build jails exclusively for nonviolent offenders.
Put them in urban areas where the crime rate is highest, so offenders can maintain contact with friends and family, while using community resources for education, work and drug-treatment programs in an effort to reduce recidivism.
But people in those areas aren't eager to participate in the test.
In recent weeks, Corrections Corp. of America, based in Nashville, Tenn., faced strong community opposition to prison sites in both Harris County and Grand Prairie, near Dallas.
In Travis County, plans to put the state jail in East Austin have sparked protests from the predominantly minority neighborhood.
"It's not something we haven't run into in other places," says Peggy Wilson Lawrence, a spokesman for Corrections Corp.
"A lot of times, emotion takes over, and people really can't listen to the facts and consider the project with an open mind."
Moreover, winning private prison contracts isn't easy, even for established companies.
Private contractors say the state imposes more stringent requirements on private facilities than it does on its own prisons.
For instance, private prisons are required to go through a tedious national accreditation process that isn't required of state-operated prisons.
Whatever the difficulties, the race to win the business is clearly on.
And Texas companies, as relative newcomers, have it doubly hard.
Corrections Corp. and Wackenhut Corp.'s Wackenhut Corrections unit, in Coral Gables, Fla., hold half of the private prison market nationwide, and usually are top contenders for any new deals.
Travis and Jack counties, two sites for the new round of private construction, have recommended Wackenhut; state officials have the final say.
But smaller in-state companies are making inroads.
North Village Corp. of Houston, operated by two former office-building developers, has focused on the development side, pairing up with an established prison-management firm to do the rest.
It is the choice of Dallas County for a new state-run jail, and one of two finalists put forward for a state facility by Harris County, where company officials built a county-run 4,000-bed facility.
Other new companies hope background and contacts in the corrections business will help them land new private prison deals.
Austin-based Southern Corrections Inc., a three-month-old company still hoping for its first corrections contract, and Midland-based Technical Approach to Secure Confinement Inc. both were started by former officials in the state and federal prison system.
Perhaps the savviest new prison company is Corrections Solutions Inc.
The Dallas company's chairman is Charles Terrell, former Texas prison board chairman, but it is predominantly owned by minority businessmen to take advantage of the state's minority business contracting goals.
Corrections Solutions has submitted a bid for a 1,500- to 2,000-bed state jail facility, to be located in Waco.
Cornell Cox Group L.P. of Houston, a three-year-old company that manages a 300-bed facility in Rhode Island, is a finalist for the Harris County state jail and has also submitted a bid for a 1,500- to 2,000-bed state contract.
President Norman Cox says that despite 23 years of experience in both public and private corrections, it has proved tough to break into the Texas market.
"There are more firms out there today than ever before," he says.
The competition is driving some companies to extremes in pursuit of a piece of the business.
A few smaller companies are building prisons on speculation, putting up facilities in hopes that state and local governments will contract with them after the space is built.
The practice occurs almost exclusively in Texas, says Mr. Thomas, the Florida professor.
And it's happening despite a notorious prisons-on-spec debacle.
In 1989, N-Group Securities Inc., persuaded six Texas counties to set up corporations and borrow $75 million to finance 500-bed prison units.
Backing the deal were Dallas attorney Ray Hutchison, husband of Republican Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison, who served as bond counsel to the county corporations, and former Democratic Gov. Mark White, whose law firm represented the underwriter.
The prisons were built, but the state initially refused to use them because they didn't meet state standards.
The state later bought them for other uses for 50 cents on the dollar.
A lawsuit filed by the bondholders is still pending in U.S. district court in Houston.
Despite those troubles, Texas' prison crowding is enough to persuade other companies to risk speculative building.
One company, WRI Group Inc. of Shreveport, La., states in offering documents that it has no experience developing a jail and no guarantee of inmates.
Nevertheless, it hopes to sell $31.7 million in certificates of participation to build a jail in Coleman County for the state's felony backlog now crowding other jails in other counties.
Greg Eden, senior vice president of Stephens Leasing Inc., which is arranging financing for the project, concedes there are no guarantees, but says Texas' jail crowding makes the plan a good bet.
Bobby Ross Group Inc. of Austin has specialized in salvaging struggling facilities that were built on spec, so it has seen other investors get burned.
But it, too, is thinking about building a 500- to 1,000-bed women's facility on spec.
"We call them `Field of Dreams' jails," says Bobby Ross, the company's president.
"We think the time's probably right to build one."
Respect hasn't come easily to Liberty Sports Inc.
Although Liberty's alliance of 13 regional sports networks is the largest source of television revenue for Major League Baseball -- about $100 million a year -- Liberty Sports President Ed Frazier says he has never been given the opportunity to meet with baseball's TV committee because the league doesn't view Liberty as a national player.
The National Hockey League rebuffed the company's bid for TV rights more than a year ago; it signed with Capital Cities/ABC Inc.'s ESPN -- although ESPN's offer was lower -- because league executives weren't certain that Liberty's national audience was as large as claimed.
Even administrators at the National Basketball Association, long Liberty's strongest supporter, have told Mr. Frazier that Liberty won't be considered one of sports TV's power players until the company has adequate national distribution capability, and can generate enough revenue to be important to a league -- despite the fact that Liberty's networks generate the third-largest sum for the basketball league, about $60 million a year (NBC, which tops the list, is paying the NBA $187.5 million a year under its contract).
But respect appears to be at hand for the Dallas provider of sports programming.
Last week, two weeks after the Big Eight Conference expanded to include four Southwest Conference universities, Liberty, a unit of Denver's Liberty Media Corp., won the national cable rights to the new conference's football games.
Liberty's aggressive offer -- $42.5 million for a five-year contract beginning in 1996 -- beat out rivals ESPN and Raycom Inc.
This deal "is their steppingstone to becoming a major player," says John Mansell, senior analyst at Paul Kagan Associates, a Carmel, Calif., media analyst.
"They'll get more respect as a bidder in national packages from now on."
For Liberty, which already has national cable rights for Pacific 10 Conference football, landing the new league was as important as "the NFL deal was to the Fox network," Mr. Frazier says.
Winning the rights allows Liberty for the first time to offer a package of prime-time Saturday college football through its Prime/SportsChannel Networks unit, a national network supplying its local affiliates.
That's an attractive draw for advertisers, and may pit Liberty directly against ESPN, whose strong point on fall Saturdays is its college football coverage.
Liberty's bid was considered high for a college football cable package, but the company believes that, based on its talks with advertisers, it can recoup its costs.
With the bid, Liberty basically locked in TV markets in Houston, Dallas, Denver, Kansas City and St. Louis, because of the strong followings for the conference teams in those regions.
But while ESPN's national broadcasts have created a name for more than a decade that sports fans associate with televised athletics, Liberty's name thus far has been virtually unknown in TV sports.
Liberty's programming, for the most part, isn't aired nationally, and its name doesn't appear on cable listings.
Nevertheless, Liberty's networks, scattered across every major market in the country, are mainstays with local sports fans, and in regional circles are closing in on ESPN.
There's Home Sports Entertainment in Houston and Dallas, Sunshine Network in Florida, Prime Sports Network Rocky Mountain in Denver, and others in Philadelphia, Chicago, the Northwest and the West Coast.
All told, Liberty's affiliates pull in about 44 million cable subscribers, and the company generates about $170 million a year in ad revenue.
Though ESPN has a single feed nationwide, Liberty networks have the ability to tailor their broadcasts to the local markets, showing the games of their areas' college and pro teams.
Liberty also is the largest provider of sports programming in the world, thanks to the company's Prime International unit, which picks up and distributes world-wide everything from cricket in Britain to badminton in India to soccer in South America.
While respect has been hard to come by, Liberty has in its corner Mr. Frazier, a 41-year-old native of Big Spring considered by many to be one of the founding fathers of regional sports networks.
He was tapped more than a decade ago by Warner Amex -- a joint venture between Warner Communications Inc. and American Express Co. that subsequently became part of Time Warner Inc. -- to found one of the country's first such networks, Home Sports Entertainment, which passed through several owners and grew into Liberty.
Mr. Frazier has since played a large part in the birth of similar networks, and four years ago helped bring together Prime network and SportsChannel America to form Prime/SportChannel Networks.
Winning the Big Eight contract moves Mr. Frazier a big step closer to his key goal: getting the folks who matter to take his company seriously.
When he first approached the NBA looking to buy rights, "they pointed at a shelf of binders and said: `Those are the contracts for major networks.
When you get big enough to be on that shelf, then you'll get what you want.'"
Striving for that shelf is a challenge Mr. Frazier is accustomed to.
His career was punctuated by Home Sports Entertainment's near-death in 1984, when the financially strapped network was 15 minutes from going dark permanently.
After three months of sales pitches failed to attract a rescuer -- Warner Amex was unable to help the company -- John McMullen, then the owner of the Houston Astros, whose games had become a staple of HSE broadcasts, rescued the network with a cash infusion.
Today, Liberty is on sturdier footing.
Its partners include Mr. McMullen, now owner of the New Jersey Devils hockey team, and Group W Services Inc., a unit of Westinghouse Electric Corp.
Tele-Communications Inc., the cable-TV giant that spun off Liberty Media in 1991, still owns a small stake in the parent company.
Mr. Frazier modestly attributes much of Liberty Sports' success to those around him who do the work.
But Bill Daniels sees it differently.
Mr. Daniels, who founded a sports network in Los Angeles in the early '80s and joined with Mr. Frazier in starting the Prime network, says: "I signed on with Ed the first time I met him because he's got what it take to be a visionary.
He'll make Liberty a national power.
The Big Eight is just the first step."
