A team of scientists at Kyoto University said that, using rat fetal-tissue transplants, it had restored virtually full motor function to newborn rats whose spinal cords had been severed.
By applying two biochemicals to the site of an injury, a European research group found it could stimulate the growth of spinal nerve cells in a way that could aid regeneration of damaged spinal tissue.
Both studies appear in today's issue of the British journal Nature.
"These two papers mark an important step forward," said Martin Schwab, a University of Zurich neurochemist who led the European group.
"We showed you can get nerve fibers in adult animals to substantially regenerate," while the Japanese paper "shows you can get functional repair" of damaged spinal tissue.
Many neuroscientists now believe that effective treatment of spinal injuries will require a combination of such biochemical treatments and surgical transplantation.
To be sure, both research studies have important limitations, and scientists in the field stress it will take some timeperhaps as long as a decade -- before they can even begin experimenting with these techniques in humans.
The European study has, as yet, gone unchallenged.
The Japanese study, however, has already drawn fire from some U.S. scientists, who claim it is sloppy and unsubstantiated.
Such controversy is par for the course in the intensely competitive field of spinalinjury treatment, which has long been plagued by grand claims that could not be replicated by others.
"In all cases like this, you have to see that a new technique works in someone else's hands," said Paul Patterson, a neuroscientist at the California Institute of Technology.
"There have been so many false hopes over the years that it makes you very skeptical."
Unlike most injuries, which heal naturally, serious spinal-cord injuries often leave their victims permanently paralyzed.
That's because the all-important spinal nerve cells that transmit both sensory information and the motor signals that control movement lack the ability to grow through the scar tissue and across the gaps left by injury.
Scientists have long sought to help such nerve cells regenerate in laboratory animals by grafting other nerve tissue into spinal injuries.
The idea is that spinal nerve cells might find it easier to grow along an existing "bridge" of nerve tissue.
Such research, however, has been controversial, since many experimenters have studied animals whose spinal cords weren't fully severed, in an effort to simulate crushing injuries.
While some researchers have had success in restoring motor control, that restoration has usually been limited.
Into this tempest stepped Kyoto University neurosurgeon Yasushi Iwashita and two colleagues, who claimed to have taken an extra step forward by restoring nearly full motor function in rats.
Working with 32 newborn rats whose spinal cords had been completely severed, Dr. Iwashita's team transplanted segments of embryonic rat spinal cord tissue into the cuts.
Of the 22 rats who survived the procedure, 14 recovered almost fully, with grafts that blended seamlessly into the connecting spinal tissue, Dr. Iwashita said.
More important, he said, these rats could not only walk, but ran, climbed and even landed on their feet when dropped upside down, very much like normal rats.
"The degree of recovery is incomparably greater than in any previous experiment," Dr. Iwashita said.
Anders Bjorklund, a neurobiologist at the University of Lund in Sweden, called Dr. Iwashita's results "truly remarkable" in an accompanying commentary in Nature.
Yet many U.S. scientists were far from impressed, pointing out that the nervous systems in newborn rats are naturally more likely to regenerate than those in adult rats.
Dr. Iwashita said he is attempting to duplicate his work with adult rats, but so far hasn't met with success.
Other researchers faulted Dr. Iwashita's lab for sloppiness and less-than-full disclosure in his experiments.
Georgetown University neurobiologist Barbara Bregman, who is doing her own spinal nerve research in collaboration with Dr. Schwab, called the Japanese research "trash," charging, for instance, that the research team didn't put the rats through widely known quantitative tests to support their claim of full motor recovery.
Dr. Iwashita insisted that his data gathered by observation are sufficient to support the paper's claims, although he said he planned to do the quantitative tests in future experiments.
By contrast, the U.S. critics of Dr. Iwashita applauded the news from Dr. Schwab's group in Europe.
That team, which worked with young adult rats instead of newborns (but didn't sever their spines completely), said it discovered that two key biochemicals can work together to accelerate the growth of spinal nerve cells as much as 20 times.
Over the past few years scientists have uncovered a variety of so-called nerve growth factors that encourage nerve cells to proliferate.
Using one such growth factor, known as NT-3, Dr. Schwab's team encouraged severed spinal nerve cells in rats to "sprout" dense clouds of new nerve fibers.
Under NT-3 treatment alone, however, these fibers rarely grew to be longer than about one millimeter -- not long enough to bridge the site of an injury.
Dr. Schwab's group, however, had another trick up its sleeve.
Having earlier discovered that adult rats naturally produce two proteins that inhibit nerve growth, the scientists turned to an antibody known as IN-1 that would suppress those inhibiting proteins.
When they tested the combination of IN-1 and NT-3, the severed nerve cells sprouted extremely long fibers -- in one case, as long as two centimeters.
Such nerve cell growth has the potential to restore some sensory and motor functions, Dr. Schwab said.
In fact, Dr. Bregman says she has started to see some improvement in motor control after treating rats using Dr. Schwab's techniques.
