THEY JUST DON'T GET IT, or they simply don't believe it.
Treasury officials have repeatedly insisted that fewer than 2% of all individual taxpayers will owe more because of the new, higher income-tax rates in the 1993 law.
But a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll shows 43% think the new law will make them pay more in income taxes.
Another 43% think they will owe about the same, and 9% expect to pay less.
Among those with household income over $50,000, 55% think they will owe more.
Among those with income under $20,000, 26% expect to pay more.
The administration contends that the impact of the tax increase on the economy will be small.
But some economists disagree.
Irwin Kellner of Chemical Bank says business already is slowing under the weight of increased taxes, bad weather, the earthquake and higher interest rates.
In the Journal/NBC poll, 23% say they are postponing major purchases or travel plans because of concern about how much they will owe in taxes this year.
But 75% say they aren't delaying spending or traveling.
THE SUPREME COURT considers a challenge to a retroactive tax-law change.
The justices recently heard lawyers argue one of this year's most closely-watched tax cases: U.S. vs. Carlton.
At issue is an estate-tax change that Congress enacted in December 1987 retroactive to 1986.
The case is drawing intense scrutiny because the 1993 tax law enacted last August raised taxes on many upper-income people retroactive to Jan. 1, 1993.
But since federal courts previously have upheld many retroactive taxlaw changes, some lawyers predict the Supreme Court will do so in this case.
After listening to justices grill government lawyers, though, a few analysts aren't so sure of the outcome.
The justices appeared highly skeptical of the theory that the original law was so boneheaded that taxpayers should have realized it was too good to be true.
"Are you supposed to read a statute with the idea that, this is a weird provision, ergo, Congress never would have adopted it?"
Chief Justice Rehnquist asked.
"Certainly, 24 years of experience here suggest the opposite to me."
A TAX BREAK isn't as generous as some upper-income taxpayers had hoped.
To ease the pain of the 1993 law, Congress is allowing many upper-income taxpayers to spread out payment of their higher taxes over the next two years with no interest.
Thus, someone owing $6,000 more because of the higher rates could pay $2,000 by April 15, $2,000 by April 1995 and $2,000 by April 1996.
Anyone who qualifies "certainly should accept," says Mark McConaghy of Price Waterhouse in Washington.
"That's a nobrainer.
It's an interest-free loan."
But many people are discovering they can defer less than they thought, says Sidney Kess, a New York lawyer and accountant.
For example, says Randall Weiss of Deloitte & Touche in Washington, many upper-income people with large amounts of capital gains, state and local taxes or miscellaneous deductions may have to pay most of their tax increase this year.
The special offer doesn't apply to increases caused by the alternative minimum tax; also, complex AMT-calculation rules may limit the deferral for many people.
Kess says some people are finding that they can defer so little that they are paying their entire tab this year.
HELP WANTED: Congress's Joint Committee on Taxation needs a new chief of staff to replace Hank Gutman, who left at the end of last year to join the Washington office of law firm King & Spalding.
The job pays about $120,000.
PRESSURE GROWS on Treasury officials to approve a tax treaty with Portugal.
Several lawmakers and former Rep. Tony Coelho write Bentsen urging him to speed up the process.
But Treasury is worried about unresolved bank-secrecy and tax-evasion issues related to the Madeira Islands.
ONLY 10% of the people surveyed in the new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll rank federal taxes as the most important economic issue facing the country.
Taxes finished a distant third behind unemployment and the federal-budget deficit, which tied for No. 1, with each selected by 33%.
AX THE MARRIAGE TAX, some lawmakers say.
But they face an uphill battle.
For years, many people have complained bitterly about a bizarre tax-law quirk known as the "marriage penalty."
This oddity means many two-income married couples must pay more in taxes than they would if they had remained single.
In many cases, wedding bells can drive up a couple's income-tax bill by several thousand dollars.
The 1993 law made it even more expensive for some couples.
A bill introduced recently by Rep. Istook (R., Okla.) and co-sponsored by about 40 other lawmakers would eliminate this penalty.
The existing law amounts to "an annual federal surtax on marriage," Rep. Istook says.
But few expect the bill to pass anytime soon, because it would cost the Treasury so much.
"Yes, it would be expensive, but this is a matter of justice," says an aide to Rep. Istook.
BRIEFS: The IRS received 41.7 million individual income-tax returns as of March 5, down 1.6 million from a year ago. . . .
Most wealthy people badly underestimate how heavily their estates will be taxed, a U.S. Trust Corp. survey shows.
The average estimate was only 24%, but U.S. Trust warns "the range is more likely to be 37% to 55%."
