Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman, who is also the interim head of the government's savings-and-loan cleanup agency and is under fire from Republicans, recused himself from matters relating to a failed Arkansas thrift.
Mr. Altman issued a terse statement saying that his temporary term as chief executive of the Resolution Trust Corp. expires March 30 and that he won't have an RTC role beyond that date.
In the meantime, he said, he will refrain from any decisions involving the failed Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan.
Clinton administration officials said Mr. Altman decided to recuse himself because news accounts depicted him as involved in a seeming conflict of interest, stemming from a contact with White House officials.
Mr. Altman disclosed that contact in a Senate Banking Committee hearing Thursday.
In that hearing, which dealt partly with the RTC's role in overseeing Madison since it took over the failed thrift in late 1989, Mr. Altman said he met early this month with several White House officials to brief them on the timetable for any possible RTC lawsuits against persons deemed responsible for the Madison failure.
GOP allegations and a persistent flow of news disclosures have linked the Arkansas thrift to helping President Clinton, who was then Arkansas governor, and Hillary Rodham Clinton finance their investment in Whitewater Development Corp., a North Arkansas land-development venture, and to helping raise money for Mr. Clinton's gubernatorial campaign debts.
The Whitewater issue was kept alive in the House Friday, when Iowa Rep. Jim Leach, the ranking Republican on the House Banking Committee, released a transcript of a taped 1992 conversation in which James McDougal, the Clintons' former partner in Whitewater, challenged the Clintons' accounting of their investment in the venture.
In the conversation with Sheffield Nelson, who ran against then-Gov.
Clinton in 1990, Mr. McDougal charged that the Clintons wrongfully claimed on their 1980 federal-income tax returns that they had made a Whitewater-related interest payment of $9,000 to him.
"They have never paid me a penny's interest," Mr. McDougal told Mr. Nelson.
"They never owed me any money."
Bruce Lindsey, a senior White House aide, has said that Mr. McDougal is confused about this and that he believes the Clintons paid Mr. McDougal $9,000 as reimbursement for interest paid on a joint loan used to finance the Whitewater venture.
According to the transcript, Mr. McDougal also said the Clintons had personally sold "a corporate asset" -- a model home and a Whitewater lot -- for which Whitewater had made all the payments.
Mr. Lindsey countered that the Clintons made some of the payments.
Mr. McDougal lately has said that the Clintons put only $13,500 into Whitewater, while the Clintons have insisted that they invested -- and lost -- $68,900.
In a memo to Republican committee members, Rep. Leach said that Mr. McDougal's comments "appear to indicate that the Clintons lost no money in Whitewater" and "suggest that the tax consequences which emanate from this venture merit careful scrutiny."
At the Senate Banking Committee hearing Thursday, Mr. Altman, a longtime friend of the Clintons, said he initiated the meeting with the White House officials "solely to be sure that White House counsel Bernard Nussbaum understood the legal and procedural framework in which the RTC was working."
He said he told participants of the meeting that he had instructed the RTC staff to handle the Madison case "exactly identical" to its handling of other cases.
Administration officials said that if there had been any hint of RTC favoritism to the Clintons or other administration officials who were Clinton associates in Arkansas, it would have quickly come out in leaked news accounts.
Mr. Altman had previously asked the government ethics office and both the Treasury and RTC ethics officers if he should recuse himself from Madison issues, and was told he wasn't legally obligated to do so, officials said.
New York Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, the ranking Republican on the Banking Committee, had several times called for Mr. Altman to remove himself from RTC decisions concerning Madison.
In an interview yesterday, the senator said he will ask the participants at the White House meeting to testify before the committee.
Separately, Sen. D'Amato, who has helped lead GOP attacks on the Clintons' Whitewater involvement, released a confrontational letter written to him on Friday by David Wilhelm, the Democratic National Committee chairman.
The senator denounced what he called Mr. Wilhelm's "political intimidation tactics" as aimed at stifling further Whitewater-Madison probing.
Sen. D'Amato accused the Clintons of using "their hand-picked political hatchetman to try and intimidate the legitimate oversight responsibilities I have" as a senator.
Mr. Wilhelm wrote that accusations of conflict of interest seem more appropriately applied to Sen. D'Amato himself.
The DNC chief recounted, among other things, that the Senate Ethics Committee had found that Sen. D'Amato acted "in an improper and inappropriate manner," by allowing his brother, Armand, to use the senator's office on behalf of a law client seeking a Pentagon contract.
Mr. Wilhelm also mentioned a case in which employees of the town of Hempstead, N.Y., were forced to make payments to the Nassau County Republican Committee.
Three law school deans said that later evidence showed that the senator, who had been Hempstead's supervisor and a Nassau County Republican official, had probably perjured himself in 1975 grand jury testimony, Mr. Wilhelm said.
But by the time that evidence emerged, Mr. Wilhelm said, Mr. D'Amato was immune from prosecution because the statute of limitations had run out.
In the interview, Sen. D'Amato said that such matters are "not relevant" to Whitewater-Madison.
He said "the appropriateness of my brother's conduct will be determined by the courts."
The senator also called the allegations of perjury "total nonsense."
