The coastal hills here offer sweeping views of the ocean and of a flickering recovery of the California economy.
Home builders, finally seeing a resurgence in demand after a three-year slump, are rushing to finish subdivisions and buy land.
February new-home sales for the Southern California region almost doubled to 2,600 from 1,400 a year ago.
In a scene reminiscent of the go-go 1970s and late 1980s, people camped out on a Wednesday recently for a Saturday opening of a Fieldstone Co. development here.
"People are starting to realize California is out of its trough," says Frank Foster, Fieldstone's regional manager.
While almost no one expects a quick, robust recovery for the California economy, which accounts for roughly 10% to 12% of the gross domestic product, there is a growing consensus that a real-estate rebound is leading a turnaround that will become more apparent next quarter.
"Residential construction will be the sector that will lead California out of the recession," said Stephen Levy, director of the Center for the Continuing Study of the California Economy in Palo Alto.
"It could make '94 a growth year rather than a flat year.
It's the sector that can produce a sizable number of new jobs to offset the defense declines."
The state is also being aided by a high-tech boom in Northern California, which never suffered much from the recession to begin with, and a gradual growth in jobs and retail sales.
The recent spate of fire, earthquake and flood has stimulated the regional economy, giving birth to a booming repair industry.
Indeed, the UCLA Business Forecasting Project recently advanced its estimate on a California turnaround to the second quarter from the third because of the stimulus of earthquake relief.
"Everything points to a recovery that if it hasn't begun will begin in the next quarter or so," said Nancy Bolton, a demographer at the project.
The painful free fall in home and land prices since 1989 laid the ground for the real-estate recovery.
While low-priced homes didn't see much price cutting, more expensive ones fell by as much as a third in value.
The price of raw land dropped by as much as half, allowing builders to put up cheaper homes.
These trends, combined with a historic fall in mortgage rates, increased the number of California households who could afford the median-priced home to 42% from 17% five years ago.
Existing-home sales have grown in the region over year-ago levels for eight consecutive months, although they are still running at about two-thirds of the peak years in the late 1980s.
But the biggest boost is coming from the surge in new-home construction, which produces a lot of economic ripple effects, such as orders for carpet companies, appliance makers and landscape firms.
The February increase of about 1,200 new-home sales pumps nearly an additional $200 million into the regional economy.
"The few of us who are left are very happy," said Ira Norris, chairman and chief executive officer at Inco Homes Corp, which has seen its market share leap 26-fold in the last five years as many of its competitors have gone out of business.
"The bleeding is over," he added.
Builders expect home and land prices to soon start to reverse their long slide.
Kaufman & Broad Home Corp., which is the largest builder in the state with about an 8% market share, is raising prices 2% to 3% throughout California this month.
Toll Brothers Inc., a large East Coast builder, snapped up a stalled 160-lot development in Yorba Linda in Orange County two years ago on the cheap and saw the project's sales explode this January.
Robert I. Toll, chairman and chief executive officer, said he was expecting to sell one home a month but instead peddled nine in nine days.
Based on early signs of interest and buyers who wanted more expensive models, the company jacked the average selling price up to $550,000 from the $450,000 it had originally expected to ask.
Dallas-based Centex Corp., which already builds here, made a major land purchase that ended a bidding war over a 915-lot site in Foothill Ranch in Orange County.
A number of outfits vied for the property, which shot up in price to about $45 million from $30 million, with Centex just edging out Kaufman & Broad.
Del Webb Corp., a Phoenix developer of senior housing, recently hired away the top management of an Orange County builder as a prelude to entering the California residential market.
The company hired the executives of Meeker Cos., a Costa Mesa builder, to head a new subsidiary that intends to start constructing single-family homes this year.
Rockefeller & Associates Realty in San Francisco signed a partnership with Akins Cos., an Irvine builder, to do the same.
"You're going to see more of that," said Jack Rodman, managing partner at Kenneth Leventhal & Co. in Los Angeles.
Mr. Rodman said an out-of-state concern recently offered cash for a parcel in Riverside County owned by a Japanese client of his.
The Japanese company paid $95,000 per lot and lost $30,000 on paper before the land climbed $10,000 in the last year to $75,000.
The owner isn't interested in selling.
"My Japanese clients are saying they're going to build on it," he said.
Some economists caution that there are big constraints on a faster or wider real-estate recovery.
Commercial construction, for example, is still moribund.
Ingo Winzer, editor of the Local Market Monitor, which tracks real estate in major cities, said that all building permits in the state fell 13% last year from the previous year and were still down 11% in January, mostly in Southern California.
Single-family permits rose 5% that month.
