PERSUADING TAX DODGERS to start filing returns isn't easy, the IRS finds.
About 7.5 million people who should be filing returns each year aren't doing so, IRS officials estimate.
To combat this problem, the IRS has been offering lenient payment terms and waivers of prosecution.
The IRS message: File before we catch you, and we will be more understanding.
While this approach has led to progress, IRS officials concede they still have a long way to go.
In the year ended Sept. 30, the IRS received 399,531 returns from people who previously were nonfilers.
"That's a good start," says Lawrence Gibbs, a Washington lawyer and a former IRS commissioner.
But he and other experts agree that is only a small first step.
Even many tax lawyers, accountants and professional return preparers fail to file.
Thus, the IRS will continue a special program aimed at tax firms.
Under that program, tax firms may ask partners and employees to sign consent forms allowing the firm to find out directly from the IRS whether or not that person has filed returns.
WHAT'S BEHIND the big drop in the number of tax returns filed so far?
Horrible winter weather, IRS officials say.
Filings are down most sharply at five of the seven IRS centers serving Central and Eastern states hit repeatedly by snow, sleet and freezing rain.
But weather may not be the sole explanation for the 10% plunge in the number of individual returns filed as of Feb. 11, some tax lawyers and accountants say.
They suspect more people may delay filing because of confusion about the new tax law or because they owe more taxes.
"I do think winter weather is a factor, but the new tax law also may well be an important reason," says Shirley Peterson, a lawyer at Steptoe & Johnson in Washington and a former IRS commissioner.
Returns filed through Feb. 11 totaled 21.3 million, down from 23.7 million in the like 1993 period.
But the IRS isn't worried.
It says the volume has picked up and it predicts "the early filing gap will close quickly."
THE IRS FLUNKS a test of its own financial management and record keeping.
A report by the General Accounting Office, a congressional watchdog agency, found "significant weaknesses" in the way the IRS managed its finances in fiscal 1992.
The GAO says it couldn't even audit about $4.3 billion of the $6.7 billion that the IRS reported spending because the IRS "could not account for all of the funds."
The report also found examples of duplicate IRS payments to vendors.
The GAO cited 23 IRS overpayments for almost $175,000 to one vendor since 1988.
IRS officials also were late in paying many bills; the agency paid about $673,000 in late-payment interest in 1992.
Other bills were paid too early, resulting in lost interest income.
The GAO concludes the IRS's data on its operating funds were "unreliable."
IRS officials say many changes already have been made and should solve most problems cited in the report.
FED UP with a tax-protest case, U.S. District Judge Patrick Conmy of Bismarck, N.D., recalls Dracula, "the legendary vampire who would not die and gained in strength and evil with each new transgression."
He adds: "This file is beginning to acquire the status of immortality, and apparently no sharpened stakes are on hand."
THE SUPREME COURT will hear arguments Monday in the closely watched case of U.S. vs. Carlton.
At issue: Can Congress change tax laws retroactively?
The decision may affect challenges to retroactive tax increases in last year's law.
BULGING BACKLOG: As of Dec. 31, IRS officials counted 577 regulations that still need to be written.
That is up from 571 at the end of November.
THE IRS EXPECTS to receive more than 117 million individual tax returns this year.
That includes 59.2 million Form 1040s, down from 60.6 million in 1992, and 19 million Form 1040As, down from 20.2 million.
It also expects 18.6 million returns on Form 1040EZ, up from 16.6 million.
STATE TAXES need a major overhaul, says a report by two groups.
State tax systems are growing more "inequitable" and "unresponsive" to economic changes, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures and the National Governors' Association.
The tax systems were designed mainly in the 1930s for a nation of smokestack industries in an economic depression, the report says.
Revisions are needed to reflect growth in services, international business, new data-based industries and an older population.
The report urges more states to consider extending sales taxes to include more services, such as health clubs, hair care, utility services, amusements and repair and installation services.
It also recommends more interstate cooperation in taxing businesses.
And it suggests more states consider coupling their income taxes to the federal base.
Spending cuts alone can't end "the deterioration of state tax bases and state tax systems' inequities and inefficiencies," the report warns.
BRIEFS: More buzzwords: "Nowhere income," which means corporate profits earned in the U.S. but not taxed in any state because of various reasons, such as limits on state taxing jurisdiction. . . .
Shades of the Godfather?
A letter from IRS Commissioner Richardson to Donald Chapin of the General Accounting Office begins: "Dear Mr. Don."
Sorry, the IRS says, just a typo.
