He calls her "Miriam."
She calls him "my General."
She's a wealthy New Yorker whose former Fifth Avenue objets d'art boutiques blossomed into Burmese business deals.
He's a devout Buddhist whose jet-flying lessons at Nevada's Nellis Air Force Base eventually propelled him to No. 2 in Burma's air force and then into the unlikely job of Minister of Livestock Breeding and Fisheries.
Their liaison has all the makings of a convoluted Burmese cinema classic except one: What brings Miriam Marshall Segal and Brig. Gen. Maung Maung together isn't love.
It's shrimp, a tiny joint venture processing them for export.
The setting is a lush Texas-sized nation of 42 million people that was sealed off from the modern world for nearly three decades, wracked by sputtering civil wars fought by Communist insurgents and secessionist hill tribes, misruled since 1962 by a military dictator, and economically ruined by his so-called Burmese Way of Socialism.
Once the world's biggest rice exporter, Burma sank into near bankruptcy, a resource-rich but undeveloped Southeast Asian afterthought where time stood still, water buffalo still plow fields and elephants haul logs.
Rangoon, a commercial and social mecca when Singapore and Bangkok were malarial swamps and opium dens, sank into moldy decay.
Now, like China and Vietnam, Burma has begun to open up and stir.
Market-oriented "reforms" have begun to move a moribund economy, sprout private Burmese entrepreneurs and lure foreign investors and Burmese expatriates.
The U.S. Embassy called last year's reported 10.9% growth in gross domestic product "a stunning recovery from years of slow or negative growth."
Authorities have struck cease-fire deals with nine of 11 major ethnic insurgent groups it has been fighting since the end of World War II, thereby opening Asia's last frontier wilderness area for development.
Regional investors and governments are actively planning a "Golden Rectangle" of economic boom where Burma, China, Laos and Thailand come together -- an area long known as the opium-growing Golden Triangle.
A huge Thai-financed casino is under construction there now.
There's only one problem here: Burma is ruled by one of the world's most-loathed military juntas, a group of 22 generals who seized power in 1988 under the banner of the State Law and Order Restoration Council, or Slorc, and proceeded to mow down hundreds of unarmed students and other pro-democracy demonstrators, imprison thousands more, and send tens of thousands fleeing into exile.
Which brings us back to our main characters.
Gen. Maung Maung, a gentle man with a ready smile, isn't a member of Slorc.
But as a cabinet minister, he works for Slorc, which is desperate to earn hard currency.
Seafood exports, he says, could quickly become the country's biggest hard-currency earner.
Meanwhile, his partner, Mrs. Segal, has become Slorc's most passionate American defender, even though she describes herself as "not a political person at all."
She has also become one of the most visible American investors in Burma.
While others file shareholder resolutions calling for corporate withdrawal from Burma of its biggest American investors, including Texaco Inc., Unocal Corp. and Amoco Corp., Mrs. Segal is running a one-woman crusade to get Americans more involved.
She has testified before Congress on Slorc's behalf, feted Burmese government delegations at her Central Park West apartment in Manhattan, buttonholed politicians, penned position papers and letters to editors, and bent telephone ears arguing that Slorc is the muchmaligned victim of bad diplomacy and biased journalism.
She wants the U.S. to grant Burma most-favored-nation trading status and adopt the kind of "constructive engagement" that Singapore, Thailand and China have followed.
Trouble is, this is the same Slorc that President Clinton accused in May of creating a "tragic human-rights situation."
He ordered a policy review with a view toward imposing economic or other sanctions.
Slorc, says Rep. Jim Leach, a Republican from Indiana, is "as odious" as its name sounds.
Republican Rep. Dana Rohrabacher of California says it deserves "gangster status," and the last U.S. ambassador to Burma, Burton Levin, calls Slorc a collection of "thugs and dopes."
The U.S. and other governments excoriate Slorc for continuing human-rights abuses, and embargo foreign aid.
Human Rights Watch calls it a "human-rights pariah," noting that it has kept Aung San Suu Kyi, a Nobel Peace Prize-winning political opponent, under house arrest for 4 1/2 years (Slorc says she's free to leave the country anytime).
Critics of Slorc dismiss the 53-year-old Mrs. Segal as a misled Manhattan baublehead who is either being used by a cynical regime or is a cynic herself who is coyly embracing Slorc to make money.
She calls herself an altruistic moneymaker, interested in both profiting and helping.
Last June, she set up a $100,000 scholarship fund for Burmese students at Brown University.
Meanwhile, the company she heads, MMAI Holdings Ltd., has invested more than $4 million in Burmese ventures, including the shrimp plant, a fishing venture and a cement-bagging facility.
The firm, registered in the British West Indies, includes as a partner the Peregrine merchant-banking group of Hong Kong, and 10 "friends" of Mrs. Segal.
It is also negotiating hotel, timber, duty-free, cellular phone, aircraft repair, expatriate housing construction, car dealership and pharmaceutical import ventures, she says.
She also hopes to set up a consulting company to help other foreigners invest.
"Don't sell her short," says Geraldine Stutz, former president of Henri Bendel, the New York fashion store in which Mrs. Segal opened the successful "Ports of Call" boutique in the mid-1960s.
Another friend, Stanley Marcus of Neiman Marcus, says, however: "She's smart as the devil on matters of fashion and taste, but I wouldn't appoint her secretary of state."
Nevertheless, Mrs. Segal argues that the U.S. punishes Slorc -- by withholding an ambassador, denying aid and trying to isolate the regime -- but not the masterminds of China's Tiananmen Square massacre.
If the U.S. thinks diplomatic and economic engagement in China will help the causes of democracy and human rights, why not in Burma, too? she asks.
(Unlike with Vietnam, the U.S. hasn't imposed a trade embargo on Burma.)
Mrs. Segal, who began importing Burmese handicrafts in 1978, says she didn't "start doing battle for them" until 1991, when she began to see positive changes and became convinced that the new generation of generals running Slorc was sincere.
Without foreign aid, she says, they have done more to open up and improve Burma in the past three years than their predecessors did in the previous 30.
She has a point.
Their predecessor and mentor, Gen. Ne Win, seized power in 1962 and launched the disastrous Burmese Way of Socialism and other policies with what historians call "extraordinary ineptitude," not to mention keen attention to his astrologer.
Ne Win's 1987 demonetization of large banknotes -- which wiped out the savings of many theretofore nonpolitical Burmese -- triggered the 1988 pro-democracy demonstrations, his retirement, Slorc's takeover and its crackdown.
Compared to Ne Win, the men of Slorc come on like progressive reformers.
However, Slorc besmirched itself not only by its brutal 1988 crackdown (like China, it argued the nation was headed for chaos and anarchy) but also for its handling of elections in 1990.
Slorc's party got trounced by a pro-democracy coalition.
Instead of stepping down, Slorc voided the vote, declaring it would continue ruling by decree until a new constitution was drafted -- by a Slorc-controlled convention at which criticism of the government is officially outlawed.
Indeed, in October, a convention delegate and 10 of his nondelegate supporters were sentenced to 20 years in prison for distributing supposedly subversive leaflets among other delegates.
(Slorc says they were threats.)
Mrs. Segal, who wasn't in Burma during either the 1988 crackdown or the 1990 election, doesn't deem Slorc faultless.
"Unfortunately, one outdated picture, one still shot frozen in time, seems to rivet everyone's attention," she writes, while Slorc's positive steps since then go unheeded.
Some diplomats in Rangoon agree and have begun to mute previously harsh criticism.
"These people aren't Syria, North Korea or Iraq," says one.
"It's more Pinochet than Pol Pot," says another.
Others even praise Slorc's energy and hard work, its reported release of more than 2,000 political prisoners, its efforts at narcotics suppression (Burma is the world's biggest opium producer), even its "enlightened" policies in preserving its teak forests (Burma has about 75% of the world's teak reserves).
"Your State Department is receiving reports not reflecting the reality in our country," Foreign Minister Ohn Gyaw said in an interview.
He has countered by inviting several congressional delegations on what he calls "see-the-truth-with-your-own-eyes" visits.
When one of those visitors, Republican Rep. Nancy Johnson of Connecticut, returned talking of progress and admitting that she had lunch with a Slorc general's wife, Rep. Rohrabacher fumed, "That's like saying, `I spent a nice afternoon at tea with Mrs. Himmler.'"
Slorc's least-believed assertion is that it will restore democracy, albeit with the military playing a "leading role" in future governments.
The obvious model is Indonesia.
Indeed, Slorc's powerful first secretary, the 55-year-old Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt, led a five-man delegation to Indonesia just before Christmas and, after a meeting with President Suharto, a former revolutionary general himself, called Indonesia a model of stability for Burma.
Actually, Burma today more resembles Indonesia 25 years ago, when Suharto and his fellow generals brooked no opposition in the wake of a bloodbath against suspected Communists that left hundreds of thousands dead and tens of thousands more in prison.
Indonesia's rulers in those days, however, had two things going for them that Slorc doesn't: First, the Cold War allowed Western aid to pour in with only token attention to human rights; second, Indonesia had a team of enlightened economic planners, educated in the West and dedicated to Suharto's commitment to national development.
No such competence appears to exist in Burma, feeding critics who contend the announced policies are mere window dressing.
Meanwhile, Slorc tolerates no political dissension.
"They've released some political prisoners, but only the people they don't fear," says a diplomat.
Organized opposition has been decimated.
At least 27 opposition politicians elected in 1990 remain in prison.
Diplomats and Burmese in Rangoon say Slorc fears some sort of spontaneous uprising and therefore rules through intimidation, its network of informants reporting to the military's vast intelligence apparatus.
While officials say Burmese can talk freely, several Slorc opponents declined to speak to or even be seen with a visiting reporter, saying through family members or friends that they feared reprisals.
Those willing to talk did so at meetings at other peoples' houses or offices -- much the same way dissidents met journalists in Beijing, Seoul, Taipei, Jakarta and Singapore in the past.
All those places, however, managed to blunt human-rights criticism with steady improvements in living standards.
Economic results in Burma continue to be mostly theoretical for all but a tiny class of budding entrepreneurs.
When Slorc "abandoned" socialism and opened the country to foreign investors in 1988, investors were slow to arrive.
This was possibly because -- in a move of extraordinary ineptitude -- Slorc renamed the country Myanmar (Burma was the name British colonialists chose), thereby lowering its profile considerably.
Nevertheless, Slorc says nearly $2 billion in investments, most of them in oil and gas projects and tourist hotels, has been pledged, much of it in the past two years.
The government says it wants to build a ski resort in the Burmese Himalayas.
Thus far, Slorc has concentrated its efforts on unifying a nation that British colonialists, in 1948, left deeply divided into ethnic enclaves.
Starting with the Wa group, which turned against its Burmese Communist Party overlords in 1989, Slorc has offered limited regional autonomy and development aid in exchange for peace.
The powerful Kachins are the latest to make a deal.
The two holdouts, the Karens and Mons, are wavering.
In Rangoon over the Christmas holidays, meanwhile, Mrs. Segal has been busily pursuing her business interests.
In her years of buying Burmese handicrafts, she got to know many of the men who now run the country.
In 1990, with Slorc eager to demonstrate its openness to foreign investors but outsiders still leery, Mrs. Segal signed a joint venture with Gen. Maung Maung's fisheries ministry for exclusive fishing rights to some 400,000 square miles of deep-water offshore territory.
The company, named the Myanmar American Fisheries Company (Mafco), subsequently sublet the rights to a Chinese trawling company based in Spain.
Wang Kai Di, China's economic and commercial attache in Rangoon, says he helped persuade the Chinese company to join Mafco because around Rangoon, Mrs. Segal had a lot of "ganxi," the Chinese word for connections and pull.
The Chinese began fishing in October.
Mrs. Segal's 16-page press kit, which she proffers in lieu of a resume, includes photos and newspaper clips of her meetings with top Burmese officials, including Gen. Khin Nyunt and U Ko Lay, Rangoon's mayor.
The biographical section describes her as being "an accomplished person who rode at the frontiers of, and exemplified, the trends of her times."
The Montreal Gazette is quoted as attributing her business success to "her ability to adapt mysterious eastern objects to the way of life of upper-crust North Americans."
Gen. Maung Maung met some of the latter in a visit to the U.S. in April that Mrs. Segal arranged -- the first by a Burmese of cabinet rank in 33 years.
She has also developed an ability to explain Eastern ways.
When an Asian magazine published photos recently of Burmese chain gangs building roads, she telephoned a reporter from Hong Kong to say: "Those are murderers and drug addicts, not political prisoners."
