Air strikes have never brought down a regime, caused an army to surrender or ended a civil war.
What, then, can we expect to result from NATO's threat to launch air strikes against Serbian forces in Bosnia on Monday?
The only certain outcome will be that NATO becomes yet another belligerent in this multisided war.
The ostensible objective, a sustained cessation of hostilities in Bosnia, is the least likely outcome.
Are air strikes a strategic error?
They could be, but not for the reasons most widely proclaimed, such as the lack of public support and the impossibility of achieving peace.
The true reason is the lack of a compelling strategic blueprint that ties together the Bosnian war with the future of Europe.
With no Soviet military threat, NATO seems to have no mission.
That is a dangerous illusion.
NATO faces a major challenge it refuses to recognize: preventing instability and civil wars in East Europe, including former Yugoslavia, for a decade or so while the former communist states transform their political and economic systems.
If NATO refuses to accept this mission, Europe will regress to its earlier patterns of diplomatic and military competition.
Yet Mr. Clinton turned down pleas from the leaders of Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia to bring at least those four states under the NATO umbrella.
The Bosnian crisis painfully shows us what more of East Europe may soon look like if NATO continues its strategic blindness.
Three years ago a rather small NATO force could have prevented the spread of civil war in the former Yugoslavia.
Today it would take a fairly large force, perhaps 300,000 troops, and they would have to remain there for years, if not decades, while peace is negotiated.
That may seem a large price to pay, but we will pay a much higher one -- the disintegration of European security -- when we can no longer deceive ourselves with token steps like air strikes, or mere threats of air strikes.
Bosnia's fate has ominous international implications.
First, it has already caused unhealthy diplomatic disputes among Germany, France, Britain, Greece, Turkey, Russia, the U.S. and others.
Second, it has had a sickening moral effect.
An old American ally, Turkey, sees a clear message: Slaughtering Muslims is tolerable but slaughtering Christians and Jews is not.
The Western European public watches the carnage on television and then goes out to enjoy opulent lifestyles.
Will a generation raised on this indifference be able to defend Europe against any threat?
The third implication of Bosnia's fate of concern to its neighbors is that the conflict may spread to Kosovo and Macedonia -- and beyond.
The example of Bosnia could inspire ethnic cleansing in Slovakia and Transylvania against Hungarian minorities.
This is only one of the more conspicuous possibilities.
Some opponents of intervention in former Yugoslavia fear another Vietnam-style debacle.
But the strategic stakes are different this time.
Bosnia's proximity to Western Europe, its disturbing impact on Eastern Europe and its links to the Middle East create clear U.S. interests.
Likewise, NATO has a strong interest in providing a security umbrella for those Eastern European states that have good prospects of a successful political and economic transition.
The two issues -- Bosnia and extending NATO -- are tightly related.
They cannot be handled separately.
Yet that is precisely what Mr. Clinton's national security team is doing.
The administration opposes the expansion of NATO while agreeing to feckless military measures in Bosnia.
Defense Secretary William Perry asked precisely the right question: If air strikes are the first act, what are the second and third acts?
Sen. Richard Lugar (R., Ind.) has provided the answer: NATO must go "out of area" -- to former Yugoslavia as well as the rest of Eastern Europe -- or go "out of business."
For acts two and three, Mr. Perry must push NATO to face its new mission, admitting four new members from Eastern Europe and supplying four or five divisions for a very long stay in former Yugoslavia.
-- The American public will not support it.
Of course not!
The public has not been presented with a strategic vision.
That's Mr. Clinton's job.
But no one should be quick to prejudge how the public would feel about U.S. involvement.
After all, who could have predicted in 1989 that President Bush would gain broad support for sending nine divisions to Saudi Arabia?
In former Yugoslavia, less than two divisions would suffice as the American contribution; Europe would have to supply the rest.
-- We could not keep troops in the Balkans for two decades.
But we've kept forces in Europe and East Asia for more than 40 years, dealing with old ethnic quarrels no less intractable than the conflict in the former Yugoslavia.
-- "Let the Europeans handle it."
That's a cop-out.
We know that the larger states in Western Europe will not allow any single one of their group to run the continent.
Yet they cannot run it collectively.
Europe has run well over the past four decades only because the U.S. took the initiative at key points, pushing through unpopular policies under a collective banner.
Europe cannot and will not act effectively in Bosnia unless the U.S. takes the lead and drags reluctant partners along.
Assuming that air strikes alone won't achieve any significant results on the ground in Bosnia, they could still have one redeeming consequence: waking the administration up to the necessity of designing and implementing an effective NATO strategy for Europe.
That is probably too much to hope for, but not many other straws are there to grasp.
Retired Lt. Gen. Odom is director of national security studies at the Hudson Institute in Washington.
