The U.S. and the United Nations may soon have to decide whether to use "a very big stick" and impose economic sanctions on North Korea, Defense Secretary-designate William Perry said.
Defending the Clinton administration's handling of the standoff over North Korea's pursuit of nuclear weapons, Mr. Perry appeared to concede that U.S. negotiators thus far have offered only "carrots" to the North Koreans.
But, he warned at his confirmation hearing before the Senate Armed Services Committee, "There are sticks downstream, also."
The efficacy of the contemplated economic sanctions would largely be determined by the degree to which China backs them, Mr. Perry added.
Thus, he argued, while it is important to support human rights in China, that goal "would pale in comparison with the prospect of nuclear war on the Korean peninsula."
Conceding that North Korea may already possess a nuclear weapon, Mr. Perry said his biggest concern isn't whether such a weapon exists but rather stopping North Korea from pursuing a pending program "to develop what may be dozens of nuclear bombs."
Reflecting the concern that Korea is now provoking in the administration, Mr. Perry at one point referred to Korea in a Freudian slip as "the nuclear peninsula."
The idea of a tougher stance against North Korea gained support yesterday in the Senate.
On voice votes, senators approved two amendments that seek international sanctions against North Korea and call for a renewed U.S. nuclear presence on the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Perry is expected to be confirmed as defense secretary easily, perhaps as soon as today.
John Deutch, currently undersecretary of defense for acquisition, is expected to be nominated soon to succeed Mr. Perry as deputy defense secretary, the Pentagon's No. 2 slot.
Like Mr. Perry, Mr. Deutch is a technocrat with a background in academia and the Carter administration.
In sharp contrast to his reputation as a military technologist with an unsure voice in the broader issues of national security, Mr. Perry staked out stances on a range of foreign-policy questions.
In addition to his comments on Korea, he disagreed with a nonbinding Senate resolution passed last week and argued against lifting the U.N. arms embargo on the Bosnian Muslims.
And he appeared to endorse lifting the trade embargo on Vietnam.
Mr. Perry also put some respectful distance between himself and Defense Secretary Les Aspin, who was forced to submit his resignation in December.
He vowed to restructure what he called the Pentagon's "ineffective" policy-making operation, which critics had said for months was a bureaucratic disaster that reflected Mr. Aspin's managerial flaws.
In what appeared to be a veiled reference to Mr. Aspin's single biggest misstep, his September decision to reject a request from the U.S. commander in Somalia for armored vehicles, Mr. Perry in his written statement pledged to give his military commanders "the required support . . . as they direct our forces in the field."
"We're very different people," Mr. Perry said about himself and Mr. Aspin, when prodded by the committee.
"But our philosophies and our objectives, what we're trying to achieve at the Pentagon, are very similar."
If anything, Mr. Perry is expected to accelerate the implementation of the Pentagon's new activist policy to help the defense industry shrink but remain healthy.
That policy is probably the biggest departure the Pentagon has made under the Clinton administration, yet only one member of the generally conservative armed services panel challenged Mr. Perry's advocacy of it.
Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.) briefly raised the issue of the Pentagon's recent decision to spend several billion dollars building a third Seawolf attack submarine, even though it isn't needed militarily.
Other members of the panel appeared somewhat cowed by Mr. Perry's technical and fiscal expertise.
Mr. Perry also showed a nervy willingness to tangle even with committee Chairman Sam Nunn (D., Ga.).
Giving Mr. Perry a chance to back down from his written testimony, which said the B-2 Stealth bomber program should stop at the 20 aircraft planned, Sen. Nunn recommended that he look at whether he might want to have Northrop Corp. build more B-2 Stealth bombers in the future.
But Mr. Perry didn't take the bait and politely stood by his view that the U.S. bomber force should shrink to about 100 B-1s and B-2s, plus several dozen elderly B-52s.
The Air Force currently operates 95 B-1s, 95 B-52Hs, and one B-2, plus six B-52Gs that will be retired next week, for a total bomber fleet of 197 aircraft.
Seeming to issue a more general challenge to Capitol Hill, Mr. Perry promised in his written statement to work with Congress.
"But," he continued, "I won't shirk from making the tough choices."
That statement appeared to refer to the frustration he and other senior Pentagon officials have felt over the past year as their efforts to cut overhead have run into roadblocks placed by lawmakers trying to protect the secure, high-wage jobs in Defense Department facilities in their districts.
Touching on another major acquisition issue, Mr. Perry said that, as expected, the fiscal 1995 defense budget will call for building a new aircraft carrier, the CVN76.
That ship would be built by Tenneco Inc.'s Newport News Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Co.
The deftness of Mr. Perry's performance before the committee was summed up in a self-criticism he delivered in an offhanded way.
"The press has observed that a principal deficiency I had for this job was being soft-spoken, and I will work very hard to overcome that problem," he said.
