A House Ways and Means subcommittee approved a $1.25-a-pack increase in federal cigarette taxes, but remained deeply divided over a proposed payroll tax to finance a Democrat-backed health-reform plan.
Rep. Sander Levin (D., Mich.) warned that he won't support the bill if it includes a general payroll-tax increase.
If Mr. Levin defects, he could fracture the narrow working majority needed to report the measure favorably to the full committee this week.
Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.), who has stayed out of the subcommittee deliberations, said that one option would be for the health panel to report all but the revenue sections favorably, leaving the tax chapter to be resolved by the full committee.
But regardless of what device is found to keep the bill moving, the political situation is ominous for the Clinton administration.
Members of the Ways and Means committee are picked by the leadership.
If seven Democrats on the health panel can't come up with the votes to advance a bill so important to President Clinton, it raises questions as to what rank-and-file members will risk when the initiative comes to the floor later this year.
The cigarette-tax increase approved yesterday also will be a source of division among Democrats.
The $1.25-a-pack increase is 50 cents more than the administration proposed and five times the current levy of 24 cents a pack.
It's estimated that the tax increase would raise $6 billion more than the Clinton plan in the year 2000 -- money that could pay for a variety of public-health initiatives as well as subsidies to help small companies pay for their employees' health insurance.
Rep. Nancy Johnson (R., Conn.) joined five Democrats in supporting the increase, and though the full committee is expected to roll back the figure closer to the president's request, the pressure for revenue makes tobacco highly vulnerable.
"It is a killer," said Rep. Michael Andrews (D., Texas), chief sponsor of the cigarette-tax increase, "and raising the tax to offset some of the costs of health care makes good sense."
The subcommittee bill shares the administration's goal of assuring health coverage for all Americans, but it streamlines or abandons major elements of the president's plan.
It would cut the basic benefit package to reduce costs, and it would expand Medicare to give small businesses and low-wage workers a government-run insurance alternative to private coverage.
To an unusual degree for a Ways and Means panel, the subcommittee has had to proceed without detailed cost estimates.
Its proposed 0.8% payroll tax was envisioned as a temporary device to keep the bill from enlarging the deficit in the year 2000.
For Rep. Pete Stark (D., Calif.), the subcommittee chairman, setting this standard of deficit neutrality was important to enforce some budget discipline against amendments to cut taxes or add to spending.
But Democrats have been skittish at facing the tax issue so early in the process.
"This is early heavy lifting, and why strain yourself if you're not sure?" said Rep. James McDermott (D., Wash.).
"That's what's going on here."
Some of those most opposed to the tax are demanding larger subsidies to help small companies cope with a proposed requirement that employers help pay for their workers' coverage.
The House Energy and Commerce Committee leadership would rely on a 1% payroll tax on companies with more than 1,000 employees to help finance its version of the president's plan.
An alternative source of funds would be to cap or phase out the current income-tax exclusion for employer-paid health benefits.
The idea has strong Republican support, and some Democrats appear prepared to embrace it, too, if it would yield bipartisan support for the health-reform initiative.
Labor unions strongly oppose taxing benefits.
One answer to their complaints could be to phase out the exclusion in a manner that protects blue-collar and most middle-class workers.
For example, individuals earning $40,000 or less could continue to receive their benefits tax free, and the exclusion could be progressively reduced at higher income levels until it is fully phased out for those earning $70,000 or more.
Though not committing himself, Mr. Stark yesterday cited such a plan, which would yield about $26 billion in the year 2000, roughly the same amount of revenue as the proposed payroll tax.
The debate underscores the power of the Congressional Budget Office in projecting the cost of competing plans.
And with lawmakers trying to look five and 10 years ahead, the budget office's projections can compound seemingly small differences.
For example, the CBO anticipates that cost controls would increase government revenues because they would reduce corporate health-care expenditures and trim business-tax deductions.
Specifically, the CBO says the Clinton plan would provide the government an $11.8 billion windfall in the year 2000 under one set of cost-control assumptions.
By comparison, the Ways and Means bill, which proposes less-severe cost controls, is projected to lose an almost equal amount of revenue that same year.
The difference between the two revenue estimates is almost equal to the proposed 0.8% payroll-tax increase.
Republicans argue that a more cautious approach would be to stretch out proposed reforms to be sure they can be financed.
In the same vein, Sen. Bob Packwood (R., Ore.), the ranking Republican on the Senate Finance Committee, said that so-called mandates requiring employers and their employees to share in paying for health insurance could be phased in over a 10year period.
For example, workers and their employers could contribute $20 a month the first year, then $40 the next, and so on, Mr. Packwood said.
As contributions increase, benefits could be improved.
By approaching the goal gradually, there would be less need for tax credits and subsidies to help both sides adjust to the new system, Mr. Packwood added.
