When Kenneth Spence, a 33-year-old mechanic, entered Jackson Memorial Hospital last October, he believed all he had was a bad case of the flu.
By the time Richard Greenman, an infectious-disease specialist, was called in two days later, Mr. Spence was unconscious and on a respirator.
Fluid had begun seeping into his lungs to the point where he would soon stand a good chance of suffocating.
His doctors at Jackson, which is affiliated with the University of Miami's medical school, were baffled.
Had this been the Southwest, Dr. Greenman observed, Mr. Spence might have been diagnosed as having a "classic case" of Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome.
That is the deadly, rodent-born disease first identified after an outbreak among Navajo Indians last May in the so-called Four Corners region of the country, where Arizona, Utah, Colorado and New Mexico meet.
But the mouse blamed for the disease -- the deer mouse, or Peromyscus maniculatus -- wasn't thought to live in South Florida.
"So I said, we're therefore going to call this a case of Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome Ha-ha, because it doesn't exist here yet," Dr. Greenman recalls.
"And we'll send off all the diagnostic stuff to see if anyone comes up with another answer."
After nearly a month in intensive care, Mr. Spence recovered, and left the hospital, still unaware of what had almost killed him.
On Tuesday, the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta confirmed that Mr. Spence had indeed been infected by hantavirus, and in the process raised fresh concerns that the virus and its killer syndrome may occur over a far wider range than once thought.
Mr. Spence had become the 54th victim of the new disease, and only its 22nd survivor.
The news of his infection followed on the heels of other evidence of the virus's long geographic reach.
Just the week before, Kansas health officials began investigating the Jan. 3 death of an 18-year-old girl in Garden City, Kan., who they suspect may be the state's second hantavirus victim.
That same week, the CDC confirmed that the death of a 14-year-old boy in Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, was the state's third case of the virus.
One of the nation's foremost hantavirus investigators, Gregory Gurri Glass of the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health, spent this week trapping rodents in Kansas and Idaho, and was bound next for Florida.
The disease is still relatively rare, especially when compared with the thousands of cases of Lyme disease diagnosed each year; nonetheless, the virus has now turned up in 15 states, ranging from Florida to North Dakota to California.
One death, of a 22-year-old man, took place in San Francisco, according to the CDC.
Researchers now suspect the virus may be present in deer mice and other rodent species throughout the U.S., prompting widespread calls for restoration of federal rodent-control programs, and warnings from state health departments about the new hazards of mice in the home, including advice to wear gloves whenever removing a mouse from a trap, and to use household disinfectants on areas where mice are thought to tread.
"We're just telling everyone to treat every mouse as if it's infected," says Lori Richardson, administrator of the health department in Morton County, Kan., home of the state's only confirmed hantavirus victim.
The victim, a 34-year-old pregnant woman, died last fall.
The recent cases, and others last year, demonstrate beyond doubt that the virus is anything but a Navajo disease, as early press reports suggested.
Its victims range in age from 12 to 69, and include a 27-year-old wildlife researcher who died last year in California, and a 58-year-old Louisiana bridge worker, who also died.
The hantavirus in question is actually one of a family of similar viruses known to cause hemorrhagic fever in Europe and Asia, and to have sickened thousands of soldiers during the Korean War.
Other, more benign strains of hantavirus have long been known to reside in U.S. rats and mice, but until the Four Corners outbreak last summer, researchers had found only limited evidence that the viruses caused disease.
Research in Baltimore, published just two months before the outbreak, found evidence only that one strain seemed to be implicated in causing a form of hypertension in residents who had been exposed to rats.
The newly recognized virus, when at its worst, is a grotesque killer.
The syndrome it triggers begins innocently enough, with symptoms of a severe cold or flu.
Some patients even begin to feel better.
With stunning speed, however, the lungs fill with fluids that leak from capillaries lining the lungs.
Three of five patients die -- they literally drown, says Rima Khabbaz, medical epidemiologist on the CDC's Hantavirus Task Force.
No cure exists; all doctors can do, she says, is provide "supportive" care.
As ominous as the news of new cases may be, researchers say the big mystery of the disease is why more people don't get infected.
Deer mice are common.
"Anyone who lives in the country has had them in their house, whether they'd admit it or not, or if they even knew it or not," says Hopkins's Mr. Glass.
But he and other hantavirus researchers now think it is fairly difficult to contract the virus.
People get it through some form of direct contact with the mice or their wastes, as by breathing residues of feces and urine.
But the virus doesn't readily skip to humans.
And while it is readily transferred from rodent to rodent, it apparently can't be passed from person to person.
"The virus doesn't do well enough in humans," says Mr. Glass.
Indeed, one theory holds that the lethal damage is not done by the rapid growth of the virus in the body, but by the body's immune response to a relatively limited infection.
Those who die may have experienced an especially powerful immune response.
And this adds up to good news, says Mr. Glass.
"You don't have the potential for an incredibly explosive outbreak, the really scary plague-type thing we often think of."
Nonetheless, the potential for panic is high, especially in communities where a suspected infection has occurred.
In Garden City, Kan., for example, it's flu season.
"How do you sort out whether you've got the flu, from whether you're going to be dead?" says Mr. Glass.
"There's a tremendous cost in terms of the unease and panic and uncertainty it produces in a community when your next door neighbor drops dead from something that you can't see and can't do much about.
People find that very scary and threatening."
When the virus struck the Navajo reservation last year, some non-Indians in the area came to treat Navajos as disease vectors.
George Brenneman, associate director of the Hopkins Center for American Indian and Alaskan Native Health, heard reports of Navajo children at school being excluded from some activities.
"Psychologically it had a very powerful impact, because the disease looked like a very bad thing coming from the Navajo Indians," he says.
"It turned into kind of a leprosy thing."
The sensitivity lingers.
The CDC wanted to name the new hanta strain Four Corners virus, in keeping with the practice of naming other strains for the places where they were identified, such as Seoul virus, and Hantaan virus, named for a river in South Korea from which the entire family takes its name.
Navajo tribal officials objected, balking at any name that might forever link the disease to the Navajo nation.
The CDC recently submitted a new name: Muerto Canyon, or Death Canyon, after a site in the Four Corners area.
A final name won't be chosen until the 1996 meeting in Israel of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses, which decides such things.
Although the Four Corners outbreak led to discovery of the new strain, researchers now believe the virus has existed a very long time.
Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome simply was never recognized; past deaths may have been left undiagnosed or attributed to Adult Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS), a kind of catch-all category for illness involving severe edema of the lungs.
Indeed, following the Four Corners outbreak, epidemiologists and virologists began looking for the virus in long-past cases, typically by analyzing preserved blood and tissue samples.
Analysis of tissue, for example, identified the San Francisco case: The young man had died of the disease in 1980.
The reason so many cases have begun appearing now -- 12 new ones since the CDC's last comprehensive report in October -- is because now researchers know what to look for.
The first Kansas case, for example, was diagnosed after the woman's death, when a county pathologist, intrigued by the case, sent tissue samples to the CDC.
At first investigators believed she had contracted the virus during an intensive two-week period of housecleaning, after she and her family moved into a farm house that had been empty for about two years.
But the move took place in May; she didn't get sick until September.
Her husband, however, later told investigators that his wife, a fastidious housekeeper, routinely set out traps to catch mice and disposed of one or two a week.
The disease was selective.
Using tests for hantavirus antibodies, investigators found that her husband and two children had never even been exposed to the virus.
"It tells us there's no person-to-person transmission, and that it's not quite the scare it should have been," says Lori Richardson, the county health administrator.
Scary enough, however, for surrounding residents.
"I'm really quite afraid," says Tommie Henneberry, cook and waitress at Spangles restaurant in the El Rancho Motel in Elkhart.
"I don't particularly want to die."
Experts at the CDC and elsewhere say the disease is directly related to the degree of contact between humans and rodents, and that the most dangerous time is during seasonal shifts or other ecological upheavals that increase such contact.
They believe the Four Corners outbreak occurred when it did because the population of deer mice had exploded after a singularly hospitable winter.
When summer arrived, and the land began to dry out and food supplies to wither, the mice began looking for new sources of food and shelter.
"So they ended up in people's houses," says Hopkins's Mr. Glass.
In temperate northern regions, he says, the same kind of thing occurs in winter.
"Basically," he says, "these mice are looking for some place to stay warm and make it through the winter alive."
Indeed, some Florida officials suspect Kenneth Spence contracted hantavirus because of changes in the area's rodent population in the wake of Hurricane Andrew, which ravaged much of South Florida in August 1992.
The deer mouse may not live here, but rodent experts say its close relatives do.
Anita Bock, the top local official of the state's Health and Rehabilitative Services Department, cites "a very significant rodent problem" in the south part of the county -- the area hardest hit by the hurricane.
Even before Andrew, she says, rodent control was being hampered by funding cutbacks.
She stresses, however, that Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome "is an extremely rare disease," and adds: "We don't have any concerns of an outbreak in Dade County."
And others caution against making too much of the Andrew connection.
"We have very little objective evidence to support that," says Gary Hlady, the state's director of communicable-disease epidemiology.
Mr. Spence's problems began last Oct. 20, when he developed a fever, chills and body aches.
"I thought I was coming down with the flu," he says.
"So I took a couple of Tylenol and went to bed."
At the time, he was living in a county-run drug-treatment facility in south Dade.
As his condition worsened, he sought out the facility's doctor.
On Oct. 22, a Friday, she sent him to the emergency room at Jackson Memorial.
Doctors quickly transferred him to the intensive-care unit.
On Saturday, says Mr. Spence, "all hell broke loose."
He began having severe problems breathing, along with "excruciating" abdominal pain.
The doctors placed him on a respirator.
He doesn't remember that, however.
He had already lost consciousness.
"Two weeks later," he says, "I came to."
He recovered gradually, and left the hospital Nov. 13.
He is, he says, simply glad to be alive.
"The doctors and nurses tell me I should thank God every day," he says, "because I am a miracle."
Researchers say they now understand the dynamics of the new hantavirus enough to project its behavior.
"You're going to see cases here and there, sort of like what's happening now," says Mr. Glass.
"But superimposed on that," he says, will be an occasional larger outbreak like the one in Four Corners, caused by sudden environmental pressure on booming rodent populations.
Researchers caution, however, that it would be a mistake to underestimate this or any other emerging virus.
The advent of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, taught that lesson the hard way, says Stephen Morse, a virologist at Rockefeller University in New York City, and an expert on "emerging" viruses.
Until then, he and other researchers agree, medicine had begun to view infectious disease as a thing of the past.
"We had gotten complacent," he says.
The new hantavirus and the expansion of other new or ascendant infections such as AIDS and Lyme Disease constitute a warning, he says.
"It reminds us that we will continue to see outbreaks of infectious diseases caused in some cases by familiar things like influenza, and in some cases by unfamiliar things like the hantaviruses.
The message is, these viruses and infections do have a future.
There are lots of them out there . . . .
It's important for us to keep on top of them, if we want to have a future."
