If President Clinton has his way, fledgling entrepreneurs no longer will get free advice at Small Business Development Centers, but will have to pony up $15 an hour.
Under the $1.5 trillion budget that the president unveiled yesterday, the Small Business Administration also would triple the cost of most of its publications to $1.50, start charging for use of its electronic bulletin board and kill a program that gives grants for small companies to plant trees.
Mr. Clinton also would initiate a fee for revising SBA-guaranteed loans.
At the same time, however, he proposes to sharply increase the program's loans to small businesses.
SBA Deputy Administrator Cassandra Pulley said the proposals to add or increase certain charges for small firms recognize "that the best thing the government can do for small business and the economy is to reduce the deficit."
She said some of the new fees the agency's clients will face are standard in private industry.
The administration expects that the proposed charge for counseling at the Small Business Development Centers, located at about 900 colleges around the country, would raise about $17 million in fiscal 1995.
The budget also would set a fee of $75 per loan for restructuring or refinancing SBA-guaranteed loans, a charge officials say will bring $7.2 million a year into the federal coffers.
And users of the electronic bulletin board that the agency set up last year would pay for most information they gain from it by using a pay-per-call "900" number.
SBA borrowers would benefit, however, from an increase in the guaranteed loan fund, which would allow the agency to stand behind $9 billion in small-business loans next fiscal year, compared with $7 billion this year.
The budget also proposes doubling funds for the SBA's investment-company program, to $730 million in fiscal 1995, through which the government helps high-risk ventures.
The loan-guarantee program for real-estate development and large equipment purchases also would double, allowing the agency to offer $2 billion in loans.
The SBA will sponsor a program in the administration's 12 new enterprise zones, designed to give economic help to poor urban and rural areas.
In what it calls One-Stop Capital Shops, the agency will offer several of its credit and advisory programs through job-creation centers to be set up in those communities.
The administration budgeted loan guarantees to support $375 million in loans at the centers.
The administration seeks to eliminate a much-criticized, $18 million a year program in which the SBA provides grants for tree planting.
Since 1991, the agency has given state and local governments grants to plant trees in parks and highways.
Under the program, the local officials must match the federal grant and then contract with small nursery businesses to plant the trees.
The administration wants to do away with $13 million in other "special programs" funded through the SBA budget last year.
Although those budget items are usually small, like the tree-planting program, they can be hard to kill because they usually are funded as a result of hard bargaining between members of Congress.
Other items in the SBA budget include the proposed expansion nationwide of a revolving line-of-credit program that began as a pilot project in New England in 1992.
If approved by Congress, the program could provide as much as $1 billion to provide short-term credit for small companies.
The average line of credit in the New England pilot program was $250,000, SBA officials said.
In addition, the administration proposes spending $30 million to cover the cost of allowing certain small-business owners to repay without a penalty loans that carry very high interest rates under a now-defunct SBA loan program.
The loans were introduced in 1979 and carried double-digit interest rates that were at the time well below the prime rate of about 20%.
The loan agreement included an obscure clause charging a high penalty for prepayment, which the 3,000 borrowers have since argued was unfair.
