What a time for France to put $6 billion of stock in Societe Nationale Elf Aquitaine, its national oil company, on the block!
Elf's earnings plummeted 82% in 1993.
Since 1989, the company's debt as a percentage of its equity has more than tripled to almost 50% from 13%.
And with oil prices close to five-year lows, Elf's financial outlook for this year isn't good, either.
But none of that has stopped the French government from going ahead with its plan to slash its 50.7% controlling interest in the oil giant to 13%.
The ambitious "global" offering involves simultaneously selling more than 88 million of Elf's 257 million shares outstanding in several international markets at once.
But should investors be buying what the French government is selling?
Or, for that matter, should they be interested in the Elf shares that already trade on public exchanges, such as its 19 million American Depositary Receipts trading on the New York Stock Exchange?
Elf ADRs, each of which is equal to one-half share of Elf common, closed yesterday at 36 1/8, down 1/8, on above-average volume.
The answer to both of the above questions is probably yes, especially if you believe that Philippe Jaffre, Elf's chairman since August, will succeed in his plan to overhaul the company.
To be sure, getting expert opinion about Elf's prospects is a complicated matter right now.
Wall Street currently abounds in Elf experts, a byproduct of all the boning up analysts have done to compete in the ritual "beauty contest" of selecting investment-banking firms to manage the huge underwriting.
But those experts who are participating in the deal -- and there are a lot of them -- are now inhibited by Securities and Exchange Commission regulations from talking publicly while the offering is under way.
Even so, by consulting analysts not under the ban and also by looking at data that analysts and portfolio managers put out prior to being silenced, investors get a picture of Elf as a company in need of repair.
Relative to international rivals, Elf is a late-comer to restructuring, cost-cutting and debt-reduction, analysts say.
"Elf is where U.S. oil companies were 10 years ago," says Bryan Jacoboski, analyst for PaineWebber Inc. in New York.
Elf's former chairman, Loik Le-Floch Prigent, "got the company into a lot of bad deals," says Bernie Picchi, analyst for Kidder, Peabody & Co. in New York.
The company paid too much for some exploration and production assets, such as its 1991 purchase of Occidental Petroleum Co.'s interest in the North Sea.
And Elf's decision to commit itself to the construction of a completely new refinery in what was formerly East Germany at a cost of more than $1.5 billion just isn't good economics.
But Mr. Jaffre's arrival at the helm has encouraged some investors to overlook Elf's bumpy three-year run.
At recent road shows in Europe and the U.S., Mr. Jaffre didn't pull punches about Elf's discouraging prospects for 1994.
But Mr. Jaffre did insist at those meetings that earnings will improve, if slowly, over the next few years.
Mr. Jaffre also assured potential investors that he has committed Elf to a program of cost-cutting and asset sales.
Some investors see Elf as already ripe for an upturn.
It should benefit from higher oil demand as European economies, led by France, begin to pick up this year, these investors say.
Elf's bottom line should also receive a boost as oil fields it's been developing come on stream, lifting oil output by 20% to one million barrels daily, possibly as early as next year.
That production growth should offset the impact of the lackluster oil prices, Elf officials have said.
Vincent Bazi of Baring Securities in Paris says the company is undervalued based upon its 4.0 price-to-cash-flow multiple, compared with average multiples of 6 to 7 for other European oil stocks.
Data from Swiss Bank Corp. show Elf is similarly cheap, relative to U.S. oil companies.
"Elf is a good long-term investment," says Douglas Terreson, manager of Putnam Energy Resources Trust, which is based in Boston and owns Elf shares.
He and others who follow the stock recommend that Elf shares be held for 18 to 24 months, about the length of time they think it will take for Mr. Jaffre to make an impact on Elf.
Meanwhile, relieving the stigma of government control should help buoy the company's stock price as well, analysts say.
The government is selling its Elf stake in a series of tranches, with specific portions allocated institutions, employees and individuals.
A core group of mostly French companies have pledged to hold their stake in Elf for several years as a type of "poison pill" defense against potential takeovers.
Shares sold to French individual investors under the offering were priced late last week at 385 French francs, a 10.6% discount to the closing share price last Wednesday of 430.7 francs on the Paris Bourse.
Prices for institutional and core group purchases won't be set until Monday, but are expected to be higher than that number.
A new analysis of key facets of the Clinton health plan shows that it would lower health-care costs for manufacturers while lifting them for construction companies, retailers and other service-sector employers.
The soon-to-be-published analysis by two Brookings Institution economists looks at the impact of three changes similar to provisions in the White House plan: a requirement that employers pay 80% of the premium for every worker, the establishment of a standard benefit package, and what's known as "community rating," or setting a single premium for every employer regardless of the age and health of its work force.
The analysis is summarized in the Congressional Budget Office report on the Clinton health plan.
Industries that already provide insurance to all their workers or that have particularly high health costs would benefit from these changes, economists Henry Aaron and Barry Bosworth conclude.
Manufacturers of autos, appliances and other long-lasting goods, for instance, would see their cost of providing health insurance fall 35%, or $1,349 a worker.
In contrast, retailers, who currently don't provide insurance for many of their employees, would see their costs climb 165%, or by $1,303 a worker.
In some cases, the differences would be even greater.
Coal mining companies -- with their aging work forces and hazardous working conditions -- now spend $9,982 a worker, Mr. Aaron said.
Requiring all companies to pay the same premium and insure all their workers would cut that by about $6,000 because companies with younger work forces and safer working conditions effectively would have to share some of that burden.
Employers' health-care costs vary greatly depending on the age, health, sex and location of their employees and their families.
Mr. Clinton would change that by setting the same premium for all employers in a given region; the Brookings analysis approximates that situation by assuming there would be a single premium for the whole country.
"The news in this for me is that the real financial change in any major health-care reform is the move to community rating," Mr. Aaron said.
"Once you've done that, you've gotten a very large dose of the shift of costs that you'll get from any of the approaches."
Several of the alternatives to the Clinton plan also would require community rating.
The Brookings economists estimate that the average private employer now pays $2,017 a worker, or 7.2% of total wages, toward workers' health-care costs.
With community rating and a mandate on all employers to provide a standard benefit package, that would rise to $2,253 a worker, or 8% of total wages.
The Brookings analysis doesn't reflect all the features of the Clinton proposal.
It ignores, for instance, subsidies that Mr. Clinton would provide to certain small employers with low-wage workers.
It also doesn't consider the effect of cost controls in the Clinton plan.
Mr. Aaron noted that the paper doesn't address the substantial differences among companies within a given industry.
The analysis, which is based on Commerce Department data, is to be published in a forthcoming issue of the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
