Top officials of Spectrum Information Technologies Inc., the little wireless company under a Securities and Exchange Commission probe, sold most of their stock shortly after hiring high-profile computer executive John Sculley as chairman.
Mr. Sculley, who took Apple Computer Inc. to $8 billion in revenue in a few short years, was hired by Spectrum to promote its technology for sending data over wireless networks.
At the time, Spectrum officials boasted about how the company would exploit its patents through licensing deals such as those it had negotiated with American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and Rockwell International Corp.
Indeed, Mr. Sculley's trumpeted hiring in mid-October gave top insiders at the Nasdaq-listed company much to cheer about.
Spectrum, which is based in Manhasset, N.Y., has never reported an annual profit.
But Spectrum's share price shot up 46% to 11 1/8 from 7 5/8 on Oct. 18 on news of Mr. Sculley's appointment.
Mr. Sculley himself voiced confidence in Spectrum's future and backed his optimism by holding on to options that could have made him millions of dollars.
When he agreed to join Spectrum, he was given a million-dollar salary and options to buy 18 million shares over five years at the exercise price of $6.125.
Three million of those options became exercisable after the first week in October -- the week before Mr. Sculley's appointment was announced.
That would have brought him a profit of as much as $15 million, based on the high point of Spectrum's stock ($11.125) on the day of the announcement.
Spectrum insiders didn't wait, however.
A trio of executives, including President Peter Caserta, who convinced Mr. Sculley to join Spectrum, exercised options and sold those shares for millions of dollars in November and early December.
The options, which became exercisable in late August, would have expired in 2002.
Chief Financial Officer Salvatore Marino and Vice President Albert Panico also cashed in.
None of these officers held -- or currently hold -- direct shares in their company, based on SEC filings.
Spectrum officials were unavailable for comment Friday, according to an outside public-relations firm.
Some of the insiders' sales were reported by the New York Post last week.
After the insiders exercised their options, Spectrum shares slid to around $8.
The stock took a further battering early last week after CNBC commentator Dan Dorfman speculated and The Wall Street Journal confirmed that Spectrum has been under an SEC investigation since May.
The stock's latest slide has all but wiped out, for now, the short-term value of the huge options package that Mr. Sculley received to join Spectrum in the first place.
Spectrum shares closed Friday at 6 5/16, up 1/16, in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
Mr. Caserta, however, profited handsomely.
"The entrance of John Sculley provided the fuel to propel the stock, which had spent most of its existence trading below 3 1/2, to the 10 range late last year," says Bob Gabele, president of CDA/Investnet, a Fort Lauderdale, Fla., company that tracks insider activity.
"The stock's move provided these insiders with a timely opportunity to sell.
Just how fast they were to seize it caught our attention."
Mr. Caserta sold just under half of his stake, exercising options to acquire one million shares at $1.13 apiece and then selling those shares in the open market at an average $9.50 apiece between Nov. 15 and Nov. 23, for a pretax profit of $8.4 million.
Mr. Caserta, according to the SEC data, still holds options to acquire one million shares at $1.13 apiece, as well as options to buy 5,000 shares at $2.91 each.
Mr. Panico, a director and vice president of operations, dumped more than half of his holdings between Nov. 22 and Nov. 24.
He exercised 333,000 options priced at $1.13 a share and then sold those shares at an average $8.55, for a pretax profit of $2.5 million.
SEC filings show him still holding options to acquire 320,000 shares, priced at $1.13, as well as options to acquire 5,000 shares at $3.75 a share.
And Mr. Marino, the chief financial officer, chopped his holdings 63%, exercising 300,000 options at $1.13 a share and selling those shares at an average $8.71 a share between Nov. 24 and Dec. 1, for a pretax profit of $2.3 million.
Filings show him still holding options to acquire 175,000 shares at $1.13.
By selling their stock, the Spectrum executives saved themselves from a big drop in Spectrum's stock price, which occurred after the SEC probe became known.
The investigation centers on the wild ride taken by Spectrum's stock last spring.
The shares skyrocketed to more than $13 in intraday trading after the company touted a patent-licensing deal with AT&T and Mr. Caserta, Spectrum's president, crowed that the deal would be worth "hundreds of millions of dollars" in new business.
The stock later plunged when AT&T disavowed the projection.
Insiders, under SEC regulations, are prevented from trading their stock if in possession of material, nonpublic information.
The guiding principle is to disclose the information to the broad public or abstain from buying or selling company shares, according to legal experts.
Spectrum general counsel Christopher Franco last week called the probe a "confidential, nonpublic inquiry" and maintained that it didn't have to be disclosed.
SEC officials declined to comment.
But Michael Bradley, professor of finance and law at the University of Michigan, said: "If that investigation wasn't publicly known, and if that investigation would have a material effect on the price of the stock, then the insiders would be bound by the principle `abstain or disclose.'"
Small-cap stocks ended at record highs Friday, as the Russell 2000 Index rose 1.37, or 0.52%, to 265.03, its session high.
The index, which tracks the performance of small-capitalization stocks traded on the Nasdaq Stock Market and the major exchanges, easily surpassed its record of 263.80 set a week earlier.
Interest-rate-sensitive issues, which had powered the advance in the previous two sessions, followed bond prices higher.
Some technology stocks also were strong.
GP Financial Corp., New York, closed unchanged at 19 after a federal appeals court Friday cleared the way for the company's Green Point Savings Bank subsidiary to convert from mutual to stock owmnership.
Community First Bankshares Inc., Fargo, N.D., rose 1/2 to 14; FFBS Bancorp Inc., Columbus, Miss., added 1/2 to 16 3/4, and Peoples Bancorp of Worcester Inc., Worcester, Mass., inched up 1/4 to 49.
Science Dynamics Corp., Cherry Hill, N.J., added 1/2 to 4 1/4; Siliconix Inc., Santa Clara, Calif., gained 3/4 to 8; and FTP Software Inc., based in North Andover, Mass., jumped 2 1/8 to 28 1/8.
Bancfirst Corp. rose 6 3/8 to 24 3/8 on the American Stock Exchange.
The Decatur, Ala., company said it entered a definitive agreement to be merged into Union Planters Corp. in a stock swap.
