Armco Inc. reported a loss for the fourth quarter and the year partly reflecting a costly restructuring, but the core specialty steel business showed year-to-year gains.
For the fourth quarter, the Pittsburgh producer of stainless and electrical steels posted a loss of $98 million, or 99 cents a share.
The result included a $45 million loss related to the expected sale of Armco's insurance operations, a $10 million equity loss related to an additional capital contribution to a steel joint venture, equity losses of $9.9 million from other joint ventures, and an extraordinary loss of $7.3 million related to debt retirement.
The year-ago loss was $376.7 million, or $3.68 a share, including special charges and losses from joint ventures and discontinued operations of $362.5 million.
The operating loss was $3.3 million in the latest quarter, without including $6.9 million of additional expense for a postretirement accounting change.
The year-ago operating loss was $1.8 million, not counting special charges of $168.9 million.
In the latest quarter, increased profitability of Armco's core specialty steel business and Douglas Dynamics, which makes snowplows for certain vehicles, largely offset escalating carbon steel scrap prices at the Empire-Detroit Steel business and the start up of a stretch mill.
The company also said it was benefiting from record levels of chrome stainless shipments to the automotive market.
Armco's president and chief executive, James F. Will, while stating he was "not satisfied" with overall results and the performance of some units, expects the company will benefit from its restructuring moves.
"Cash from divesting nonstrategic operations has improved our liquidity," he said.
"We refinanced and retired obligations so that we have no substantial debt due until 1999."
The company also expects to return the Empire-Detroit business to profitability.
Overall sales fell 22% to $363.5 million from $464 million.
Sales for the specialty flat-rolled steel business fell to $225 million from $242 million, largely reflecting changes in product mix, Armco said.
Mr. Will said orders are strong for both stainless and electrical steel products.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Armco rose 25 cents, or 3.9%, to $6.625.
