Credit Lyonnais SA is to get a cash injection of 4.9 billion French francs ($852.3 million) from the French government and its two other principal shareholders, the Thomson-CSF SA defense electronics group and Caisse des Depots & Consignations, following a loss of 6.9 billion francs last year.
The 1993 loss, which was well in excess of most analysts' predictions, was calculated only after the exclusion from the bank's 1993 accounts of 40 billion francs of property loans of doubtful status.
These are to be transferred to a workout fund backed by the state, effectively isolating the bank from any future losses in connection with them.
As a result of both these moves, Credit Lyonnais said it would still be able to maintain a capital adequacy ratio of 8.3%, just above the internationally accepted 8% minimum ratio.
Credit Lyonnais ended 1992 with a capital adequacy ratio of 8.2%, after reporting a loss for the year of 1.85 billion francs.
Credit Lyonnais Chairman Jean Peyrelevade said, however, that an 8.3% ratio was barely sufficient in today's competitive banking environment, meaning that further funds would be needed.
Subject to an improvement in its prospects during the course of this year, he said, the bank plans to raise possibly as much as five billion francs through a rights issue later this year, in which private investors will be invited to participate.
He said that he would also propose transforming the bank's nonvoting investment certificates into voting shares, as a first step towards its eventual privatization.
Given the bank's poor track record over the past few years, it will need to produce some solid evidence of future recovery prospects to make the rights issue plan a success.
Even under the best scenarios, officials expect Credit Lyonnais to barely break even this year and to make only a small profit next year, paying nothing more than a token dividend for 1995.
As a selling point, however, Credit Lyonnais executives hope that the competitive advantage posed by that bank's extensive European network will prove attractive enough to entice investors to participate in the rights issue.
Credit Lyonnais has branches or subsidiaries in almost every country in Europe, and Mr. Peyrelevade announced a drive to take advantage of the synergies available through this network.
Although the bank's operating profits rose slightly in 1993, to 13.2 billion francs from 12.1 billion francs in 1992, provisions for loan losses rose even more, to 17.8 billion francs from 14.4 billion francs.
Mr. Peyrelevade said it was impossible at this stage to calculate the potential for future losses on these loans.
Mr. Peyrelevade, the former head of French insurance group Union des Assurances de Paris, was appointed to run Credit Lyonnais last November in place of Jean-Yves Haberer, its chairman since 1988.
Mr. Haberer, a former director of the French treasury who previously was chairman of Paribas, the investment banking group, led Credit Lyonnais on a spectacular expansion strategy.
But he also presided over a run of heavy losses caused by imprudent lending, notably to the movie industry, and problem industrial investments, including the acquisition of a stake in Usinor-Sacilor, the loss-plagued state-controlled steel group.
Presenting Credit Lyonnais's results for 1993, Mr. Peyrelevade refused to make any comment on the bank's management under his predecessor.
Looking somber and strained following long and difficult negotiations with the government over the extent of the financial package needed to support Credit Lyonnais, he restricted himself to stating that to the best of his knowledge, the accounts as now presented gave a fair picture of the bank's situation.
Even so, he warned that he couldn't exclude the possibility that further loan-loss provisions would be needed in the form of "mopping-up operations" during 1994.
One of the bizarrest legacies from the Haberer years is Credit Lyonnais's ownership of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc., the Hollywood movie producer.
Mr. Peyrelevade said this is now being managed by a team of cinema professionals, with a view to its eventual sale to an outside buyer.
Meanwhile, as part of a drive to shore up the bank's balance sheet, Mr. Peyrelevade said he plans to raise at least 20 billion francs by means of asset sales between now and the end of 1995.
Credit Lyonnais has a portfolio of industrial and financial shareholdings valued at 49.4 billion francs, including participations in such firms as Bouygues SA, Lyonnaise des Eaux SA and Pechiney SA, as well as a 20% stake in Aerospatiale, the ailing state-owned aircraft and defense group.
In addition to asset sales, however, Mr. Peyrelevade said Credit Lyonnais will need to make a major belt-tightening effort in order to return to profitability.
Setting a target of zero growth in current spending for 1994, to be followed by a reduction in spending next year, he announced plans to reduce the bank's work force by around 10% in France over the next three years, shedding 3,500 jobs.
He also confirmed plans for some 900 job cuts in Germany, Spain and the Netherlands this year, reducing the group's European work force outside France by 4%.
Amid the generally gloomy panorama, there were only a few bright spots.
In Britain, Credit Lyonnais made a profit for the first time in several years.
In Germany, BfG Bank, acquired just over a year ago, accounted for a 16% increase in Credit Lyonnais group revenues to 53.6 billion francs.
BfG turned in a net 1993 profit of 25.9 million marks, against a loss of 1.14 billion marks the year earlier.
After dividend payments to other BfG shareholders, that resulted in a positive contribution of 50 million francs to Credit Lyonnais's bottom line.
Separately, Thomson-CSF said it will post a net loss for 1993 because of its 21.56% stake in Credit Lyonnais.
In a statement, Thomson-CSF noted that its executive board will decide April 21 "on the possibility of paying a dividend" this year.
Of Credit Lyonnais's 6.9 billion franc loss in 1993, Thomson-CSF's part is thus about 1.48 billion francs.
