Federal wildlife regulators have designated 6.4 million acres of southwestern desert -- including the proposed site of a bitterly-contested nuclear waste dump in California -- as critical habitat for the desert tortoise.
The action by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is certain to reverberate in the debate over conflicts between wildlife and commerce, which is intensifying as Congress takes up reauthorization of the nation's principal wildlife protection law, the Endangered Species Act.
The agency's move sets aside nearly as much land for desert tortoises as the government did for spotted owls.
Most of the land is in California, but three other states are also affected.
Some 80% of the land is federally owned, with the remainder owned by states, Indian tribes and private interests.
Protected under federal law, the tortoises have been in steady decline because of disease and habitat destruction caused by mining, off-road vehicles and other human encroachment on the desert, many scientists agree.
Under the Endangered Species Act, human activities on land designated as critical habitat for protected species can be strictly limited.
Thus, the agency's move casts further doubt over the future of the low-level nuclear dump project, known as Ward Valley.
Business interests and California state officials say the facility is crucial to the health of California's burgeoning biotech, medical and research industries, which, in addition to many jobs, generate much low-level nuclear waste.
The state has issued a license to U.S. Ecology Inc. to build and operate the dump.
U.S. Ecology officials say they've invested about $40 million to date in engineering and environmental studies and other preconstruction costs.
But antinuclear activists and environmentalists have fought the dump project fiercely for nearly 10 years, asserting that it threatens the nearby Colorado River, as well as desert animals such as the tortoise.
Moreover, Ward Valley is on federal land, and the Clinton administration to date has declined to transfer the land to the state -- a prerequisite for dump construction -- while lawsuits challenging the dump wend their way through the courts.
Although the critical habitat designation theoretically doesn't doom the Ward Valley project, since federal agencies can permit activities in prime habitat areas under certain circumstances, dump opponents were nonetheless jubilant.
"It should be the final blow against this ill-advised project," said Philip Klansky, co-coordinator of the Bay Area Nuclear Waste Coalition.
But Steve Romano, a U.S. Ecology vice president, said the company thinks it can still build the dump without harming tortoises if the Clinton administration transfers the land to the state.
If it doesn't, Mr. Romano said, "our company would have little alternative but to sue" to recover its investment so far in the project.
The Ward Valley debate is part of a larger national problem of coping with low-level nuclear leftovers.
In the 1980s, Congress passed laws requiring states to have low-level dumps up and running by 1993.
That process has melted down: Plagued by design and environmental problems and beset by environmental protests, not a single new low-level waste dump has been built.
