Striking workers at General Motors Corp.'s assembly plant in Shreveport, La., ratified a three-year labor contract that will require the company to add 100 workers at the plant, wiping out some of its productivity gains.
The settlement represents a setback for GM, which is struggling to raise productivity so it can compete with leaner companies, such as Ford Motor Co.
With the added workers, the Shreveport plant will use 27% more workers yet assemble only 11% more vehicles than a competing Ford truck plant in Minnesota.
Both plants build compact pickup trucks.
In addition to adding back jobs at the plant, GM also agreed to provide employment for an undetermined number of GM workers in a nearby Johnson Controls Inc. factory that builds seats for the Shreveport assembly plant, a GM spokeswoman said.
By adding 100 workers at Shreveport, GM will essentially slow down certain work at the plant.
However, the spokeswoman said about a third of the new workers will be used to replace others who have retired or transferred, and she said these workers would have been replaced anyway.
The new Shreveport workers will come from the company's pool of surplus labor at other facilities.
In return for these concessions, GM said it defused a union attempt to change the plant's operating agreement, which includes deployment of workers in teams and flexible classifications for skilled trades workers.
"We were able to preserve our basic work philosophy, which was challenged in these negotiations," said the company spokeswoman, who added that the plant will still be able to meet its productivity goals despite the added workers.
Production at Shreveport, where 4,000 compact pickup trucks are built weekly, will resume today.
Analysts estimate that the strike will hurt GM's bottom line by between $8 million and $12 million.
More important is the precedent the Shreveport pact sets for other plants.
Although GM and the United Auto Workers signed a national three-year pact in November, GM still has about 50 locations where it and the union have yet to agree on local contracts.
The UAW has vowed to fight any productivity improvement that comes through a work speedup.
