The dollar received a drubbing against the yen yesterday on disappointment over a Japanese plan to open its domestic markets to foreign goods, which fed fears the U.S. would renew official pressure to boost the value of Japan's currency.
But the dollar brushed off steep slides in the U.S. stock and bond markets to stage a rather remarkable, and somewhat baffling, comeback against European currencies.
Late in New York, the dollar was quoted at 1.6735 marks, up from 1.6715 marks late Monday in New York.
The U.S. currency also was changing hands at 103.13 yen, close to an intraday low of 103.05 yen and down from 104.05 yen Monday.
Sterling was trading at $1.4845, down from $1.4960.
About noon Wednesday in Tokyo, the dollar was trading at 102.75 yen and at 1.6715 marks.
The Japanese government's long-awaited package of market-opening measures, announced during Asian trading, proved to be the anticlimax the market had long anticipated.
The package was more noted for what it left out than for what it has in it.
And perhaps the biggest omission, traders said, was numerical trade targets.
Japan's refusal to offer any had led to the collapse of U.S.-Japan trade talks in February.
The latest package also didn't make any commitments in areas such as tax cuts and government procurement.
The heart of the issue is the U.S.'s simmering displeasure over Japan's $60 billion trade surplus with the U.S. and its refusal to open its markets to U.S. goods.
Traders fear that a lack of Japanese progress in the trade dispute will compel the U.S. to seek to boost the value of the yen to slash its deficit.
Late in New York trading, the dollar pushed to its intraday lows against the yen when U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor said that the measures fell short of U.S. expectations, and aren't sufficient to revive the collapsed trade talks.
Indeed, the dollar had been pressured lower all of yesterday in anticipation of a negative U.S. response to the package, said Belal Khan, senior customer dealer at the Bank of Tokyo in New York.
Mr.KKhan said the dollar soon may hit 100.40 yen, the post-World War II low that it reached last August.
"I wouldn't doubt a test of historic lows, possibly in the next few days," Mr. Khan said, noting that any Bank of Japan intervention to halt the dollar's plunge would be fruitless without coordinated intervention by other central banks.
Japan's central bank was said to have intervened repeatedly earlier yesterday, but failed to stem the dollar's slide.
Elsewhere, traders expressed puzzlement at the U.S. currrency's technical strengthening against the mark.
"It was a surprise to me as to why the dollar got above 1.6780 marks," said Rick Porter, vice president of Brussels Lambert in New York, referring to the dollar's intraday high.
He added that market conditions appeared ripe for a softening of the dollar against the mark, with all the fundamentals seen as bearish.
Among the factors that should have weakened the dollar were yesterday's slides in the U.S. bond and stock markets.
The yield on the 30-year bond rose above 7%, helping to trigger a sharp 63.33-point drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average -- its steepest one-day fall since Feb. 4, when it plunged 96 points.
In another negative for the dollar, Mr. Porter said market expectations are for only a small easing today in the rate for the Bundesbank's securities repurchase agreements, or repos.
Repos are the Bundesbank's main instrument for influencing Germany's money market.
The German central bank's slow pace in cutting its repo rates has frustrated the currency market, which earlier in the year had banked on a faster convergence of U.S. and German interest rates.
Mr. Porter said he expects a Bundesbank shaving of about two to three basis points on its repos from the current level of 5.80%.
