With founder Sergio Bosco and stockbroker Rafi Khan in the front seat, a cable television and programming company called Future Communications Inc. took a wild ride on the stock market last summer, picking up techno-hungry investors along the way.
They all should have known better.
The company -- whose stock leapt from about $7 at the start of June to $27.50 in late August as Mr. Khan was saying it was on its way to $40 -- now is being sued for fraud by the Securities and Exchange Commission and several shareholder groups.
Milton Berle is suing, too, saying Future violated his contract as celebrity spokesman.
Price Waterhouse is denying Future's contention that Price Waterhouse agreed to become Future's auditor.
And Future has filed for Chapter 11 protection under the bankruptcy law.
Future creates television programming and sends it by satellite to stations in exchange for advertising time that Future can sell.
Mr. Bosco has envisioned it as a TV network that would grow to rival the major networks in size, a "fifth alternative" for American viewers.
But creating TV networks isn't cheap; Fox spent a reported $140 million launching one, and Future has never reported annual revenue of more than $6.6 million.
Worse, court records reveal Future to be a financial and management morass.
Although Future attracted fund managers at such institutions as Fidelity Investments in Boston, Pioneering Management Corp. of Boston and the Invesco Funds Group of Denver, the stock last fall was delisted by the National Association of Securities Dealers.
For investors tempted by the glamour of fashionable industries, Future's story is a vivid reminder of just how badly hopes can outstrip reality, especially when boosted by hyperbolic pronouncements and obscured by a convoluted corporate structure.
Future got its start in the late 1970s when Mr. Bosco, an electronics whiz who had formed several small firms on New York's Long Island to build cable-TV systems, went public by merging one of his companies into a shell company.
A decade later he moved the firm (initially called Futuresat Industries Inc.) to Dallas and changed its name to Future Communications.
Over the years, Mr. Bosco has left a trail of bitter business associates, investors and former employees, some of whom describe being beguiled by his ever-sunny disposition.
Some of these adversaries sued, accounting for dozens of lawsuits filed against Mr. Bosco, the company and its units in federal, state and county courts in Dallas alone.
Mr. Bosco, several former employees recall, was known for saying, "We don't pay them until they're on the courthouse steps."
Through his lawyer, he denies saying that.
Future had trouble meeting some of the standards of public companies.
In the 1980s it missed or was late on four annual and eight quarterly reports, an SEC injunction shows.
In 1988 and 1990, Future didn't issue proxy materials or hold annual meetings.
(Mr. Bosco's lawyer says it held meetings every two years to save money.)
Future still hasn't held an annual meeting for the year ended Oct. 31, 1992, to say nothing of the subsequent fiscal year; one postponement reason stated in a press release was that officials were too busy.
Future and its web of affiliated firms are run, for the most part, by Mr. Bosco, family members and friends.
Mr. Bosco's wife, Josephine, who suffers from emphysema and requires oxygen 24 hours a day, is director of programming for MSTV Inc., the core property.
Her nine-year-old grandson stars in one program.
Mr. Bosco's son, Richard, is president of Communications Investment Corp., an affiliated company.
Sergio Bosco's daughter, Lia Gorman, acts as his secretary and administrator and holds a stake in Classic Video Theater Inc., a Florida company that supplies programming to MSTV.
Mr. Bosco's son-in-law, David Gorman, was named president of Future in late September.
As for his qualifications, past proxy statements said that in 1981 to 1983 he ran a Dallas cable-TV program distribution unit of Oak Industries Inc. of Waltham, Mass.
In fact, from August 1981 to March 1983 Mr. Gorman was serving time in a Florida prison after being arrested in an Orlando parking lot with 141 pounds of marijuana.
Mr. Gorman, after first saying this was someone else with the same name and birth date, later admitted serving prison time for the crime and said Future's proxies were erroneous because he hadn't given it correct information.
Mr. Gorman says that when he became Future's president he replaced Gary Dartnall, whose appointment as president and a director Future announced a year ago.
But Mr. Dartnall says he never assumed the post of president.
He says he was an "honorary part-time consultant."
(Future says he quit the company last fall.)
At Future's former offices in west Dallas, money often was shuttled among units.
For instance, on Nov. 23 and 24, 1992, John DuPertuis, now Future's chief financial officer, wrote two checks totaling $87,600 to MSTV out of one unit's bank account, according to bankruptcy-court documents for a company affiliated with the unit; on Nov. 23, an $87,600 deposit was made into that account from another unit.
"I saw them take all this money and move it through accounts to build up their revenues, balance sheet and profits and losses," says Putt Fleming, who was a consultant to Future for part of 1992.
Mr. DuPertuis says shuttling money about is common for companies whose units share common working capital.
"It does not affect the income statement," he says.
Some of this activity was designed to cover cash shortages.
Like many growing companies, Mr. DuPertuis says, Future hasn't always had enough cash on hand.
"Their nonsufficient check charges had to be astronomical," says Shelley McBride, a salesman who quit a year ago after, he says, he received a series of bounced checks for wages and business expenses from the company.
In its report for the fiscal second quarter ended April 30, Future said its outstanding checks totaled $198,520 more than its bank balance.
(Mr. DuPertuis says that part of the report was an error.)
As for Future's board, Arne Jensen, a director until September, says that at board meetings, he was often the only one of three outside directors in attendance.
Mr. Jensen, a former CBS News technical supervisor, also says he was placed on the audit committee without his knowledge and "never even attended a meeting" of it.
Mr. Bosco denies this through his attorney.
Mr. Bosco, who declined to be interviewed, has temporarily stepped aside from the company's operations.
Despite all this, Future's stock got hot last summer.
It was plugged for months by market-maker Chelsea Street Securities Inc. of Irving, Texas, and later by Reynolds Kendrick Stratton Inc. of Beverly Hills, Calif., which absorbed some Chelsea brokers after Chelsea closed in June.
Offering unwavering support at Reynolds Kendrick was Mr. Khan.
The broker saw great promise in Future's MSTV network, which deals mostly with low-power stations.
He told investors that the federal Cable Act of 1992, in requiring cable systems to carry some low-power stations' signals, "transforms MSTV's 100-plus local lower power TV-station affiliates with a limited local audience into a viable alternative viewing network."
He envisioned a "three-year bonanza."
Future's own forecasts were no less rosy.
In one SEC filing, it said MSTV had a potential viewership of more than 42 million households -- a huge 49% of the U.S. market -- and already had 118 "affiliates," defined as stations that broadcast at least four hours of its programming daily.
But 31 of the stations listed as affiliates don't meet that definition; 23 of them, in fact, broadcast just one hour of MSTV programming weekly, usually "Billy Bob's Country," a country-music program filmed at a Fort Worth nightclub.
Mr. Gorman contends that stations that take any programming are affiliates.
Through the summer, Future itself issued a series of announcements: A deal had been made to acquire two film libraries containing 700 copyrighted films.
Earnings per share for the third quarter ending July 31 would more than double from the 23 cents reported a year earlier.
(They came in at 49 cents.)
Mr. Khan kept raising his earnings projections.
On June 17, he estimated $2 a share for the October 1994 fiscal year.
On July 30, he raised this 150% to $5 a share.
On Aug. 18 he raised it again, to $6.
However, as Mr. Khan's bullishness on Future intensified and the stock took off, his employer, Reynolds Kendrick, was aggressively selling shares.
On June 11, when Future's stock was at $7.375, the brokerage firm and its retail clients owned 1,176,255 shares, according to an affidavit given by Michael J. Chiodo, Reynolds Kendrick's vice president for finance, in a suit filed in a federal court in New York City against the firm and Mr. Khan by short sellers.
In subsequent weeks, Future announced it had obtained a commitment letter for $12.5 million in financing from a West Coast finance company so it could buy 700 films featuring such stars as Charlie Chaplin, Buster Keaton and Laurence Olivier.
On Aug. 17, Future announced it had completed the acquisition.
The next day, Mr. Khan recommended "aggressive accumulation" of Future shares.
However, three weeks later, Future filed an 8-K report with the SEC that disclosed that the film purchase hadn't been completed.
Mr. Gorman says closing documents were signed on July 29, but the financing never came through.
By Aug. 27, the number of Future shares held by Reynolds Kendrick and its retail clients was down 67% from June, to 385,728 shares.
Three days later, on Aug. 30, the stock peaked at $27.50.
On Aug. 31, NASD halted trading, questioning Future's qualifications for listing.
Reynolds Kendrick's chairman, William Stratton, explains the stock selling as profit-taking by longtime Future shareholders.
As for the institutions that bought on Mr. Khan's recommendations during this period, they were "very sophisticated investors . . . not dupes for anybody," Mr. Stratton says.
Several investment pros were among the believers.
Daniel Leonard, manager of Invesco Strategic Technology Fund, bought 2,000 shares for his personal portfolio and 160,000 for the fund, bankruptcycourt records show.
Walter Downey, a portfolio manager at Fidelity, was high on the stock through last October; Fidelity bought 105,000 shares.
Pioneering Management bought 145,000 Future shares.
But skeptical investors were shorting Future, that is, betting on a decline by borrowing the stock and selling it.
Stephen Carlson of Aspen Capital in Denver said in early September that he saw Future as "a fraud of monumental proportions."
On Sept. 3, Future's auditor, Alegnani & Co. of Dallas, resigned.
Future announced that Price Waterhouse would be its new auditor.
But a lawyer for Price Waterhouse told the SEC on Oct. 1 that the accounting firm never agreed to take the account.
With shares not trading publicly, Reynolds Kendrick tried to force short sellers to "repay" borrowed stock at a rate of $36 a share, a price it said it got by checking with its customers.
Five short-sellers sued, alleging that Mr. Khan and Reynolds Kendrick had manipulated Future's stock and had access to material undisclosed information -- charges Mr. Khan and Reynolds Kendrick denied.
One suit has since been withdrawn, one dismissed and three ordered into arbitration.
On Oct. 14, the NASD delisted Future, alleging the dissemination of erroneous and misleading information and the withholding of material information.
Mr. Gorman, Future's president, contends Future was a victim of a bruising stock-market duel between investors and short sellers.
"When the price of the stock continued to rise, these short sellers stood to lose $75 million to $85 million," he says, and drove the price down.
The SEC, in suing Future and Mr. Bosco in federal court in Dallas, alleged dissemination of misleading information and fraudulent inflation of the stock price.
It seeks monetary penalties and the return of any illegal trading profits Mr. Bosco may have made.
(The agency and Future are working on a possible settlement; a lawyer for the SEC says it seeks to bar Mr. Bosco from serving as an officer or director of a public company.)
On Nov. 9, Future filed for Chapter 11, listing assets of $22.2 million and liabilities of $5.3 million, about half of them in claims for stock options and wages from Mr. Bosco, his family and company officers and employees.
Mr. Gorman says Future filed because it couldn't meet financial obligations and wanted to centralize the litigation it faces.
Future has sued Price Waterhouse in U.S. bankruptcy court in Dallas for breach of contract.
Price Waterhouse calls the suit "nonsense."
What the future holds for Future is uncertain.
Mr. Berle would like to continue as its celebrity spokesman if the dispute over his five-year, $1.25 million contract can be resolved, a Berle lawyer says.
Mr. Jensen, the former director, says he is "ticked off" at Mr. Bosco but still believes the company is "sitting on a gold mine."
Mr. Leonard at Invesco says his fund will hang onto its 4% stake.
"I think they have a valuable franchise with all those TV stations and Billy Bob's," he says.
He expects Future to file a reorganization plan soon.
Fidelity's Mr. Downey, who said as late as October that "the fundamentals are pretty good on this company," now declines to comment.
Mr. Khan, who has left Reynolds Kendrick and now works in Los Angeles for Desert Mountain Securities of Phoenix, remains a booster; "I've seen nothing of substance to question the core assets," the controversial broker says.
He would like to see current management ousted: "That would clean the muddied waters better than anything else."
But Bishop Cheen, an analyst at Paul Kagan Associates in Carmel, Calif., says the idea of building networks out of low-power stations "has been tried and has died many times before."
Future isn't a company Mr. Cheen tracks, but he says the Cable Act of 1992 mandates only that low-power stations be carried on cable systems in sparsely populated areas where there isn't a full-power station available.
The company is still out there peddling its vision.
A convention last week in Miami Beach of the National Association of Television Program Executives had a busy MSTV booth.
Passers-by could pick up a February program schedule and the "First Issue, Collector's Edition" of Main Street Magazine, all about the nascent network.
It describes Milton Berle as chairman of the network's executive committee, and MSTV as a division of Future Communications Inc., traded over-the-counter on the Nasdaq system under the stock symbol FCMI.
-- Sergio Bosco, chairman and CEO of Future (temporarily stepped aside in October).
-- David W. Gorman, president of Future.
-- Robert Rios Jr., executive vice president and secretary of Future.
-- Ronald I. Palluth, electrical technician and consultant to Future.
-- Robert K. Wilpitz, energy consultant.
-- Luis Miguel Aguilar, CEO of Por Cable Television Nacional of Mexico.
-- Gerald Beeson, bank executive.
Joined board in September, replacing Arne Jensen, a former CBS News technical supervisor.
