Some Ohio state legislators got more than cookies and soda at a meeting in Columbus last June with officials of McDonald & Co.
Securities, a municipal-bond dealer.
On the way out, they also got $500 checks -- or as McDonald puts it, honorariums for their time.
The Securities and Exchange Commission is now considering a proposal that would bar municipal-bond dealers and underwriters from making political contributions to state and local officials.
But political contributions aren't the only way to win influential friends in the municipal-bond business.
Besides honorariums, dealers and underwriters have given issuers and politicians perks ranging from golf trips and fancy dinners to baseball and theater tickets.
The practice of gift-giving by bond dealers seeking underwriting business is widespread, says Paul Woolsey, who worked in municipal finance in Oklahoma for 25 years.
"It goes on everywhere in the country."
Indeed, underwriters have paid for bond issuers to attend the lavish annual Pennsylvania Society Dinner at New York's Waldorf Astoria Hotel.
In Ohio, the firm Season, Good & Mayer fetes issuers with baseball and football tickets and opening-day buffets.
And Maine's state treasurer took advantage of an expense-paid trip to a conference in Tucson, Ariz., sponsored by a company that provides investment-management services for bond issuers.
The treasurer, Sam Shapiro, says he accepted expenses for the trip because he was a speaker on a panel.
Prosecutors, attorneys and others familiar with the municipal-bond industry say that at the very least, the practice of giving and taking even small gifts provides the appearance of a conflict of interest.
At the worst, it may be downright illegal, for it may be part of a pattern of extensive wrongdoing.
Under what he terms the "Al Capone theory," Michael Chertoff, the U.S. attorney in Newark, N.J., says that in situations where there is reason to suspect corrupt activity, but where the alleged crimes are tough to prove, prosecutors will resort to charging individuals with "technical crimes like receiving a gratuity, whether it be a trip or a $75 dinner."
This recalls the government's approach of cracking down on the Chicago gangster by charging him with tax evasion instead of harder-to-prove crimes.
It's a tactic that hasn't yet been used in criminal cases involving the municipal-bond industry, Mr. Chertoff says.
But it has been employed in other cases involving government officials.
Last year, for example, a federal jury convicted a former Housing and Urban Development Department official, whose job entailed soliciting business from that agency, on a charge of providing an expense-paid trip to New York and tickets to the hit musical "Cats" to a HUD official.
"Even if state law doesn't forbid it, public officials shouldn't be accepting gifts or presents on account of their public positions," Mr. Chertoff says.
"The gratuity situation is potentially corrupting and symptomatic" of bigger problems.
State laws governing the acceptance of entertainment and gratuities vary.
Kentucky officials aren't even permitted to attend dinners held for the closing of bond offerings.
Iowa officials can go to dinner -- if it costs $4 or less.
In Virginia and North Dakota, laws are more lenient.
Wall Street firms are accustomed to schmoozing and boozing their corporate clients.
But wining and dining municipal-bond issuers is different.
"These are not private transactions, they are in the public domain," says Mr. Woolsey.
"Every dollar that goes into these entertainment expenses is a dollar out of a taxpayer's pocket," because underwriters often seek to recoup the costs by charging the local bond issuers higher fees.
Carol Roberts, a county commissioner in Palm Beach, Fla., says she learned that the hard way, when as a new commissioner, she flew to New York for a closing of a deal.
"It takes an hour to sign the contracts and documents," she says, but "all the costs of the trip are charged back to you."
Responding to increased scrutiny of the municipal-bond market by prosecutors and the SEC, the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board last week proposed new record-keeping requirements for gifts and gratuities made by bond dealers and underwriters.
The board, the industry's self-regulatory agency, sets a $100-a-year cap on the value of gifts, although it exempts certain payments.
Among the items exempted: "Occasional gifts of meals or tickets to theatrical, sporting and other entertainment events, as well as the sponsoring of legitimate business functions."
Merrill Lynch & Co., Goldman, Sachs & Co., Lazard Freres & Co. and other Wall Street firms have already tightened their own rules in recent months.
Municipal-bond employees at those firms must clear in advance lunches and dinners bought for issuers.
Goldman is even considering barring those engraved plastic cubes that are given to municipal-finance clients as souvenirs of a deal.
Mr. Shapiro, Maine's treasurer, says he has already noticed the difference.
Wall Street firms, he says, have cut back sharply on holiday gifts.
"This year, I had to buy my own address book," he says.
"I used to get lots of them."
And on a recent trip to New York, he says, he asked a Kidder, Peabody & Co. banker if they could take a cab downtown, only to be told, "We're taking the subway."
(Mr. Shapiro says the banker gave him a $1.25 subway token.)
Gordon Reis, managing partner of Season Good, a Cincinnati-based municipal-bond firm, says he sees no reason to quit giving away sports tickets.
"I don't think anybody in the world can be bought for the price of a baseball ticket -- especially to the Reds," he says.
What these events do, he says, is to provide "access" to officials.
In the Ohio honorarium incident, McDonald says it gave checks to about 17 state legislators who attended two informal meetings with company officials last June.
"It seemed a perfectly acceptable practice to pay them an honorarium for spending time with us," says Richard Clark, a McDonald spokesman.
At least one state representative returned his check to McDonald.
But others, including Wayne M. Jones, cashed theirs.
"It was legal," Mr. Jones says, adding, "We have absolutely no control over awarding bond issues."
Mr. Jones, however, does sit on a Legislature finance committee.
McDonald's action, which was lawful, has certainly made waves in Ohio.
Last week, the state Legislature passed a bill prohibiting honorariums and limiting gratuities to $75 a year for each legislator.
Gov. George V. Voinovich is expected to sign the bill into law soon.
Treasurys were pushed higher across the board Friday on word that inflation pressures were minimal in the fourth quarter.
Soon after the Commerce Department reported fourth-quarter gross domestic product figures in the morning, prices began soaring.
Profit-taking by midafternoon took some of the glow off the gains, but nonetheless, the market put in an impressive performance.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond rose 5/8 point, or $6.25 for a bond with $1,000 face value, to 100 13/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of its price, dropped to 6.21% from 6.26% on Thursday.
Traders and investors, both in the U.S. and abroad, ignored the strong fourth-quarter gross domestic product growth rate of 5.9% to cast their eyes on inflation data within the GDP report.
The Commerce Department reported the fixed-price deflator rose at a rate of 2.2% and the implicit price deflator, a measure of consumer consumption patterns, rose at a rate of only 1.3%.
"Growth was strong, but within consensus, and the market really roared on the low deflator data, and sort of ran with that all day," says Cary Leahey, senior financial market economist at Lehman Brothers Inc.
In doing so, the market ignored some data that may indicate that first-quarter growth will be stronger than anticipated.
The fourth-quarter GDP report wasn't boosted as much as expected by inventory rebuilding, Mr. Leahey noted.
"That bodes well for first-half growth," he said.
