At a time when China has thrown open its economy and embraced transformation, the Rev. Michel Masson is an anachronism.
Together with another Jesuit scholar, the graying French priest scours Chinese-language news clippings for details of change in China.
Information they glean from 21 newspapers and four dozen magazines is compiled into a thin, biweekly newsletter, China News Analysis.
It is, says one subscriber, "the China watcher's bible."
But knowing China doesn't mean trusting it.
So this summer, the two Jesuit priests will shut down their spartan Hong Kong office, lay off their local staff and move to Taiwan.
In part, the reasons are professional: A Catholic university law school there has decided to establish a research center on China, and China News Analysis has been offered a home.
In larger part, though, the reasons are political: In 1997, Hong Kong will revert to China.
The intellectual heirs of the Jesuits who arrived in China more than four centuries ago aren't waiting to find out whether Chinese history will repeat itself and once again they will be forced out.
"We are not threatening to the Beijing government," Father Masson says.
"But you could have some people in the church here who would want to be more patriotic than the next, saying, `who are these people spying on the government?'"
"That could make the Jesuits uneasy," Father Masson adds.
China News Analysis' decision to leave Hong Kong highlights the sense of unease about freedom of information in post-1997 Hong Kong.
Beijing has promised to maintain the territory's existing customs and way of life for 50 years.
But Beijing already is showing signs of being uncomfortable with open debate on some subjects -- particularly China.
When Hong Kong's Foreign Correspondents' Club recently decided to screen two documentaries about the life of China's late Chairman Mao Tse-tung, for instance, the Chinese government's local arm tried to persuade the journalists to call off the showing.
Apparently feeling the political pressure, Hong Kong's government suggested the club would need a license for the screening.
The club ignored both requests and showed the films to a standing-room-only crowd of 300.
More than other publications, China News Analysis has a history that might bring trouble with Beijing.
The Hungarian Jesuit priest who founded the publication, Laszlo Ladany, was a bitter opponent of Communism.
"He had an anti-Communist twist," says Father Masson, "but for good reasons."
Father Ladany lived in China from 1940 to 1949, and was forced to flee to Hong Kong when Mao's Communists came to power in 1949.
He put his Chinese expertise to use founding China News Analysis in 1953, then spent the next three decades unraveling the ideological and social upheaval in the newsletter.
He disclosed the enormous starvation that followed the Great Leap Forward in the late 1950s, and he monitored 14 radio broadcasts a day to report on the chaos of the Cultural Revolution a decade later.
When a team of four Jesuits -- including Father Masson, 57 years old, who has a Harvard doctorate in the intellectual history of modern China, and his colleague, the Rev. Yves Nalet, 46 -- took the helm a decade ago, after Father Ladany retired, they tempered the partisan approach and focused more on economic change.
The approach works: Even at $200 a year, circulation has doubled now to about 700 -- including some subscribers in China.
Father Masson says he wouldn't feel secure in a China-ruled Hong Kong.
Catholics remain persecuted in China -- Bishop Su Zhiming, a 61-year-old Roman Catholic leader, was released last Thursday after two weeks' detention following a meeting he had with a U.S. congressman.
Two other priests arrested last month also were released.
Father Masson says the move won't affect what he considers the objectivity of China News Analysis.
"We report on what the Chinese are saying, including their own criticisms," he says.
