R.H. Macy & Co.'s board approved an outline of a bankruptcy-law reorganization plan that strikes a compromise between the positions taken by Macy Chairman Myron E. Ullman III and board member Laurence Tisch.
According to people familiar with the board's conclusion, Macy's eleven directors unanimously agreed yesterday to value the New York-based retailer at $3.5 billion, less than some creditors and Mr. Tisch had advocated.
Macy's proposal is designed to pacify the company's junior creditors, including unsecured bondholders who are owed $1.3 billion.
Under the plan, they would receive securities representing any value above $3.5 billion.
But Macy's plan may not please senior creditors enough to prevent them from making good on threats to throw their weight behind Federated Department Stores Inc., a Macy rival and creditor that has stated its desire to merge the two department store companies.
Fidelity Investments, whose mutual funds own $490 million of senior debt, had been working with Macy management since mid-January on a joint plan.
Earlier this week, Daniel Harmetz, the Fidelity manager who is negotiating with Macy, said he would not back a Macy proposal that valued the company at more than $3.5 billion.
Further, Macy's plan virtually ensures greater contention between senior creditors and public bondholders over the value of the collateral backing the senior creditors' claims.
Under bankruptcy law, a reorganization plan cannot be approved over the objections of senior secured creditors.
Senior creditors, who are owed about $2.4 billion plus interest, have claims against all of Macy's assets, which run the gamut from real estate to the value of the Macy name itself.
The bondholders are to be paid only after senior creditors have been paid in full.
Macy and its creditors are prevented by a court order from discussing any aspect of the reorganization.
However, Cyrus R. Vance, the court-appointed mediator, allowed the company to release a statement yesterday.
"Macy's board examined a variety of options," Mr. Ullman said in the statement, which came after an often-contentious two-day board meeting.
He added in the statement that he believes Macy's proposal will lead to a consensual plan all creditors will accept and that the company envisions emerging from Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law proceedings in January 1995.
The company has been operating under bankruptcy court protection since January 1992.
Mr. Ullman's efforts to craft a plan involving Fidelity and General Electric Co.'s GE Capital, also a Macy senior creditor, appear to have run into trouble because he did not fully inform the board.
According to one Macy board member, Mr. Ullman never sought approval from Macy's board to negotiate a deal which would have transferred control of the company to Fidelity.
Under the plan Mr. Ullman and his team favored, Fidelity would have ended up owning as much as 40% of Macy's stock.
The Macy director said yesterday that Macy's board didn't become aware of management's negotiations until a report appeared in The Wall Street Journal.
"If there was a negotiation, it wasn't presented to the board as something to be approved by the board," he said.
Mr. Ullman yesterday denied that the board had been kept in the dark.
"The board of Macy was kept fully informed and involved in the process," he said.
However, Macy's board first heard a formal presentation about a joint plan that could involve Fidelity on Feb. 28, from Blackstone Group.
The presentation prompted Laurence Tisch, a Macy board member, to invite representatives of the bondholders to present their alternative valuation for the company to Macy's finance committee on March 10.
That sparked his eleventh-hour effort to place a higher value on the company than Macy's management and advisers had previously been willing to do.
Through Loews Corp., and its insurance company affiliate, CNA, Mr. Tisch owns about $52 million of Macy junior bonds.
Under the reorganization plan favored by Mr. Ullman, those bonds would have received nothing.
Under the compromise, holders of those bonds will get new Macy securities whose value depends on whether the company is worth more than $3.5 billion.
Besides Mr. Tisch, board members A. Alfred Taubman, GE Capital Chairman Gary Wendt, and Louis Page also have owned Macy bonds in the past.
Macy's proposal now forces Federated to come up with a more enticing offer, if it is to carry out Chairman Allen Questrom's announced intention to merge the two retailers.
To date, Federated has kept its plan under wraps.
Ronald Tysoe, Federated's chief financial officer, will attend today's meeting, scheduled for two o'clock in Manhattan.
It is now up to Mr. Vance to determine how Macy's negotiations with its creditors should proceed.
Mr. Vance is likely to meet with creditors following today's meeting, in order to hear their objections, before deciding whether to solicit term sheets from other interested parties, such as Federated and Fidelity.
Mr. Vance was appointed on Feb. 22 in order to speed Macy's protracted two-year bankruptcy-law proceeding.
GENERAL ELECTRIC Co.'s GE Capital unit in the past has owned some R.H. Macy & Co. bonds.
An article Wednesday incorrectly said that Gary Wendt, GE Capital's chairman, had owned the bonds.
