In recent months, Francisco Franco Orozco has trekked from his native Guadalajara as far north as Peoria, Ill., looking for just the right place for a new plant to bottle his company's tequila.
Tequila from Peoria?
Mr. Franco Orozco is still weighing that option, but his search is one sign that Ross Perot's giant sucking sound goes both ways.
That's the sound that was supposed to be made by jobs moving south because of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
But while some U.S. companies are indeed stampeding south, dozens of their Mexican counterparts are eagerly charging north.
Mexican banks, steelmakers, tire manufacturers, truck and bus makers, broadcasters and apparel and food companies are among the concerns that have been lured north by the promise of the giant U.S. market.
It isn't only Nafta that's attracting Mexican business, says Linda Killian, an analyst for Renaissance Capital Corp.
In recent years, the Mexican government has made it easier for Mexican companies to invest in the U.S. -- sometimes in surprising ways.
State officials in California are negotiating with Mexican food producers to take over canneries closed when U.S. concerns, such as Green Giant, a unit of Grand Metropolitan PLC, moved to Mexico.
In McAllen, Texas, Elasticos Selectos SA, a Mexico City-based elastics concern, will break ground this month on the first Mexican-owned maquiladora built on the U.S. side of the border.
(Maquiladoras are foreign-owned factories near the border that produce largely tariff-free goods for export.)
The motivation for the moves varies.
Consorcio G Grupo Dina SA, a Mexico City-based maker of buses and trucks, last month acquired Motor Coach Industries International Inc., Phoenix, Ariz., an intercity bus maker, in a $337 million stock swap.
"Dina essentially bought out their No. 1 interstate bus-making competitor," says Ms. Killian, of Renaissance Capital Corp.
But, adds Steven Colbert, an analyst at Prudential Securities, Dina had another powerful motive for entering the U.S. market: The Mexican bus market is expected to decline 40% this year.
Alfredo Naim Sarkis, president and chief executive of Elasticos Selectos, praises the quality of U.S. workers and of the physical infrastructure; but mostly, he cites the sales he expects from customers who demand a Made-in-the-U.S.A. label.
David Hyland, president of the U.S. unit of Internationacional de Ceramica SA, of Chihuahua, which is building a $76 million bathroom-tile manufacturing plant in Garland, Texas, says higher U.S. labor costs are offset by other factors.
"Interest rates are higher in Mexico, and ceramic tile is heavy, so freight costs are a factor," he says.
Besides, he adds, "this is where the market is."
Last week, an investor group led by Mexican entrepreneur Bernardo Dominguez agreed to buy the Westin Hotel & Resort chain's operations in the U.S. and Europe from Aoki Corp., Osaka, for $708 million.
That includes 39 U.S. hotels.
Other Mexican companies are heading north as a defensive move.
Cementos Mexicanos SA, Monterrey, the largest cement producer in North America, has been buying ready-mix concrete companies in California, Arizona, Texas and other states.
Hector Castillo, an analyst for Morgan Stanley & Co., says the company wants to keep U.S. cement from flooding Mexico, where it controls 66% of the market.
In Mexico, cement now sells for about $85 a metric ton, compared with $64 in the U.S.
But some Mexican companies are finding the U.S. market tougher than expected.
Conservas de la Laguna SA, of Coahuila, opened shop in San Antonio six months ago because "we know U.S. companies are coming" to Mexico, says Miguelangel Fernandez Montoya, president of the vegetable packing concern, "and we know there are products -- sweet corn, pickles -- where U.S. companies are more productive, more efficient than we are."
So the packer is dumping those lines at home and pushing its strong suit -- jalapenos -- abroad.
The company is getting an expensive education.
Half of its first shipment -- three trailer-loads of plump, juicy chiles in jars and cans -- remains unsold.
Mr. Fernandez says the company wasn't familiar with the U.S. system of wholesaling through food brokers and had little luck peddling to retailers -- in part because it overestimated the prices it could charge.
Also, the company hasn't advertised, making it difficult to break into the market, says Laura Trevino, general manager of U.S. operations.
"Even though it's a high-quality product, it's new here," she says, and retailers are afraid to sell brands people aren't familiar with.
So the company has chopped prices to get its foot in the door, and this month, Ms. Trevino hired a marketing consultant.
She says if that doesn't produce results by April, "we'll hire a broker."
To reduce the risk of entering an unfamiliar market, some Mexican companies have sought U.S. partners.
For example, Grupo Industrial Bimbo SA, a huge Mexico City-based baking concern that acquired tortilla factories in Ohio and Oklahoma in recent months, said it will form a joint venture with privately held Mrs. Baird's Bakeries Inc., of Dallas.
Bimbo will help finance Mrs. Baird's planned national expansion, and, among other things, Mrs. Baird's will distribute Bimbo's tortilla products.
In the U.S., the benefits of the migration are starting to show.
McAllen expects the Elasticos Selectos plant to create 400 new jobs and pump $25 million to $30 million a year into the local economy.
Garland's bathroom-tile plant will generate another 400 jobs.
And bilingual managers in the U.S. -- people such as native Texan Roger Trevino -- are suddenly in great demand.
Mr. Trevino, who founded his own local candy company in 1986, is now also general manager of the U.S. subsidiary of Chicles Canels SA, of San Luis Potosi, a Mexican candy maker looking to expand its U.S. market.
In his cluttered warehouse office in San Antonio, Mr. Trevino sorts through mango/jalapeno sweets, pickle-flavored salt packets and oddly truncated ice cream cones filled with cajeta -- a Mexican caramel treat whose other name, leche quemada, translates as burnt milk.
His task is to winnow, rename and repackage these Mexican treats to appeal to American kids.
He shows the new cover art for Lava Rocks, bright-red candies that fizz and pop in the mouth.
He decided that name would go over better in the U.S. than the Mexican product name: Ogritos, or Little Ogres.
"It's just a question of Americanizing things," he explains.
