It's early morning, and you're a new-wave conservative girding for battle.
You flip on your personal computer and call up the Conservative Daily, a computerized daily planner that today offers a pithy antiabortion commentary and a cartoon to punctuate it.
To get ready for the debate on the Clinton health plan, you cruise into the Town Hall computer forum for conservatives and pluck out the latest think-tank talking points trashing the administration's program.
For an invigorating lunch, it's over to the Rush Room in the Palm Restaurant in downtown Washington to listen to radio firebrand Rush Limbaugh and fax in a comment.
Later, you share computerized post-show chatter on CompuServe's Rush Limbaugh Forum.
After work, you relax at home by tuning your TV to National Empowerment Television, the new 24-hour conservative cable-television network.
This isn't a fantasy: It's the way conservatives are operating in 1994.
Political operatives are rapidly discovering that the information superhighway carries big potential for power, both by making it easier for activists to link up and by allowing leaders to send them messages with electrifying speed.
And it is conservatives who have begun moving onto the highway the fastest, well ahead of their liberal foes.
"All this technology has been around for a while, but only now are people starting to use it effectively politically," says Lamar Alexander, a former Tennessee governor and Bush education secretary who now produces his own TV program.
In Teddy Roosevelt's day, Republicans organized through community clubs, Mr. Alexander adds, but in the 1990s they will be doing it "in their neighborhoods hooked up by cable television."
And not just by cable TV but also by modem, satellite dish and interactive video.
Michigan Gov. John Engler, an ambitious young conservative, has just started his own computerized forum on America Online.
The Heritage Foundation and National Review magazine are launching the joint Town Hall computer network, where enthusiasts can talk and retrieve background papers and articles.
The Republican National Committee last month started both its own computer forum and a weekly, hour-long TV show broadcast by satellite to 4,000 local GOP organizations.
National Empowerment Television, which was started by activist Paul Weyrich, hopes to go interactive on an experimental basis within two years.
If, for example, Senate GOP Leader Robert Dole were on discussing tax cuts, viewers could instantly vote on whether he should run for president, and also pull up a background paper on low tax rates.
"We don't even know what we've got," says Republican National Chairman Haley Barbour.
"We're just starting to use technology in the way a lot of businesses and industries have been using it."
Of course, Democrats and liberals also are discovering this, too.
The Democratic Party started a computer forum to dispense information before the GOP did, and faxes out 2,700 copies of Democratic talking points every day to followers.
The Clinton White House uses computer networks to send out word of its policies and views and to take in mail from the public.
Environmentalists and gay and lesbian activists have been particularly active.
Gay-rights advocates are organized in a computer network called Digital Queers.
And the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force just discovered the power of its forum on America Online.
When First Interstate Bancorp in Los Angeles drafted a personnel policy that didn't specifically ban discrimination based on sexual orientation, the Task Force put out a computerized call to write and phone the company.
Last month, First Interstate altered its policy.
(A spokesman says the dispute arose when First Interstate, which had in practice banned discrimination, drafted a corporatewide policy based on federal antidiscrimination guidelines that don't specifically include language regarding sexual orientation.)
But overall, conservatives are "definitely" ahead of liberal groups, says Steve Barr, a 34-year-old California Democratic activist.
He recently ran unsuccessfully for state party chairman by preaching a need to catch up.
Now he is trying to do it on his own; he will be host of a Los Angeles TV show slated to be "an urban, progressive version of what Rush Limbaugh does, with an interactive element to it."
Conservatives are out front in this race largely because a combination of forces pushed them to the leading edge of technology in the 1970s and 1980s.
Lacking the Democrats' advantage of a sympathetic labor movement with a national network of local branches, Republicans had long cast about for a similar organizing tool.
In the 1970s, Richard Viguerie discovered one.
It was direct mail, then a revolutionary concept in which computers were used to build vast mailing lists of sympathetic citizens, generate regular letters to them and rouse them to donate money to causes.
Just as that high-tech light was going on over conservatives' heads, another new technology offered them a way to address their longstanding complaints that TV-network news has a liberal bias.
That technology was cable.
Pat Robertson and Jerry Falwell launched shows and eventually an entire network carrying a political as well as a religious message.
And conservative commentators such as Robert Novak and Patrick Buchanan established early homes on cable.
"By and large conservatives have been cut out of mainstream TV," argues Burt Pines, a former journalist who is vice chairman of National Empowerment Television.
"Conservatives . . . had to find other ways of communicating."
That need became more compelling in 1993, when Republicans lost the White House bully pulpit.
That's when National Empowerment Television began taking shape.
Mr. Weyrich, head of an advocacy group called the Free Congress Foundation, had a small-scale operation to produce periodic TV programs for satellite broadcast.
In March 1993, he summoned his small staff and announced: "We're going to turn this foundation into a TV network, and each of you is going to have your own program."
Mr. Weyrich, who keeps a model of Genghis Khan's sword on his office wall so he can tell visitors he sits "to the right of Genghis Khan," reasoned that the C-Span public-affairs network had shown there is an audience for political programming.
And in the coming world of innumerable cable channels, he thought, operators would be eager for political programming with a sharper edge.
Many were skeptical.
Mr. Weyrich went to 63 conservative organizations, inviting them to sign on as "associates," meaning they would produce their own daily hour-long programs and pay a fee to have them carried on NET.
Only nine groups, including the National Rifle Association and the U.S. Business Industrial Council, signed up.
Still, with the help of a $1 million grant from a committed follower, Mr. Weyrich radically expanded his television studio.
He pieced together a lineup of original programming, including a weekly show with House Minority Whip Newt Gingrich as host, began selling conventional TV ads and hour-long "infomercials," and in December managed to begin a 24-hour-a-day schedule.
Now NET estimates it is reaching 3.6 million households by satellite dish, and four to five million more by cable.
The operation isn't making money, but Mr. Weyrich thinks it will eventually.
At the same time, Mr. Alexander was moving to launch his monthly satellite program, which takes the form of a televised town hall in which followers linked up by satellite dishes watch an hour-long discussion of some hot topic.
Mr. Alexander admits he hopes the forum will help him launch a presidential bid in 1996.
Others are moving aggressively into computer networking.
The joint Heritage Foundation-National Review computer forum, after a trial run as a free-standing service, is being reorganized and beefed up for launch on CompuServe in April.
And new conservative computer entrepreneurs are moving into the political world as well.
One is 31-year-old Mark Shorman, an engineer and consultant who was looking for a way to "combine my two loves, computers and politics."
He recently formed a company to produce the Conservative Daily, a computerized daily planner.
Each day, it gives subscribers a conservative commentary and related cartoon, along with a more conventional daily calendar.
It also contains an encyclopedia of statistics "that reveal conservatives are right" on a host of issues.
Mr. Shorman plans to send subscribers new computer disks quarterly to update the calendar.
It is unclear how much effect all this information-age politicking will have.
Some Democrats suggest that Republican and conservative TV shows amount to little more than expensive preaching to the choir.
"As a priority in an election year, should you put that money into talking to people who are already for you?" asks Catherine Moore, spokeswoman for the Democratic National Committee.
Still, Democrats are considering starting their own shows.
And in any case, there's no doubt that a lot more conservative messages are zipping around the country.
Here are some images from just one day's stroll through the land of high-tech conservatism:
On the Republican Party's computer forum, an inquisitive GOPer trying to weigh in on the health-care debate pleads for help in finding the text of Sen. Dole's response to President Clinton's State of the Union speech.
His query is promptly answered by a GOP staffer, who directs him to the forum's computerized library.
On the Rush Limbaugh computer forum, Rush's troops are egging on one another about the evils of gun-control laws.
"How many more laws do we need?" fumes John, a Limbaugh fan.
"Eventually we will have so many ineffective laws that the gun-control crusaders can push for a complete ban as the only solution."
On "Rising Tide," the weekly Republican Party program, GOP politicians are talking health care.
Over on NET, the co-anchors of the nightly "American Family" show are bashing the Clinton administration for the way it has implemented Congress's instructions on gays in the military.
And Mr. Weyrich himself, the network founder and a onetime Milwaukee television reporter, hosts a viewer call-in program with guests including Vic Gold, biographer of former President Bush.
Mr. Gold gets in a few shots at the "liberal media," and a caller from Syracuse, N.Y., allows that when President Bush raised taxes "I got so mad, I tell you I cried."
But the spirit of the technologically empowered conservatives seemed to be summarized best by a caller from Clarksville, Ark., who proclaims: "I thank God every day for NET."
