The Senate, in a bipartisan show of support for reconciliation with Vietnam, voted to urge President Clinton to end the U.S. trade embargo against Hanoi.
Twenty Republicans joined 42 Democrats on the 62-38 roll call, and the depth of support makes it more likely that Mr. Clinton will move soon to lift the restrictions first imposed on Vietnam after the fall of Saigon to Communists in 1975.
"It will be weeks not months," predicted Sen. John McCain of Arizona, a former Navy pilot and prisoner of war who was pivotal in winning GOP support for the resolution.
Minority Leader Robert Dole of Kansas and Sen. Phil Gramm of Texas, two potential presidential challengers in 1996, opposed the measure.
But most of the remaining GOP leadership followed the example of Minority Whip Alan Simpson of Wyoming and urged ending the embargo.
Among Democrats, the political picture was at least as mixed.
While business and oil interests were influential in shoring up Southern support, a striking number of liberals, including Sens. Paul Wellstone of Minnesota and Carol Moseley-Braun of Illinois, opposed the measure.
An administration official said later that no timetable has been set for a decision by Mr. Clinton, whose record of avoiding the draft in the war makes Vietnam an awkward issue for him.
There was some bitterness among proponents that the White House political apparatus remained neutral during the debate.
Left to carry the fight in support of the resolution was Massachusetts Sen. John Kerry, a Vietnam veteran who has led his party in the often tortuous debate over the thousands of Americans still missing in the war.
Like Sen. McCain's, Mr. Kerry's combat record helped him withstand attacks by veterans organizations, and both argued that trade would make it easier for Americans to move about in Vietnam and work with Hanoi on the missing.
This argument is critical to the White House, and though Vietnam is credited with cooperating during the past year, the president's main standard is still whether lifting the embargo will help in gathering more data on the missing.
To preserve some leverage, the resolution stops short of urging normalization or trade concessions enjoyed by neighbors of Vietnam.
It also draws a link between improved relations and Vietnam's success in improving its human-rights record.
