The Securities and Exchange Commission settled civil fraud charges against broker-dealer Stratton Oakmont Inc. and three of its top officers.
The Lake Success, N.Y., company, which didn't admit or deny charges, agreed to "disgorgement" of $1.5 million plus prejudgment interest of $518,622, and civil penalties of $500,000.
The SEC originally charged in March 1992 that Stratton's four top officers used aggressive stock-selling tactics to make at least $11 million in two episodes of manipulating the shares of Nova Capital Inc., Atlanta.
The SEC had characterized Stratton as a "boiler room" operation that used untrained brokers for massive coldcall selling.
Under the settlement, Stratton Oakmont remains in business, but three top officers agreed to fines and stiff penalties.
The brokerage firm also agreed to set up a fund to first pay individual clients who suffered losses as a result of their purchases and sales of Nova's stock and then for customers who have won arbitration awards against the firm.
Former Stratton Oakmont President Jordan Belfort will pay a civil penalty of $100,000 and has agreed to be barred from association with any broker, dealer, investment adviser, investment company or municipal securities dealer.
Former Secretary Kenneth Greene will pay a $100,000 civil penalty and is barred, with a right to reapply after five years to become associated with brokers, investment companies or similar entities.
Former Vice President Daniel Porush, who has been president of the firm for the past six months, was suspended in a sales supervisory capacity for 12 months, and ordered to pay a civil penalty of $100,000.
He will continue as president of the firm.
Stratton Oakmont said it was "extraordinarily pleased" with the SEC settlement.
New York attorney Ira Lee Sorkin, outside counsel for the firm, noted that Stratton Oakmont had set up a reserve in anticipation of a settlement.
The firm has "more than sufficient" funds to keep its 300 employees and brokers in business and meet all regulatory financial requirements, he said.
