Kim Joo Jin and his diminutive Anam Group are in a precarious position: They must tread softly, lest they arouse South Korea's industrial giants, but not so quietly that they are ignored by stodgy bureaucrats.
Outgunned by huge conglomerates, which control the production of everything from textiles to oil tankers in South Korea, Mr. Kim and his associates have become experts at identifying smaller, but lucrative electronics markets that the bigger groups have passed by.
Along the way, the Anam group has earned a reputation for being the kind of innovative, focused concern that Korea Inc. needs to maintain its competitive edge.
It is a strategy that has already helped group flagship Anam Industries Co. become the world's leading semiconductor-packaging company, generating sales of about $1 billion last year while maintaining its grip on 40% of the world's chip-packaging business.
"Investors are attracted to Anam's commitment and innovation," says Han Ilsuk, an analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities Ltd.
"Because it has become such a key niche player . . . you can always be sure of its earnings growth."
Now, Anam is focusing on telecommunications.
While the big business groups, known as chaebols, stalk huge contracts for fiber-optic cable and cellular-phone networks, Anam is homing in on one sector: radio systems for use by transportation companies.
It is a simple but lucrative technology that is already reaping gains in Japan for Motorola Inc.
Anam has invested about $30 million in trunk-radio research, which Mr. Kim says could eventually generate $1 billion in local and overseas sales.
"Hopefully, we can create a new industry and export it to China and Southeast Asia," says the 60-year-old Mr. Kim.
The only roadblock is the ministry of communications, part of the extensive bureaucracy that has managed local industry since South Korea launched its economic development in the late 1960s.
Before Anam can develop a radio system, it must first obtain a license from the ministry, and that takes time.
"We're trying to convince the ministry that we're the company they should deal with," says Mr. Kim, who lectured on economics at Villanova University before taking the helm at Anam in 1992.
Anam's approach, and the resistance it is encountering, offers a microcosmic look at South Korea's bumpy transition from a centrally planned, developing economy to a sophisticated, free-market one.
President Kim Young Sam has made deregulation, innovation and globalization key pillars of his administration, but his reformist vision isn't always embraced by South Korea's powerful civil servants, many of whom are wary of proposals that come from outside the bureaucracy.
A spokesman for the communications ministry declined to comment on Anam's bid, but the ministry has announced that it will decide on the license next month.
It wouldn't be the first time Anam has introduced a new technology to South Korea.
Mr. Kim's father and group founder, Kim Hyang Soo, opened a small chip-packaging plant in 1968, making Anam Industrial the first South Korean company to enter the semiconductor industry.
Nearly two decades later, Anam Semiconductor Design Co. developed a process that greatly enhances the density of circuits on Asic semiconductors, which expands the applications of each chip.
Now named Anam Semiconductor & Technology Co. and awaiting approval for a listing on the Korean Stock Exchange, the company is a world leader in Asic design packaging.
Anam Electronics Co., a consumer electronics maker and the group's only listed affiliate, anticipated the demand for large-screen televisions and dominated that market until rivals from the Goldstar and Samsung groups caught up.
It now holds a 20% market share.
Still, an aggressive capacity expansion program has saddled Anam Industrial with a relatively high net debt-to-equity ratio, which has hobbled the company's earnings growth.
But analysts expect that figure to decline and profit growth to recover in the next two years.
Anam's narrow focus makes it an exception in an industrial culture seemingly obsessed with size and breadth.
On average, South Korea's chaebols control 21 affiliates engaged in diverse, often unprofitable businesses; all but one of Anam's six affiliates are related to electronics.
As a result, Anam can move faster.
When Australia's Cedcom Network Systems was looking for a licensing and production agent for its Wireless Lan office network last June, Anam S&T jumped at the chance.
A deal was signed by last November.
"With these multinationals, you're always dealing with second layers," says Ralph Tobias, Cedcom's managing director.
"But with Anam, you deal straight with the chairman.
I find their view quite refreshing."
Cedcom's system, which is patented in the U.S., South Korea and Australia, replaces wires with signals transmitted from ceiling stations.
The technology is so new that it is not yet standardized, which has dissuaded South Korea's big companies from entering the industry.
"Maybe when the business matures, the chaebols will get into it," says J.S. Choi, sales director for AT&T Communications Korea Ltd.
Mr. Kim says he expects a prototype Wireless Lan system to be ready by the end of this month, with production scheduled for June; the system is not so large or powerful that it needs a license from the ministry.
With any luck, he reckons, Anam will be marketing the system in the U.S. before the chaebols can react.
"You have to create your own market," says Stephen Kim, Anam S&T's president.
"That's how we survived for 30 years in Korea as such a small company," he says.
