World trade growth slowed to less than 3% in 1993 from 4% in 1992, mainly because of a decline in the flow of goods across borders in Western Europe, which accounts for 47% of the global activity.
But production growth doubled to an estimated 2%, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade said at the multilateral trade group's annual meeting in Geneva.
Sharp growth last year in areas such as North America, which accounts for 18% of the world total, and Asia, including China, couldn't offset the trade decline among sluggish European economies.
Trade in the European Union, formerly the European Community, was the most depressed, because of ailing sectors such as autos.
Western European economies showed signs of recovery in the 1993 fourth quarter, and consumers and investors in recession-hit economies could regain confidence, bolstered by the recent North American and world trade-liberalization agreements, a GATT official said.
A Japanese court ordered 12 factories in Tokyo's industrial belt to pay a total of $6.5 million to 106 area residents as compensation for illnesses from tainted air.
Though the Kawasaki court held the firms responsible for air pollution, it dismissed demands that they reduce plant emissions -- the second such ruling in Japan, which encourages industrial development.
The 1982 lawsuit had been filed by 128 residents, seeking $23.6 million in compensation and tighter pollution controls.
The court also rejected a claim that auto exhaust contributed to the pollution and health problems, thus relieving the government and highway operators of liability.
China's Communist Party ordered tough controls on the media, saying "ideological rectitude" is essential to the ruling party's power and success with economic reforms.
Propaganda officials nationwide are to be indoctrinated to guide public opinion about the sweeping shift to a so-called socialist market economy, allowing further reforms.
As the government has overhauled its tax and banking system, liberalized prices and cut subsidies, it also has faced threats to its authority from disaffection with high inflation, chronic corruption and economic dislocations.
Just 16.3% of Japanese companies allow employees leave to care for ill or elderly family members, up only slightly from 14.1% three years ago, a Labor Ministry survey found.
But 51% of the 8,000 firms with at least 30 workers offer child-care leaves.
With Japanese society aging rapidly, the ministry has been preparing legislation on nursing leaves with job protection.
These leaves are more common at large companies and scarce at small and midsize firms.
Though a 1991 law requires child-care leaves, it lacks a penalty for any violations, so compliance has been slow.
Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto opened Pakistan's first all-female police station, as part of her campaign for equal rights for women.
About 50 female officers staff the Rawalpindi station, joining Punjab's provincial force of 85,000 men at the same pay scales.
Mrs. Bhutto said, "Financial independence is the key" to deterring abuses of women in the predominantly Islamic, male-dominated society, where women typically get less education than men and marry early.
Mrs. Bhutto has promised to put women in 10% of top police posts and on the country's highest court, and to set up special courts for cases against women.
About 50,000 condominiums will be offered for sale in the Tokyo area this year, a 13% increase from last year and the highest total since 1983, a private research firm estimated.
Including unsold condos that were put on the market last year, the total supply this year will increase 7% to 56,700, the Haseko Corp.
General Research Institute said.
Demand is expected to be brisk because of record-low mortgage rates.
Public-sector unions in Portugal said at least 85% of their 630,000 members staged a one-day strike over pay.
The government said the estimate was exaggerated.
The walkout closed schools and halted public transit and most hospital services.
The unions hinted at a general strike if the center-right government refused to increase its offer of a 2% pay raise for 1994, when annual inflation is targeted between 4% and 5.5%.
Saying the 2% offer would be canceled by a 2% increase in workers' pension contributions, the unions want wages boosted at least 6%.
The government reiterated it wouldn't budge, saying economic recovery and job creation hinge on wage moderation.
In Bolivia, a one-day general strike -- to demand a higher minimum wage and protest government plans to let private investors buy as much as half of state-owned companies -- got only limited support.
Unions then agreed to open talks with the economically conservative government, which had declared the national strike illegal.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
Commercial and residential rents in Hong Kong will increase at least 10% this year, a property agency estimated.
Office rents last year soared 39%, as demand quickly absorbed available space. . . .
A Canadian arbitration panel ruled that an employee of Toronto's housing agency who didn't turn up for work because he had a hangover is entitled to sick pay.
