Short interest on the Nasdaq Stock Market continued its seemingly inexorable climb, setting a record for the 14th consecutive month in March, according to the National Association of Securities Dealers.
Nasdaq short interest for the period Feb. 9 through March 8 (and settled as of March 15) grew 2.2% to 717.3 million shares from mid-February's 701.8 million.
Short interest is viewed as a generally bearish indicator.
This month's climb in short interest comes amid a correction in most broad-based stock indexes.
Topping the list of companies with the largest short-interest positions was highflier Snapple Beverage Corp., followed by Mobile Telecommunications Technologies Corp. and Dell Computer Corp.
Dell has seen its stock slide sharply in recent months.
Rising short interest in a stock suggests investors see further declines ahead.
A short sale is a bet that a stock will tumble.
An investor sells borrowed shares, knowing that they must eventually be replaced for return to the lender.
If the replacement shares cost less than those sold earlier, the short seller makes a profit.
Short interest is the total of shares sold short at any given time and not yet covered.
Short interest on the Nasdaq National Market, comprising the larger-capitalization issues, climbed 1.9% to 665 million shares from 652.5 million a month earlier.
Among the small-cap stocks, which make up a third of the Nasdaq market, short interest jumped 6% to 52.3 million shares from 49.3 million a month earlier.
The National Market's short interest ratio as of mid-March rose to 2.56 from 2.39.
The short interest ratio for the smallest Nasdaq stocks rose to 1.14 from 0.94.
The ratio -- the number of trading days that would be required to close out the total short position through share purchases -- is viewed as a measure of trader sentiment.
Among the companies with the largest short interest positions, Snapple's grew nearly 3% to 9.6 million shares, Mobile Telecomm climbed about 2% to 8.7 million shares and Dell Computer surged more than 10% to 8.4 million.
The Nasdaq stocks with the largest volume increases in short interest were Great American Recreation Inc., Electronic Arts Inc., Site Holdings Inc., Price/Costco Inc. and Intel Corp.
Those with the largest volume decreases were Comcast Corp.'s Class A special shares, MCI Communications Corp., American Power Conversion Corp. and Westwood One Inc.
The following table shows the Nasdaq issues in which a short interest position of at least 100,000 shares existed at mid-March, or in which the short position had changed by at least 50,000 shares since mid-February.
