Stung by European Parliament accusations of foot-dragging, the European Union's single-market commissioner vowed to push EU governments into abolishing border checks of individuals.
Passport checks have multiplied since barriers supposedly were dropped a year ago.
The EU Commission will present members with measures setting conditions for people's free movement.
Passage is iffy, as most of the proposals need EU governments' unanimous approval.
The most controversial measure would allow free travel throughout the 12-nation bloc by non-EU citizens after legal entry.
Britain, which opposes abolition of border checks, argues that guarantees of people's free movement don't apply to nationals of non-EU countries and contends passport checks are thus needed.
Problems with a central computer system delayed the Feb. 1 lifting of passport controls by all EU countries except Britain, Denmark and Ireland.
That pact could be implemented by the end of June.
A Philippine committee identified ways to make up for revenues that would be lost by scrapping a deficit-fighting increase in the oil-products levy, suspended following widespread protests.
Among substitute measures that could be imposed by executive order are increased motor-vehicle registration fees, an airport terminal fee and a 5% cut in government maintenance and operating expenses.
Other revenue-raising measures, which need congressional approval, include broadening the value-added tax and reducing the tax exemption for married couples.
French auto makers and insurers agreed on a plan to reduce car thefts and claims for them.
Producers will install antitheft devices in most of their high-end models, adding about $165 to a car's price.
If this results in fewer claims, insurers will reduce policy premiums proportionately.
In 1992 -- the latest data available -- 312,000 vehicles were stolen in France, only one-third of which were recovered, and insurers paid $1.42 billion on 850,000 claims totaling $2.26 billion for stolen cars or accessories.
Claims have doubled since 1990.
Steep insurance premiums for autos favored by thieves have discouraged car purchases, hurting the economy.
After communications workers in Russia blocked transmission of radio and television programs to much of the vast country, the government agreed to demands by the 950,000-member union to make good on months of unpaid wages.
Technicians' brief strike silenced 40% of state radio's reach and blacked out favorite shows on the two nationwide TV networks.
The government promised to pay $43 million it owes to broadcasting companies.
It blamed a payment crisis, affecting millions of state workers in sectors ranging from mining to steel, on insufficient revenue and a reluctance to print more money, to avoid fueling inflation.
Turkey plans to accelerate sell-offs of state enterprises, predicting proceeds of $20.69 billion and savings of $7.33 billion in outlays for the firms by the end of 1995.
Since the privatization program began in 1984, only $1.7 billion of enterprises or shares have been turned over to the private sector, with net government proceeds totaling $900 million.
In redirecting its focus from mismanaged firms, the agency has marketed stock in more robust operations to help finance roads, dams and water projects.
But agency financing, aided by taxes and duties, has been diverted or used to plug government deficits, and the program has run up $7.8 billion of debt.
Israel's central bank will liberalize foreign-exchange transactions in a few months, allowing banks to set their own constantly floating rates for currencies against the shekel and compete for customers.
Now, the Bank of Israel sets exchange rates once a day, with commercial banks serving only as order conduits.
The new system, common in developed economies, is part of reforms to reduce the central bank's role in currency trading and make the shekel fully convertible.
The sale of a confectioner, Poiana-Produse Zaharoase SA, marked the start of big industrial privatizations in Romania.
Kraft Jacobs Suchard, the Swiss unit of Philip Morris Cos. of the U.S., acquired 82% of Poiana for $4.4 million and plans to invest $17 million over five years to modernize the company and increase its production capacity.
The remaining 18% will be offered to Poiana employees.
Since Romania's authoritarian regime collapsed in December 1989, only small companies, mostly restaurants and hotels, have been privatized.
Corruption charges halted a sell-off of Petromin, the state's big shipping concern.
Pressured by international lending organizations, the government has vowed to complete 2,000 privatizations this year, or almost five times the total since Romania began pursuing a market economy.
POSTSCRIPTS . . .
An Athens prosecutor filed felony charges against a graphic-design firm that raised money to pay its debts by allegedly printing forged bonds of Greece's National Mortgage Bank. . . .
Spain said gross income from tourism last year rose 12% to $17.82 billion from a year earlier.
