Cable industry executives have been streaming into Washington in the last few weeks with a blunt message: Lower cable television rates would put a roadblock in the information superhighway.
Their target is the Federal Communications Commission, which is scheduled next Tuesday to take up the issue of whether to seek further cuts in cable rates.
Commission members have leaned toward further rate cuts, worried that their credibility is on the line.
They promised consumers a 10% cut in rates nationwide last April; instead, a spot survey last fall showed a third of cable subscribers actually paid higher rates following the FCC action.
But industry executives argue any further rate cuts will hurt their profits and crimp their ability to help build Vice President Al Gore's vaunted nationwide information system.
Even small rate cuts, they argue, will shatter the vision of cable and phone companies competing to offer affordable phone and cable TV service along with interactive entertainment, educational, medical and shopping services.
Some executives have even dragged their bankers to FCC meetings, to testify to their tenuous financial condition.
On the hot seat is new FCC Chairman Reed Hundt, who will be presiding over his first major vote.
"If Chairman Hundt does this as his first major policy decision," warns Texas GOP Rep. Jack Fields, "he is going to ignite a war."
The heated lobbying may be an early taste of the future for the FCC.
The once-sleepy regulatory agency plays the key role in the government's effort to balance the interests of the telecommunications industry against those of the consumer.
And legislation reshaping that industry, which many on Capitol Hill believe is likely to be enacted this year, will vastly increase the FCC's role.
Alan Gerry, chairman and chief executive officer of Cablevision Industries, the nation's eighth-largest cable operator, was one of those who came in to plead with Mr. Hundt last week.
In a 10-page letter, he argued that "reregulation of cable television has had a profound impact on CVI's business by significantly reducing our revenues and operating cash flow."
He said further rate cuts could force the company out of the cable business, or lead it to sell out to a telephone company.
"We want to be competitors on the information superhighway, not victims of it," Mr. Gerry wrote.
Backing up the executives are their allies on Capitol Hill.
Rep. Fields, the ranking minority member on the House telecommunications subcommittee, said in a letter to Mr. Hundt that "any further downward rate adjustment by the FCC can only be read as an expression that you do not believe that there is any meaningful role for the cable industry in developing the information highway of the future."
Mr. Hundt has been under pressure from lawmakers on the other side of the issue as well.
Last November, shortly after he was sworn in, he received a letter from Senate Commerce Chairman Ernest Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina, and 35 other senators, who warned: "It is our view that the commission must take additional action to reduce cable rates and step up its enforcement activities to ensure that cable firms are not evading the letter and the spirit of the legislation passed last year."
As a result of that legislation, the FCC adopted rules establishing "reasonable" rates for cable service in the handful of markets where cable companies face competition.
Under the law, cable operators can skip this benchmark process and opt for calculating rates based on their actual costs of providing service.
To get approval for cost-based rates, however, companies have to give the FCC detailed cost data.
On Tuesday, the FCC will vote not only on modifying the benchmark formula but also on standards for cost-based pricing.
In anticipation of the decisions, the commission extended its freeze on cable systems' revenues until May 15.
Consumer groups argue that the cable industry has been doing well -- too well -- under the 1993 rules.
Bradley Stillman, legislative counsel for the Consumer Federation of America, which played an instrumental role in passing the 1992 Cable Act, contends that "captive consumers should not be forced to pay prices above competitive market levels" to build the information superhighway.
Mr. Hundt won't comment, but an FCC staff member said the chairman issued his marching orders several weeks ago: "Read the law, look at the economics and do the right thing."
