I once worked for a publisher more latitudinal than generous.
The company had a policy (since abandoned) of no pensions.
Its founder believed employees should be free to decide how to allocate their pittance without him as nanny.
This had philosophical appeal, but the tax laws made it a ghastly mistake in practice.
It consigned us to do our retirement saving with after-IRS dollars.
Only the smallest employers and those with a transient work force would still sensibly subscribe to such a policy.
My former employer subsequently began combining a 401 (k) program with annual distributions to self-managed employee accounts.
This is the way most businesses have initiated or supplemented retirement programs since the traditional annuity pension plan became less viable in the 1980s.
In a sense, the contemporary pension is a model "empowerment" device.
It aims to further a social objective -- independence in old age -- with a fairly individualized mechanism that allows "portability" between jobs.
The employer is still mixed up in it (only Individual Retirement Accounts avoid that) but the formula calls for responsibility on the receiving end, at the risk of painful consequences.
We'd be lucky to get as much out of this year's health care lawmaking.
The problem for the self-directed pension paradigm is that some key people think it's falling way short.
The evidence, say doubters, including Securities and Exchange Commission member Carter Beese, is the insidious failure of many baby boomers to keep their funds fully and smartly invested.
The result, critics fear, will be a generation decidedly poorer in retirement than its parents.
Once aggrieved, the worry goes, this group will demand government remedies.
The accompanying chart from Mr. Beese spotlights his concern (see accompanying chart -- WSJ Feb. 22, 1994).
Over the past five years, investors needed to be in stocks (as represented by the S&P 500 and Lipper Growth indexes) to realize serious gains.
Yes, this was a bull market, but stocks outperform over any meaningful stretch of time.
That's why professional money managers typically keep most of their accounts in equities.
But ordinary Americans put their self-directed pensions into low-risk bond funds or "guaranteed investment contracts" (GICs) that pay peanuts when interest rates are flat.
Those and cash represented half the portfolios of such pensions in 1992, with stock in employees' own companies an additional 21%.
That isn't going to cut it, say some economists and actuaries.
Within 20 years, they say, we'll be hearing from a politically powerful cohort that will feel seduced and abandoned.
Social Security for a typical couple over age 65 now pays only about $14,000 a year.
Today's middle-aged middle class is going to expect a lot better, but apparently doesn't know what it will take to have it.
"The baby-boom population is moving through its peak earning years toward retirement, and time is on our side -- but not for very long," Mr. Beese told one audience.
Not everyone holds this dire view.
The Congressional Budget Office last September found the boomers to be in better shape than their parents were at a similar point in life.
But the CBO used measurements from 1989 -- a peak in home prices, which distorts the picture.
-- Some want to shore up the traditional pension arrangements by relaxing strictures of the ERISA law.
This 1970s legislation was intended to safeguard recipients but reduced coverage because so many companies sought to escape its clutches.
Easing the reins on old-fashioned annuities would be fine, but these plans -- some very underfunded -- are now caught in such a web of shared obligations that their future is in doubt.
-- The alternative form of pension -- self-directed -- could be strengthened if employers stayed more involved.
Corporations could brief employees on how to meet their expectations.
But that would require some relief from legal liability when every investment does not go up and individuals seek to fix blame for their losses.
Already the market is catching on to the need for better advice.
Brokerage houses have begun advisories, although they, too, have to watch the legal restrictions on overstepping their custodial roles.
With all the personal-financial press and software packagers clamoring for attention as well, however, it shouldn't be long before anyone half awake is at least as savvy about needed yields as he is about, say, common tax deductions.
-- Some argue that the big window for withdrawal from self-directed pensions, the lump-sum distribution when leaving a job, needs to be closed.
Certainly it would be nice if the paperwork burden of transferring these holdings to a new job were eased.
But lump sums currently can be used to start a business as a second career, and it wouldn't make sense to lock up seeds of entrepreneurism.
-- That said, piggy-bank raids are nonetheless a serious shortcoming.
The culprits are people who, even if they're not necessarily on hard times, are disposed to live hand-to-mouth.
In response, some people are proposing mandatory savings -- in other words, a new tax.
This would provide "universal coverage," under a sort of super-Social Security.
A few other nations have this kind of savings scheme; the record is not one of stellar returns.
In the abstract, it might be good to see that everyone pays his due and no one is left, at the end of the day, with cause to call on someone else.
But that is not the nature of programs subject to U.S. politics.
They become mechanisms for redistribution and control, not for promotion of virtue.
If what we fear most is a generation that will seek to force others to make up for its mistakes, the best thing to do now is to pass constitutional barriers to such a majoritarian grab.
At the same time, we could attack the general flaw of undersaving by enhancing tax concessions that are a demonstrable boon to thrift -- 401 (k) s and IRAs, for example.
And we could raise the retirement thresholds for Social Security, which would have modest impact by itself but could have mammoth effects if pensions follow suit.
That wouldn't succeed in making everyone comfortable in old age, but it would improve the lot of most prudent people.
And it wouldn't require any nannies.
