Ronald W. Tysoe, who skillfully brought warring creditors together to pull Federated Department Stores Inc. out of bankruptcy-law proceedings, is at work again canvassing R.H. Macy & Co.'s creditors.
Ever since Federated bought a big chunk of Macy's secured debt two weeks ago and said it wants to merge with its rival, which is now operating under bankruptcy-court protection, Mr. Tysoe, Federated's vice chairman and chief financial officer, has been making the rounds of Macy creditors to discuss Federated's plan.
Back in 1992, he orchestrated Federated's relatively smooth and swift, about 24 months, emergence from bankruptcy.
Now, accompanied by bankruptcy lawyer David G. Heiman of Cleveland-based Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue, which represents Federated, Mr. Tysoe makes Federated's case without going into details of how it would carry out a merger.
Mr. Tysoe declined to be interviewed, but Macy creditors who have met him said he makes clear that Federated believes it can forge a better reorganization plan than Macy can on its own and that the Cincinnati-based retailer wants all of Macy, not just a piece, as some have speculated.
But Mr. Tysoe's message is "they want consensus from the creditors," said Robert Miller, an attorney with Berlack, Israels and Liberman, who represents holders of $1.3 billion in Macy bonds.
Mr. Tysoe is also gathering crucial data that will help Federated form its own reorganization plan for Macy.
For now, Federated won't interfere with Macy's exclusive right to file a plan.
"Tysoe is in the information-gathering mode," said Barry Monheit, co-managing director of Kahn Consulting Inc., who advised bondholders in the Federated bankruptcy case.
"He's asking, `What's it going to take to get the support of your committee.'"
Despite Macy's cool reception to Federated's overtures, some Macy creditors said they rest easier knowing that the 40-year-old Mr. Tysoe is spearheading Federated's plans.
"He's not a gunslinger.
None of the Federated people are," said Charles Leeds, a partner in Omega Advisors Inc., which holds big positions in Macy's most senior bond issue.
"That's one reason I am not as afraid as I might otherwise be."
Mr. Tysoe is considered an ideal counterpart to Federated's high-profile chairman and chief executive, Allen I. Questrom.
Indeed, his unflappable style could help Federated in what is certain to be a prolonged merger attempt.
"He's very levelheaded and unemotional," said Johnson Redbook analyst Peter N. Schaeffer.
"I believe he's got an exact plan down to what they would sell off and stores they would close" in a merger.
Mr. Tysoe was instrumental in the ill-fated Campeau Corp. takeovers in the 1980s.
As a top executive under real estate developer Robert Campeau, with whom Mr. Tysoe has acknowledged having a father-son type of relationship, he helped construct back-to-back hostile takeovers of Allied Stores Corp. and Federated in debtfueled deals.
In 1990, Federated and Allied filed the largest retail bankruptcy in U.S. history, and the Campeau empire collapsed.
But Mr. Tysoe's reputation was unsullied.
"He was Campeau's right-hand man, but one of the few guys to survive the disaster," said Mr. Schaeffer.
"Federated realized he had a high intellectual level and kept him because it would be easier to get out of the bankruptcy with someone who knew the intimate details of the takeovers."
In Federated's bankruptcy, the Vancouver, British Columbia, native deftly dealt with a host of creditors groups.
"Tysoe sat down with each creditor group, addressed their needs, and made a consensual plan that in the end everybody could live with," said Kahn Consulting's Mr. Monheit.
"Our group was very hostile to him at first because he was Campeau and Campeau screwed a lot of people.
He turned out to be honorable."
Though some creditors, especially banks, favored a big asset sale, Mr. Tysoe was able to get Federated's banks, bondholders and suppliers to drop their original claims largely in exchange for new debt, cash and equity in a slimmed-down and more profitable Federated, wiping away $5 billion in debt.
But Mr. Tysoe is in a far different position with Macy.
"Tysoe's not driving the bus, Ullman is," said Mr. Monheit, referring to Macy Chairman Myron E. Ullman III, who wants to keep his company independent.
