Montgomery Ward & Co., in its first major purchase since it went private in 1988, said it agreed to buy Lechmere Inc., an appliance and consumer-electronics retailer, based in Woburn, Mass.
The acquisition takes general merchandiser Montgomery Ward a step further in its plans to expand its geographical reach and open more specialty stores.
Montgomery Ward last month said it planned to open six stores this year that sell only consumer electronics, appliances and furniture.
Details of the Lechmere transaction, finalized last weekend, weren't disclosed as both companies are closely held.
But a source familiar with the deal said Montgomery Ward is paying about $750 million.
Montgomery Ward did say it will finance the deal primarily through borrowings and will assume about $100 million of Lechmere's long-term debt.
Lechmere, whose 24 stores generated sales of $800 million last year, will operate as a separate company under its own name, said Montgomery Ward.
Officials added that it isn't yet known who if any among Lechmere's management will stay on to run the company, which employs about 5,000 people.
The acquisition, which is expected to be completed by early April, will bring synergies to Montgomery Ward, according to Chairman Bernard F. Brennan.
Both companies are major sellers of appliances and electronics, Montgomery Ward through its Electric Avenue stores-within-stores.
But Mr. Brennan noted that Lechmere also is strong in areas in which Montgomery Ward isn't, such as housewares, home-office products and prerecorded music.
What's more, Montgomery Ward has only 14 of its 360 stores in Lechmere's territory -- New England and upstate New York.
Of those, only four are located in markets also served by Lechmere.
Mr. Brennan said Lechmere stands to gain leverage with suppliers through Montgomery Ward's more formidable buying power.
Montgomery Ward expects to announce 1993 sales of $6 billion.
All told, the companies overlap in product categories whose combined sales amount to $4 billion, he said.
Despite the synergies and symmetry, both companies are struggling with the same problem: intense price competition from appliance and consumer-electronics retailers such as Circuit City Stores Inc., and Fretter Inc.
Such pressures contributed to the meager 2% operating-earnings gain Montgomery Ward recorded in the first three quarters of 1993.
"The solution for one is the solution for the other," said Steve Herman, a Sudbury, Mass., retail consultant.
He added that Lechmere could benefit from Mr. Brennan's well-known ability to cut costs and reduce debt.
Lechmere faces the additional challenge of doing business in New England.
"Clearly the New England economy is not the fastest growing in the country," said Montgomery Ward's Mr. Brennan.
"But I firmly believe that if you have the locations, the dominant market share . . . and the name, then you're going to get more than your share of business."
Lechmere was taken private in a 1989 management-led leveraged buyout that was financed by Berkshire Partners, a Boston buyout specialist.
Mr. Herman, the retail consultant, said the private sale to Montgomery Ward is an indication that Lechmere lacks confidence in its ability to make a successful public offering.
Mr. Brennan led a $3.8 billion leveraged buyout of Montgomery Ward in 1988.
