A consortium led by GTE Corp. was awarded a major contract by Argentina granting it the exclusive right to provide cellular services in southern Argentina for two years.
GTE said it expects the consortium to sign a similar contract soon for the northern part of the country.
Together, the contracts will make up one of the largest such awards in South America to date, GTE said.
The two regions contain 22 million people.
According to GTE, the Compania de Telefonos del Interior consortium, based in Buenos Aires, will invest up to $700 million over the next two to three years to bring cellular service to the Argentine interior.
The consortium includes GTE, which owns a 23% stake, and American Telephone & Telegraph Co., which has a 10% interest.
"This represents a significant opportunity to expand our activities in Latin America," a GTE spokesman said.
Among Latin American countries, the telecommunications company currently offers cellular services in Venezuela and the Dominican Republic.
GTE had 1.3 million cellular subscribers world-wide at the end of 1993.
AT&T, valuing its share of the contract at more than $250 million, said it represents the largest non-U.S. cellular contract awarded to its AT&T Network Systems unit.
The unit, a maker of network telecommunications equipment, will supply AT&T's Autoplex System 1000, including mobile switching centers, cell sites and related software.
The $250 million contract could engender additional equipment sales for AT&T when the network expands.
AT&T could also potentially sell pocket-phones under its brand name to Argentinians.
Other members of the consortium include Telefone SA (owner of a 22% stake), which is part of Argentinian newspaper publishing company Clarin Group; TCW Americas Development Association, a closed-end investment partnership of over 60 investors, mainly U.S. companies and financial institutions (5%); Compania Austral De Inversiones (Cayman) Ltd., a closely held holding company (20%); and Intelcel SA, a company controlled by Benito Roggio e Hijos SA, one of Argentina's largest construction companies (20%).
The consortium said it has already invested over $200 million in the project, and expects its effort will create several hundred jobs in the region.
The contract excludes the city of Buenos Aires.
Currently, cellular service is provided there by a consortium led by Atlanta-based BellSouth Corp., the GTE spokesman said.
