"What you see is what you get," said White House budget director Leon Panetta on Monday, by way of describing the Clinton FY 1995 budget.
This turns out to be good advice, because what we see in the actual budget numbers contrasts so much with what Mr. Panetta and the Beltway echo chamber are saying.
The "toughest budget on spending cuts the Congress has yet seen," declared President Clinton.
"Lean times," chipped in the New York Times.
Taking its cue from White House and Congressional spinners, the media and interest-group chorus makes it sound as if fiscal discipline has finally hit Fat City, USA.
If only this were true.
For the real story, we turned to the bowels of the budget, to pages 119-121 of the Historical Tables.
Table 8.9, which is illustrated in the nearby chart, shows spending authority on key domestic areas from 1976 through the Clinton budget estimates (see accompanying illustration: WSJ Feb. 9. 1994).
The chart shows only "discretionary" accounts, meaning it leaves out the "entitlements" (such as Medicare and Medicaid) that have been growing even faster.
It also excludes defense, which Mr. Clinton has been cutting as fast as he politically is able.
The spending history is illuminating.
From 1976 to 1980, essentially the Carter years, domestic spending went on a tear.
Then the Gipper rode into town.
Ronald Reagan's budgets expanded defense spending and never did rope in entitlements, but there's no doubt they cut discretionary accounts.
By 1988 total nondefense domestic spending was still lower than it had been in 1981.
No wonder liberals declared his budgets "dead on arrival."
The Bush years saw a return to Carter, only more so.
To get his 1990 budget deal with Democrats, Dick Darman sold his President's birthright and domestic spending boomed.
From 1989 to 1993, domestic budget authority climbed to $212.3 billion from $145.2 billion, a whopping 45% increase.
No wonder voters didn't believe Mr. Bush when he tried to campaign in 1992 as a born-again fiscal conservative.
The Clinton years are continuing the Bush pattern of talking tough but silently spending away.
The chart shows healthy gains in domestic spending through 1996; the fiscal discipline, such as it is, occurs only in the "out years," as people in Washington like to say, which means in Bill Clinton's second term, which means it will never happen.
Even by Mr. Clinton's own budget table, domestic spending will climb by $11 billion in fiscal 1995 to $227.2 billion, or a healthy 5%.
Tim Muris, a budget expert from the Reagan era now at George Mason University, has inspected the fine print and says we should include another $4.9 billion in FY 1995 for user fees and health spending.
That puts the 1995 increase alone at 7.3%, or two-and-a-half times the rate of inflation.
This is "lean times"?
In what is becoming its trademark, the Clinton White House has tried to mask all of this with smoke about 115 "program eliminations" and supposedly tough cuts.
The Clintonites apparently understand they can't be honest and pass their program.
With their 1995 budget presentation, Messrs. Clinton and Panetta have truly earned that most coveted of Beltway adjectives, "Darmanesque."
