Housing starts plunged 17.6% in January, the Commerce Department said, as the big freeze in much of the nation chilled home-building after a strong surge late last year.
Even without the bad weather, economists said, the robust December construction pace couldn't continue.
Still, analysts and industry executives figure the market will improve with the weather, and they look for housing -- the fastest-growing sector of the economy in the fourth quarter -- to turn in another strong performance in 1994.
January starts fell to an annual rate of 1,294,000 units, the lowest level since last July, from a revised 1,571,000 in December, the department said.
It was the largest monthly drop in three years.
Starts fell 33% in the already depressed Northeast, where the freeze was most severe, and around 22% in the Midwest and South.
They rose slightly in the West, despite the effects of the Los Angeles earthquake.
The housing figures, along with last week's report on lower retail sales, "indi cate some possibility of a slower first quarter than we might have anticipated," Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown said, but "the economy's underlying momentum remains intact."
Some analysts think it will take at least a little while for home-building to rebound.
But many of them look for starts to equal or top last year's 1.3 million -- the highest since 1989 -- and they expect no serious damage from the Federal Reserve's boost in short-term interest rates earlier this month.
"The thaw that started this week will have to continue for the remainder of the month for a marked recovery in housing starts to occur for February," said Robert Sheehan, economist for the National Apartment Association.
While single-family starts were off 8.5% in January, those for multifamily units fell 34%.
Bob Davis, chief economist at Savings & Community Bankers of America, doesn't see a full rebound until March.
But he predicts about 1.5 million housing starts this year.
What's still unclear is the impact of the Fed's decision this month to raise the federal-funds rate to 3.25% from 3%.
The increase in that rate -- the fee banks charge on overnight loans to one another -- is affecting other short-term rates and will tend to make adjustable-rate mortgages more expensive; ARM rates generally move with short-term rates.
Notably, though, three-fourths of all mortgage borrowers are opting for fixed-rate loans, and that share seems almost certain to grow.
The Mortgage Bankers Association reports that in the week after the Fed's action, the average interest rate on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages rose to 7.2% from 6.9%.
"But a lot of this was from refinancing," says David Lereah, chief economist.
"People had been waiting for rates to fall farther and, when they didn't, they refinanced.
I don't expect rates to change much in the near future."
Rates are still around 25-year lows and are likely to continue to drive sales.
At the end of last year, moreover, the homes available for sale totaled only a 4 1/2-month supply, the smallest inventory since 1971.
A survey by the National Association of Home Builders shows members' feelings about the future are in "really bright shape," said David Seiders, chief economist.
He forecasts 1994 housing starts of about 1.4 million, including the highest single-family total since 1978.
"Our quarter ended Jan. 31 set a record for new contracts signed," says Joe Sicree, a spokesman for Toll Brothers, a major builder of single-family homes based in Huntingdon Valley, Pa.
"We're very bullish on 1994."
Mr. Seiders says, however, that recent traffic of prospective home buyers, along with the January housing starts and building-permits figures, have been sluggish.
Permits for future construction were off 8% in January, falling to 1,360,000 from 1,476,000 in December, an indication that any home-building pickup from January may be slow to arrive.
Permits in the Northeast fell a full 42% from December.
Weather wasn't the entire January story, however, economists said.
The slowdown shows "the economy is taking a breather after a frenetic finale to 1993," said Robert Barr, deputy chief economist for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
The January data, though still 11% ahead of January 1993, show construction work retrenching to a level more in line with the 3% economic growth that the Chamber projects for 1994, he said.
Last year's figures for the housing industry, including both new construction and sales of existing homes, are striking.
Housing grew at a 32% rate in the last three months of 1993, making a major contribution to the 5.9% jump in inflation-adjusted gross domestic product for the period.
The biggest factor was single-family construction.
Secretary Henry Cisneros of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, announcing the publication of a new quarterly publication on housing statistics, said that the last quarter of 1993 "shows clearly that housing is rebounding and playing its traditional, leading role in economic recovery."
