U.S. Surgical Corp. said it completed negotiations that will result in a $200 million investment in the company.
The struggling maker of surgical equipment said last month it was seeking new equity to bolster its sagging financial position.
U.S. Surgical has been buffeted by stiff competition, bloated inventories and concerns among its customers over health reform and other changes in the health-care system.
U.S. Surgical refused to identify who was providing the $200 million in capital or to give other details, saying it will make an announcement Monday afternoon.
However, the Norwalk, Conn.-based company did say the transaction would be "exempt from registration" with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
U.S. Surgical, once a hot growth stock, said last month it was operating under waivers from its insurance-company leaseholders, and that while it isn't in default of any bank agreements, it is "precluded from further borrowings" under those agreements.
Leon C. Hirsch, U.S. Surgical chairman, said yesterday that "this equity will give us a lot of financial flexibility" and will fully resolve issues with the company's lenders.
But he said he couldn't elaborate until Monday, when the company plans a briefing for securities analysts and the media after the market closes.
U.S. Surgical shares closed at $19.75, down $1.25, in composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.
Kurt Kruger, an analyst with Hambrecht & Quist, said the new capital is "a good thing," and that it likely will lead to reduced interest costs.
"It will also allow the company to focus on the daunting task of taking market-share back" from Johnson & Johnson's Ethicon unit.
Ethicon, U.S. Surgical's chief rival for equipment used in minimally invasive surgery, has made steep inroads into U.S. Surgical's dominance of the market.
But the new investment will likely have a dilutive effect on the company's earnings in 1994.
Mr. Kruger speculated that U.S. Surgical would issue 10 million new shares at $20 a share to raise the $200 million.
The company currently has about 56 million shares outstanding.
Mr. Kruger lowered his 1994 earnings estimates for the company to 13 cents a share from 19 cents.
The company said last week it had a loss of $138.7 million, or $2.48 cents a share, in 1993, including a restructuring charge of $137.6 million.
The results weren't audited.
