A task force advising New York City's new Mayor Rudolph Giuliani says that contracting out some city services could save taxpayers $500 million a year.
Cleveland Mayor Michael White says his city can no longer afford to have eight workers man a pothole repair truck and get substandard work.
He is exploring the use of private firms to deliver city services.
Once just a think-tank buzzword, privatization has become an accepted management tool.
But change won't come easily.
Peter Vallone, the powerful New York City Council Speaker, says he will oppose any contracting out of city services without advance proof they will save money.
But if he really wants proof, he need only talk with the mayors and managers of other cities for whom competition in service delivery is old hat.
Vehicle towing, for example, is now done privately in 85% of surveyed cities.
Nonetheless, municipal unions and other special interests are raising objections that need to be addressed:
Private firms cost more in the end.
Skeptics say that once a private firm wins a city contract it will use its monopoly power to raise prices.
A simple solution is to make certain every service is periodically put out for competitive bids.
Cities can be divided into zones so that no one company dominates.
Sometimes a public force made leaner by competition can even win back a contract.
In 1978, Phoenix began allowing private firms to bid against city garbage collectors in many neighborhoods.
At first, the private firms won every contract.
Under pressure, the city force cut its maintenance costs by 25% and reformed its labor practices by automating trucks.
By 1989, the city had cut costs and won back every neighborhood contract.
Contracting out leads to corruption.
New York City's limited use of private vendors in the 1980s resulted in bribery horror stories.
But it didn't use competitive bidding and made many decisions in secret.
Linda Morrison, director of competitive contracting for Philadelphia Mayor Ed Rendell, has compiled a checklist on how cities can run rational, open-bidding contests and negotiate sound contracts.
Privatization can lead to mistakes, but they are more easily corrected than in the public sector.
Los Angeles County saves $53 million a year contracting out such services as building security.
But its five-year contract with one firm to repair the county's 5,000 vehicles ran into problems.
However, it was able to end the contract after three years and now has three firms do the work.
Picking contractors properly and monitoring them can ensure a high level of performance.
Contracting out means job losses that will hurt minorities most.
While many local governments are heavily overstaffed, contracting out seldom leads to layoffs.
Negotiations with unions can allow job losses through attrition.
Contractors can also be required to give first choice of jobs to any laid-off public employees.
E.S. Savas of New York's Baruch College says no more than 5% to 7% of government employees are laid off when a service is privatized.
As for minorities, studies for the Joint Center for Policy Studies and the city of Newark, N.J., where more than 20 services have been privatized, show that the racial makeup of the private contractor's work force mirrors that of the city.
Contracting out is fine for Phoenix, but not for a city like New York.
"The one constant I find in advising local governments is that they insist their own situation is unique and that things can't be done differently," says Robert Poole of the Los Angeles-based Reason Foundation.
He notes that many California cities contracted out only after the tax-cutting Proposition 13 forced them to re-evaluate the status quo.
Now more than 100 different services are contracted out by California cities and counties.
Lakewood, Calif., with 63,000 people, has only 160 municipal employees; almost all city services are contracted out.
Mayor Giuliani and Cleveland's Mayor White are caught between falling revenues and taxpayers fed up with poor, high-cost services.
So they are turning to privatization.
With imagination and courage, local officials can convert a political headache into a better, more efficient delivery of services.
Pulling that off will not only save money but win the gratitude of local voters.
