If it hasn't already happened, it probably will: You're going to have to buy one of these things.
But what do you look for?
And what should you avoid?
Here's a guide to buying a cellular phone.
First Things First: Cellular phones come in three basic styles: "mobile," permanent in-car models with high-powered (three-watt) transmitters; "transportable" phones that offer similar power, but can be carried outside the car with a battery pack about the size and weight of a large dictionary; and tiny, lower-powered (about a half-watt) pocket-size models -- the most popular type of cellular phone sold today.
But the lines aren't rigid.
Most pocket phones, for instance, can be fitted with a bracket and hooked into the conventional car-phone transceiver; that gives a user a more-powerful phone while driving, and keeps the pocket phone's battery from running down.
Batteries: In-car phones use a car's alternator and battery for power.
Transportable phones, when taken away from the car, use a powerful battery pack.
But because a pocket phone contains its own transceiver in the handset, it requires tiny batteries -- nickel cadmium in older models, and smaller, more-powerful nickel metal hydride batteries in the newer phones.
What's It For?
Now that you know what kinds of phones are available, you have to ask yourself: Why do you want one, anyway?
Do you have a long drive to and from work, but spend most of the day in an office?
If so, you may want a permanent phone installed in your car.
Most new users, however, are using their phones as a convenient communicator -- a pay-phone substitute.
When you're in a mall or on a street corner, and you need to call home or work quickly, a small pocket phone is more than up to the job.
The decision also depends on where you live and work.
For those in rural areas where transmission coverage isn't very good, a powerful transportable phone may be necessary.
It may not fit in your pocket, but the phone's battery will have the power to reach the nearest cellular tower, as well as to operate over extended periods.
Talk Time: Portable phones are only as good as their "talk time" -- that is, how long you can actually talk on the phone before the battery dies.
Buyers also should look carefully at "standby" time, which is how long the phone can be left on to accept calls before needing a recharge.
Today, the average talk time is about two hours on the better phones, with about 18 hours of standby time.
Some extended-life batteries offer up to 160 minutes of talk time.
And coming soon: Japanese models with lithium-ion batteries that offer 15% more talk time than today's most-powerful pocket models.
Gimmicks: Unlike the brick-size phones seen in cellular's early years, today's models are sleek and come with a vast array of features.
Most phones have little calculator-type screens to show the number that is being called.
The screen will also warn about a low battery before your call conks out.
The better car phones also permit hands-free operation through voice-activated dialing (say "Mom" and it dials her number) and a speakerphone.
Digital: A small number of new phones operate on the new digital networks, which some carriers have begun installing to replace their older "analog" networks.
The new phones work in both modes (and are therefore known as dual-mode phones).
In the long run, the new digital networks will handle a greater number of calls, making it more likely that a call will get through on the first try.
Digital will also give users a clearer sound and greater privacy (since digital pulses are hard to tap).
But the new digital networks are experiencing some start-up bugs, including some noise problems.
So, to encourage users to go digital, some carriers, such as McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. of Kirkland, Wash., are offering discounts as deep as 20% on per-minute charges for digital calls.
Picking a Carrier: This is pretty simple.
Each market has an "A" carrier and a "B" carrier.
The "A" carrier is an independently owned network, such as the Cellular One network, run by McCaw in the New York City area.
The "B" carrier is owned by the same company that offers regular local phone service in that area.
Your dealer will electronically program your phone to operate on the network with which it is affiliated.
How do you pick between the two?
The same way you would between competing long-distance carriers: Compare price and quality -- and then guess.
Cost: Remember: It's a buyer's market.
Just about every consumer-electronics dealer is offering fat discounts on cellular phones.
And thanks to carrier subsidies to spur usage, pocket phones now go for between $50 and $800.
Occasionally, a carrier will offer free phones in exchange for a long-term service contract -- say, for three months to a year.
If you stop service early, you pay a penalty.
(California is the only state that doesn't allow this bundling.)
Even so, your phone bill will get a lot fatter with a cellular phone.
The price cuts hawked in daily newspaper ads and on television, for example, don't include installation charges for in-car phones.
Those can run an extra $200 to $300.
Many ads also don't mention plenty of other fees.
Carriers charge one-time service-activation fees that can run more than $100 if you already own a phone and want to order service.
For most sales that include phones, however, carriers usually waive this charge.
You also will have to cough up a monthly payment of up to $30 for network "access."
So, even if you don't use your phone, you will still pay about $360 a year.
Then there are the charges for actually talking on the phone.
The price changes, depending upon the time of day.
Calls during peak hours can cost as much as 80 cents per minute, excluding a separate extra charge if the call is long-distance.
Off-peak usage costs as little as 10 cents a minute.
Sometimes, a carrier will throw in free calling during certain periods.
And remember: In almost all markets, you pay for calls you receive as well as the ones you make.
The upshot: Cellular-phone customers spend, on average, between $60 and $70 a month, according to various analysts' estimates.
(This includes the monthly access fee, as well as long-distance charges, which are handled by regular carriers such as American Telephone & Telegraph Co.
Like regular phone service, you designate your long-distance carrier when you sign up for cellular service.)
Many users say these bills are a small price to pay for the convenience.
For others, though, they only make the pay phone on the corner look like a bargain after all.
Mr. Keller is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.
