The Clinton administration plans to hold back commitments of new aid to Russia until it wins assurances that President Boris Yeltsin intends to continue his market-oriented economic reforms.
"The pace of support will reflect the pace of reform," an administration official said shortly before President Clinton arrived here to discuss arms control, economics and foreign-policy interests.
Congress last fall appropriated $2.5 billion in aid to the former Soviet republics, much of which hasn't been disbursed yet.
But the U.S. clearly wants to send a message to Mr. Yeltsin and his opponents that the U.S., as well as other Western governments and the international financial institutions, wants reassurance that economic reforms will continue.
The visit comes at an awkward time.
Mr. Yeltsin is facing a new parliament filled with members who charge that his efforts to move the nation to capitalism from communism are shrinking the economy and throwing people out of work.
The administration is looking for signs of Mr. Yeltsin's continuing commitment to policies that are turning state-owned businesses private, cutting subsidies and damping down inflation.
The signs could include keeping reform advocates in the government and adherence to budgetary policies that reduce subsidies of noncompetitive heavy industries, such as coal and steel.
Instead of spending money to prop up industries that can't compete in world markets, the U.S. wants Russia to boost unemployment and other social benefits needed to ease the pain of economic adjustment.
"This is a critical juncture for the Russian government" and its reform policies, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said after a round of meetings.
But it's also a test of Washington's belief that it can use Western aid to help Mr. Yeltsin stay the course that he's already charted.
In any event, the U.S. isn't coming with much to offer.
Mr. Bentsen's discussions focused on ways to speed the distribution of aid that already has been promised.
Mr. Clinton is prepared to flesh out the U.S. contribution to a previously announced program to aid equity investment in newly private Russian businesses.
In addition, the U.S. has been talking to the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and representatives of the Group of Seven industrial nations about accelerating, and ultimately expanding, aid to Russia if reforms continue.
Late last year, the Yeltsin government made significant progress on two fronts: controlling inflation and slowing the growth of its budget deficit.
Inflation fell from 30% a month early in the year to 12% in December, the difference between annual inflation of 2,229% and 290%, according to U.S. Treasury calculations.
In addition, it held the budget deficit to 10% of national economic output, down from 18% projected in the middle of the year and the 25% the parliament thought appropriate.
But the improvements took place after Mr. Yeltsin dismissed the parliament last fall, giving him a freer hand to carry out his policies.
Now, in the face of a more hostile parliament, "it's unclear what the president wants to do and it's unclear what this team will be," said a World Bank official in Moscow.
"The dangers of providing more aid until the situation has stabilized are obvious."
