NO NEED to weep for the lawyers who labored in vain to link up Bell Atlantic Corp. with Tele-Communications Inc.
Despite the companies' busted plans, the attorneys will be compensated at their usual high rates for much of the time they put in, according to people familiar with the legal payments in the deal.
This puts the lawyers in a better position than the other major group of deal advisers, investment bankers.
They make more than lawyers if a deal connects -- usually as much as 0.5% of the purchase price.
But the bankers aren't paid by the hour, and if things fall apart, they walk away with at best a modest fee.
The TCI deal followed the usual pattern, says a banker advising one of the parties.
The Bell Atlantic and TCI lawyers, however, can forget about the big premiums that might have been their due if the deal had gone through -- even though the lawyers weren't responsible for the pricing disputes that aborted the merger last week.
And in a sign of the times, lawyers in deals that go awry might even come under pressure to discount their rates on hours that their clients haven't already paid for, some Wall Street attorneys say.
In the mid-to-late 1980s, the wide availability of debt financing meant that relatively few deals foundered.
The takeover boom fueled fantastic fees at some law firms, where the successful conclusion of a transaction was rewarded with premiums of as much as double the $400 hourly rate for top partners.
At least one of the most elite firms, Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz, was even able to bill like an investment bank, abandoning the hourly rate altogether and negotiating for a cut of the deal.
This newspaper reported in 1988 that Wachtell Lipton charged $20 million for its two weeks' work representing Kraft Inc. during its $12.9 billion takeover by Philip Morris Cos.
ALTHOUGH premium billing continues in difficult deals, the sort of contested transaction that usually generates premiums is rarer these days.
And that has made the environment much more favorable to clients.
Many top merger lawyers say companies bring more merger work in-house for friendly deals, and outside lawyers can now rarely wrangle premiums of more than 50% above their hourly rate.
Moreover, many are willing to lure skittish clients with an agreement in advance that if a transaction falls through, they will slash as much as 25% from the agreed-upon hourly price-offering a bargain known as a "busted-deal rate."
A well-known New York merger lawyer says his current pitch to clients runs like this: "OK, we'll do the work up to the time the merger contract is signed, and if it isn't signed, we'll do it for 80% of the hourly rate.
If it is signed, we'll bill you straight time at normal rates.
And if the deal closes, we'll get a premium."
He says discounting is usually offered to clients of long standing, because the law firm can expect to recoup its losses in future deals.
Discounts also are sometimes negotiated during the course of a deal or after it falls apart.
People familiar with the Bell Atlantic-TCI matter say a busted-deal rate wasn't negotiated at the outset, though sometimes companies introduce the subject after the fact.
Although TCI has a long-term relationship with its principal outside attorney, Jerome Kern of New York, a lawyer familiar with the arrangement said that the cable company pays Mr. Kern "time and disbursements -- win, lose or draw," and that "there were no adjustments" in this case.
Bell Atlantic's outside law firm, New York's Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, hadn't represented the company in a deal before.
Stephen Banker, the Skadden lawyer who helped land the phone company's work, declined to comment about fees.
Precise calculations of the legal fees in the scuttled deal aren't available.
For one thing, time sheets and other fee material haven't yet been completely sorted out, say people involved with both companies' legal work.
For another, lawyers risk upsetting clients by talking about fees -- and they are especially disinclined to discuss fees when a merger deal doesn't succeed.
Finally, and most importantly, the laws that mandate disclosure of certain bankers' fees don't apply to lawyers.
THE SECURITIES and Exchange Commission requires disclosure of the compensation of anyone making "solicitations" or "recommendations" to shareholders in connection with a tender offer.
Under this rule, lawyers don't count, because, unlike investment bankers, they don't deal with the public.
Even so, it seems clear that the legal bills in the TCI matter were substantial.
Although the two parties never officially progressed beyond a letter of intent, they came "very close to a definitive agreement" that required dozens of outside lawyers to spend "many thousands of hours" working on drafts of a definitive agreement, according to Alan Bulliner, vice president and corporate secretary of Bell Atlantic.
Skadden Arps had about 20 to 30 lawyers working on the case since it got the assignment in August, Mr. Bulliner says.
If the firm billed close to full time on the project at rates that typically average between $200 and $300 an hour, Bell Atlantic is facing at least several million dollars in legal bills for six months' work.
TCI is probably in a similar boat.
Mr. Kern's Houston-based law firm, Baker & Botts, has put in a total of "something in the neighborhood of 10,000 hours," says a lawyer familiar with the project.
Baker & Botts has been paid on a monthly basis for the work, which included drafts of a merger agreement and due-diligence projects.
The lawyer declined to estimate the firm's total legal bill to TCI, but says, "I'm sure fees ran into the millions."
Leslie's Poolmart expects to report a fourth-quarter net loss of about $1.9 million, or 32 cents a share, compared with a year-earlier net loss of $1.7 million, or 30 cents a share, Brian McDermott, president and CEO, said.
Sales in the fourth quarter, traditionally a weak period for the Chatsworth, Calif., swimming-pool supply company, were up about 15% to $13.5 million, from $11.7 million, Mr. McDermott said.
Full-year net income jumped to about $3 million, or 52 cents a share, from $2.1 million, or 37 cents a share, in 1992.
Sales rose to just under $120 million from $96.3 million, he said.
He added that comparable-store sales were up 11.7%.
The anticipated results are slightly better than analysts' expectations, which had called for a fourth-quarter loss of about 35 cents a share and profit of about 49 cents a share for the full year.
