When President Clinton interceded with Saudi Arabia's King Fahd to swing a $6 billion aircraft sale to Boeing and McDonnell Douglas two weeks ago, Al Gore was immediately dispatched to Seattle to collect the glory.
He arrived at Boeing all smiles and waves, like a conquering hero -- or to use his President's metaphor, an Olympic gold medal winner.
Perhaps some Boeing employees resented the grandstanding, knowing as they do that it isn't hard for the U.S. to squeeze King Fahd and that what really sells airliners is the quality they build into them.
But they were hardly in a position to complain about this gift of divine intervention.
The complaints came from Europe, where Airbus Industrie, aced out of the Saudi deal, protested that the U.S. had violated GATT rules if it won the business by stretching out Saudi payments on military contracts.
The White House didn't seem concerned -- Europeans don't vote in U.S. elections.
But maybe some who do vote, U.S. business leaders, should be concerned.
The Clinton administration's rampant politicization of trade has pitfalls for them.
When the government becomes a partner to business it quickly assumes the role of senior partner, one that thinks it knows a lot more about business than it really knows.
To be sure, Mr. Clinton last year displayed some encouraging trade instincts.
His weight behind the Nafta and GATT agreements indicated an understanding that free trade is good politics in America, a lesson his congressional colleague Richard A. Gephardt seems incapable of learning.
On the other hand, Mr. Clinton is proving capable of putting his weight behind free trade in general while at the same time practicing something substantially different in the specific.
It was only an illusion during the Nafta-GATT debate that he was abandoning the managed trade concepts his team had espoused a year ago.
The Clintonites, no sticklers for either consistency or logic, simply think they can play the politics of managed trade and free trade simultaneously.
In fact, the two are antithetical.
That became evident when Mr. Clinton and Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa agreed to disagree at their summit earlier this month.
The president dragged out the old managed trade formulas and slapped them on the table.
The Japanese were asked, for example, to increase their auto and auto parts imports from the U.S. by 20%, according to Hiroshi Kumagai, Japan's Minister for International Trade and Industry (MITI).
Given the fact that Japanese consumers, not unlike Americans, have their own ideas about whose cars they buy, it is anyone's guess how Japan was supposed to comply.
Mr. Hosokawa smilingly said "no."
This touched off threats of U.S. trade sanctions and some subtle moves to cheapen the dollar and thus reduce the cash flow of Japanese exporters.
Since that also threatened exchange rate losses on U.S. bonds, it backfired by rocking an already skittish U.S. bond market.
Trade chief Mickey Kantor hurriedly went on the air to assure the world that the U.S. was not starting a trade war with Japan.
This was further evidence that U.S. trade policy is largely improvizational and unreliable.
Certainly the Japanese are guilty of trade sins but they hold no exclusive franchise on ways to violate the GATT rules.
The Japanese are masters at administrative blockages of imports.
But the U.S. and Europe are deft at other means, such as setting safety and "environmental" standards that catch foreign firms off guard or demanding "voluntary" quotas on certain items.
As a final resort, the Clintonites and like-minded trade managers in Congress simply soar above all the niggling arguments about rules and demand that trade partners who sell significantly more than they buy in the U.S. adjust the balance or face sanctions.
This is a pretty stupid way to conduct trade policy.
Merchandise trade never balances, even globally, in part because the statistics that measure these things are arbitrarily derived and unreliable.
Consumer choices and the comparative advantages of producers change constantly.
To enforce "balance" would require nothing less than police state methods, which is why the Clinton fixation on managed trade is scary.
And in the final analysis, balance is not important.
Trade never balances but dollar accounts always do.
Dollars earned by foreigners remain in the dollar capital pool.
The Clinton attack on Japan comes at a time when the U.S. is enjoying economic recovery and Japan is in recession.
There is no macroeconomic evidence that the U.S. is being injured in its trade relationships with the rest of the world.
Quite the contrary.
If the U.S. were running a trade surplus, the rest of the world would no longer be piling up all the dollars that now help prop up the U.S. bond and stock markets.
In the 1980s, the Japanese were major purchasers of U.S. Treasury bonds -- which Congress of course issues in great abundance.
Japanese buying has since slacked off.
The politicization of trade poses more dangers than benefits to U.S. exporters.
Boeing may have had help on the Saudi deal but it is very worried that the administration's practice of trade politics in Asia may cost it sales in that huge and rapidly growing market.
The U.S. is putting a political squeeze on Indonesia, demanding that it raise labor standards and costs, and is threatening to deny China tariff equality (MFN) with other U.S. partners.
China is expected to grow some 9% this year and Indonesia some 6%.
Indeed every nation in Asia is growing faster than Japan, the place that generates all that White House paranoia.
There are a few marginal signs in the press that this year's return to trade politics is not as popular with American voters as last year's trade agreement achievements.
Mr. Clinton can't have things both ways.
Either he abides with agreements that remove trade barriers or indulges in political games that, as often as not, violate those principles.
It might not be such a bad idea as well for American corporation CEOs to consider that for every happy Saudi deal, with its political midwifery, there is the potential for a deal lost by a government's political meddling.
