In a new commercial for Chips Ahoy!, a technical tour de force transforms the exclamation point on the cookie bag into a dancing fool.
The blue punctuation mark spins and gyrates to Benny Goodman's "Swing, Swing, Swing."
The television ad from FCB/Leber Katz Partners for RJR Nabisco's Chips Ahoy! actually has a purpose beyond trying to move more chocolate-chip cookies off supermarket shelves.
Another, subtler objective is to introduce Madison Avenue to a new creative technique.
The creator of the new advertising approach, called dimensional animation, is Will Vinton, and he is counting on success to repeat itself.
Mr. Vinton swept into advertising in the 1980s with Claymation, which spawned those dancing raisins singing "I Heard It Through the Grapevine," as well as many imitators.
But the advertising world, which latches onto new gimmicks with a vengeance, is equally unforgiving when the fad fades.
In 1991, Mr. Vinton visited agencies to convince Madison Avenue that Claymation wasn't overexposed and was far from death's door.
But it was a tough sell with Claymation so associated with the California raisins campaign.
Ad executives complained then that as soon as consumers saw a Claymation commercial, they usually thought of raisins and not the product in the advertisement.
"We knew we had to open up our technical tools because we had a studio of artists and animators who were underutilized," concedes Mr. Vinton, chief executive officer of the Will Vinton Studios in Portland, Ore.
"The important thing when you get pigeonholed, as we did with the raisins and Claymation, is to show the range of what else is possible."
So Mr. Vinton and his studio developed a complicated technique of melding three forms of production: Claymation, stop-motion animation and computer animation.
The Chips Ahoy! commercial is the first time the three have been combined.
It was a painstaking process, taking 10 six-day workweeks to produce a half-minute spot.
The idea to use the three methods in one commercial came after the ad agency discussed with Vinton executives what it hoped to accomplish.
"They wanted dimension in the spot, not unlike 3-D," says David Altschul, president of Vinton Studios.
"They wanted the exclamation point to leap off the package and have a personality."
In the commercial, the punctuation mark bounces onstage, plunges into a Chips Ahoy! bag and dives into a sea of cookies, among other feats.
Vinton and FCB/Leber Katz decline to disclose the cost of creating the animated gymnastics.
According to A.C. Nielsen, Chips Ahoy! ranks as the No. 2 national brand in the cookie category with sales of $164.1 million, up 4% in the 52-week period ended Sept. 11.
The No. 1 cookie brand is RJR Nabisco's Oreo, whose sales were down 4.5% to $201.1 million.
Shoppers have been switching to cheaper private-label cookies, which posted a sales gain of 16% to $297 million.
The entire cookie category had sales of $3.3 billion, up 3.8%.
The visual appeal of the commercial, which began airing last week on such broadcast network shows as "Home Improvement," "Mad About You," "Sisters" and "Coach," is aimed at -- what else? -- breaking through the clutter.
Indeed, as soon as the spot begins with the big-band classic, it's hard to resist looking at the screen.
And once the exclamation starts doing its thing, most viewers will be hooked.
"Everyone in advertising is looking for something new to latch onto," says Bob Neuman, senior vice president, group creative director at FCB/Leber Katz, the New York office of Foote, Cone & Belding Communications.
"This could be it.
And we're first with it."
But other ad agency executives are skeptical that clients will be so willing to follow the lead of RJR Nabisco.
"My feeling is that once someone has done it, it's been done, and everyone else is copying it," says Jonathan Mandell, group creative director at Young & Rubicam.
"Techniques like Claymation and dimensional animation aren't advertising ideas.
They are mechanical devices in search of an advertising idea."
Mr. Mandell, who hasn't seen the Chips Ahoy! spot, adds: "That's not to short-change what they're trying to do.
It may be great.
What usually happens is that the first one out there tends to own the technique.
Everything that followed the raisins looked like a cheap imitation, even if it wasn't."
Such an attitude is perhaps why the Vinton Studios have hopes for dimensional animation far beyond the confines of Madison Avenue.
"My expectations are for it to be used in theatrical family entertainment," Mr. Altschul says.
"All the Hollywood studios are dying to get on the bandwagon for a technical breakthrough."
Mr. Vinton concedes that it was time to evolve beyond the creatures created by Claymation.
"Claymation served us well for a very long time," Mr. Vinton says.
"But now we have something new that we desire to show to other ad agencies.
"We were limited with what we could do with Claymation," he continues.
"Now, with combining the three techniques, we feel the sky is the limit."
Negotiations for Ayer Inc. to acquire Hal Riney & Partners Inc., San Francisco, have been abandoned "for the time being," Ayer said late yesterday.
One industry executive said, however, the talks, which began in October, weren't likely to ever resume.
In a statement, Hal Riney, chairman and chief executive officer, said some differences arose that were "technical in nature as opposed to philosophical."
Mr. Riney declined to comment beyond his prepared statement.
However, an official at Riney, who didn't want to be quoted by name, said, "It wasn't a mutual decision.
This agency decided not to proceed with the merger about a week ago."
In an interview in December, Mr. Riney put the odds of the deal going through at "50-50."
According to an individual with knowledge of the discussions, Mr. Riney was scheduled to sign documents this week that would have created the Ayer Riney agency.
"This was an 11th-hour pullout," said the individual, who didn't want to be identified.
"It was a done deal as of Monday afternoon."
In the new agency, Mr. Riney would have been co-chairman with Ayer Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Jerry J. Siano, 58 years old.
Although details of the contract couldn't be determined, the second individual said it called for Mr. Riney, 62, to remain with the agency for at least two years and be "heavily involved with the clients."
This isn't the first time that Ayer tried an agency marriage.
In 1992, it held prolonged discussions with Ketchum Communications Inc. in Pittsburgh.
Those talks collapsed last January because of philosophical differences on how the combined agencies would operate.
Mr. Siano was traveling and couldn't be reached for comment.
In a statement, he said he was "sorry it didn't work out.
I wish Mr. Riney and his agency well."
Coca-Cola Co. and the National Basketball Association have reached a five-year agreement for the soft-drink giant to be a major global sponsor of the league.
The partnership, involving an estimated $300 million commitment on Coke's part, will be launched with a 30-second TV ad on the NBA's All-Star Game on Sunday.
The spot, part of a new flight of ads from Creative Artists Agency, features animated uniforms of seven NBA stars playing a frenetic game.
The sponsorship is Coke's first "integrated marketing" effort on such a large scale with a pro sports league.
"The NBA's demographics match our target very well," said M. Douglas Ivester, Coke's executive vice president and principal operating officer.
Coca-Cola has other global sports-marketing tie-ins, including sponsorships of the Olympic Games and World Cup soccer.
But Mr. Ivester said the NBA delivers a younger audience than the Olympics-in the 12- to 29-year-old range-and a bigger U.S. presence than the World Cup.
NBA games also are televised in more than 100 countries.
Porsche Cars North America is ending a five-year absence from television advertising with a campaign from ad agency Goodby, Berlin & Silverstein, a San Francisco unit of Omnicom Group.
Porsche is mounting a $20 million advertising and marketing campaign this year to revive the Porsche name in the U.S. and introduce a new model, the 911 Carrera.
Porsche's U.S. sales last year were less than 4,000, down from a high of 30,000 in 1986.
"People aren't thinking Porsche like they once were," said Joel Ewanick, general manager for manager of marketing for Porsche Cars North America, which imports cars made by Porsche AG of Germany.'
The spots profile actual employees of the Porsche factory in Stuttgart-Zuffenhausen, Germany, and tout the quality of the cars.
