The government's barometer of future economic activity rose in December, along with sales of new homes and help-wanted ads in newspapers, giving further evidence that the economy is gaining momentum.
The Commerce Department said its index of leading economic indicators jumped a vigorous 0.7% in December, the fifth monthly rise in a row, bringing the index to its highest level since April 1989.
The index is designed to forecast future economic health.
Eight of the 11 indicators that make up the index improved.
The most robust indicators were consumer expectations, materials prices and initial claims for unemployment benefits.
Capital equipment, unfilled orders for durable goods and the money supply were down very slightly or unchanged.
Robert Dederick, chief economist at Northern Trust Co. in Chicago said, "We're in a full-fledged cyclical expansion.
Before we had one or more of the cylinders of the economy not working.
Now they are all running."
Separately, sales of new homes shot up 11.4% in December to an annual rate of 862,000, the highest in seven years, according to a report by the Commerce Department and the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Homes sales figures are volatile, an increase one month is often followed by a decline.
The numbers also have large margins of error.
The big increase surprised some analysts, coming on the heels of a revised 6.2% increase in November.
Much of the December growth was due to a jump of between 51% and 75% in the Midwest, and a modest increase in the South.
Despite the wide margins of error, it was clear that the housing market experienced strong growth.
The December 1993 figure was 30.2% higher than that of December 1992.
The number of houses for sale has increased steadily over the past year, but sales have outpaced supply.
There were 669,000 units sold in 1993, an increase of 9.7% from the previous year.
Separately, the Conference Board said its index of help-wanted advertising rose to 110 in December from 107 in November, and is now about 16% higher than a year earlier, an indication that businesses are beginning to hire again.
"Employers seem to feel that sustained improvement in the general economic environment allows them room to hire new staff rather than simply try to meet increased demand by scheduling more overtime hours," said Conference Board economist Ken Goldstein.
In the past three months, help-wanted advertising increased in all regions, except for a 2.1% decline in the area around Birmingham, Ala., and Memphis, Tenn.
Sharp gains were reported in the West and the Northeast.
All figures have been adjusted for normal seasonal variations.
Here are the net contributions of the components of the Commerce Department's index of leading indicators.
After various adjustments, they produced a 0.7% rise in the index for December and a 0.5% rise for November.
The ratio of coincident to lagging indicators was 1.15, unchanged from 1.15 in the previous month.
