When hospital executives want cost-cutting advice, they increasingly turn to the consulting firm of APM Inc.
But to many nurses, APM is an enemy.
At issue is one of APM's most frequent recommendations: that hospitals change their "nursing skills mix" to rely less on higher-paid and better-trained nurses and more on lower-paid aides to perform routine tasks.
APM claims it can save money without affecting patient care; many nurses disagree.
"We view APM as the nemesis of health care," says Rose Ann DeMoro, president of the California Nurses Association.
"They're out selling cost-savings models that have been used in the industrial sector.
The problem is they look at the patient as a bunch of parts, rather than as a whole human being."
APM calls the criticism unfair.
If done properly, decreasing reliance on nurses shouldn't hurt patient care, says James Kagen, managing partner of APM's New York office.
"This is a tough issue," he concedes.
"We are taking out layers, and we get noise from people about it.
But if you don't have noise, you aren't doing the job."
The showdown typifies the turmoil associated with hospitals' efficiency campaigns.
Many of America's 5,300 hospitals say they must trim expenses as they lose business to outpatient services and cope with insurers' demands for discounts to hospitals' prices.
But cost cutting can bring labor clashes and a hail of questions about whether patient care is at risk.
The American Nurses Association says recent studies have found that patients fare best at hospitals with the most nurses, suggesting that care might suffer if nurses' jobs are cut.
But Mr. Kagen says that facilities implementing APM's cuts usually see improvements in such quality measures as waiting times or patient satisfaction.
He says most jobs can be cut through attrition, without layoffs.
Based in New York, APM has become one of the heavyweights in the crowded hospital-consulting field.
Since 1987, APM says, it has helped more than 80 hospitals trim a total of at least $1 billion in expenses.
Typically, an APM consulting team spends nine months or so at a hospital, developing cost-cutting recommendations in areas ranging from bill-collecting to computer operations.
APM's biggest target is usually labor costs, notably nursing.
At many hospitals, 75% or more of patient care is provided by registered nurses, who have at least two to four years of training.
They make appreciably more than licensed practical nurses, who generally have 12 to 14 months of training, and often make double the pay of unlicensed aides or orderlies.
Because of the cost differentials, APM advises hospitals to redesign work teams to rely more on lower-paid aides for simple duties, like making beds.
This workplace re-engineering can mean big savings.
In California, hospitals can save as much as $25,000 a year for each nurse's job converted to an aide's job.
Stanford University Hospital in California estimates that it has saved $25 million in nursing costs since it hired APM in 1989.
Sharon Flynn Hollander, director of nursing, says that before APM showed up, 80% to 90% of the hospital's patient-care employees were nurses.
The figure is now less than 60%, she says.
At many hospitals, nurses' time can be chewed up by such low-skill jobs as giving baths or feeding patients, APM says.
It advocates putting fewer nurses on a patient ward and having them focus on high-skill care, such as inserting catheters or administering drugs.
Low-skill tasks would be switched to unlicensed aides under the nurses' supervision.
Using this team approach, Vanderbilt University Hospital in Nashville, Tenn., cut its nursing staff by 21%, to 627 full-time jobs, in the past five years.
It has hired dozens of "patient-care assistants," typically high school graduates who have worked in a hospital.
After several weeks of training, they are assigned simple duties.
Changes like these let nurses "spend more time doing what they are trained best to do," says Mr. Kagen.
"A lot of our re-engineering comes about because we ask nurses what they want."
But some nursing groups say even basic tasks shouldn't be assigned to unlicensed help.
"When you're giving a bath to a patient, you can check their skin for ulcers, or see if they are dehydrated," says Margaret Berry, president of the Massachusetts Nurses Association.
"That's where clinical judgments are made.
You can't just have an R.N. go in to spend two minutes with a patient and make an assessment."
In Boston, Carney Hospital hired APM in 1992 to create a cost-cutting program using the team approach, but delayed changes after nurses protested.
Eileen Norton, a nurse at Carney, says she was concerned about patient care, but adds: "It's also about jobs."
More controversy may lie ahead as some hospitals try to expand the work that lower-paid aides can perform.
Among those tasks are drawing blood, gathering data for medical charts or bandaging incisions after surgery -- duties that nurses may not want to leave in the hands of less-trained personnel.
"We've learned that going very slowly worked well," says Mary Boosalis, senior vice president, operations, at Miami Valley Hospital in Dayton, Ohio.
Her hospital has been phasing in skill-mix changes for two years and expects to finish this summer.
"There's a massive amount of education involved," Ms. Boosalis says."
