THE PROBLEM WITH the gee-whiz approach to new high-tech products frequently favored by Wall Street analysts and some parts of the press is that it is driven mainly by the glamour of the new technologies themselves.
These breathlessly positive reactions too often undervalue the more mundane issues of whether and when the new technologies will actually make a difference for consumers -- providing benefits previously unavailable -- and at what cost.
Yet, in the end, those are the only questions that matter.
That's the flaw in much of the advance billing for the 3DO gamemachine system, the most heavily touted new gizmo for homes.
Many of the glowing forecasts came from well-meaning folks who hadn't tried a 3DO player in a real home setting, as I have lately.
After a couple of weeks of using a 3DO machine, I, too, am willing to admit the thing has potential for greatness.
But I wouldn't advise anyone except well-heeled technology freaks or adult game addicts to run out and buy one any time soon -- despite a recent, welcome $200 price cut.
To my mind, the benefits 3DO delivers to families today are scant, especially considering its still-hefty $500 cost.
There's no problem with the hardware, which is based on technology developed by 3DO of Redwood City, Calif., and incorporated so far in only one player, Panasonic's REAL model.
In our rec room, the 3DO showed itself capable of higher-quality, higher-speed animation and video than game machines from Sega and Nintendo and most standard PCs.
My game-savvy boys, ages 12 and 15, rated it technically far above the Sega Genesis and the Macintosh and IBM-compatible PCs on which they've played.
But, as with computers, it's the software that's key.
If it's weak, predictable or unsuitable for family use -- in the eyes of the parents who pay for it -- so is the game system that plays it.
AND SO FAR, TO the eyes of this father, many of the handful of software programs available for 3DO (and even many of the new titles we tried out in prerelease versions) don't move the ball.
With one impressive exception, what I saw were merely visually juiced-up variations of the same tired and often-violent genres now playable on much cheaper game machines, or copies of what's available on the multimedia personal computers parents are rushing to buy precisely so they can pry their kids away from game machines and bad TV shows.
The goal of 3DO is to deliver much better and more interesting entertainment and education programming than exists on game machines, and at a lower cost than that of a personal computer.
The machine uses CD-type disks, not cartridges, and can play not only games but music CDs, Kodak photo CDs and, later this year, movies on CDs -- with a $200 attachment.
It has a well-designed hand controller that even permits the use of headphones, and the player can accept add-on devices, including a keyboard, as they become available.
Unfortunately, the one game shipped with the Panasonic player, Crash 'N Burn by Crystal Dynamics, isn't an encouraging sign for 3DO.
It's a road race, with armed cars that attack each other.
Though visually impressive, it features a tired, violent theme nearly as old as the PC.
It's the same with another highly praised 3DO title from the same publisher, called Total Eclipse.
This is the old spaceship shoot-'em-up theme with better scenery.
Another Crystal Dynamics title, The Horde, shows promise because it uses some video clips with real actors and lets you build villages.
But in the end, it's really about killing and wounding again -- this time involving blob-like creatures who pillage the towns.
JOHN MADDEN Football from Electronic Arts has videos of the colorful sportscaster, but otherwise seems a lot like other football simulators on other machines.
Much worse is the 3DO version of the notorious game Night Trap, from Digital Pictures.
In it, a bunch of lovely teenage girls are stalked by masked men with grappling hooks in a spooky house.
This violent, sexist theme is made more noxious by the 3DO's more-realistic video and sound.
But we did see one terrific 3DO title, Twisted, by Electronic Arts, that showed how the machine's technology might be used to provide great interactive family entertainment beyond what I've seen on game machines and PCs.
Despite its deviant-sounding name, Twisted is a fast-paced parody of a TV game show in which multiple players can compete by solving a variety of puzzles and challenges.
It's packed with great video and audio, including an unctuous host and funny contestants, played by actors, who are controlled by the players.
There's inventive content and lots of humor, though I always lose miserably to my offspring.
There are a number of other good titles out or planned for the system -- though, unlike Twisted, they're not uniquely based on 3DO technology and are already available for personal computers.
And the 3DO company is believed to be considering developing its own software offerings, to better show off the technology.
It's also negotiating with more companies to build the machines, at lower prices, and working on making 3DO technologies available on personal computers, through an add-in circuit board.
If 3DO technology becomes a path for bringing unique and valuable content into the home, it'll make sense for many families to own one.
But until then, wait.
