A U.S. panel issued new guidelines aimed at improving treatment for patients who suffer severe chest pain that often leads to heart attacks.
The guidelines provide doctors with information to help them quickly determine which patients are at low risk of a heart attack and can be treated as outpatients, and which are more seriously sick and thus need hospital care.
While the guidelines don't call for a major departure from current practice, they do urge less reliance on certain drugs and costly, invasive tests as first-line therapy.
If widely adopted by cardiologists and primary-care doctors, they could reduce wide variation in how patients with unstable angina, as the condition is called, are treated in U.S. hospitals.
"The main change they will bring to American health care is consistency," said Robert Jones, a cardiac surgeon at Duke University Medical Center and a leader of the guideline project.
Unstable angina "is a gray-zone" medical problem that sits between heart attacks and mild chest pain, he said.
It leads to over 500,000 hospital admissions yearly.
"You'd rather have somebody in the hospital that doesn't need to be" than have a patient go home and have a heart attack, Dr. Jones said.
"But that tends to drive a lot of extra utilization."
The guidelines are intended to "provide some reassurance and structure" and encourage "more appropriate use of resources," he added.
They are being published by the U.S. Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, which funded their development along with the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.
They were presented in Atlanta at the annual meeting of the American College of Cardiology, one of several professional organizations that endorsed them.
"The guidelines aren't intended to be a cookbook of rules," said Jarrett Clinton, administrator of the agency; nor are they intended specifically to reduce health costs.
"We're talking about improving value for the dollar spent," he said, and improving the ability of doctors and patients to make decisions about care.
Among the recommendations for unstable angina: People who suffer severe chest pain that lasts more than 20 minutes should get to a hospital within 60 minutes.
By taking a patient history, giving a physical and electro-cardiogram, doctors can usually determine who is at significant risk of a heart attack or other cardiac occurrence.
Patients at low risk generally need not be hospitalized.
Drugs, including aspirin, heparin, nitroglycerin and beta blockers, should be administered to medium- and high-risk patients.
But a class of drugs known as calcium channel blockers isn't generally recommended as first-line therapy.
Clot-busting drugs aren't indicated for unstable angina.
