With trade talks in a stalemate and a deadline looming Friday, the U.S. is pressing Japanese car makers in the U.S. to accept domestic-content rules far tougher than for any other foreign firms.
Japanese negotiators say the U.S. wants so-called Japanese transplants to produce cars that have 90% of their parts made in North America.
U.S. officials don't confirm that number, but acknowledge they want Tokyo to accept local-content quotas substantially higher than called for in the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Under that pact, car makers located in the U.S., Canada and Mexico must produce cars with 62.5% locally made parts within eight years to qualify for tariff-free status within North America.
U.S. officials said they figured Japanese car makers would reach the Nafta numbers out of self-interest.
But the U.S. wants to hold Japanese car makers to a higher number to ensure that valuable parts of the car, such as the engine or transmission, are made in North America.
The U.S. is asking Japanese companies "to make good on what they have said publicly," Commerce Undersecretary Jeffrey Garten told the Japan Society Friday, "that they intend to achieve significantly higher levels of parts made in the United States."
Mr. Garten didn't name the domestic content number the U.S. seeks.
The Japanese reject the U.S. demand as unfair and contrary to international trade agreements requiring that foreign companies be treated the same as domestic ones.
The dispute also demonstrates how far apart the two sides remain on their "framework" trade talks.
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa is to arrive in Washington Friday to meet President Clinton and supposedly wrap up a trade deal.
Koichiro Matsuura, Japan's deputy foreign minister, said the talks are "at an impasse over one of the main issues," referring to the U.S. demand that Japan set numerical targets, such as the domestic-content rules.
Mr. Matsuura and a team of Japanese officials will resume talks with their Clinton administration counterparts in Washington today.
In addition to the disagreement on microeconomic issues, the Japanese government is also moving slowly on another major U.S. demand, that Tokyo enact quick, bold macroeconomic measures to end its recession, which is damping demand for imports.
Mr. Hosokawa had planned to announce an income tax cut and a new public-works spending package last week.
But a bitter feud within his coalition government over how to pay for the stimulus forced him to back off from his plan, and it's now uncertain when the package will be finished.
"My hope is that when Prime Minister Hosokawa goes to Washington, he will have a new economic package in place," Mr. Matsuura said in an interview Friday.
But he acknowledged that the unexpected economic policy fracas was a setback.
"Many other steps we initially envisaged we should take" before Mr. Hosokawa leaves "will be affected," Mr. Matsuura said.
"Definitely there is a further delay in action in many areas."
Mr. Clinton last week dispatched U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor to Tokyo to try to push the talks along.
After three days of meetings with Mr. Hosokawa and other top politicians, however, Mr. Kantor appears to have left after making little progress.
At a news conference Friday, the main advance Mr. Kantor could cite was that the premier had "personally directed his government to redouble their efforts to reach a successful conclusion."
In addition, Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata agreed to oversee the talks for the Japanese side.
The U.S. has long complained that top bureaucrats have stalled the talks through their intransigence.
But Mr. Kantor and his Japanese counterparts disagreed even on what the two sides had agreed to last week.
Mr. Kantor, for example, said Mr. Hata "neither accepted nor rejected" the U.S. demand for numerical targets during meetings.
That implies that Mr. Hata may be more flexible than the bureaucrats in reaching a trade deal.
But a senior Japanese government official involved with the negotiations said, "It's not true."
Mr. Hata "clearly refused numerical targets," the official added.
In less-contentious areas, though, the two sides appear to have moved ahead.
Japan's negotiators indicated that changes would be made in the way the Japanese buy medical equipment, so that foreign companies have a better chance to win government contracts.
Some U.S. negotiators believe the Japanese strategy is to make enough changes in procedure that the U.S. will drop its insistence on numerical targets rather than forgo the Japanese concessions.
Some Japanese officials said Mr. Kantor may actually have hurt the talks by taking a hostile tone at many of his meetings.
During his visit, Mr. Kantor made many not-too-subtle hints that the U.S. would slap sanctions on Japan if the framework talks fell through.
On Capitol Hill, meanwhile, calls are mounting for further pressure on the Japanese if the framework talks fail.
The gap between the two sides was starkly apparent yesterday when Hiroshi Kumagai, minister for international trade and industry, held an unusual debate with Bowman Cutter, a top U.S. negotiator, on a Japanese Sunday morning talk show.
"I want you to understand, Cutter-san, that the Hosokawa government's policy is to . . . promote drastic deregulation," Mr. Kumagai said, complaining that U.S. demands for Japan to set import targets would actually boost government involvement in the private sector.
"We can't do things counter to that."
Craig Forman contributed to this article.
