China bowed to U.S. pressure and agreed to limit the growth in its textile exports to the U.S. over the next three years.
Although other disputes -- such as on human-rights issues -- remain, the textile accord averted a trade war and could make it easier for the U.S. to reward China with broader trade benefits later.
Specifically, it boosts China's chances of winning an extension of favored trade status and gaining entry into the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, a Geneva-based world organization that sets rules for world trade.
U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor said there was "no linkage whatsoever" between the textile pact and other trade benefits.
But he said the agreement is "the beginning of a healthier and more productive relationship."
The U.S. believes China has skirted quotas by shipping textiles through third countries and putting those countries' labels on the products.
To compensate, the new agreement will freeze China's quota for 1994 at 1993 levels and limit growth to 1% in each of the next two years.
A five-year pact that expired at the end of last year had allowed for 4.4% annual increases.
The new agreement means a reduction of $700 million, or 13%, in what China's total quota would have been for the three years, had the previous growth rate been allowed.
Still, that reduction is considerably smaller than the 25% to 35% cut that Washington threatened to impose if the two sides failed to reach a compromise by yesterday.
"We would like to see the Chinese government begin to act in trade and other areas as part of a world community, in a way that we would all find to be appropriate and helpful," said Mr. Kantor, the U.S. trade representative.
"This is a situation in which they have done so . . . ."
The new pact provides that Washington could cut China's quota by three times the amount of any future illegal shipments.
This option would take effect only after two infringements by China, and any penalties imposed would be spread out over the three-year agreement period.
The U.S. says Chinese companies transship, or export through third countries, about $2 billion of goods to the U.S. each year.
China also agreed to let U.S. government officials conduct surprise inspections of Chinese companies suspected of engaging in illegal transshipment.
Chinese officials could accompany such inspection groups.
The companies could, under local law, deny the groups entry in the absence of a search warrant from Chinese authorities.
Mr. Kantor insisted that the new restrictions wouldn't have a significant impact on U.S. consumers and were necessary to protect jobs in the U.S.
The assertion comes amid criticism that consumers pay higher prices because of U.S. tariffs and quotas protecting the textile and apparel industry.
The Institute for International Economics, a Washington research group, called textile trade barriers the "Mount Everest of U.S. trade protection," in a recent study.
It said they cost U.S. consumers $24 billion a year.
The textile agreement comes just before a visit tomorrow to Beijing by U.S. Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, who would be the highest-ranking official of the Clinton administration to visit China.
China's foreign-trade minister, Wu Yi, said the textile agreement can "create a very positive atmosphere for the upcoming visit of Secretary Bentsen."
In a second document, the two sides agreed to limit the growth in Chinese exports of silk to the U.S. to 1% each year, U.S. officials said.
This was the first time the two countries have signed an agreement governing silk apparel, following the rapid increase of cheap silk exports by China to the U.S.
Last year, China exported about $2.2 billion in silk garments to the U.S., compared with total textile exports to the U.S. of about $7.2 billion.
Both sides showed relief and exuberance at a signing ceremony for the textile agreement late yesterday in Beijing.
The three days of negotiations had included talks stretching past midnight.
The U.S. negotiators nearly walked out yesterday afternoon, just a few hours before they were scheduled to board a plane and after reporters had already been gathered for the signing ceremony.
After the signing, Ms. Wu put her arm around the chief U.S. negotiator, Jennifer Hillman, and the two clinked champagne glasses.
"Cooperation has the best future," Ms. Wu said, laughing.
The Chinese place great importance on Mr. Bentsen's visit.
The U.S. will consider later this year whether to renew China's Most Favored Nation status, which allows Beijing to ship products into the U.S. at the lowest tariff levels the U.S. imposes.
Moreover, by winning entry into GATT, China would gain significant benefits from a sweeping trade agreement that 117 members of the group completed last month, reducing trade barriers around the world.
Such membership also would boost China's status as a player in the world economy.
But significant trade disputes with the U.S. continue to simmer.
For one thing, the U.S. is threatening to crack down on China for not protecting copyrights.
Negotiations over that dispute are supposed to start later this month.
The U.S. wants China to agree to an enforcement plan by midMarch and is threatening to initiate trade sanctions if China doesn't comply.
