Consumers across the country are wrestling with significantly higher home heating bills generated by the near-record cold of January and much of February.
Residential heating bills for both oil and natural gas jumped sharply over last year's levels.
Most of the increase is the result of higher consumption rather than escalating oil and gas prices.
Although residential heating oil prices rose through this winter, they aren't much higher than last year's prices during the same period, experts say.
Natural gas prices for the consumer also have remained relatively flat compared with last year.
But the American Petroleum Institute in Washington, D.C. says heating oil consumption this January rose by 30%, or 950,000 barrels a day, over last year.
Electric utilities used part of this oil trying to prevent blackouts during the bitter cold.
Utilities that couldn't get enough gas to meet heavy demand bought up distillate, or heating oil, supplies to fuel extra generators, according to the Petroleum Industry Research Foundation in New York.
Consumption of natural gas hit a record during the month of January, with customers using 2,560 billion cubic feet of the fuel.
The last record of 2,426 billion cubic feet was set 15 years ago.
Mark Stultz, an official with the American Gas Association in Washington, D.C., estimates that gas usage during January was about 11% higher nationally.
The American Petroleum Institute estimates that during the cold snap, temperatures in the Northeast, the world's largest heating oil market, were 35% colder than last year and 15% colder than normal.
(Last winter was unusually mild, weather experts say.)
Various gas utilities report that it was 26.8% colder in Illinois, 25% colder in Wisconsin and 39.6% colder in Kentucky in January compared with last year.
The Peoples Gas Light & Coke Co., which sells natural gas in Chicago, said its customers' bills for January were 21% higher than last year's bills.
Consumers of Columbia Gas Distribution Cos. in Columbus, Ohio, are paying 37.2% more than last year, according to an official for the utility; that meant a typical customer paid $138.58 for this January compared with $100.98 last year.
And at Wisconsin Gas Co. in Milwaukee, customers' bills are 25% higher than last year; people who paid $120 to heat their homes last January paid $163 this year.
Residential heating oil costs are harder to ascertain because regions are serviced by many small fuel oil businesses.
But Philip Verleger, a senior fellow at the Institute for International Economics, believes residential oil bills, at least for January, could be 30% higher than last year.
Keven Rooney, executive director of Oil Heat Institute in Hauppage, N.Y., estimates that bills on Long Island may have risen about 15% for January and will likely rise by a similar amount for February.
That means Long Island customers paid $440 to heat their homes during January and February this year compared with about $375 during the same period last year.
Mr. Rooney represents heating oil distributors in that area.
Some consumers already have received these bills, either as lump sums or spread out over several payment periods.
Others "will be getting smacked with these bills from January and early February into at least March," Mr. Verleger said.
And some customers who are on a budget plan, which means they pay a pre-set amount each month through the year, won't pay for the cold winter until June or year-end, when the budgets are typically reassessed.
