New York -- I have a $135 hat, a Stetson XXXX Beaver, Silver Belly "Rancher."
There's a hole burned in the front of the crown.
And if it is anybody's fault it's John F. Kennedy's.
Our 35th president, you might recall, didn't wear a hat after his inauguration in 1961.
Thereupon 98% of American men took their cue and doffed their hats, giving up one of the most practical items of male adornment ever to come down through the centuries.
(No president since then except possibly Lyndon Johnson has worn a hat.)
A hat keeps the sun out of the eyes and the rain off the scalp.
The straw hat keeps the head cool in the summer and the felt hat keeps it warm in the winter.
It can be tipped in respect or tossed in the air in ecstasy.
In emergencies it can be used to fan a spark into a flame or lift a drink of water out of a stream for you or your horse.
(None of these attributes can be claimed by baseball caps, motorcycle helmets or those little wool head coverings that can be wadded up and stuffed in a coat pocket and therefore do not qualify as true hats.)
The Kennedy-inspired wholesale abandonment of the hat three decades ago has wrought hardships on those few of us who have persisted in wearing a hat.
Take the problem of going to the movies.
Before 1961, almost every theater down to the local movie house had a U-shaped wire rack welded to the underside of at least every other seat.
The hat wearer simply turned his hat upside down and slipped it into the rack so that it hung by the brim, out of mind and out of the way.
Today, not a single seat in any theater in these United States retains such a rack.
Obviously, a hat cannot be worn in a theater without risking physical violence from those in the next row back.
So the hat has to be laid on the adjacent seat and the owner must be ready at any moment to jerk it out of the way should a latecomer wish to occupy that seat.
The hat can be laid on the floor underneath the seat, but chances are it will be stained by puddles of spilled soda and sprinklings of popcorn.
Otherwise, the hat owner must sit through the whole evening holding his legs close enough together to keep the hat from slipping to the floor.
Even the legitimate theaters of Broadway, which once accommodated all kinds of hats, including silk ones, have removed the wire racks from the seats.
Check the hat?
Theaters, restaurants and nightclubs used to have hatcheck girls who knew exactly how to handle a hat, down to brushing it off before returning it to the customer.
No such employee exists today.
Some theaters and restaurants have a relic called a coat-check person, but hand one of these persons a hat and you'll get a look of puzzlement in return; it can't be put on a coat hanger.
After a moment, the checker's wandering gaze notices a shelf above the coat rack and enlightenment dawns.
Some old telephone directories are pushed aside and the hat is laid on the shelf-brim down.
Now, in the old days, if there were no hooks on which to hang hats, an experienced hatcheck girl knew never to lay a hat on its brim since this would risk getting the highly visible underside of the brim dirty.
She would lay it upside down so that, should the shelf be dusty, there would be only a thin, barely noticeable line of dust around the top of the crown, which could be quickly brushed off.
To hand a hat to a restaurant coat checker today risks incurring a $25 cleaning bill -- provided one can find a dry cleaner who can still clean and block a hat.
(There are only three left in all of Manhattan.)
Anyone walking into a cafe or a honkytonk in the Southwest these days will see an acre of hats bobbing over a bowl of chili or circling around in a Texas two-step.
This isn't a flouting of the etiquette of the Old West (John Wayne would never wear his hat at the table or while dancing with the school marm).
It's just that these erstwhile cowpokes have no place to hang their hats except on their heads, even in Texas.
And therein lies the explanation for the hole burned in my Stetson XXXX Silver Belly.
(This hat, if you're wondering, is a kind of modern, higher-crown version of the hat Gary Cooper wore in "High Noon," except it's a silver-belly gray instead of the black that Cooper wore even though he was the good guy.)
Each Wednesday, my friend, Ben Patrusky, and I have lunch in a lower Manhattan saloon.
It has the comfortable feel of one of those old New York bars left over from the last century, and the food is excellent and inexpensive.
But, unlike the saloons of the last century, there is no place to put a hat.
There is no coat-check person, much less a hatcheck girl, and the hooks on the wall on which customers hang their coats are too short to hold a true hat.
There is, however, a little-noticed closet where the waitresses hang their coats; it remains shut until early evening when the shift changes.
The hooks therein also are too short to take a hat, but there is a rarely used bald light bulb that sticks out perpendicular to the wall.
The bulb accommodates a Stetson XXXX Beaver, Silver Belly "Rancher" perfectly and had done so every Wednesday for more than three years -- until the other day.
During the lunch hour, someone, who obviously was born after 1961 and thought my hat was some kind of new lampshade, turned the bulb on and left it on.
I'm thinking about sending the bill for a new hat to Teddy Kennedy.
Mr. Bishop covers science, technology and medicine for the Journal.
