Time Warner Inc. reported sharply lower net earnings for the fourth quarter because of heavy interest expense but said cash flow increased 2.7% on gains in its music, publishing and Home Box Office divisions.
Net income for the three months was $7 million, compared with $68 million for the fourth quarter of 1992.
After preferred dividend payments, the net income applicable to common shares was $4 million for the quarter, compared with a $93 million net loss a year earlier.
The entertainment company's per-share results were affected by the preferred dividend requirements of $3 million in the 1993 period and $161 million in the yearearlier period.
On a per-share basis, earnings in the 1993 quarter were one cent, compared with a net loss of 25 cents a share in the fourth quarter of 1992.
Time Warner has been on a campaign to restructure expensive debt, replacing costly preferred dividends with tax-efficient, lower-cost debentures.
Time Warner said cash flow increased to $760 million on revenue of $4.1 billion in the fourth quarter, compared with cash flow of $740 million on revenue of $3.8 billion in the 1992 fourth quarter.
Cash flow, or operating income before interest, depreciation and amortization, is a primary indicator of health for cable companies, and because of its heavy debt, Time Warner has stressed the cash flow results in its quarterly reports.
Revenue was up 9.6% for the quarter.
The results, which were in line with analysts' expectations, were boosted by gains in the music and publishing groups, which reported a combined cash flow of $361 million, up 10% on revenue of $1.96 billion.
Time Warner restated its earnings for 1992 to reflect the purchase of a 25.5% stake in its Time Warner Entertainment unit by U S West Inc. in September 1993, and the acquisition by its filmed entertainment group of 50% of Six Flags Entertainment it didn't already own.
In the entertainment group, fourth-quarter cash flow was up 9% to $61 million for Home Box Office, mainly because of an increase in subscribers, but down for the filmed entertainment and cable divisions.
In filmed entertainment, although the Warner Bros. studio posted a record fourth quarter, cash flow for the Six Flags theme park was down because of business's seasonal nature.
For the cable division, cash flow for the quarter was down 5%, largely because of the effects of the 1992 Cable Act, which restricts rate increases.
Time Warner stock gained 12.5 cents to $39.75 a share in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday.
