It seemed that everywhere bond traders looked yesterday, they found reasons to sell: turmoil in the Mexican bond markets, rising commodity prices, falling American stock prices and a report suggesting solid U.S. economic growth.
"You had a whole series of things taking place that rocked the market," said James Kenney, head trader at Prudential Securities Inc.
By the time the session was over, prices of U.S. Treasury securities were posting big losses, and the yield on the 30-year bond once again threatened to break through 7%.
The price of the benchmark 30-year bond dropped nearly 3/4 point, or nearly $7.50 for a bond with a $1,000 face value to 91 5/32.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from the price, rose to 6.95% from 6.89% on Wednesday.
The Treasury bill sector survived relatively unscathed.
That's because investors headed into the relative safety of shortterm Treasurys yesterday and pulled cash out of the battered U.S. stock market -- where the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 48.37 points to 3821.09 -- and out of the troubled developing-nation debt markets.
But the changes in the coupon-equivalent yields for Treasury bills in response to the increased demand were modest.
The yield of the three-month bill, for example dropped to 3.51% from 3.53% on Wednesday while the yield of the six-month bill was unchanged.
And the yield of the one-year bill actually rose to 4.32% from 4.30%.
Traders traced the bond market's troubles back to Wednesday's session, when they said they bid too aggressively at the Treasury Department's auction of $11 billion five-year notes.
Traders, awash with the securities, found themselves having to repeatedly mark the issues down in price in attempts to attract investors.
Meanwhile, news overnight of the assassination of Mexico's leading presidential candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, only worsened the situation.
Investors and dealers who were confronted with a plunge in the prices of developing-nation bonds had to turn to the Treasury market in order to offset those losses.
"There were an awful lot of people that were selling U.S. Treasurys against developing-nation bonds," said Mr. Kenney of Prudential.
Meanwhile, the rest of the banking industry followed a move by a handful of banks Wednesday to raise their benchmark prime lending rate 0.25 percentage point to 6.25%.
Banks that raised their rates yesterday included J.P. Morgan & Co., Bank of Boston Corp. and Wells Fargo & Co.
The prime is a benchmark used by banks to peg rates for consumer products such as credit cards and home-equity loans, as well as small-business loans.
In the U.S. Treasury market, selling was concentrated among longer securities, traders said.
But the havoc in the Latin American debt markets gave a little boost to short-term Treasurys.
Investors, seeking a safe harbor from the uncertainty of Latin bond markets, as well from the drop in the U.S. stock market, moved cash into the bill market.
As if this weren't enough news to digest, traders were unnerved by rising commodity prices.
The widely watched KR-CRB Index broke to a recent high yesterday, gaining 0.74 point to settle at 230.84.
Gold prices also surged-partly in response to events in Mexico-rising $4.50 per ounce.
The value of the dollar in the foreign-exchange markets also dropped yesterday, sparking concerns of a flight out of U.S. assets, and further undermining the willingness of traders to hold longer-term Treasurys.
To cap it all off, the Whitewater affair returned to haunt the market.
Traders spoke of a crisis of confidence in the U.S. government, adding to the bond market's woes.
With all the selling among longer-term Treasurys and buying of bills, traders were forced to reverse arbitrage trades, where they had previously bought bonds and sold shorter-maturities.
Known as "curve-flattening trades," these bets pay off when the gap between short-term and long-term interest rates narrows.
"The whole sequence of events just started feeding on itself," said Paul McCulley, chief economist at UBS Securities Inc.
"This stuff happens in a bear market," he said.
"When people come in to sell, it starts to cascade and ends up with a life of its own," agreed Steve Nothern, a portfolio manager at Massachusetts Financial Services Co.
Traders stressed that beneath the jumble of factors pressuring the bond market was one concern that made such a sell-off possible: Investors remain unwilling to aggressively commit new cash to the bond market against a backdrop of frothy economic growth.
"The bond market has every right to be concerned about an economy that is cranking along at over a 4% rate until there is conclusive evidence that growth is going to slow to 3%," said Joseph Liro, chief economist at S.G. Warburg & Co.
Until growth slows, investors will not be completely convinced that inflation will not be a threat down the road.
And it could take some time before investors come around to that view, participants said.
Bond investors fear inflation because it reduces the value of investments with a fixed rate of return.
"Playing in the bond market lately has been like ice fishing in the spring," said Brian Wesbury, economist at Griffin, Kubik, Stephens & Thompson.
"Every time you think you've found some support, it caves in."
Prices on bonds sold by Mexican corporate issuers plunged sharply early in yesterday's trading session news of Mr. Colosio's assassination, but the issues regained some of their losses by the end of the day.
New corporate issuers, meanwhile, stayed clear of the market following volatility in the U.S. Treasury market.
Early in the session, yields on the bonds of the Mexican government and state-owned trade bank Banco Nacional de Comercio Exterior SNC rose by 0.20 to 0.40 percentage point in response to the news of the assassination.
In heavy trading, Banco Nacional de Comercio Exterior's 7.25% coupon global bonds maturing in 2004 fell four points, or $40 for a bond with a $1,000 face value.
But by the end of the day, the paper regained two points, or $20, to close at 86.25.
The yield rose to 9.30% from 8.95%.
Global bonds are securities simultaneously offered in major financial centers and designed to be easily traded.
The volatility also spilled over to other Latin American issues.
Republic of Argentina 8.375% global bonds maturing in 2003 fell 1.5 points, or $15 for a bond with a $1,000 face value, but then regained more than a half point to end at 90.375.
The yield rose to 9.93% from to 9.78%.
"It was our busiest day all year," said one trader, adding that his firm sold more than $200 million of corporate and sovereign Latin American debt yesterday to a range of clients.
Some U.S. money managers saw the drop in Latin American debt after the assassination as a buying opportunity, but others said they are waiting for more news before buying or selling.
Bill Kohli, a portfolio manager at Franklin/Templeton Group, says the plunging market makes for opportunities in other Latin American debt, particularly in Argentina's government issues.
"Argentina's debt is a good value now, and it will be a better value later," Mr. Kohli says.
"The fundamental markets we are still most comfortable with are Mexico and Argentina."
Mexican issues comprise more than 10% of Sun America's Diversified Income Fund.
After lengthy consideration yesterday, portfolio manager Charles Dudley said he isn't changing his position.
"In this market the tradition was that you buy on the coup and the assassination," Mr. Dudley said.
"It's better just to watch and wait this time around."
Most of the Mexican debt in Sun America's $180 million high-yield portfolio is dollar-denominated corporate debt, such as that of Banco Nacional de Comerico Exterior, he said.
Prices of municipal bonds tumbled as much as one point.
Among secondary issues, the yield of the Florida Board of Education's 5.125% capacity outlay refunding bonds of 2022 shot up to 6%, from 5.89% late Wednesday.
No new municipal offerings of $100 million or more were priced yesterday.
Meanwhile, New York City Comptroller Alan Hevesi said the city could sharply reduce short-term borrowings by collecting $1.1 billion it is owed in state and federal aid.
Mr. Hevesi said he expects to collect "most" of those unpaid funds, a large portion of which were never formally sought by city agencies for various reasons.
Although the unpaid funds can't be used to close the city's huge budget gap, collection "would obviate the need for us to do as much short-term borrowing," Mr. Hevesi said.
The city could slash its $1.7 billion of short-term borrowing planned in fiscal 1994 to $600 million or $700 million, save on debt expenses and earn interest on the added cash, he said.
Prices of mortgage securities fell amid yesterday's general sell-off.
Among prices of 7% securities for April delivery, Government National Mortgage Association issues ended 19/32 lower at 97 3/32.
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
Gold issues and Federal National Mortgage Association issues were both off 15/32 at 97 21/32 and 97 14/32, respectively.
"There was mortgage-banker selling throughout the early morning and into the early afternoon," said Craig Lipka, head of mortgage products at CS First Boston Inc.
Also, he said, a number of large retail customers placed large sell orders of mortgage-backed issues.
