Propelled by record trading revenue, J.P. Morgan & Co. yesterday announced sharply higher fourth-quarter earnings.
Four other banks, Bank of New York Co., Wachovia Corp., First Fidelity Bancorp. and Mellon Bank Corp. also announced improved results.
Morgan's profit surpassed analysts' expectations by jumping 77%, while earnings at Bank of New York rose 40%.
Wachovia's net rose 12%, First Fidelity's earnings climbed 16%, and Mellon's profit rose 8.6%.
Morgan's results were driven by trading revenue of $606 million, up from $200 million in the year-earlier period.
Driving profits for the four other banks were continued wide profit margins between borrowing costs and rates earned on loans, as well as upticks in revenue from lending and credit cards.
The improved results did little for the banks' stock prices.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Morgan closed at $70.375, up 75 cents; Bank of New York closed unchanged at $58.75; Wachovia gained 12.5 cents to $33.875, First Fidelity closed at $44.50, up 12.5 cents; and Mellon closed at $54.875, up 50 cents.
"Morgan had a great trading result, and the stock did not react very positively," said Robert Albertson, the chief bank analyst at Goldman, Sachs & Co.
"The results for the regionals were pretty much what we expected, so they were also basically neutral."
The stronger-than-expected trading results were "a very big surprise," said James Rosenberg, a bank analyst with Lehman Brothers Inc., who said that a large chunk of the earnings came from Latin American debt instruments.
Although the stock market has tended to treat the New York bank's massive trading profits somewhat skeptically out of a concern that they are one-time gains, analysts are beginning to view trading earnings more favorably.
"Morgan is showing us that they have the capacity to surprise us over and over," Mr. Rosenberg said.
In addition to its spectacular trading income, Morgan had strong revenue growth in virtually all of its other business segments.
Fees from investment management as well as custody, clearing and brokerage services all rose significantly in the quarter.
Corporate finance was a particular standout, jumping by 45% to $158 million.
The big New York bank benefited from increased fee income, reduced credit and operating costs, and slightly enhanced net interest margins.
However, while earnings were in line with analysts' expectations, Christoph Kotowski, a senior vice president at Oppenheimer & Co., said they would have fallen short if it weren't for a reduction in its rate of taxation.
"Although the numbers are what we expected, that's only because their tax rate dropped a couple points," he said.
"It was a disappointing quarter."
Net interest income amounted to $392 million for the quarter, up 4% from the year-earlier period.
While the industry's margins peaked in the first quarter of last year, Bank of New York was able to buck the trend: Its net interest spread was 3.12% in the fourth quarter vs. 3.09% in the third quarter and 2.95% in the fourth quarter of 1992.
"Their spread is staying stable because they are growing the credit-card business," said David Berry, the research director at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods.
Michael Pascale, a vice president of the bank, said cards contributed about 23% of earnings throughout 1993.
The Pittsburgh-based company posted net income of $114 million, or $1.50 a share.
That compares with year-earlier net of $105 million, or $1.62 a share, which included a tax benefit of $29 million.
For 1993, earnings declined 17%, a reflection, Mellon said, of a $130 million tax benefit a year earlier.
The bank posted net income of $361 million, or $4.63 a share, for 1993, including the net impact of a restructuring charge related to Boston Co. and securities gains.
That compares with year-ago net of $437 million, or $6.96 a share, including the tax benefit.
Mellon returned to fully taxed status in 1993 after exhausting tax-benefit carry-foward in late 1992.
The bank emphasized that operating earnings were up in 1993.
On a fully taxed basis, year-earlier figures were $307 million, or $4.63 a share.
In the fourth quarter of 1993, Mellon agreed to acquire Dreyfus Corp., a mutual-fund company, for $1.85 billion.
Mellon's provision for credit losses was $25 million in the fourth quarter, down from $35 million a year earlier.
Nonperforming assets declined 13% at Dec. 31 compared with Sept. 30.
Net interest margin was 4.39% at the end of 1993, compared with 4.44% a year earlier.
Wachovia continued to benefit from growing interest income and reductions in both expenses and provisions for credit losses.
The company, with joint headquarters in Winston-Salem, N.C., and Atlanta, saw a 7.6% increase in loans in the fourth quarter to $1.57 billion.
Total average interest-earning assets increased almost 10% to $2.81 billion from a year earlier.
Wachovia's already strong credit quality continued to improve with nonperforming assets totaling $154.9 million at the end of the fourth quarter, compared with $188.1 million in the third quarter.
The results, which were in line with expectations, reflected a provision for credit losses of $18 million for the just-completed quarter, compared with $28.6 million a year earlier.
For the year, the provision for loan losses was $92.7 million compared with $119.4 million in 1992.
First Fidelity's 16% increase in fourth-quarter net income resulted in per-share earnings that were slightly higher than the consensus estimate of analysts.
The improved performance partly reflected the Lawrenceville, N.J., banking company's acquisitions.
In 1993, First Fidelity acquired five banks, and it announced three additional acquisitions that it expects to close in the 1994 first half.
The results also reflected an increase in net interest income, improving asset quality and some increases in certain noninterest income.
First Fidelity also cited continuing control of operating expenses.
At year end, First Fidelity's total assets were up to $32.27 billion from $30.89 billion a year earlier.
Tony Terracciano, chairman and chief executive, said the company's geographic expansion through acquisitions "should provide opportunities for continued cost-effective growth in the now-stronger economy."
When one of her writers fails to persuade a homicide investigator to give up a photo of a bludgeoned corpse, Rose Mandelsberg, editor of True Detective magazine, gets the cop on the phone.
Lowering her voice provocatively, the red-haired, 37-year-old Ms. Mandelsberg purrs: "Of course, sergeant, we'll need a good picture of you, too.
We appreciate excellent police work."
Thus disarmed, the officer still protests that his photos are too gruesome for publication.
But after he grills Ms. Mandelsberg about her journalistic ethics, she responds: "No sir, I don't want to put the `Creature from the Black Lagoon' on my cover.
We want to tastefully keep our readers informed."
The photos land on her desk the next day.
The world of detective magazines is just brutal these days.
The breathless "Whodunit" gazettes are grudgingly being transformed into a "Who's Who of Gore."
The old formula of gumshoe-gets-bad-guy isn't enough to attract crime buffs anymore, as readers have become jaded by the steady stream of motiveless bloodbaths on the evening news.
"The love triangle still happens, but there are more atrocities now, and people are really into them," Ms. Mandelsberg says wistfully.
Squeezed by competition from supermarket tabloids and a wave of true-crime TV shows such as "America's Most Wanted," Ms. Mandelsberg feels compelled to run ever-more sensational covers and headlines.
Her editors recently crafted such gems as: "For a Measly 15 Bucks, He Ripped Her Body Apart Over and Over," "Who Torched Grandpa At the Rodeo?" and "Strangled Nude In a Flying Hearse."
Along with the blood and gore, a sense of pride comes with the crime writer's job.
"Every word is fact," says Ms. Mandelsberg.
"And we aren't hacks.
We know that the word Dumpster is a capitalized trademark.
When so many people you write about end up stuffed in the garbage, you have to know things like that."
Besides editing True Detective, she is also editor in chief of four other crime magazines, plus some special yearbooks: Front Page Detective, Inside Detective, Master Detective and Official Detective.
The magazines, owned by Reese Communications Inc. in Manhattan, have a combined circulation of 500,000 -- which is holding steady, but grimly so.
Single-copy sales (at $2.50 each) represent 80% of the circulation.
But the proliferation of new magazines -- which have grown 83% to 3,300 titles since 1982 -- has pushed crime periodicals off many downtown newsstands.
So the genre now survives mainly in suburban convenience stores, supermarkets and drugstores, especially in the South.
That's a far cry from when the first issue of True Detective appeared in 1924.
It was the gumshoe's Golden Age.
Crime writers were able to impose a certain rhyme, reason and romance on their stories before automatic pistols and random slaughter became common.
A yellowed page in an early edition carries a byline that would later become famous for fictionalized mysteries: Dashiell Hammett, the creator of Sam Spade.
But the magazines' depiction of glamour in detective work is more and more lost in the blood-and-guts of today's crimes, says Arthur Lurigio, associate professor of criminology at Loyola University in Chicago.
"People now read about crime to be psychologically inoculated -- to see that those who commit horrors are caught," he says.
Some crime buffs find today's criminals less interesting than yesteryear's.
Crime novelist Elmore Leonard says most modern felons are too senseless to inspire his fiction.
"When I was a kid in the 1930s, I had a picture taken with a toy gun in a pose mimicking Bonnie and Clyde, who were on a robbery spree.
But they weren't shooting their victims down like dogs, the way so many robbers do now.
Where's the drama in that kind of craziness?
I can't get interesting criminals out of the news.
I have to make them up."
But Ms. Mandelsberg has to stick to the facts, right down to the most grisly particulars.
"We have a core of loyalists out there who want every detail, from what brand of cigarette the perp was smoking, to seeing the ballistics expert dig the slug out of a body, to the judge meting out the sentence."
According to a recent survey, 54% of True Detective readers are women.
One is Gail Jensen of Vadnais Heights, Minn., who sells industrial products and says her main hobby is knitting.
"I abhor violence," she says.
"I read these magazines to see criminals brought to justice."
Catherine Haas, an Omaha, Neb., investment counselor, says she likes reading stories about "murderers of old ladies, really vicious types."
But she won't let her 11- and 13-year-old children look at the magazine, and she says she is praying that "NYPD Blue" is taken off television because of its violence.
Joe Schwarz, a Chicago dentist, says Official Detective magazine lets him "live vicariously in a world of catching rapists and killers.
It's escapism."
But he doesn't leave copies in his patient waiting area.
"People having their teeth cared for don't need to read about chain-saw massacres," he says.
True Detective also reaches people on the other side of the law.
Each month, the publication receives a few letters from prison inmates.
Many of them praise the magazine's ubiquitous ads for schools and correspondence courses to become private eyes and locksmiths, saying they inspired them to turn their lives around.
(Ads cost $500 a page.)
A job at True Detective can be unsettling for the squeamish.
Gary Krystofiak, who was hired as production manager from Classical, a music magazine, last year, says he became nauseated over lunch after viewing some photos for his new employer.
"What we call art!" he exclaims, putting one hand on his stomach.
But "people want dirt," Ben Hirsch, art director for the magazines, says defensively.
Learning the Craft Ms. Mandelsberg seems an unlikely person to edit these bloodcurdling publications.
A former private-school English teacher, she says her favorite writer is Chaucer.
She says she took a secretarial job at True Detective in 1977 simply to do something "more creative."
She began learning about crime writing while typing editors' letters to free-lancers instructing them on improving their stories.
When assigned to fact-check articles, she learned to uncover and corroborate evidence.
She also developed a skill for getting photos of crime victims from reluctant sources -- some of whom worry about being sued for handing them over.
"If the detectives won't cooperate, I go to the district attorney, then the coroner until someone comes through."
Ms. Mandelsberg kept moving up the masthead until being named editor in chief of all Reese Communications detective magazines in 1990.
Since taking over, Ms. Mandelsberg has done away with one staple of the trade: staged cover photos showing scantily clad women under attack by men.
The covers were sexist, she says.
But women still turn up most often as victims in stories.
And the copy and graphics have become increasingly graphic.
"I push for excellence in writing, but when a killer removes the victim's intestines, it's fascinating," says Ms. Mandelsberg.
Christos Mirtsopoulos, a story editor at True Detective, says the editing at the magazine is firm by necessity.
"We have to save the reader from some writers who think they're Mickey Spillane," he says.
The magazine pays just $250 for a 6,000-word story ($200 for cover photos).
Charles Sasser, a former homicide-squad detective in Tulsa, Okla., has written about 400 such pieces since quitting the force.
He says, "I enjoy reporting on detectives, but being one gave me nightmares."
