Sega Enterprises Ltd. plans to break into next-generation video games sooner than expected, with hardware that offers a price break over contenders such as 3DO Co.
The Japanese company's U.S. unit, which is based in Redwood City, Calif., said it will ship a $149 accessory that plugs into the cartridge slot on its Genesis video game machine, roughly doubling that 16-bit system's performance with 32-bit processing power and improved graphics.
Sega of America said it will introduce the system next fall and predicted sales of 2.5 million units world-wide in its first 12 months on the market.
Sega's Genesis Super 32X accessory contains the same Hitachi Ltd. microprocessor chip as Saturn, the code name for an entirely new hardware system that will be introduced in Japan next fall and hadn't expected to appear in the U.S. in 1995.
The system will require software that has been designed to take advantage of the new circuitry, but will still play existing game cartridges; owners of the company's Sega CD system can also play their disks with the accessory.
"We fully expect the game play on this machine to exceed the current 32-bit machines on the market," said Thomas Kalinske, president of Sega of America.
"And you don't have to pay $500 for it."
Mr. Kalinske's comment is a critique of the price on 3DO's Interactive Multiplayer.
The only current manufacturer, Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., recently cut the price to $499 from $699 after 3DO offered to give away shares of stock as an inducement to manufacturers.
Some analysts agreed that the Sega strategy could cast a cloud over 3DO's attempt to build support for its new hardware platform.
On the other hand, 3DO has a head start in developing new 32-bit games and other applications software.
"That lead is 3DO's to capitalize on or not," said John Taylor, an analyst with L.H. Alton & Co.
"There still is an opportunity for 3DO to establish an installed base if they can come up with a killer application."
Bob Farber, 3DO's senior vice president of sales and marketing, said it had heard of the new Sega product from software developers, and isn't particularly worried.
"It sure looks like this is just further validation of what 3DO has been saying all along -- that the current generation of systems just isn't good enough to provide the level of experience that consumers want."
3DO's stock rose $2.25 to close at $26.75 a share on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
The other big video game player, Nintendo Co., argued that accessories such as the Super 32X will have limited appeal to software developers, who make more money selling games for the huge base of installed 16-bit systems.
Nintendo took the different route of developing an accessory chip that fits in 16-bit cartridges and improves their performance.
Meanwhile, Nintendo is working with Silicon Graphics Inc. to develop a more advanced game player expected in 1995.
