Allen Group Inc. expects sizable gains in sales and pretax profit this year, but a sharply higher tax rate will result in lower earnings from continuing operations, said Robert G. Paul, president and chief executive officer.
Because the producer of mobile-communications equipment and truck parts exhausted its tax-loss carry-forwards in 1993, its combined federal and state income-tax rate will rise to about 39% for 1994 from 11% last year, said Robert A. Youdelman, senior vice president and chief financial officer.
Mr. Paul said in an interview that 1994 net income could slip below $1 a share, but he declined to make a specific forecast.
In 1993, Allen Group had earnings from continuing operations of $29.5 million, or $1.19 a share, on sales of $280 million.
Net income -- after losses from discontinued operations and a gain from the cumulative effect of a change in accounting for income taxes -- was $24.1 million, or 96 cents a share.
"If our pretax income rose by 29%, which was the rate of gain from continuing operations achieved last year, our earnings per share would be 97 cents," he said.
Mr. Paul said he isn't forecasting that result and declined to make a specific forecast of pretax profit and sales for 1994.
But he said the figures illustrate the sharp impact of the tax rate change.
He said the earnings decline is likely to be sharp in the first quarter, ordinarily a weak earnings period.
In the 1993 first quarter, Allen Group earned 29 cents a share from continuing operations and had net income of 31 cents a share, after gains and losses, on sales of $66 million.
Mr. Paul said demand for the company's truck parts is strong, and cellular-telephone products sales are booming overseas.
Domestic sales of mobile-communications products are expected to be flat for the second consecutive year, he said, because the cellular-telephone network is in place in the U.S.
Mr. Paul said two major new markets will produce sharply increased sales and earnings in 1995 and 1996.
Allen Group expects to sell a significant volume of products for the proposed personal-communications systems by the 1995 second half, he said.
And the company's vehicle-emissions testing division will turn profitable next year as new emissions-testing stations begin operating.
Mr. Paul said the company benefited from "a tremendous growth around the globe in mobile telecommunications."
Last year, overseas sales accounted for 31% of Allen Group's telecommunications-equipment sales, Mr. Paul said, and that share will continue to grow.
U.S. sales of telecommunications equipment will begin rising again in 1995 as construction begins on base stations for personal-communications systems, he said.
However, product-development spending this year will rise, he said, to $10 million from $8.6 million in 1993.
Mr. Paul said truck and off-road equipment sales rose 12% in 1993 and operating profit more than doubled.
Allen Group's recently launched automotive-emissions testing operation -- contributed little revenue in 1993, Mr. Paul said, and had a pretax loss of $1.5 million.
It will lose about $2 million this year, he said, but will turn profitable in 1995, based on current contracts.
