Bell Atlantic Corp. is in talks to revise the financial terms of its multibillion-dollar acquisition of cable giant Tele-Communications Inc. following a decline in Bell Atlantic's stock price and a cloudy outlook for TCI's cash flow.
The renegotiation is one reason why the regional Bell telephone company and TCI have already run past two deadlines for hammering out a final pact.
The companies recently said they hope to complete the task by mid-February, but they haven't come to terms and now won't specify a new deadline.
People familiar with the talks said both sides are looking at a few key elements.
They include determining how many new shares Bell Atlantic will have to issue to acquire TCI's extensive assets and how they should be valued; and the mechanism and timing for putting a value on the programming assets that TCI and its Liberty Media spinoff hold.
Bell Atlantic declined to comment yesterday, and a TCI spokesman couldn't be reached.
The protracted dickering is viewed in part as a trademark manuever of TCI Chief Executive Officer John C. Malone, who is known in the cable business for renegotiating after a tentative deal has been signed.
But it also reflects the uneven fortunes of both companies as the euphoria has faded in the four months since the huge acquisition was announced.
Bell Atlantic's shares surged after the TCI coup, closing at a high of $67.625 on Oct. 14, the day after the deal was announced.
That was more than $20 higher than where the stock traded at the start of October.
But yesterday Bell Atlantic shares fell $1.25 to $53.125 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, below even the guaranteed value of $54 a share that Bell Atlantic had set for the stock it would pay to acquire TCI under the original agreement.
For TCI, the concern is that its cashflow outlook is now more uncertain than when the deal was unveiled in mid-October.
At the time, the companies had agreed that Bell Atlantic would pay a final price for TCI assets based on 11.75 times cash flow in the quarter preceding the deal's closing, probably the fourth quarter of 1994.
But now the Federal Communications Commission has extended a freeze on cable rates until May.
On Tuesday the FCC will take up the issue of whether to impose further cuts in cable prices, posing a new threat to the cash flow of TCI systems.
"It appears there's a fair amount of cloud-cover over this deal right now," said Marion Boucher, an analyst with Bear, Stearns & Co.
"A lot of issues could make this deal veer off into directions that the companies never intended to take."
When Bell Atlantic first made its bold bid for TCI, it was valued at as much as $16 billion for most TCI cable systems and its programming interests, plus the assumption of about $10 billion in TCI debt.
Those numbers, however, were based on a variety of measures, including TCI's cash flow.
Rather than leave the final price to the vagaries of cash-flow multiples, TCI advisers are said to be pursuing a different approach.
Mr. Malone is concerned about Bell Atlantic's initial plans to pay in the form of a new class of stock that wouldn't pay a dividend for five years, one executive familiar with the discussions said.
In particular, the Malone camp is said to worry about how to place a value on the new shares and what level they might trade at on the open market, compared with regular Bell Atlantic shares that pay an annual dividend of $2.68.
Mr. Malone is no fan of dividends, preferring to reinvest funds in the business.
But, "the one thing John Malone likes less than dividends is not knowing the value of what he has," said one person familiar with the situation.
One executive familiar with the situation said a possible solution would involve using regular dividend-paying shares rather than the new class of nondividend stock.
But other advisers dimiss that solution as unlikely.
In part, that's because such a move would require Bell Atlantic to pay perhaps $600 million a year in extra dividends beyond the $1.1 billion a year it already pays out.
Bell Atlantic Chairman Raymond Smith has made keeping the company's regular dividend intact a central promise as he tries to win support for the TCI acquisition.
That would be made all the more difficult if the company, at a time when it plans to spend billions on new interactive networks, had to pony up even more dividend cash.
Bell Atlantic, for its part, hopes to find a way to lessen the earnings dilution caused by the enormous number of new shares it must issue to acquire TCI and Liberty.
The original pact calls for it to pay 220 million new shares for most TCI cable systems, which would force up a reduction of as much as 35% in its per-share earnings; plus an additional load of about 188 million shares to acquire TCI's and Liberty's equity in cable channels.
But the Baby Bell would have to issue even more shares if its own stock price continues to slide below the $54 level it had guaranteed when it signed the preliminary agreement.
That would further hurt its reported per-share earnings, unless the company can find a way to renegotiate terms and pay out a lower number of new shares.
The two sides also are dickering over how and when to acquire the programming assets.
Originally they had conceived forming an independent company and having Bell Atlantic acquire it only later, at a price to be determined at that time, after receiving necessary federal approvals.
Now they are looking at setting a hard value for the programming stakes up front, before TCI's cash-flow outlook could deteriorate, and finalizing the price and terms before winning the regulatory goahead.
Johnnie L. Roberts contributed to this article.
