Construction contracting in January held steady with December's pace as a laggard housing market was offset by modest gains in construction other than residences and buildings, an F.W. Dodge survey reported.
The report said the Dodge index stood at 103, unchanged from December's revised levels.
The index measures the seasonally adjusted rate of total construction, using the average monthly rate that occurred in 1987 as a base of 100.
In the past 12 months, the index reached a high of 109 in October, but has since experienced "mild erosion" in falling to its current levels, the report said.
On an unadjusted basis, January's construction contracting volume totaled $17.17 billion, down 1% from a year ago.
"The recent steps backward are not yet troubling, since a surge of activity is often followed by a period of consolidation in which the industry catches its breath," said Robert A. Murray, vice president of economic affairs and chief economist for F.W. Dodge, the forecasting unit of McGraw-Hill Inc.
"There's a positive side to January's data -- a variety of structure types were able to pick up the slack for housing, adversely affected by the month's harsh winter weather," he added.
"This kind of broader participation is just what is required to keep the construction recovery going this year."
Residential construction in January slid 3%, retreating from a robust volume reported at the end of 1993 largely because of a 5% decline in single-family housing.
The depressed multifamily side improved slightly to offer some support.
Nonbuilding construction edged up 2% last month, showing slight improvement from December's lackluster performance.
Within this category, public works remained stable as stronger totals for highways and water-resource projects balanced lower contracting for bridges and sewers.
The utility segment stood at $2.5 billion, up from December's $1 billion.
January's totals for this segment, however, remain significantly below levels shown over the past five years.
Ford Motor Co. said it formed a China unit to manage all of the company's business negotiations relating to parts- and vehicle-manufacturing.
Ford named James J. Paulsen, formerly manager of Ford's plastic and trim products division, as president of the Ford China operations.
