The Clinton administration has a message for the rest of Asia: Don't worry, you aren't next after the trade battle with Japan.
That message is being delivered in a private meeting today in Singapore between Commerce Undersecretary Jeffrey Garten and Singapore's most powerful politician, Lee Kuan Yew.
Mr. Garten's trip to Asia was planned before the collapse of U.S.-Japan trade talks 10 days ago.
But the Clinton administration is using the trip as an opportunity to shore up support -- or at least to blunt opposition -- from fast-growing countries in Asia.
"If their worry is somehow we're gunning for them because of problems we have with Japan," Mr. Garten said in an interview, "that's really misplaced."
U.S. trade officials believe they were outflanked by Japan in the public-relations battle that accompanied the failed "framework" trade negotiations.
Japan was able to portray U.S. demands for specific import goals and measurements as so-called managed trade and to convince others in Asia that the U.S. would turn on them next.
The six member countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations "look to us as the eldest brother," Sozaburo Okamatsu, vice minister of Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry, said in an interview before the framework talks failed.
"If we don't get a good result, they say, `We'll be caught in the U.S. trap.'"
In a speech to Singapore's Federated Chambers of Commerce yesterday, Mr. Garten laid out the Clinton position.
"Japan is a unique case," he told the group.
"The problems we face are not just in one product area or another, not just when it comes to goods or services, not just when it comes to structural issues -- it is all of this together."
He said the U.S. wouldn't become so "fixated" with Japan that it loses sight of trade opportunities elsewhere in Asia.
In an interview, Mr. Garten said he will carry that message to trade ministers in Indonesia, China and Hong Kong during his two-week trip.
He also plans to meet with other Asian ministers who are in Singapore today and tomorrow for the Asian Aerospace Show.
As part of their strategy to turn up the pressure on Japan, U.S. officials have singled out Singapore and South Korea as potential allies.
Mr. Garten is trying to get Southeast Asian countries to flesh out a plan to promote joint ventures between U.S. companies and Southeast Asian ones.
Regarding South Korea, administration officials said they are dusting off a Korean proposal, made at the end of the Bush administration, to set up a "strategic technology alliance" with the U.S. -- which largely excludes Japan.
But the hunt for trade allies may prove fruitless.
Late last week, at the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the world trade forum in Geneva, a succession of countries took turns lambasting the U.S. for muscling Japan.
Moreover, Japanese relations with the rest of Asia are complex.
Tokyo runs big trade surpluses with many Asian countries.
However, Japan is also a major source of foreign investment for Asia and, for some nations, hefty foreign-aid checks.
Tokyo also could try to parry U.S. moves if it interprets them as isolating Japan.
An early test could come this year, when Japan decides whether to back a Malaysian proposal to create an Asian economic caucus that excludes the U.S.
In the past, Japan has blocked the Malaysian plan.
But now, "the fear of protectionism may bind us," said Kazuo Nukuzawa, managing director of Keidanren, Japan's big business organization.
G. Pierre Goad in Singapore contributed to this article.
