Corning Inc. swung to a loss in the fourth quarter primarily because of a charge related to breast-implant litigation at Dow Corning Corp.
Corning posted a loss of $120.9 million, or 64 cents a share, including a $203 million charge.
Corning said the charge is being taken in expectation of a global settlement of suits brought by breast-implant patients.
Corning and Dow Chemical Co. are 50-50 owners of Dow Corning.
In the year-ago quarter, Corning earned $41.2 million, or 21 cents a share, including a gain of three cents a share from a tax-loss carry-foward and accounting and special charges totaling $1.78 a share.
Revenue rose 9% to $1.09 billion from $1 billion a year ago.
Excluding the special charge, which amounts to $1.06 a share, Corning had earnings of $82.2 million, or 42 cents a share, in the latest quarter, compared with year-ago operating profit of $79.9 million, or 42 cents a share.
Corning said the nearly flat operating results reflect difficulties in its consumer products unit, which it is restructuring, as well as pricing pressures in its optical fiber and cable, and clinical-testing units.
Corning's consumer products business, which makes Corning Ware, Revere Ware, and Corelle dinner ware, among other brands, has been hurt by the recession in Mexico, where it has large operations, and by the weak economies in Europe.
"My guess is if they don't get results in a year, they might sell the business," said Kimberly E. Ritrievi, an analyst with PaineWebber.
A Corning spokesman said, "That's a speculative comment.
We are working to improve the business."
Analysts noted that the fourth-quarter results included a gain of about two cents a share for a tax benefit related to Corning's Vitro Corning SA joint venture, which is being dismantled.
They also said Corning's effective tax rate was 26% in the quarter, down from 28% a year ago.
"If you normalize the tax rate, you're looking at 38 cents or 39 cents a share on an operating basis," said B. Alex Henderson, an analyst with Prudential Securities.
"It's certainly down from a year ago."
Nevertheless, the results were generally in line with analysts' expectations.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Corning fell 25 cents to $31.125.
For the year, Corning posted a loss of $15.2 million, or nine cents a share, including the breast implant-related charge as well as a charge for accounting changes.
That compares with a year-ago loss of $12.6 million, or eight cents a share, including a gain of four cents a share for tax-loss carry-foward and accounting and special charges totaling $1.78 a share.
Analysts said the company appears comfortable with estimates of $1.75 to $1.80 a share for 1994.
