Damn the torpedoes, half speed ahead.
That's the lesson being drawn from the stunning collapse of the Bell Atlantic-Tele-Communications deal by cable and phone company executives who want to build their own sections of the information highway.
The deal's demise won't mean the death of similar proposed alliances, they say.
The computer, telephone and cable industries are on a collision course because of the explosion of digital technology, easing of regulations and growing competition.
"There's convergence going on in these industries, and there are relationships that are going to be formed by telephone and cable companies to put their strengths together," says Richard D. McCormick, chairman and chief executive officer of U S West Inc.
But the deal's collapse will slow the pace of the alliance-making.
The reason is not that potential partners will second guess the soundness of the strategy but that the looming threat of an industry colossus has been eliminated, says Thomas R. Gage, a vice president at Gemini Consulting.
A Bell Atlantic-TCI combination -- offering phone and interactive video services nationwide -- would have threatened the businesses of virtually every large cable and phone company.
Now, with the phone-cable deal of the century scuttled, "the heat is off," Mr. Gage says.
So what will the deals look like now?
For one thing, the pricetags may be lower.
"It's going to make sellers think twice about trying to hold out for top dollar," says Steven Yanis, an analyst at Kidder, Peabody & Co.
Some companies may decide they no longer need to be part of an outright merger.
Instead, they may consider partnerships such as the venture formed by Southwestern Bell Corp. and Cox Enterprises Inc. to acquire cable properties, or U S West's $2.5 billion deal with Time Warner Inc. to build interactive video systems.
"It's always easier to do a joint venture where there's no change in control," says Mr. Yanis.
Mr. McCormick, one of the architects of the Time Warner-U S West alliance, argues that "the elegance of the Bell Atlantic-TCI merger was perfect alignment of corporate interests when you have a common owner.
On the other hand, ours was easier to do, didn't require as much money and we don't have any cultural issues to deal with."
Other fallout: The deal's collapse may help validate the strategies of such Baby Bells as Ameritech and Pacific Telesis Group, which have shunned cable alliances.
Instead, these companies are spending billions of dollars to rebuild their phone systems into two-way video pipelines.
Some executives say the unsettled regulatory environment that Bell Atlantic and TCI cited for their deal's demise also can't be dismissed.
In addition to the 7% cable rate cut ordered this week by the Federal Communications Commission, Congress is considering legislation that would tear down the barriers separating the phone and cable players.
With cable companies possibly coming under even greater regulation, they may make less attractive partners for the heavily regulated Baby Bells.
For the Bells, "a lot of the interest is entering businesses where you don't have those shackles," says Andy Zimmerman, a telecommunications consultant at Coopers & Lybrand.
And there's another possibility: While the collapse of the deal may temporarily slow down other cable-phone alliances, over the long term it could have the opposite effect.
Since it knocked down the prices of cable stocks, it could make cable properties more attractive to suitors.
That could ease the concerns of some phone companies that have shunned cable deals because they thought the prices were too rich.
