Many businesses with operations in Los Angeles were disrupted by the earthquake.
Companies shut plants and offices, retailers reported heavy damage to some stores, and airlines canceled or delayed flights.
But the damage apparently wasn't widespread; while businesses close to the quake's epicenter were hit hard, offices just 20 miles away were untouched.
Also, the earthquake occurred at 4:31 a.m. PST, a time when traffic was light, and on a day when many workers were off for the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday.
Nevertheless, it was difficult to assess the full extent of the damage, and it wasn't clear when many businesses would get back to normal.
Los Angeles's chief of police, at a news conference yesterday, urged businesses to remain closed today.
The local phone network emerged from the quake relatively intact, but calling into and out of the area was difficult to impossible throughout the day because of the heavy volume of calling.
Many companies had difficulty contacting their operations in the Los Angeles area.
Retailers were hit particularly hard.
R.H. Macy & Co. reported extensive damage at its stores in Los Angeles.
It said eight department stores in its Bullocks chain were hit, with the Northridge mall store at the very epicenter of the quake.
A Macy spokeswoman said that store suffered extensive structural damage, and sprinklers that went off damaged some merchandise.
Macy said none of its employees were injured, though all eight of the stores remained closed yesterday.
Dayton Hudson Corp. said 10 of its Mervyn's department stores and six to 12 of its Target discount stores were damaged.
A spokeswoman said five Mervyn's stores sustained "a great deal of damage," including buckled walls, fallen ceiling tile and water damage from sprinklers, while two Target stores had major structural damage.
Two employees at a Target store in Valencia were injured when stockroom shelving toppled over on them.
The spokeswoman said they were taken to an area hospital by ambulance, but she didn't know the extent of their injuries.
At one Target store in Granada Hills, 98% of the ceiling tile had fallen.
That would mean "a lot of merchandise on the shelves is also down," the spokeswoman added.
Sears, Roebuck & Co. said 10 of its 27 Los Angeles-area stores suffered damage and eight remained closed yesterday.
It said another was closed because of lack of power.
A spokesman for Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc. said many, if not all, of the company's 11 stores in the area were closed, as was the Los Angeles headquarters.
In the Los Angeles basin, power outages swept throughout much of the area as transmission substations, transformers and power lines went down.
By some estimates, as many as 1.3 million people were without power shortly after the quake.
Officials at Southern California Edison, the utility operating unit of SCEcorp., initially reported 750,000 of its approximately four million customers without power.
By midafternoon, 125,000 of the utility's customers had regained power, but a spokeswoman said until physical inspections of damaged areas had been completed, it would be difficult to estimate when power would be restored to all its customers.
The earthquake also rattled the interwoven electricity grid system, causing scattered outages as far north as Alberta and British Columbia.
In Idaho, about 110,000 customers lost power for three hours as the grid sought to correct load problems stemming from the quake.
Communications companies were burdened by the heavy volume of callers.
In some cases, Los Angeles residents had to wait 30 seconds or more to get a dial tone.
Incoming callers often found themselves listening to a recording indicating that all circuits were busy.
There were reports of scattered breaks in the network that caused some areas to lose phone service.
By late afternoon, Pacific Telesis Group's Pacific Bell said most areas had full phone service restored.
Pacific Bell, which has about 3.5 million customers in the affected area, asked long-distance companies -- American Telephone & Telegraph Co., MCI Communications Corp. and Sprint Corp. -- to restrict incoming calls to Southern California to help keep lines open for emergency outgoing calls.
AT&T said it lost some long-distance services into and out of parts of Los Angeles because of equipment damage and power failure.
Until equipment was back in service, AT&T was assisting customers in placing calls and providing access codes so that customers could place their calls over the networks of other companies, including rivals MCI and Sprint, which reported no network outages.
Transportation companies also were affected, as the earthquake collapsed highways and damaged rail lines.
The Los Angeles International Airport was closed for about two hours, disrupting many flights.
Other area airports also were briefly closed.
UAL Corp.'s United Airlines said it canceled at least 40 flights stemming from the earthquake.
USAir Group Inc.'s USAir said one of its jetways at the airport was "twisted a little bit" and its terminal lost "a few ceiling tiles."
But both airlines said they believed bad weather on the East Coast would result in even bigger delays.
The earthquake shut Interstate 5, the primary traffic artery between Northern and Southern California, when a section of road collapsed.
The closure created lengthy detours and delays for truckers.
"We have to reroute freight to the east and north, a couple hundred mile detour," said a spokesman for Consolidated Freightways Inc.
"We'll move the freight but not without expense and not without trouble," he said.
Southern Pacific Lines, a unit of Southern Pacific Rail Corp., said a "substantial shift in track" near the epicenter of the earthquake derailed one train.
The company said there were no injuries.
Among the derailed cars were 16 tank cars that spilled 5,000 gallons of sulfuric acid and 3,000 gallons of diesel fuel.
The company said vacuum trucks were dispatched to the scene.
But important east-west transcontinental rail links to the area escaped the earthquake with only minor delays, and are expected to return to normal operations today, railroad officials said.
Computer companies based in the Los Angeles area escaped relatively undamaged, because most are concentrated far south of the quake's epicenter in the San Fernando Valley.
The oil-refining industry of California, the nation's third largest behind Texas and Louisiana, was largely unharmed, although several plants lost power and many pipelines shut down.
