Bird Corp., experiencing mounting losses, dismissed George F. Haufler as its chief executive officer after 12 years on the job.
The building-materials and environmental-services company said its president, Joseph D. Vecchiolla, who joined Bird last May, will succeed Mr. Haufler as its CEO.
"The action was predicated on the financial performance of the company," said spokesman Charles Fletcher.
Bird announced Jan. 17 that it expects to report a fourth-quarter loss that is "significantly larger than previously anticipated."
For the fourth quarter of 1992, Bird posted a net loss of $541,000, or 23 cents a share.
The company also said in January that it was planning to withdraw from its "on-site" environmental-remediation business in the first half of 1994 because of disappointing results.
Mr. Fletcher said Bird is continuing its negotiations with banks over its previously announced technical default on a $50 million loan agreement.
The company has said it will not declare any dividends until it negotiates an amendment to the loan.
The company said Mr. Vecchiolla "has already begun to put in place a plan of action which emphasizes stabilizing banking relations, eliminating environmental business unit losses, building a strong balanced sheet, and focusing future growth initiatives on Bird's profitable core housing-related operations."
Mr. Vecchiolla, 38 years old, originally joined Bird as vice president and chief financial officer.
In November, he was named president and chief operating officer, and he was elected to the board in December.
He previously served as vice president and chief financial officer of Horizon Cellular Telephone Co.
Bird said Mr. Haufler, 62, will continue as a director.
Mr. Haufler is on leave of absence as chairman because of medical problems.
Guy W. Fiske, the board's vice chairman, will continue as chairman of the executive committee and will have the full responsibility and authority of chairman of the board.
Mr. Haufler, who recently was diagnosed with lung cancer, said: "With my current health condition, I think what is being done is appropriate."
