A young woman named Julie, who has recently lost her husband and child in a car accident, returns to the family mansion.
She finds the family's cook wailing in the kitchen.
"Why are you crying?" the widow, who is very beautiful, asks the old woman.
"Because you're not," replies the cook.
Julie's decision not to cry is the subject of "Blue," a baffling, beautiful French and Polish collaboration directed by Krzysztof Kieslowski.
Unable to kill herself after the death of her family, Julie decides to live without memory.
She settles her financial affairs, puts the house up for sale and moves to an apartment in Paris where she plans to live in anonymity.
As part of her break with the past she makes love with the man who has always adored her at a distance, her dead husband's collaborator.
She tells him she has done this so he will no longer fantasize about her.
She wants nothing about her former life to continue.
But this is impossible.
Her husband was a famous composer and she was his unofficial adviser; she can't block out the music they created.
Not only is she unable to eliminate the past she remembers, she learns disturbing new things about it.
Zbigniew Preisner composed the original music for the film, strong haunting chords that give it a feeling of depth.
The music and the face of Juliette Binoche (Julie), beautifully photographed by Slawomir Idziak, hold this elliptical film together.
At times the movie seems just slightly more developed than sophisticated advertising, full of seductive imagery signifying a lot but revealing little.
Yet there are moments of sad humor, of genuine humanity.
When, for example, Julie visits her mother in a nursing home.
The mother no longer recognizes her daughter.
Dementia has allowed the mother to do what Julie is trying to do but can't, to cut herself off from her memories.
Julie stares at her mother staring at a television set, watching a report on bungee jumpers.
As the bungee jumpers belt themselves up and fling themselves over the edge of a cliff, the mother says, "I can see the whole world."
At the time of this writing I am wearing a navy blue sweater, a black turtleneck, slacks with green and purplish checks, and brown boots.
When I chose these clothes in the dim light of my bedroom, before putting in my contact lenses, they seemed to match.
But in the cool fluorescent light of the ladies room here at the Journal I could see I might have made a mistake.
I offer this insight into my sartorial judgment, or lack thereof, as a partial explanation for what my mailbox indicates is the most serious error I've ever made as a film critic.
On Dec. 23, in this newspaper, I described a scene in "The Pelican Brief" in which Julia Roberts, playing a beautiful law student, and Denzel Washington, playing a reporter, are running through a parking garage, trying to elude the professional killers chasing them.
"They run, run, run," I wrote.
"Then, just when it seems they are trapped, they leap from one level of the car park to the level below, land on the hood of a car, hop off and continue running without missing a beat -- or even breaking a heel.
"I can't think of a funnier scene in any of the current movie releases . . ."
If only I'd let it go at that.
But some demon compelled me to say more.
I ran the scene back through my mind.
There they were, the journalist and the law student, running, running, running.
On my internal movie screen Ms. Roberts was wearing a slim skirt and high heels.
I added this detail to the review.
On every other movie screen, however, Ms. Roberts wore the slim skirt and high heels elsewhere in the movie.
In the parking garage she was wearing a loose skirt and flats.
This error was pointed out by many, many readers.
"You can rest assured that I will never read another review of yours," wrote A.D. of Irvine, Calif.
"I don't want to be misled with erroneous facts again."
"I always had an image of The Wall Street Journal as being a paragon of journalistic quality and integrity," wrote C.C. of Lakewood, Ohio, "but unfortunately Julie Salamon's review of the `Pelican Brief' proved my high regard of your newspaper was undeserved."
And so on.
Clearly movies awake great, unexpected passions.
"The handsome John Broadwood & Son instrument that plays the title role in `The Piano' is so pummeled and abused in the course of the movie that after awhile I wanted to shout, `Stop battering that piano!
It's innocent!'" writes Craig Seligman in a recent issue of Piano & Keyboard.
So I guess I shouldn't have been surprised by the ardent watchdogs who rally around even a really silly movie like "The Pelican Brief."
My apologies to all.
I am imposing a mandatory sentence on myself: six months of remedial reading of fashion magazines.
VIDEO TIP: I'll also watch "Funny Face" a few more times, though that's pleasure not punishment.
In this 1957 musical, Fred Astaire plays a fashion photographer who discovers a book-shop clerk (Audrey Hepburn) and turns her into a model for a Vogue-like magazine.
The George and Ira Gershwin score is great and so are the clothes by Givenchy.
