CBS Inc. struck a five-year deal with the Southeastern Conference to televise football and basketball, yielding the conference an estimated $100 million and possibly setting off a series of other network deals that will change the television landscape of college football.
For CBS, it represents a step to fill the void left by its loss of National Football League rights.
"There was a big impact when CBS lost pro football to Fox, and they were looking for something from a college standpoint," said Mark Womack, the conference's associate commissioner.
"For us, it will greatly enhance our national exposure."
The conference includes such football powers as the University of Florida and Auburn University.
The contract's football portion, which accounts for an estimated $85 million of the total value, doesn't take effect until 1996.
But it has an immediate impact on the College Football Association, or CFA, which since 1984 has negotiated network TV contracts on behalf of 63 member schools.
The bolting of the 12 Southeastern Conference schools jeopardizes the ability of the CFA to keep other members under its umbrella.
"Now the other conferences are saying, `Gee, what about me?' " said David Downs, an ABC Sports vice president.
ABC and its sister cable network, ESPN, currently pay the CFA about $60 million a year for TV rights, under a contract expiring in 1995.
The two Capital Cities/ABC Inc. units had reached a tentative agreement with the CFA to extend their pacts to 2000, at a rate paying a combined $70 million a year.
But CBS's agreement with the Southeastern Conference, which has teams accounting for about 25 percent of CFA telecasts, scrapped that.
ABC and ESPN may now wind up negotiating deals with individual conferences, which, like the Southeastern Conference, think they can do better for themselves.
Some are exploring possible mergers or alliances to increase their TV negotiating clout.
The Southwest and Big Eight conferences are considered prime candidates for affiliation.
"At this point, we feel it's fair game to listen to whatever the conferences bring to us individually," ABC's Mr. Downs said.
"But we'll listen to the CFA, too."
CBS has already made overtures to the Big East: a reported five-year $55 million to $60 million offer to broadcast its football games, also beginning in 1996.
CBS is believed to be interested in splitting up Saturday-afternoon football games regionally between the Southeastern Conference and Big East, which has several glamor teams, including the University of Miami.
CBS, which currently broadcasts Big East basketball games, would also reportedly pay the conference another $13 million to extend its hoops contract by six years.
Big East officials wouldn't comment.
CBS officials also wouldn't comment on the status of the Big East or the Southeastern Conference, whose agreement was disclosed by the conference.
The CFA may meet with representatives of conferences and TV networks early this week.
But nothing firm has been set, according to a CFA spokesman.
"It's a very fluid situation now," he said.
