Paul Gigot's Potomac Watch column on Republicans and health care was right on the money ("When a Bridge to Bill Isn't Worth Building," March 4).
Republicans must not be the ones to save socialized medicine for the Clinton administration.
However, Mr. Gigot joins almost all other analysts in erring when he states that Mr. Clinton's criteria for health care reform is "universal coverage."
This ignores the more important criteria of "private insurance" for "every American" that the president insisted on in his State of the Union speech and in subsequent statements.
Here are the president's own words: "I want to make this very clear. . . .
If you send me legislation that does not guarantee every American PRIVATE health insurance that can never be taken away, you will force me to take this pen, veto the legislation, and we'll come right back here and start all over again" {emphasis added}.
Thus, using the president's own criteria, a single-payer plan, if passed, would be vetoed because it would not provide private insurance.
But so too would the president's own plan, which would allow individual states to adopt a single-payer system.
This, of course, would violate the president's insistence on private insurance for every American.
What, then, are we to make of the president's oft-repeated criteria?
Is his continual reference to "private insurance" merely a way to give his plan a patina of respectability with a public grown weary of government programs?
And if he doesn't mean it, why does he keep saying it?
Where are the reporters asking the president to clarify his remarks?
Will someone at the Journal step forward?
Rep. Robert K. Dornan (R., Calif.)
How does the Cooper health reform bill deal with pre-existing condition restrictions in health insurance?
Michael Tanner's Feb. 14 editorial-page article "Cooper Plan-Clinton Lite" is substantially correct.
Gail Shearer's March 11 letter on the subject was very misleading.
The basic rule is that sickness, injury or health status may no longer be used by insurance companies to deny Americans coverage.
H.R. 3222 on page 69 says that they "may not deny, limit or condition . . . coverage . . . based on the health status of an individual, claims experience . . ., receipt of health care . . ., medical history . . ., receipt of public subsidies . . ., lack of evidence of insurability . . ., or any other characteristic of the individual that may relate to the need for health care services."
This offer is not unlimited because we don't want people waiting until after they get sick before they buy coverage.
Therefore, once all of the reforms and subsidies are put in place, we propose a six-month amnesty period (which could be longer) for everyone to get coverage regardless of health.
If someone fails to get coverage during the amnesty period, then they may have to pay a price for their own negligence.
Affordability should not be a problem since we pay for or subsidize everyone up to double the poverty level (almost $30,000 for a family of four), give new tax deductions for the purchase of coverage, and allow everyone to buy a guaranteed issue, near-community-rated health policy.
We protect newborns and pregnant women, but everyone else should sign up for coverage within six months so that their own health history becomes irrelevant to the insurance industry.
I wish we could have unlimited amnesty, but, under a voluntary system, we cannot afford too many free riders.
This is one way to allow every American to wipe his or her health-history slate clean, with a minimum of government involvement or coercion.
Rep. Jim Cooper (D., Tenn.)
