Since Asian share prices tumbled almost two weeks ago, the investor hotline at Fidelity Investments Management Ltd.'s office here has been getting far more calls than usual.
Few customers want to sell mutual fund shares, says Richard Wastcoat, regional marketing director for the fund management firm.
Rather, he says, most "are calling to ask what everyone else is doing."
Fidelity's answer, on the phone and in a newspaper advertisement: Hong Kong's "weakness may present a buying opportunity."
As if to prove the point, stocks rebounded 5.9% Friday.
Similar bounces brought the main indexes back up at the end of a losing week: Stocks climbed 8.1% in Malaysia, 5.2% in Thailand and 4.9% in Singapore.
Most analysts agreed with Fidelity that Asia's continued economic strength would foster a sustained rebound sometime.
But it is tougher to know if that bounce has already begun and how to ride the recovery when it does come.
Southeast Asia's markets have corrected their similar rallies in subtly different ways.
Targeting rebound plays by dissecting each market's own correction means ignoring many analysts' attempts to explain all the corrections in one blow by simply reversing 1993's logic.
Conventional wisdom argues that stocks fell across the region because a tide of U.S. money, which had lifted them in late 1993, is being sucked back into the developed world.
But some Hong Kong-based analysts admit U.S. clients aren't selling heavily these days.
Other analysts said the region's mass correction has been technical, implying that the markets are returning to historical behavior patterns after soaring above normal levels in recent months.
But one fund manager said U.S. and Japanese investors' sudden power in Asian markets makes traditional behavior irrelevant.
In considering reasons for each market's drop, though, the seeds of Asia's impending rebounds become clearer.
Kuala Lumpur's decline, for example, had little to do with foreign investors; rather, it was triggered largely by a message the Malaysian government was said to be sending speculators early this month.
As an election is expected this year, some analysts suggested the ruling party wants an inevitable stock-market correction out of the way first.
So Malaysia's top officials warned that stocks had reached unreasonably high levels, an influential former finance minister said he had mostly bailed out of stocks and the central bank acted to sop up cash from the financial system.
Sure enough, the Kuala Lumpur index tumbled 21% between Jan. 5 and last Thursday, and many speculators sold losers to repay margin loans.
In the Thai market, the recent rout also had more to do with local speculators than foreign investors.
After Bangkok's index started sliding on fears that foreign investors were cashing out of Asia, brokers said clients felt forced to repay margin loans while they could sell stocks at a profit.
Growing fears that speculators might default on margin loans, in turn, weakened financial shares that had led the market in late 1993.
Now, Bangkok's strongest signs of a rebound come from resilient demand for mutual fund shares.
The conventional wisdom about Asia, that foreign investors sparked tumbles and will unleash rebounds, applies most readily in Hong Kong, considered the easiest market outside Japan for foreign participation, especially by institutions that can jump in and out of stocks quickly; when opportunities pop up elsewhere, Hong Kong often gets hit hard.
Tokyo stocks rallied 2.1% Friday on expectations of Japanese political stability and a new economic stimulus.
London shares also surged 1.2%, in a short-covering scramble on the final day of a trading account.
But Frankfurt prices tumbled 1.1% in a continuing correction.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 113.24, up 1.42, or 1.27%, reflecting increases in markets in all regions.
Plantation stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 248.93, up 38.42, or 18.25%, with United Plantations of Malaysia posting a 30.61% gain in its local currency.
Advertising stocks trailed, at 132.25, down 0.48, or 0.36%, with Interpublic Group of the U.S. sliding 1.92% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index jumped 396.44 to 18973.70, after edging above 19000 in intraday trading for the first time since early November.
In trading Monday, the Nikkei index fell 217.62 points to close the morning session at 18756.08.
Friday's first-section volume was estimated at 450 million shares, up from 422.4 million shares a day earlier, but 36% of the turnover came in the first hour, much of it tied to settlement of Nikkei options for January.
Gainers swamped losers, 828-219.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues surged 22.15, or 1.5%, to 1525.62.
Foreign investors remained strong buyers, and individuals made a return appearance on increasing certainty that political reform legislation would be passed by Japan's Diet, or parliament, smoothing economic-stimulus measures.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Index 100-share index surged 40.6 points to 3400.6.
The FT 30-stock index rallied 34.7 points, or 1.3%, to 2612.1.
Volume was 1.02 billion shares, up from 896.2 million shares a day earlier.
Many investors scrambled to buy stocks sold short -- borrowed stock sold in hopes of profiting by replacing the positions at a lower price -- and due for delivery on the trading account's final day.
Later, the German central bank chief said interest rates shouldn't stay at current levels any longer than necessary, helping to spur London stocks broadly.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index sank 22.84 points to 2141.82, bringing last week's loss to 3.2%.
The gauge has lost 126.16 points, or 5.6%, from a record high set Jan. 3.
Investors were disappointed about earnings prospects and other corporate developments.
Swiss and U.S. investors have been net sellers this year.
In Paris, after a two-day profit-taking loss of 3.5%, stocks rose.
In Amsterdam, prices recovered smartly after last week's declines aroused bargain hunting and short-covering.
In Madrid, stocks climbed to a record, boosted by recoveries in other European markets, early strength on Wall Street, and buying by Spanish and U.S. institutional investors.
In Stockholm, prices also advanced to a record, lifted by rallies in the auto and forestry sectors; institutional demand was heavy amid speculation about Swedish interest-rate cuts.
In Sydney, shares surged 1.4%, as investors returned to the market in force after several days of profit-taking.
But in Seoul, stocks lost 2.2% after the government unveiled steps to cool what it termed an overheated market, urging institutions to refrain from buying and requiring them to pay cash deposits, and allowing short sales.
In Mexico City, equities tumbled 1.9% on profit-taking as rebel peasants' challenge to the government remained unsettled.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
