In U.S. television ads, the Energizer bunny is threatened by the fictional likes of King Kong and Ernst Blofeld, the evil genius of James Bond spy novel fame.
Canadian commercials menace the mechanical hare with something that's really dangerous: the country's awful winter.
The U.S. "kill the bunny ads didn't go over well" in Canada, says Brent Pulford, a Canadian ad executive at Backer Speilvogel Bates.
So Energizer's Canadian marketing team slogged up to Churchill, Manitoba, known as the Polar Bear Capital of the World, to shoot an ad that would have more appeal.
The Canadian spot, which began airing in Canada last month, features the drum-thumping cottontail vying with a dog-sled team in a race across the frozen tundra.
No prizes for guessing the winner.
Production team members say the weather was brutal during the shoot.
The temperature hovered near 30 degrees below zero, with the wind chill making it feel like minus 90.
Cameras had to be wrapped in electric blankets to keep them from seizing up.
The Energizer bunny got star treatment.
The creatures cost a cool $70,000 each, so Energizer was loath to see one frostbitten.
"The bunny had his own truck where all his gear is.
In between takes he was rushed back to the truck to keep warm," says Mr. Pulford, who wrote the spot.
Two handlers looked after the hare while the commercial was being filmed.
They put him together for shoots (the bunny's head comes off when he's not on a job), brushed his fur, and kept his batteries charged.
(No, the bunny doesn't run on Energizer flashlight batteries, as the ads imply.
But the company says it does make the battery pack that powers the creature's motor.)
True to the Energizer hype, the bunny kept going.
Little wonder.
With all his internal mechanisms, the bunny weighs in at 40 pounds and stands nearly 2 1/2 feet tall.
He runs by remote control on a track, like a tank.
When the winds peaked on the third and final day of the shoot, "everything else was blowing down" except the rabbit, Mr. Pulford says.
P.S. The bunny didn't just cross the finish line first in the Canadian commercial.
He arrived towing the sled with the pooped canines stretched out on top.
