Republicans charged that a Democratic television commercial touting President Clinton's health-care program intentionally distorts comments by a prominent governor.
Republican National Chairman Haley Barbour demanded that the Democratic National Committee retract the ad and offer an apology to South Carolina Gov. Carroll Campbell.
Mr. Barbour said that the ad contains a taped comment "that has been doctored to totally misrepresent a statement made by" Gov. Campbell.
The ad shows brief clips of four Republican politicians, including Gov. Campbell, asserting that the nation doesn't face a health crisis.
It then charges that Republicans "just don't get it" on health care.
A transcript of Gov. Campbell's full remarks shows he was, in fact, making a different and more complex argument than the ad suggests.
In an interview with TV host John McLaughlin on Jan. 28, Gov. Campbell actually said: "But, number one, you shouldn't say there's not a crisis.
There's a crisis for people that don't have health care.
And there is a crisis in the financing.
There's not a crisis in the whole medical system of America, and there's a different interpretation."
In response, Democratic National Chairman David Wilhelm said words by Gov. Campbell used in the ad came from the final sentence in that passage and helped show that "Democrats and Republicans have fundamentally different interpretations and approaches when it comes to the problems facing working Americans."
Mr. Wilhelm contended in a letter to his GOP counterpart that Republicans are attempting "to distance themselves from their political strategy that had at its core denying a health care crisis exists."
Separately, Hillary Rodham Clinton called on an association of health-maintenance organizations to launch an advertising campaign proclaiming the successes of managed care, in which networks of doctors and hospitals provide all necessary medical care for a set annual fee.
The Clinton administration has been beset by criticism that it wants to move people into HMOs and other managed-care networks, which are generally cheaper than other health-insurance plans but often place limitations on the doctors patients can see.
"There should be, in my view, ads running that show the high level of satisfaction with HMOs," Mrs. Clinton told a meeting of the Group Health Association of America.
Meanwhile, the nation's most prominent organization of religious conservatives announced it is launching its own campaign against the Clinton plan.
The Christian Coalition said its $1.4 million offensive will include radio spots airing in 40 congressional districts and 18 states, postcards distributed in churches, ads in daily newspapers and a direct-mail and phone campaign.
