Cotton-futures prices soared in a trading session that was cut short by heavy snow in New York.
At New York's Cotton Exchange, cotton for March delivery was up 1.87 cents to 77.47 a pound.
Joining the Cotton Exchange in closing early yesterday were the Commodity Exchange, which trades precious-metals futures contracts, and the New York Mercantile Exchange, which trades energy contracts.
The fourth New York market, the Coffee, Sugar & Cocoa Exchange, closed at its normal time of 1:43 p.m. EST.
Cotton prices had sagged Monday on nervousness about the U.S. stock market's big decline the previous week.
But yesterday buyers returned to the cotton market in force, lured primarily by news reports that continued to suggest an extremely tight global supply of cotton.
India, a traditional exporter of cotton that had been expected to compete aggressively with U.S. exporters for the world's demand for the fiber, suspended delivery of cotton it had contracted to sell.
India originally had contracted to export 500,000 bales of cotton this season, said Sandra Kaul, senior analyst for Smith Barney Shearson.
In January, the country announced it would sell 130,000 bales less than expected.
Yesterday India said it would withhold an additional 200,000 bales it had agreed to export, Ms. Kaul said.
Analysts expect mills in the Far East and Europe, which had contracted to buy India's cotton, now to return to the world market to "re-buy" the cotton they need.
U.S. exporters are likely to win much of that business, because the U.S. is one of the few countries that still maintains salable stocks of high-quality cotton, and U.S. cotton remains favorably priced compared with cotton available overseas.
Pakistan, another major international competitor for the U.S. cotton-exporting business, has harvested a much smaller-than-expected crop this year.
Last August -- the beginning of the 1993-94 growing season -- Pakistani cotton production had been forecast at about 8.7 million bales, but now the U.S. Agriculture Department is predicting a much smaller Pakistani crop of about 6.5 million bales.
China and Australia, two other major cotton producers, are also projected to have smaller-than-expected crops.
ENERGY: March crude-oil futures fell four cents a barrel to $15.21, but outer months finished higher in trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange, which closed more than an hour early because of a snowstorm.
Other petroleum futures contracts were higher, as well, with heating oil, especially, getting a boost from the very weather that truncated the trading session.
The March heating-oil contract gained 0.59 cents to close at 50.57 cents a gallon.
Meanwhile, traders were anticipating the weekly report from the American Petroleum Institute to show another build in U.S. crude inventories and a slackening in refinery usage, which would put downward pressure on crude prices today .
March natural gas jumped 6.4 cents to $2.411 per million British thermal units, roughly equivalent to one thousand cubic feet, on the severe weather and supply questions.
PRECIOUS METALS: The price of gold regained some of the ground it has lost in recent days as physical demand for the metal returned to the market.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery rose $3.40 to $384.10 an ounce, while the March silver-futures contract was up three cents to $5.27 an ounce.
The Federal Reserve's tightening of the short-term Fed Funds rate on Friday weighed heavily on precious-metals prices because it was seen as an anti-inflationary step.
Inflation, or the threat of it, tends to exert upward pressure on metals prices.
Yesterday, bargain-hunting buyers helped to bring gold's price up from its Monday lows.
