Eastern European retailers posted modest sales increases in 1993 as consumers shrugged off recessionary woes and spent money on such products as beer, cigarettes and soft drinks.
Yet with the region still facing economic and social change, the buying binge isn't enough to make retailers rejoice in Hungary, Poland, Czech Republic and Slovakia.
A survey for The Wall Street Journal Europe by market research firm A.C. Nielsen found that food retailers in all four countries -- the most economically advanced in the former East Bloc -- entered 1994 with nagging doubts about the prospect of sustained sales growth.
Hungarian and Polish retailers were almost evenly split between those who predict a downturn and those who foresee flat sales.
Only about one-third expect sales to improve.
But in Czech Republic and Slovakia, only 14% of the retailers surveyed believe sales will worsen.
The rest are equally divided between optimism and stagnation.
There's no apparent bloc mentality when retailers in Eastern Europe are asked why they are less than enthusiatic about sales.
In general, they say the hard times characteristic of transition economies contribute to the uncertain outlook.
But the survey suggests the reasons vary from country to country.
Hungarian retailers are more concerned about their company's financial problems than are those in other countries.
Polish retailers tell pollsters that customers without sufficient purchasing power are their main worry.
Fewer Hungarian and Czech retailers report hesitant consumers on the horizon.
Hungarians are confident that even cost-conscious shoppers can be coaxed to spend -- if prices and store locations are right.
That's why major foreign food retailers in Hungary are rapidly expanding into no-frills, discount outlets to meet the needs of customers who are quickly learning what value-for-money means.
"Small and medium-sized `hard' discount stores on the edge of town were missing from the Hungarian market until we came along," says Istvan Kavas, managing director of Duna Fuszert, a wholesaler-turned-retailer in which Belgium's Delhaize "Le Lion" SA has a majority stake.
Duna operates 24 Profi shops in Hungary (18 opened in 1993 alone) hopes to have between 150 and 200 outlets by the end of the decade.
Austria's Julius Meinl, which saw sales rise about 15% at its 111 stores in Hungary, jumped into the discount trade last year with four stores.
Germany's Tengelmann is also pushing into the market with its discount Plus chain in Hungary, in direct competition with Profi.
It's easy to see why Profi and Plus stores are popular.
They're no-nonsense operations that offer a wide variety of products at prices 10% to 15% lower than in downtown megastores.
On a recent afternoon, there's shopping cart gridlock in a clean, bright Plus outlet on the outskirts of Budapest near a large housing project.
"I come here because I live in the neighborhood, it's cheap, and it's friendly," says Lajos Domokos, a 55-year-old taxi driver.
"Maybe rich people who live up in the Buda Hills don't check price tags, but I do," he adds.
Such shops are a world away from Hungary's old state-run chains that are almost extinct.
In one dark and dingy state shop in downtown Budapest, dusty canned goods are displayed in a dirty plastic basket and the edges on sliced meats are curling.
An elderly customer is on her knees trying to extricate a bottle of Coca-Cola from a packing crate on the floor.
No employee bothers to help her.
Compare this with Meinl's stores in Hungary, with their wide aisles, modern refrigerated displays and meat and cheese counters.
Some even have salad bars.
"We may not have the lowest prices, but we offer a great assortment of products, service, and a friendly atmosphere which customers really appreciate," says Kornel Kiss, Meinl's general director for finance.
Snob appeal does appear to be part of the Meinl image.
Says Tim Knox, a retail analyst and director of Strategic Consulting Group in Budapest: "For many people, a Meinl shopping bag is considered a status symbol."
Retailers in Czech Republic are also starting to treat customers like kings.
Stores have been cleaned up, they stay open later and on weekends, and they try to draw shoppers with promotions such as coupons sent through the mail.
The Krone department store on Prague's Wenceslas Square is typical of the trend toward service and variety.
"I buy food here even if it's more expensive because I like to try new things," says 69-year-old Ester Mudranincova.
"I'm happy when I come here.
I feel like I'm in paradise."
Such Western-style, joy-of-shopping experiences haven't really taken hold in Poland yet.
Small mom-and-pop shops and street kiosks, as well as bustling farmers' markets, are where most Poles buy food.
There are some self-service shops, but many privatized grocery stores are still run by surly shopkeepers.
The retail expansion seen in Hungary is hampered in Poland by a lack of available space.
However, this hasn't stopped chains like Norway's Rema 1000, which has a big, modern store under Warsaw's Central Station, from taking the plunge.
Rema 1000 can be more expensive on some products, but shoppers are enthusiastic, especially when free samples are handed out.
But in general, Polish retailers remain sceptical about consumer confidence and aren't rushing into costly renovations.
Only 17% of Polish retailers surveyed say they'll invest in improvements, compared with 42% in Czech Republic and Slovakia.
