The Democrats have come to Ohio, and the ripples of Whitewater are already here.
In the suburbs east of where party leaders gathered for a national meeting, Republican challenger Tucker Marston has begun turning up the heat on Democratic Rep. Eric Fingerhut, challenging the ethics-minded freshman to demand "immediate and open" congressional hearings into potential "civil and criminal violations by the president, the first lady and their staffs."
As editorial pages in Cleveland and Cincinnati blast ethical lapses in Mr. Clinton's White House, GOP Rep. John Boehner uses Whitewater to link Ohio's other vulnerable Democratic freshmen, Ted Strickland and David Mann, to purported abuses of power by House Democratic leaders.
Such episodes, now being repeated in states and congressional districts across the country, show how the often-arcane Whitewater controversy has moved from Washington virus to a low-grade fever that's beginning to worry Democrats elsewhere.
"It has gone beyond . . . the Beltway," says Sen. Bob Graham of Florida, who chairs the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.
"You have to be concerned about it."
The controversy provides a case study of a media-driven political culture in which partisans use the modern communications apparatus to ride a wave of press attention and maximize pressure on their opponents.
It also shows that Mr. Clinton, more than Democratic lawmakers who don't have deep institutional or personal ties to him, is the one most likely to get squeezed.
Republicans aren't shy about appearing to cash in politically on the issue.
Since the highly publicized resignation of White House counsel Bernard Nussbaum and the issuance of subpoenas to several Clinton aides in recent days, GOP campaign committees have shifted into high gear, faxing unflattering news clips and background material to local Republicans.
Beyond Ohio, Democratic candidates in Virginia, North Dakota and Maryland, among others, have been hit with GOP missives.
Rep. Bill Paxon of New York, who heads the National Republican Congressional Committee, welcomes the controversy as a vehicle for blocking movement on Mr. Clinton's health plan.
"It's kept the president and Mrs. Clinton from . . . being able to focus" on health care, Mr. Paxon boasts.
"It's undermined his credibility.
The Democrats have a lot to worry about," he says.
"We have to conduct ourselves in a way that ensures he's a one-term president," adds GOP Rep. Robert Dornan of California, a self-styled "commando" and sometime substitute for right-wing radio personality Rush Limbaugh.
Piggybacking on Mr. Limbaugh's own efforts, Mr. Dornan says he and other members of the House GOP "Theme Team" will now "hammer on this every day" in an attempt to link questions about Whitewater with questions about Mr. Clinton's conduct in his personal life.
So far, insist Democratic National Committee members who have gathered here as the midterm election season heats up, the issue hasn't yet made a deep impression on voters.
Many dismiss Whitewater barbs as a measure of GOP desperation as Mr. Clinton enjoys a strong economy, moves forward on health care and co-opts traditional GOP themes such as crime and welfare reform.
"The only issue they can even dream about is this," says Ohio's state Democratic chairman, Harry Meshel.
Opening the three-day session with a news conference dominated by Whitewater, Democratic National Chairman David Wilhelm shrugged off the Republican strategy as "the pursuit of gridlock by other means."
He added that "once the smoke clears from this week, the essential dynamics of the 1994 elections will be back in place," and insisted that the American people "now look . . . to this party for leadership."
Yet some rank-and-file Democrats at the same time are keeping a certain distance from Mr. Clinton's troubles.
In an earlier era, when they depended on their party establishments for political survival, Democrats and Republicans alike had strong incentives to rally behind embattled leaders.
Now, those ties have weakened as politicians place top priority on protecting their own local power bases.
"I don't know what kind of person Bill Clinton was as governor of Arkansas," says veteran Rep. Jim Chapman, a conservative Texas Democrat.
"Most Democrats are looking at it and saying, `We don't know.'"
"I haven't said whether he's innocent or guilty," adds freshman Rep. Peter Barca of Wisconsin, who was elected by the slimmest of margins in a special election last spring.
Either way, Whitewater is "starting to capture people's attention," he says.
"When people start hearing words like subpoena, those words carry a certain weight."
Republicans hope that sort of pressure will buckle Democratic leaders' opposition to congressional hearings on Whitewater.
Mr. Fingerhut of Ohio is standing firm, rejecting Mr. Marston's call by saying it is "common sense" not to interfere with the special counsel's investigation.
At the same time, he calls White House handling of Whitewater "very disturbing," and points out that he has voted against Mr. Clinton's legislative program more often than any other Ohio Democrat.
The scandal may also become an issue in Pennsylvania.
Republican Rep. Rick Santorum, a combative conservative now running for the Senate as a self-styled "reformer," envisions TV commercials using Whitewater to skewer Democratic incumbent Harris Wofford as "a lapdog" for the administration.
But Sen. Wofford, while closely allied with the president on health-care issues, is preserving his maneuvering room.
He says he privately urged the White House to seek a Whitewater special counsel before the president decided to do so.
And he adds that "I don't have a closed mind" on the congressional hearings that Mr. Clinton wants to avoid.
Rising public cynicism toward politics means the issue carries some risk for Republicans as well as Democrats.
While many voters may assume some wrongdoing, they also may see the GOP's focus on Whitewater as more political "blue smoke and mirrors," as Indiana Democratic Chairman Ann DeLaney put it.
"Does it make a difference to anybody's life?
No, it doesn't," says Ms. DeLaney, noting that she's still trying to book Mr. Clinton to speak at a party dinner in May.
Nevertheless, as Mr. Nussbaum's resignation and special counsel Robert Fiske's investigation have finally put the issue on the front page in many communities, a few Democratic candidates are beginning to ask party strategists whether they should still welcome the president's embrace.
"Anytime the focus is on the president and negatives, it's going to have a negative impact on the party," says John Marino, a Democratic national committeeman from New York who is close to Gov. Mario Cuomo.
"It's getting a lot of ink.
It's all over TV news."
On Capitol Hill, the Democratic leadership may soon start fighting back by forming a task force, including House Whip David Bonior and others, to defend Mr. Clinton on the House floor and on TV talk shows.
"We need to start helping the president," says New Mexico Rep. Bill Richardson, one of Mr. Bonior's deputies.
Some Democrats in Cleveland aren't sure the issue needs any more attention.
"They need to get the danged thing over with," says James Wengert, a labor leader and Democratic committeeman from Iowa, where the issue grabs headlines in part because of the efforts of home-state Republican Rep. Jim Leach to investigate the scandal.
"They should just worry about passing health care, the crime bill and welfare reform, and let the special prosecutor do his work," concludes Illinois Chairman Gary LaPaille.
"If we stay on that message, we won't have problems."
"Do you believe Clinton committed financial wrongdoing in Whitewater or is the issue just being used against him for political purposes?
If you don't know enough to have an opinion, please say so."
