The Environmental Protection Agency issued a long-awaited regulation that it said will require chemical plants to reduce emissions of airborne toxic wastes 88%.
The rule, which Administrator Carol Browner termed "one of the most sweeping air pollution rules EPA has ever issued," is expected to affect about 370 chemical plants, most of them in Texas, Louisiana and New Jersey.
Proposed in the waning days of the Bush administration, it will reduce allowable emissions for 112 of the 189 airborne toxic chemicals -- including benzene, chloroform and vinyl chloride -- that the EPA must regulate under the 1990 Clean Air Act.
The EPA said the rule will require chemical companies to spend an estimated $450 million for new equipment and will raise their operating costs $230 million annually.
The Chemical Manufacturers' Association put the capital costs at $1 billion.
The EPA said the rule could raise the price of individual chemicals as much as 3%.
The new requirements will be phased in over three years for existing plants.
New plants must comply immediately.
The chemical industry, which has known the rule was coming since 1990, is thought to have done much to achieve the required reductions already.
Joe Mayhew, assistant vice president for environment and policy analysis at the Chemical Manufacturers' Association, estimates that toxic emissions already have been reduced about 35% below 1990 levels.
The rule will allow some "emissions averaging" by chemical plants -- meaning that a given pollution source, such as a smokestack, need not reduce air emissions if offsetting reductions are achieved elsewhere in the plant.
But unlike the Bush administration proposal, the final rule won't allow averaging among all pollution sources within a given plant.
In a plant that has 1,000 pollution sources, for example, averaging will be limited to about 25 pollution sources.
In addition, the new plan, unlike its predecessor, will allow individual states to block averaging.
Also yesterday, the EPA announced a final rule cutting annual emissions of nitrogen oxide, a key ingredient in acid rain, from 700 coal-fired electric utility plants.
It also proposed rules aimed at reducing by 95% toxic air pollutants from the magnetic-tape manufacturing industry and at reducing by 99% emissions of ethylene oxide from commercial sterilization operations for medical and other equipment.
Separately, the Clinton administration proposed limiting exports of hazardous waste.
Under the plan, which must be approved by Congress, the U.S. could continue to export hazardous wastes to Canada and Mexico.
Such shipments now total an estimated 140,000 tons annually.
The U.S. has bilateral agreements on such shipments with both countries.
Shipments to other countries -- currently estimated at 5,000 tons annually, much of it discarded batteries -- would no longer be allowed.
