Lotus Development Corp. said fourth-quarter net income more than doubled on a 13% sales gain, as strong growth in communications software and new Windows-based products offset a decline in older 1-2-3 software packages.
The results were ahead of most analysts' expectations, as were gross profit margins, which rose despite industrywide price cutting.
The stock rose $2.75, or 5.2%, to close at $55.625 in heavy Nasdaq Stock Market trading of 3.8 million shares.
Net was $29.6 million, or 64 cents a share, compared with last year's $14.6 million, or 35 cents a share, on 11% fewer shares.
The year-ago results also included a $15 million restructuring charge and a $15 million gain from the sale of stock.
"This is the quarter that explains the 178% run-up in Lotus's stock price in the past year," said David Readerman, an analyst with Lehman Bros.
"The fundamentals going forward are strong."
Lotus reported strong growth in sales of electronic mail and its Notes software, which "now are firmly driving the business" and rose to 25% of sales, said Rick Sherlund, an analyst with Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Products based on Microsoft Corp.'s Windows operating software rose to 70% of sales, while programs for the older DOS system fell by half.
Revenue rose to $278.3 million from $246 million.
Terry Quinn, an analyst at Furman, Selz in New York, said Lotus's revenue would have been even better except that the company didn't book about $16 million in Notes sales -- which will be recognized in the first quarter instead -- and tightened inventory in retail sales channels.
"They have an embarassment of riches, and they're deliberately trying to restrain expectations for the year," Mr. Quinn said.
Several analysts raised forecasts for the current year.
Mr. Sherlund boosted his to $2.30 a share from $2.20.
But Lotus's chief financial officer, Edwin Gillis, said Lotus hasn't altered its guidance to Wall Street of $1.95 to $2.15 a share for the year, "and anyone above that is out there at their own risk."
Separately, Lotus played down reports of a bug in its flagship spreadsheet, 1-2-3 for Windows.
A spokesman noted the product has been out for seven months and "if this problem were widespread we'd have heard about it immediately."
He said that fewer than 1% of calls coming into the customer help line related to the glitch, which can cause data to be lost under certain rare circumstances.
