The foreign money flooding into Taiwan's stock market has helped lift the shares of Acer Inc., the country's largest computer maker, more than 40% since early December.
But it isn't Acer's core personal-computer business that is attracting foreign, as well as domestic, investors.
Instead, it is the big earnings gains from Acer's recent land sales and its majority stake in TI/Acer Inc., a lucrative joint venture with Texas Instruments Inc. of the U.S. that is Taiwan's only maker of dynamic random access memory chips, or DRAMs, the memories of computers.
As a result, foreign investors have snapped up nearly all of the 10% of Acer shares outstanding that they are allowed to buy under Taiwanese regulations.
The company's shares closed Thursday at 48.30 new Taiwan dollars (US$1.84), down from NT$51.50 the day before.
Investors view Acer's core PC business with skepticism, particularly after watching the company leap from strategy to strategy over the past few years amid vicious global competition.
"Definitely, PCs are not the reason to buy Acer," says Jonathan Ross, Taiwan country manager for HG Asia Securities Taiwan Ltd.
"You're buying 58% of a DRAM manufacturer, essentially."
Ben Lee, an analyst with Wardley James Capel Taiwan Ltd., adds: "Maybe it is a short-term speculative buy based on asset sales, but from a long-term perspective, I still hold many doubts about the company's future."
Acer Chairman Stan Shih doesn't see it that way.
While acknowledging that the company has relied on land sales and chips to boost earnings in the past few years, he says Acer's mainstream business will come back strong this year.
As for the view that investors don't buy Acer for its computers, he says: "I don't think this will be true in the future.
Maybe we still have some land to sell, but the real potential is in all our core businesses."
In an interview at Acer's new downtown Taipei offices -- occupied after the sale of the company's suburban headquarters -- Mr. Shih says Acer expects its production of motherboards, the combinations of integrated circuits that serve as the brain of a PC, to increase 50% this year, after tripling last year.
Output of notebook computers, with Acer's brand name and for other companies, is expected to double after also tripling last year, he says.
These mass-produced goods, along with such specialized products as multimedia PCs and computers based on reduced instruction set computing, or Risc, chips, will drive Acer's earnings to a record NT$1.5 billion this year, Mr. Shih says.
Tuesday, Acer announced that parent-company earnings in 1993 rose 1,829% from a year earlier to NT$1.08 billion on a 56.5% gain in sales to NT$19.4 billion.
The company projects that sales this year will rise about 2.5% to NT$20 billion.
The 49-year-old Mr. Shih, who still looks like the young electrical engineer he was when he started Acer in a garage in the 1970s, insists that the company's earnings will climb nearly 40% this year.
Some of the increase, he says, will come from ever-improving economies of scale and the elimination of heavy losses in the company's U.S. and European operations.
Last year, those two regions incurred losses of some NT$800 million, largely the legacy of Acer's efforts to break into the U.S. market through takeovers and ill-advised expansion.
Mr. Shih says Acer's overall manufacturing operations, excluding peripherals, turned a profit of NT$20 million last year.
Analysts take a less-rosy view of the prospects for Acer's computer business.
They note that computer makers worldwide have been buffeted by fierce competition for the past three years, and that even with a solid increase in computer and related sales last year, industry earnings growth has been slim because of tight profit margins.
Many analysts worry that another round of price-cutting could be coming this year, which could cut into profit even more.
"Most of my clients aren't too enthusiastic about PC manufacturers in general," says Mr. Ross of HG Asia.
Mr. Lee of Wardley James Capel says Acer's profit margins have declined steadily in the past three years, to 1.99% in the first nine months of 1993 from 4.7% in 1991.
But Mr. Shih says the company has offset that trend by mass-producing computer products.
Meanwhile, the factors that have lured investors to Acer's stock will lose some of their appeal this year.
In the past two years, land sales netted the company nearly NT$1 billion in extraordinary income, but Acer plans to hold on to most of what remains in its land bank.
At the same time, Mr. Shih expects that the rapid increase in profit from TI/Acer likely will level off.
Earnings from that venture last year contributed nearly NT$800 million to Acer's profit, the first time that TI/Acer has turned a profit since it began operations in 1991.
Mr. Shih says the company is projecting similar returns this year.
He says an expected increase in output to about three million chips a month from the current level of about two million should be offset by a projected second-half decline in DRAM prices.
He adds, however, that the company's projection may be too conservative.
Mr. Lee of Wardley James Capel says investors see another benefit to holding Acer shares in coming years: the prospect of the company listing subsidiaries on the Taiwan Stock Exchange.
Mr. Shih confirms that the company plans to submit applications to Taiwan's Securities and Exchange Commission during the second quarter of the year to list two units.
One is Acer Peripherals Inc., a 49%-owned subsidiary that makes monitors, keyboards, fax machines and other products.
Some 20% of Acer Peripheral's shares would be sold to the public.
The unit last year earned NT$470 million, and Mr. Shih says its profit this year is projected at NT$540 million.
The second subsidiary that Acer would like to see listed is Acer Sertek Inc., a 49%-owned trading company that markets Acer products and many imported hightechnology products in Taiwan.
Both spinoffs would add big one-time gains to Acer's 1994 earnings, and the companies would continue to contribute operating earnings.
(One reason Acer projects that its sales will increase only 2.5% this year is that if the two subsidiaries are listed, their revenue would no longer be reflected in the parent company's sales totals.
Such revenue would, however, fall under total Acer Group sales, which are projected to rise 25% this year to NT$62.5 billion from NT$50 billion in 1993.)
Many analysts say they look forward to the day that TI/Acer is listed, but Mr. Shih says that that step probably won't come until after 1997.
