CHRISTOPHER SPARKED criticism from China and U.S. executives there.
The secretary of state, in Beijing to warn that China must improve its human-rights record or face a trade penalty, was rebuffed by Chinese officials.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman, saying that the two countries view human rights differently, predicted that if trading privileges are revoked, "the U.S. will suffer no less than China."
The potential damage to U.S. interests was described to Christopher during a meeting with the American Chamber of Commerce in Beijing.
A fundamental problem for U.S. policy is that, in view of the huge growth in bilateral trade, no one believes that Washington is prepared to revoke Beijing's favored trade status.
Israel's cabinet banned two Jewish extremist groups, branding them terrorist organizations on a par with militant Islamic activists.
The ban on the Kach and Kahane Lives movements was announced amid PLO demands that Palestinians in occupied lands must be protected from settler vigilantes.
Muslims and Croats agreed to establish a federation in Bosnia.
The accord, reached after 10 days of talks in Vienna, is to be signed in Washington later this week.
Meanwhile, U.S. aircraft called off a planned air strike against Serbs firing at French troops near Bihac, saying the Serb forces had halted their assault.
A South African diplomat took over as leader of Bophuthatswana to ensure that the black homeland takes part in the country's first all-race election in April.
The homeland's president, Mangope, was ousted after he lost control of the local government during violent pro-democracy protests.
Hundreds of Inkatha backers occupied a stadium near the port city Durban, forcing the rival African National Congress to hold a campaign rally on the streets.
A total of about 6,000 partisans from the two political parties were involved in the standoff.
A dispute is escalating between Associate Attorney General Hubbell and his former law firm in Little Rock, Ark., concerning $1 million in expenses and unbilled time charges.
London's two major airports were closed for two hours last night in a security alert after the IRA launched its third mortar attack in a week and threatened more.
Although none of the bombs exploded, officials closed both Heathrow and Gatwick.
Britain's top senior military officer quit in the latest of a string of sex scandals that have embarrassed the government.
Sir Peter Harding resigned amid allegations that he had an affair with the Spanish ex-wife of a former defense minister.
Poland reached an accord with commercial banks to reduce and restructure over $13 billion of debt.
The nation stands to receive a reduction of more than 40% in principal and as much as 20% in unpaid interest arrears.
The head of the GSA has asked the federal agency to investigate his own possible misuse of travel expenses.
Roger Johnson asked for the probe after The Wall Street Journal obtained his travel vouchers.
He said he intends to refund to the federal government at least some of the expense money he received.
Agouron Pharmaceuticals said it discovered the three-dimensional atomic structure of a key enzyme involved in causing the common cold.
The biotechnology concern said the finding provides a "detailed framework" for the development of drugs to treat or prevent common upper respiratory infections.
Rep. Rostenkowski retains a thin lead over Illinois state Sen. Cullerton, the chief rival among four Democrats challenging the powerful Ways and Means Committee chairman in tomorrow's primary, according to polls.
Kohl's party was defeated in the first contest of Germany's 1994 voting season.
The chancellor's Christian Democratic Union lost a Lower Saxony state election to the incumbent Social Democrats by a larger margin than in 1990.
A U.S. flotilla will remain off Somalia until the beginning of May to protect U.S. citizens and diplomats, Joint Chiefs Chairman Shalikashvili said during a visit there.
American ground troops are to leave by the end of this month.
