Easy come, easy go.
Barely two months after closing a record year, the huge private investment funds that swing through international currency and bond markets are enduring a stark reversal of fortune.
Steinhardt Partners, Tiger Management, Caxton Corp., Omega Advisers and Soros Fund Management have had losses of hundreds of millions of dollars over the past few weeks.
That's a setback of as much as 10% for some hedge funds, the private investment partnerships that borrow to the hilt to make big bets on the direction of markets.
But the gunslingers aren't suffering alone.
The proprietary trading desks of big investment and commercial banks, which act as in-house hedge funds, have also been hit.
Over the last several years, these institutions have been willing to accept an increasing amount of risk because of the benign environment of falling interest rates, which generally boost the value of fixed-income investments.
No more.
With interest rates rising this year, one market after another has turned into Sherman's march to the sea.
There seem to be as many ways to lose money as there were to make it last year.
Among the causes of misfortune: the surprisingly steep decline of the dollar against the yen, which came quickly on the heels of rising interest rates in Japan and Europe.
The firms won't comment about their positions, but here's the picture traders paint.
Goldman, Sachs & Co. suffered losses of as much as $125 million when interest rates rose in Japan in January.
When European interest rates then rose at the beginning of February, Steinhardt, Tiger, Caxton and Omega were hit by losses in their European-bond positions.
Finally, when the dollar plunged against the yen last week, some of the $10 billion in funds managed by Soros lost 6% in two days of frenzied trading -- a decline of as much as $600 million, according to one investor.
The markets have recovered somewhat since, but traders say that these large players are still under water for this year.
Some analysts say that some of the large funds' selling has worsened price declines in some markets, forcing sales by other, more conservative investors.
"What we could be seeing is a mini-global liquidity crisis," warns Avinash Persaud, an international economist at J.P. Morgan & Co. in London.
Rumors of heavy selling by big traders even sprang up during a drop-off in the U.S. bond market last Thursday.
Traders say one of the first big trading firms to feel the pain in January was Goldman Sachs, whose traders contributed significantly to the firm's record $2.3 billion profit last year.
Since last March, the firm had been touting the Japanese government bond market.
But interest rates rose in the benchmark 10-year government bond, to 3.57% from 3.02% at the beginning of the year.
So much money has flooded into the Japanese bond market because it's been such a slam-dunk trade that traders found themselves unable to get out.
Hedging with futures didn't work either: The contracts are expensive and the market is thin.
"Liquidity can dry up immediately, which makes it hard to control risk," says one trader.
"If there's a seller and no buyer, the Japanese suspend trading until they find one."
The hedge funds were victims of their own past successes in Europe.
In the first two weeks of February, the German government bond dropped 2.4% in price, and the British government bond lost 2.8%, according to Ezra Zask Associates.
Futures contracts declined even further.
At the same time, major European currencies, which were forecast to fall against the dollar, are trading near to or above where they began in 1994.
But it took a while for the hedge funds to catch the signals, traders say.
Emboldened by past successes, some funds added to their positions, which deepened their losses.
That may have contributed to the 10% drop for funds managed by Steinhardt since the beginning of the month -- a $500 million hole for the firm, which manages about $5 billion.
The firm wouldn't comment on its results, but its chief, Michael Steinhardt, conceded to a visitor last week that "this is one of those tough years."
Losses are only slightly less stark at Tiger, run by Julian Robertson, which is down 8% or so, and Omega, run by Leon Cooperman, down 4%.
Neither firm would comment on results.
The biggest loser in European bonds may be Bruce Kovner of Caxton Corp., which has held long positions in European bonds, according to traders.
A representative of the firm said he was unable to comment at this time.
The sharp declines are putting the funds in a bind.
Position limits are forcing the large traders to liquidate holdings into the declining markets.
"Those who were leveraged have been selling bonds in France, Germany, Holland, Spain and in the U.K. particularly," says Michael H. Hyman, managing director at GH Asset Management Ltd. in London.
Goldman Sachs has been among the major sellers, fueling rumors that the investment bank suffered losses in excess of $500 million from its London-based proprietary trading desk.
A spokesman for the firm said last week that the bond selling was for the benefit of clients.
In a statement released in the midst of the market rumors, the firm said it had experienced no "significant trading losses" since the start of its fiscal year in December.
But the selling pressure continues to take its toll.
When the German central bank cut its key discount rate by half a percentage point on Thursday, European bond markets rallied for only half an hour before collapsing under the weight of selling by hedge funds and other traders.
The steepest loss of the year came in the currency market, when the yen soared against the dollar last week.
Soros, like many other traders, had expected the yen would fall, in large part because of the poor Japanese economy.
Instead, the brutal movement cost the $5 billion Quantum Fund 6% in two days, a loss that traders say was echoed in the other funds managed by Soros.
Hedge-fund managers are quick to say privately that reversals are to be expected, especially after last year's stunning returns of 70% or more.
But the sudden drops at the beginning of the year mean they will have to dig themselves out of their holes before they can collect hefty performance fees.
That's small comfort to investors, many of whom are newcomers lured by the siren call of so-called fund of funds managers who spread their money across a number of hedge funds to damprisk.
"I've been calling around, and so far I've found no one who was on the right side of the yen-dollar trade," says one mournful money manager.
