At a gathering of top financial analysts earlier this month , Peter Job, chief executive of Reuters Holdings PLC, offered an apology.
"With all humble respect to those of you who come from full-service brokers," he said, the company's Instinet unit "is doing very well."
The analysts needed no explanation: Instinet is one of several electronic-trading services helping Reuters steal commissions from banks, brokerage firms and stock exchanges.
But Credit Lyonnais Euro Securities analyst Keith Sykes had a question for the chief executive: "Is Reuters getting too near a conflict of interest?"
After all, banks, brokerage firms and stock exchanges are big customers of Reuters's traditional product, financial news.
Mr. Job's quick denial of any conflict failed to convince everyone.
"Reuters has to be careful," says Alastair Smellie, who follows the company for Lehman Brothers International Ltd.
"They're treading on the toes of their core customers."
This venerable news agency is pressing forward on a number of fronts.
Its agreement last month to acquire, for an undisclosed price, Citicorp's Quotron stock-information system could boost its share of that market in the U.S. to around 30% from only 3% (possibly enhancing its ability to compete against, among other services, Dow Jones Telerate Inc., owned by Dow Jones & Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal).
And Reuters is furiously fashioning products -- such as one informally called the "Bloomberg killer" -- in an attempt to lure away customers from financial information-services upstart Bloomberg L.P.
But the fastest-growing division at Reuters has nothing to do with news, and some of its traditional customers aren't thrilled.
With Reuters -- through units such as Instinet -- now doubling as a broker, "we're extremely scared of it," says Ian Myers, chairman of the United Kingdom division of PaineWebber Inc., a unit of PaineWebber Group Inc.
Reuters's move into electronic brokering already has precipitated a backlash.
Last year, a dozen mostly American banks -- concerned that the company was quickly monopolizing automated foreign-exchange dealing -- formed a consortium to create a competing system.
And some of the world's largest stock exchanges are taking measures to win back business from Instinet and similar systems.
Mr. Job, 52 years old, says most brokers recognize that his company's brokering business -- with revenue of less than #250 million ($371.3 million) out of total revenue of #1.87 billion -- is too small to pose a threat.
But a former executive says, "Privately, Reuters wants to be the world stock exchange."
And Reuters itself says in a letter to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, that electronic brokers such as Instinet could "render stock exchanges obsolete."
Reuters is flourishing.
One of its biggest challenges last year was how to spend a rapidly mounting pile of profits (it bought back 350 million of its stock and went on an acquisition binge).
Its pretax profit rose 15% in 1993 to #440 million, or 72 pence a share, and analysts say earnings should continue growing at that rate for several years.
Certainly there is a precedent for Reuters being redefined by one of its fledgling ventures.
It was a news-gathering service with mainly domestic subscribers until 1973, when the world's fixed-exchange rate system broke up.
With currencies fluctuating, traders suddenly needed up-to-the-second information on prices, and Reuters used its electronic news network to fill the void.
As the volume of foreign-exchange trades accelerated, particularly in the last 10 years, revenue at Reuters surged more than seven-fold from 1983 through last year.
Meanwhile, its traditional customers -- newspapers, magazines and broadcasters -- have come to account for less than 10% of revenue.
Will its brokering business similarly transform Reuters?
Although tiny, it is certainly the company's fastest-growing operation.
The largest of its three electronic-trading services, Instinet, which deals in equities, grew 97% last year, to #120 million, following growth of 57% the year before.
That pace is expected to continue.
Use of Reuters's electronic system for trading currencies, known as Dealing 2000-2, increased five-fold in 1993, to 1,310 terminals.
And while its electronic futures and options trading service, called Globex, has shown slow growth amid a variety of problems, Reuters wants to keep the service moving ahead, Mr. Job says.
The American Stock Exchange has asked the SEC to consider regulating services such as Instinet, while officials of Frankfurt's stock exchange have announced a campaign to lower prices and increase efficiency expressly to "draw back trade" from Instinet and other new competitors.
A group of Amsterdam Stock Exchange members, trying to recapture business, have asked other members to stop using Reuters screens.
In foreign-exchange markets, where one Reuters product provides price information and another the technology with which dealers execute trades, the introduction of yet another product -- Dealing 2000-2 -- has prompted concerns not only about lost commissions but also about a monopoly.
Citing fears that Reuters would begin setting the price and terms of foreign-exchange dealing, a group of mostly American banks decided to stop using the 2000-2 system and to create their own, called Electronic Broking System.
There is also a third new system, called Minex and operated by a group of Japanese banks along with Telerate.
What worries some observers is the idea of one company providing everything from financial analysis to the means to buy and sell.
Will users of Reuters brokerage services gain any privileged access to Reuters news?
"As they climb the escalator" toward greater dominance of the industry, says Mr. Sykes, the analyst, "they head into all sorts of potential conflicts with their customers."
Mr. Job says Reuters tirelessly protects the interests of all its customers.
Yet its news operation suggests to some observers that the lines between its divisions could be more sharply defined.
Its recent excursion into program production for specific television stations has angered some subscribers to its news service.
And Reuters now requires regional editors to report to business managers, and it also asks its reporters to meet regularly with customers.
"Aren't all journalists required to think more about revenue these days?" says Mark Wood, 41, Reuters's editor-in-chief.
Indeed, he says he was promoted to that position in 1989 because "I felt editorial needed to become much closer to the rest of the company."
