As corporate America ratchets up its capital spending, it's doing so with a much keener eye to profiting from the effort.
A growing number of companies in the U.S. are setting aggressive return-on-investment hurdles for capital spending, the money that's spent on new machines, computers and other equipment.
Last fall, RJR Nabisco Inc. told its managers that new capital expenditures must cut the tobacco and food company's costs by an amount equal to 20% of the investment -- and in the first year.
Telecommunications giant American Telephone & Telegraph Co. has also set tough, new guidelines that similarly hold capital spenders' feet to the fire.
Companies, of course, have always demanded a certain rate of return for equipment spending.
But in the current climate of slow sales growth in the U.S., corporations are insisting on higher, and more immediate, returns.
In an odd way, capital spending has become something of a profit center.
"Chief executives are becoming much more disciplined about saying OK" to spending requests, says Ennius Bergsma of McKinsey & Co., the management consulting firm.
"They want to know what will happen in year one, two and three, rather than plow money in and realize nothing materialized."
Notably, the sharper scrutiny isn't scaring spending projects away.
Economists say that, for the second year in a row, companies this year are expected to boost spending on equipment by more than 12%.
DRI/McGraw Hill, which forecasts economic trends, sees capital spending on equipment in the U.S. reaching a record $457 billion this year.
It expects capital spending in total, which includes the construction of new plants, to reach $610 billion, up 11% from 1993.
"We keep seeing new opportunities" for saving money through capital investments, says Reuben Mark, chief executive of Colgate-Palmolive Co., the big maker of household and personal-care products.
One recent opportunity involved the company's Italian unit, where Colgate installed $1 million worth of new automated equipment for packaging the company's stand-up toothpaste tubes.
The machines replaced some workers.
Estimated savings to Colgate in the first year: $250,000.
The company is demanding more of this sort of cost-saving investment from its managers: In 1994, it wants total capital expenditures to equal 6% of sales, up from 5.2% of sales last year.
When Mr. Mark became chief executive in 1984, roughly 13% of Colgate's total capital spending was going toward cost-saving ventures; the rest went into building new plants, among other things.
Now the company is demanding that fully 60% of its capital spending be for cost-saving projects.
Colgate even has assigned a force of spending police to track the rate of return on capital expenditures.
"This is not misty, Ingmar Bergman stuff," says Mr. Mark.
In fact, part of a manager's compensation is determined by how well he or she meets the cap spending guidelines.
"We're in a brave new world," explains Lawrence Ricciardi, president of RJR Nabisco.
In the past, "many companies were less precise about budgeting for capital spending than budgeting for profit and loss," he says.
"I know this has changed at RJR."
The company, for example, is spending $62 million this year to install three larger ovens at its Chicago bakery operations.
RJR, a unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp., expects the new ovens will let it produce more cookies in the same amount of time as its old equipment -- and employ fewer workers to monitor the process.
The company also expects the ovens to produce $12 million in cost savings and other benefits in their first year of operation.
At Eaton Corp., the big auto-parts supplier, President John Rodewig says his scrutiny of capital spending is also more intense than it was a few years ago.
Now when the company replaces an old machine with a new one, "We look very stringently for productivity improvements and increased flexibility," he says.
One of the ways Eaton pushes managers to make wiser spending decisions is by measuring the return on the investment without depreciation.
By excluding depreciation, which expenses the cost of equipment over a number of years, the capital cost is higher on paper.
For managers, that raises the bar for return on investment -- exactly what Eaton intended.
AT&T set higher standards for capital spending last year and tied management compensation to how well the investments perform.
The new system encourages managers to act "like they are running their own business," says James Meenan, chief financial officer of the long-distance division.
It even attempts to measure intangibles such as whether a customer stays with AT&T because capital spending improved service.
More and more spending decisions involve considerations of this sort, notes Robert Miller, a machine-tool marketing consultant who runs his own firm, ITMC, in Cleveland.
Indeed, he says, corporate America can expect to see more production managers calling their colleagues in customer service, marketing, engineering and other departments to drum up good arguments for their next capital-spending proposals.
