Tokyo stocks ended Tuesday's see-saw session with a 1.1% loss, following late profit-taking by Japanese institutional investors.
London equities posted strong gains on bets that British interest rates are poised to drop.
Frankfurt prices also slid 1.1% on worries about weak corporate, currency and bond market developments.
Hong Kong stocks jumped 2.1% on bullishness about a Sino-U.S. trade agreement, but Taipei shares skidded 2.9%, as financial issues dropped sharply.
World-wide, stock prices rose in dollar terms.
The Dow Jones World Stock Index was at 113.43, up 0.40, reflecting higher markets in all regions.
Casino stocks were the top gainers in the Dow Jones World Industry Groups, closing at 217.16, up 5.35, or 2.5%, with Resorts World of Malaysia posting a 4.9% gain in its local currency.
Shipbuilding stocks trailed at 115.49, down 1.27, or 1.1%, with Bremer Vulkan of Germany sliding 5% in local currency.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-stock index, which sank 248.33 points Monday, tumbled 210.82 to 18514.55, which also was the intraday low.
In trading Wednesday, the Nikkei rose 326.03 points to close the morning session at 18840.58.
Tuesday's first-section volume was estimated at 280 million shares, little changed from 280.4 million shares a day earlier.
Retreating issues outnumbered advancing issues 583399.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index, or Topix, of all first-section issues, which dropped 9.71 points Monday, surrendered 4.52 to 1511.39.
The main buyers continued to be overseas investors, though they were less aggressive despite a supportive Nomura Research Institute report that weak Japanese bond prices could fuel a rise by the Nikkei to 24000 in the near term.
Some investors weren't convinced a collapsing bond market was good news, saying rising bond yields generally reflect a belief interest rates will rise, which can reduce stocks' allure as investors lock in high yields on fixed-income investments.
Meanwhile, the stock market lacked direction pending parliamentary action on political reform, though some communications and electronics shares extended their rally on talk of multimedia growth.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index climbed 29.2 points to 3437.0.
The FT 30-stock index rose 7.8 points to 2623.3.
Volume was 964.9 million shares, up from 808.3 million shares a day earlier.
Smaller stocks, measured by the FT-SE 250 index, jumped 64.5 points, or 1.6%, crossing the 4000 threshold to end at 4013.3, its third consecutive record finish.
Interest-rate futures and gilts, or British government bonds, also rallied while the foreign-exchange market began pricing in lower interest rates.
Last week's stock losses, on pessimism about how soon Britain's base lending rate would be reduced, were considered overdone, and the market extended the rebound that began Friday.
One trigger for the bullish mood was the pound's persistent strength, which has prompted speculation that Britain must cut rates to check its currency or risk harming exports and damping economic recovery.
Yesterday's biggest-gaining sectors were those sensitive to rates: building and construction, merchant banking and utilities.
In Frankfurt, the DAX 30-stock index slumped 23.54 points to 2113.84.
The drop was blamed on the weak German mark and bonds, corporate financial problems, and diminishing hopes for German interest-rate cuts this week.
Sentiment also was depressed by technical analyses of market trends that indicated an only short-term rebound followed by a consolidation.
In Paris, after lingering in negative territory in the morning, stocks were pushed up by a bargain-hunting rally to end with gains.
In Amsterdam, shares rose, lifted by buoyant U.S. and European markets, though a softer dollar hurt some blue chips, and investors took profits on some banks and insurers, while bargain hunters snapped up food and beverage companies.
But in Milan, the broader market including electronically traded issues fell on profit-taking and consolidation following the previous day's jump.
In Madrid, prices bounced back from a weak start to surge to a record, spurred by hopes for a cut in German interest rates, which could be followed by a reduction in Spanish rates.
In Stockholm, following a 4.4% rally to three consecutive record highs, stocks fell on profit-taking.
In Brussels, shares advanced 1% on foreign buying and good earnings expected by bluechip companies.
In Hong Kong, despite late profit-taking, the solid gains -- the market's third consecutive rise to the highest level since Jan. 10 -- began accumulating early, partly on positive bank earnings and a belated reaction to the agreement between the U.S. and China on textile quotas that averted a trade war.
Hong Kong media played up benefits of the textile deal and hopes for similarly avoiding tensions in pursuit of China's winning U.S. renewal of favorable trade status.
The financial and property sectors each surged 2.4%, and the commercial and industrial subindex gained 2.2%.
In Taipei, the market's broad plunge was led by a 3.5% decline in financial issues, prompted by the Taiwan government's conservative stance regarding stocks.
A day earlier, the central bank governor rejected a proposed increase in the stock-investment ceiling for foreign institutions.
All sectors fell: Electronics lost 3.3%, construction shed 3% and textiles dropped 2.7%.
In Seoul, shares rallied 1.1% following three losing sessions in a row amid fears of possible selling by the government's stabilization fund.
In Sydney, equities declined, as Australian and overseas investors consolidated positions following the market's recent strength.
In Singapore, prices recovered from early weakness to close mixed in thin, cautious dealings; the choppy activity of the past week began to steady.
In Kuala Lumpur, stocks rose, rebounding from an early decline on broad profit-taking that also knocked prices lower the previous day; the market recovered when support for blue chips and other solid stocks encouraged broader buying.
In Mexico City, stocks rallied 2% as the southern rebels situation remained quiet and investors focused on strong corporate earnings estimates.
Among corporate developments, in Tokyo, Japan Airlines jumped 10 yen, or 1.6%, to 640 yen ($5.77).
The carrier said that it would post a $270 million pretax loss for the year ending March 31, and that it planned to cut 5,000 jobs, or 23% of its work force, and slash capital spending 48% to $3.96 billion over the next four years in a bid to hold down fares, as competitiveness has been hurt by the Japanese yen's strength against the dollar.
Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index, calculated in local currencies, is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end.
