Democrats on the House Ways and Means Committee struggled to preserve a fragile working majority capable of at least moving a health-reform bill to the full committee for action next month.
"The question is not what will go out, but whether anything will go out," said Rep. Fortney "Pete" Stark, chairman of the health subcommittee, which is slated to begin voting on the measure today.
"I think by Friday, we will know."
Failure to act would be a major blow to the chances for health reform this year in Congress.
Given these stakes, subcommittee Democrats, who caucused yesterday, face immense pressure from party leadership to resolve their differences.
"No one makes a decision in this business until they have to," Rep. James McDermott (D., Wash.) said last night.
The deliberations illustrate the immensity of the reform initiative and how even relatively like-minded Democrats can become hung up on the choices before them.
Mr. McDermott wants more generous benefits.
Rep. Sander Levin (D., Mich.), a close ally of Majority Leader Richard Gephardt of Missouri, frets about the burden on business intensified by a temporary payroll tax proposed by Mr. Stark.
"I'm not unhappy, I'm thinking," said Mr. Levin, making light of his worried-looking appearance.
"There is more in common than differences, but the differences are important."
The alternative before the panel would abandon, or streamline, major parts of the Clinton administration's own health plan and substitute a new government-run, Medicare-like program to achieve universal health coverage.
The basic benefit package is cheaper than the administration's, but without subsidies, small employers would still have to absorb premiums of about $2,000 a year per worker.
Though most attention has focused on the plan's impact on business, conservatives say the Democrats' own labor constituency will ultimately pay in reduced wages.
To bolster its case, the Heritage Foundation will release an economic analysis today, arguing that average annual wages could fall by about $189 over several years as employers shift costs of the Clinton plan onto their workers.
Wages of employees in companies that already offer health coverage will be about $400, or 0.9%, higher than they otherwise would be, according to the report, prepared by the health-policy research firm Lewin-VHI Inc.
Wages at firms that don't currently offer coverage could drop by as much as $1,243, or 6.1%.
"An employer mandate is in a real sense meaningless," said Stuart Butler, a Heritage policy director.
"The lion's share of this money in other words comes out of the worker's paycheck, not the employer's profits."
While the administration promises tens of billions in subsidies to soften the impact of its plan, the Ways and Means panel has yet to decide how to address the problem.
Although business subsidies are the most conventional approach, a more direct option would be to borrow a page from Heritage's own arguments and directly aid lower-wage workers through some type of tax credit.
One of the most striking features of the health-care debate is how GOP conservatives are often more aggressive than Democrats in using the tax code to influence the insurance market and the way consumers pick their health coverage.
Sen. Don Nickles (R., Okla.), a Heritage ally, and Rep. Jim McCrery (R., La.), a member of the Ways and Means health subcommittee, are both proponents of different schemes that would force wholesale changes in the tax treatment of health-insurance costs.
And though they are far to the right of most of their Democratic colleagues, the ideas they offer could yet be part of a final compromise this year.
At this stage, however, Mr. Stark must rely entirely on his fellow Democrats; and with only a 7-4 majority in the subcommittee, the California liberal can't afford more than one defection.
While the Medicare model in the bill bears his own stamp, he has compromised elsewhere to hold together diverse camps ranging from advocates of a full-fledged, government-run system on the left to those supporting a private-market, managed-competition school of reform.
Testimony by staff yesterday outlined specific Medicare savings in the bill that would pare federal payments for teaching hospitals and often inner-city hospitals that care for a disproportionate share of the poor.
But the total Medicare savings are still significantly less than what the administration has proposed, reflecting the liberal bent of the subcommittee.
While most attention has focused on the Ways and Means committee, Democrats on the House Education and Labor Committee will begin meetings today toward crafting their own version of the president's plan.
And the party leadership in the Energy and Commerce Committee is testing support for its own alternative, which would also alter the Clinton plan but not include the government-run Medicare option in the Stark bill.
The closed-door negotiations contrast with what will be the first in a series of Oxford-style, free-wheeling debates on the House floor tomorrow on the same health issue.
The 90-minute event, to be broadcast live on television and radio, is to include several members from both parties on the Ways and Means health panel and seems likely to add to the stakes in the votes this week.
