FAR FROM SILICON VALLEY or Wall Street, entrepreneur forums proliferate.
At the Florida Venture Forum's annual conference, held at Coral Gables earlier this month, 21 companies made pitches for financing.
Financiers from 18 venture capital firms attended, some from as far away as Minnesota and Massachusetts.
The Florida showcase is one of many outside the high-tech capitals that small companies now can attend to publicize their businesses and attract investors.
Similar events in other cities, such as Baltimore, Cleveland, Des Moines, Iowa, and Indianapolis, are attracting enthusiastic small-business audiences.
Representatives of more than 60 companies attended Baltimore's Middle Atlantic Venture Conference in October.
And Iowa's conference last September drew people from about 15 companies and more than 30 venture capitalists.
The large numbers of companies participating indicate that the venture-capital world beyond the Northeast corridor and Silicon Valley is growing, says venture capitalist Robert Pinkas, managing general partner of Brantley Venture Partners in Cleveland.
These conferences introduce investors to regional economies and to specific companies, he says.
Forums in which entrepreneurs engage investors aren't new.
In the late 1970s and early '80s, investors flocked to the Monterey, Calif., technology conference sponsored by the American Electronics Association.
Later, a plethora of copycat conferences diminished the format's impact, venture capitalists say.
But within the past two years, the forums have changed and are more likely to lead to specific deals.
They are attracting more established companies and investors, says David Gillece, a Baltimore economic-development consultant.
Venture capitalists now encourage companies in which they hold stakes to appear at these pageants to attract new investors.
"They have become real business-transaction events," says Mr. Gillece.
The last two Florida conferences, for example, have resulted in more than $32 million in financing for some companies that participated, says Jeanne Becker, executive director of the Florida forum.
Of the 65 companies that have attended the Iowa conferences, seven have gained financing through the meetings.
Venture capitalists are looking to the young companies that participate in these conferences because "start-up investing is back in vogue," says Richard Tadler, a general partner of TA Associates, Boston.
Not every company that wants to make presentations can get in, says Myrt Levin, executive director of the Iowa conference.
Selected applicants receive extensive help with business plans and presentations.
Says Ms. Levin of the participants: "Even if they don't get funded, they go away learning a lot about themselves."
(This, of course, is not the main object.)
SOME VENTURE CAPITALISTS were big winners in last year's IPO boom.
Investors in companies whose stock prices soared after initial public offerings in 1993 include Morgenthaler Ventures, Cleveland; BankAmerica Capital Corp., Costa Mesa, Calif., J.H. Whitney & Co., New York, Grace-Horn Ventures, Cupertino, Calif., and Walden Group of Venture Capital Funds, San Francisco, among others, a survey indicates.
VentureOne, a San Francisco research concern, conducted the study, covering 1993 IPOs of companies backed by venture capitalists.
Morgenthaler, BankAmerica, Walden and Whitney all were investors in Microchip Technology Inc., a Chandler, Ariz., chip maker.
By year end, Microchip's stock had risen sixfold, to $39 a share from $6.50.
Morgenthaler, BankAmerica and Grace-Horn were investors in Vical Inc., a biotechnology start-up, whose stock nearly tripled to $13.50 from $5.
Walden also benefited from a more than doubling in the share price of Gymboree Corp., a retailer of toys and clothes.
Grace-Horn's other winners included Interlink Electronics, a maker of touch-sensitive electronic components and Hometown Buffet Inc., a chain of buffet-style restaurants.
Interlink stock more than doubled after its IPO.
Hometown Buffet shares increased by 88%.
VentureOne also listed concerns holding stakes in companies whose stock prices nosedived after their IPOs.
These included Alpha Partners, Menlo Park, Calif., Crosspoint Venture Partners, Los Altos, Calif., D. Blech & Co., New York., New Enterprise Associates, San Francisco, and Schroder Ventures, New York, among others.
Alpha Partners had invested in both Photonics Corp. and Superconductor Technologies Inc.
Shares of Photonics, a computer networking company, fell 31% while those of Superconductor, a developer of superconducting materials, declined 36%.
Crosspoint, also an investor in Photonics, had another loser in Adaptive Solutions Inc., a specialty semiconductor manufacturer.
Adaptive shares were down 54%.
New Enterprise Associates, one of the largest venture-capital firms, also had some big losers.
Six of the 10 companies in its portfolio declined in price after their IPOs.
Its losers included Biosurface Technology Inc., a biotechnology start-up that is developing artificial skin products; Telor Pharmaceuticals Inc., a maker of opthalmic products, and AutoImmune Inc., a start-up that is working on immune system diseases such as AIDS.
In spite of New Enterprise's performance, the venture-capital firm had little difficulty raising a new $193 million fund last December.
SBICs SAY new banking proposals will reduce their ability to invest.
Under the Community Reinvestment Act, banks must allocate capital for community-related investments.
Historically, they have received credit under the act for all equity investments in small businesses that they made through small business investment companies, or SBICs.
New regulatory guidelines will allow banks to receive CRA credit for only those investments that benefit "low- and moderate-income geographies or persons."
The narrower guidelines will reduce the incentive for banks to invest through SBICs, contends Peter F. McNeish, president of the National Association of Small Business Investment Companies, the industry trade group.
Banks account for almost $2 billion of the roughly $3 billion in assets that SBICs currently manage, and the loss of CRA credit for their small-business investments might force them to curtail their investing, says Mr. McNeish.
Still, some SBICs don't feel they will be immediately affected.
"I don't see it changing the way we invest," says Tom Adamek, president of Premier Venture Capital Corp, the SBIC of Premier Bank in Baton Rouge, La., that invested $3.5 million last year.
But for banks that have been using SBICs as a way to meet CRA guidelines, the new rules will be a blow, he says.
