Gold and platinum futures prices rose on perceptions of political instability in South Korea and Russia.
At New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for April delivery climbed $3.10 to $386.70 an ounce.
And at the New York Mercantile Exchange, the price of the April platinum futures contract was up $5.90 to $388.10 an ounce.
The market derived strength early yesterday from buying of gold by Swiss dealers and buying of platinum by at least one big U.S. brokerage company, analysts said.
As the day wore on, political strife became "an excuse for a knee-jerk reaction" by traders who bid prices higher, said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.
The Clinton administration said yesterday it planned to ship Patriot antimissile weapons to South Korea for use in defense against the possibility of missile strikes by North Korea.
North Korea has threatened to end its armistice agreement with South Korea on the Korean Peninsula.
Such posturing for the possibility of war usually tends to push precious-metals prices higher.
At times of political instability, investors often pour money into such hard assets as gold and platinum because they believe these commodities will hold their value.
Adding fuel to the fire yesterday were reports that Russia's finance minister, Boris Fyodorov, had resigned, said Bernard Savaiko, senior analyst for PaineWebber Inc.
Mr. Fyodorov reportedly quit after accusing Russian Prime Minister Victor Chernomyrdin of engineering "an economic coup" in Russia.
As precious-metals prices rose in New York, they triggered "stops," which are prearranged orders to purchase futures contracts.
Many of these orders had been placed by commodity funds, which are managed pools of investors' money, and the big trades helped to continue to drive prices higher.
Yet analysts say the price of gold has become mired in a trading range of roughly $380 to $395 an ounce.
"We need to see the market move back through recent highs if we're going to sustain the rally that's been going on," Mr. O'Neill said.
"But I suspect we're going to be rangebound for a while."
ENERGY: A bullish industry report on U.S. petroleum inventories and another wave of cold, snowy weather in the Northeast combined to push petroleum futures prices higher in trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Heating oil futures for February delivery led the pack, gaining 2.41 cents a gallon during the session to close at 52.31 cents.
The weekly report late Tuesday from the American Petroleum Institute showed a huge 8.2 million barrel drop in supplies of distillates, or heating oil and diesel fuel.
An Energy Department inventory report yesterday echoed the institute's statistic, but put the decline in distillate supplies at an even bigger 8.9 million barrels.
Meanwhile, weather forecasts were calling for more cold and snow in the Northeast, a factor in the heating oil price rise and in a jump in natural-gas prices.
March natural gas rose 11.3 cents to $2.359 per million British thermal units, roughly equivalent to one thousand cubic feet.
The strength in heating oil pushed March crude higher, as well, with the contract gaining 30 cents a barrel to close at $15.47.
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Wheat futures prices fell on perceptions of dwindling export demand for U.S. wheat.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, wheat for March delivery was down 4.25 cents to $3.7275 a bushel.
An array of export purchases announced about two weeks ago has tapered off, exerting downward pressure on futures prices, said Richard Loewy, president of AgResource Co., Chicago.
Pakistan and China have agreed to purchase some wheat, but the market has already digested that news.
And the lack of fresh demand for wheat has begun to erode prices.
