To get an idea of how tense relations between India and the U.S. are these days, pick up a copy of Sunday magazine, a national newsweekly published out of Calcutta.
Dominating the cover is a photo of Bill Clinton, complete with horns and fangs.
"Yankee Devil?" asks the headline.
Or listen as an Indian industrialist in Bombay buttonholes an American visitor at a dinner party: "Those asses in the State Department," he says angrily, waving a finger in the air.
"Why are they against India?
It's getting to the point that a joint venture in India flying the U.S. flag would get firebombed."
These are passionate times in South Asia, where India, the world's largest democracy, is undergoing a deeply wrenching shift from socialism to a freemarket economy.
Aloof from the U.S. during the Cold War, the nation has put on a new face: The old Fabian Socialists in the bureaucracy now eagerly talk of privatization, foreign investment and the capitalist flag they have raised over India.
But many of them also complain that Washington, far from embracing India, has -- either by design or misstep -- recently driven a wedge between the two countries by repeatedly criticizing New Delhi's human-rights record and questioning the legality of its claim to Jammu and Kashmir, a brutalized land claimed by both Pakistan and India.
Matters got so heated recently that an infuriated Indian government asked the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi whether the U.S. was questioning "the territorial unity and integrity of India."
Ultrasensitivity abounds in India's Parliament and press -- in part, a legacy of the U.S.'s close relationship with Pakistan, and of India's loss of a powerful patron, the Soviet Union.
It's no surprise, then, that India has seized on Washington's year-long failure to post an ambassador to this nation of 890 million as yet another sign of Washington's tilt away from New Delhi.
Late yesterday, Clinton administration officials said Frank Wisner, the Pentagon's top policy official, would be nominated as ambassador to India.
The business elite has even begun worrying that deteriorating political ties might threaten the blossoming economic relationship between the two countries, and also hurt America's broader influence in this sometimes volatile region.
Foreign Ministry officials, meanwhile, are gritting their teeth in advance of the arrival in New Delhi next week of Robin Raphel, the assistant secretary of state for South Asian affairs and the focus of much of India's displeasure.
The ministry hopes to patch up matters.
But bureaucrats here also worry that Ms. Raphel may instead prove a lightning rod for yet more controversy.
One U.S. diplomat in India acknowledges: "We're going through a public heartburn period."
Indian officials, the diplomat adds, "have been receiving some signals we're not sending."
The problems began in September, when President Clinton angered India by referring to ethnic conflict in Kashmir in an address before the United Nations General Assembly.
In December, in what U.S. diplomats here say was a routine White House form-letter response, Mr. Clinton answered a letter from Ghulam Nabi Fai, an American citizen associated with the Kashmiri Action Council, saying he looked forward to working with Mr. Ghulam "to bring peace to Kashmir."
India's ambassador to the U.S. complained to the State Department, claiming the Action Council was a front for groups "promoting militancy" in Kashmir.
Then in February, Mr. Clinton wrote to Rep. Peter Blute (R., Mass.) that the treatment of the Sikh minority in India "is one of the important human-rights issues on our agenda with India."
And that same month, Mr. Clinton accepted the credentials of Pakistan's new ambassador, noting, "We share Pakistan's concern about human-rights abuses in Kashmir."
All of this generated heated criticism in India, as did remarks by Ms. Raphel in October.
During an off-the-record briefing she held in Washington, Ms. Raphel was pressed by an Indian reporter to comment on Kashmir.
"We view the whole of Kashmir as disputed territory, the status of which needs to be resolved," she said, repeating U.S. policy.
Then referring to the administrative means by which Jammu and Kashmir joined India at the time of the partition in 1947, she added, "We do not recognize . . . that instrument of accession as meaning that Kashmir is forever more an integral part of India."
The reporter printed the remark, much to the chagrin of some of Ms. Raphel's colleagues, who felt she had been a bit too blunt on a complex issue.
The Jammu and Kashmir region, located at the northern tip of India and often referred to just as Kashmir, rivals the Middle East in its tortured modern-day history.
The land was once a princely state, where a Hindu maharaja governed a largely Muslim population, though Muslims are not dominant in all parts of the state.
Kashmir, like other princely states which had special powers during British rule, was given the option of joining India or Pakistan when the two nations were carved from British India in 1947.
The ruler of Kashmir delayed.
Irregular forces from Muslim Pakistan invaded to claim the territory.
The rattled maharaja of Kashmir quickly signed an "instrument of accession" joining the state to India.
India sent in troops to battle the Pakistanis; ultimately, the two nations fought to a draw, and the U.N. created a cease-fire line with the bulk of Jammu and Kashmir in India and the rest administered by Pakistan.
(China later took control of part of the region.)
Over the years, the area has been the wellspring for much U.N. debate, and repeated clashes between India and Pakistan, including two wars.
A violent Muslim separatist movement has also taken hold, particularly in the Kashmir valley.
Both India and the separatists have been accused of human-rights violations there.
Ms. Raphel dived headlong into this morass.
"We are hearing in Raphel's statement a qualitative shift in U.S. position," the Indian government declared.
Ms. Raphel wasn't available for comment, but a State Department official yesterday said, "Robin wasn't trying to be confrontational."
He said she and President Clinton have merely reiterated oftstated U.S. policy: Kashmir is disputed territory for which India and Pakistan must find their own bilateral solution.
"We don't accept that the instrument of accession means that Kashmir is part of India," he says.
"Overall, the relationship between the U.S. and India in substantive terms has never been better," adds a U.S. diplomat in India.
"We're adding depth to places where we agree.
I don't think you can underestimate the value of the commercial relationship."
Indeed, U.S. investment in India continues to increase rapidly, amounting to some $1 billion in commitments in 1993.
That said, India's Prime Minister took a moment in Parliament a few days ago to send a clear signal to the U.S., and to the diplomats arriving from Washington next week.
Kashmir is India's, he insisted, the accession is final, and the only issue left to negotiate is how and when Pakistan will withdraw.
