A BUYERS' MARKET fades as demand for white-collar workers picks up.
No longer are job-searching executives jumping at the first offer that comes along.
"With the labor market improving, executives aren't as flexible as they were in the past three years," says William Shockey of Thorndike Deland Associates in New York.
Search firms are noticing a greater reluctance to relocate, and candidates are seeking out competitive offers.
After several years of 5% salary increases, managers "feel they are behind" and want to catch up, says Dwight Foster, head of New York search firm Foster Partners Inc.
The standard 25% pay increase for newly acquired executives is pretty much obsolete, says Roger Sekera, vice president of A.T. Kearney Executive Search.
Executives say, "You've got to double my income," he says.
Executives seem to have the greatest pull in the fields of marketing, chemicals, engineering, construction and international consumer goods as well as those who bring diversity of sex and race.
TRAINING TO MEET skill shortages may be the wrong focus for tomorrow's jobs.
Highly skilled jobs are expected to grow at a faster rate, but 21 of the 30 occupations the Labor Department expects to grow the most numerically by 2005 require little education.
Roughly 13 million additional cashiers, janitors, gardeners and other low-skilled workers will be needed by then, the department estimates.
These jobs tend to have high turnover rates, meaning far more than 13 million people will eventually fill these spots.
"These jobs take logical thinking, good control and judgment -- none of which are trainable," says labor economist Audrey Freedman.
She says figuring out how to instill "characteristics that should be learned in childhood" will be difficult and probably be a big problem in President Clinton's welfare-to-work program.
These abilities have already become more important as many companies have trimmed managerial layers, giving more responsibility to front-line workers.
IT JUST TOOK TIME.
Older folks are as adept on computers as young hot shots.
Five years ago, older employees were "standoffish" about computer technology, says Adriane Carr, manager of education and development at BellSouth Corp.
But now, she says, "they're more adaptable" and actually have a better knack for visualizing practical applications for what they are learning than their younger counterparts who have less on-the-job experience.
Companies do note differences, though, in the way old and young people learn computer skills.
"Older people like to learn through seeing and reading, and younger people learn more adroitly by listening and then trying it," says Chris Wichers, vice president of front-office operations for Hilton Hotels Corp.
Hilton also finds videos are perfect for those who didn't get computer training in school, because employees can watch in the privacy of their own homes without feeling threatened.
GOOD NEWS for permanent job seekers: Use of temporary workers is on the decline.
Temporary jobs are expected to represent 9.6% of total employment growth this year, compared with 14% in 1993 and 48% in 1992, according to market-research firm Omnicomp Group.
One reason is that unions such as AT&T's CWA Local 1058 are forcing employers to set limits on temp use.
THE U.S. CONSTRUCTION industry trails most Western countries in the development of new technologies to increase safety on the job, and three to four workers die each day from injuries, according to the Center to Protect Workers' Rights.
The center cites two-handed screwdrivers and drywall in smaller sizes as innovations in other nations that have reduced injuries.
SIDE TRIP.
Teamsters President Ron Carey invites other union presidents and AFL-CIO chief Lane Kirkland to take a break from this week's meeting in Bal Harbour, Fla.
The plan is to get arrested tomorrow afternoon for civil disobedience at an Entenmann's bakery plant in Miami.
The idea is to publicize the Teamsters' boycott of Diamond Walnut and labor's push for a law against permanent replacement of strikers -- and be back in time for dinner.
UNION OFFICIALS say bureaucrats undercut rehiring of air-traffic controllers.
Some 5,000 fired controllers who were involved in an illegal 1981 strike applied to be rehired following President Clinton's decision to allow them back.
But the National Air Traffic Controllers Association says the Federal Aviation Administration plans to hire just 50 over two years, starting next year.
"The people who fired the controllers are still in the hierarchy of FAA.
They don't want them back," says Joseph M. Bellino, a union official.
But the FAA says there aren't any limits on the fired controllers, and that they can compete with other candidates for jobs "as soon as jobs are available."
Still, the FAA has said it expects to hire no more than 200 controllers a year to fill openings.
And many controllers are holding off retirement to see if Congress approves early retirement buyouts.
THE CHECKOFF: As the AFL-CIO executive council huddles this week in Florida, young union officials begin calling the gathering "Jurassic Park." . . .
The comeback?
After 14 years of decline, the number of union members in the U.S. increased in 1993, according to the Labor Department.
Growth was concentrated in the public sector.
