The Supreme Court agreed to consider again demands for constitutional limits on punitive-damage awards in civil lawsuits.
The justices said Friday they would hear an appeal by Honda Motor Co. of a $5 million punitive award that an Oregon jury handed a plaintiff who was badly injured when his three-wheel all-terrain vehicle overturned.
The Japanese car maker stressed in its appeal that Oregon, apparently alone among the states, bars any oversight by trial and appellate judges of punitive or compensatory damage awards.
Few legal issues spark greater indignation in business and insurance circles than large punitive-damage awards, which are designed to punish defendants and deter future wrongdoing.
Compensatory awards repay plaintiffs for their losses.
Consumer advocates defend large punitive awards as necessary to discipline corporations, doctors and other defendants.
They also argue that punitive awards provide an incentive for plaintiffs' lawyers to file legitimate suits that are expensive to pursue.
In a series of cases in recent years, the Supreme Court has rejected appeals by business interests for distinct constitutional guidelines that would curb punitive damages.
The high court has seemed to assume, though, that when such awards are challenged as excessive, they ought be reviewed by trial and appellate judges.
The Oregon Supreme Court, in contrast, has interpreted the state's constitution as prohibiting judges from second-guessing the amount of compensatory or punitive damages awarded by juries.
In the case the justices agreed to hear, the jury found that the Honda vehicle was unsafe and awarded the plaintiff $19,390 for medical expenses and $900,000 for "pain and suffering," in addition to the $5 million in punitive damages.
The compensatory part was reduced by $184,000 be cause the jury had found the plaintiff 20% at fault for the accident, which occurred when he tried to ride up a steep embankment.
Following state judicial precedents, the trial judge refused to consider whether the punitive damage award was excessive.
The Oregon Supreme Court affirmed the trial results.
It rejected Honda's argument that U.S. Supreme Court decisions last year and in 1991 said at least some judicial review of punitive awards is needed to meet the U.S. Constitution's guarantee of "due process."
All that is needed to fulfill the due-process require ment, the state's top court said, was judicial review of the instructions given to the jury and of whether the evidence was sufficient to justify any punitive damages at all.
The U.S. Supreme Court could limit the significance of the case by issuing a narrow decision pertaining only to Oregon's unusual approach.
But a victory for Honda could provide a basis for challenges to other state punitive-damage systems that limit judicial review, Honda's lawyers as serted in their brief.
(Honda Motor Co. vs. Oberg)
Separately, the high court agreed to decide whether states may ban attorneys from advertising that they are also certified public accountants.
The justices will hear a challenge brought by a lawyer who claims that Florida's ad regulation violates the First Amendment's protection of "free speech."
(Ibanez vs. Florida)
