In a departure from long-standing policy, Kaiser Permanente, the big health maintenance organization, will allow its members to get medical care from non-Kaiser doctors.
Its decision to provide what are called point-of-service options reflects growing pressure from employers to remove a major hurdle that discourages employees from choosing HMOs for their health care.
Many employees reject managed-care plans because of concern they will have to end long-standing relationships with doctors or lose the ability to seek second opinions from physicians outside the health plan.
For Kaiser, it is also an effort to increase its share of a competitive marketplace.
"This is a stepping stone, a way of gradually introducing people to Kaiser that doesn't have the fear factor that sometimes an annual decision can have," said Linda Armstrong, manager of product development for Kaiser Permanente's Northeast Region in Hartford, Conn.
Under the arrangements, members may get care from either Kaiser physicians and facilities or choose any doctor outside the health plan.
Those who go outside the plan will pay a higher share of the medical bill and higher deductibles.
Premiums that employers pay for the point-of-service option will average about 10% higher than for employees who agree to get all their care within Kaiser.
Michael M. Dudley, a vice president who heads the HMO's point-of-service effort, said the decision came after several years of debate over concerns that allowing members to go outside the plan would compromise Kaiser's ability to manage both the cost and quality of its services.
But the HMO has lost some customers who wanted the flexibility of point-of-service and many employers don't even give workers the choice of plans that lack the option.
"We were listening to what the market was saying and decided to go in this direction," he said.
The decision predated the Clinton adminstration's health reform plan, which would require health plans to offer similar flexibility.
To provide the services, Kaiser is establishing alliances with traditional insurance companies in several U.S. regions.
Kaiser, based in Oakland, Calif., isn't the first HMO to offer a point-of-service option, but as the nation's largest prepaid health plan, with 6.6 million members, its actions have enormous influence in the health-care market.
Separately, the California Nurses Association said its members ratified a three-year contract with Kaiser, ending the possibility of a strike at Kaiser's Northern California hospitals and clinics.
