AMR Corp. said its first-quarter loss will be wider than Wall Street analysts' estimates because of winter storms and last month's fare cuts.
The American Airlines parent said that Wall Street's consensus estimate loss is 24 cents a common share.
For the 1993 first quarter, AMR had a net loss of $22 million, or 43 cents a share, on revenue of $3.81 billion.
AMR made its announcement in response to a report in yesterday's Dallas Morning News that said the company's first-quarter net loss could exceed $100 million.
The newspaper anonymously quoted pilots, who attended a Wednesday meeting with AMR's chairman and chief executive, Robert L. Crandall, at which they were told the company had deficits in January and February.
A spokesman for the company said AMR had a net loss for the month of February of $46 million.
He made no comment regarding January, and said the company expects to be profitable in March.
AMR is scheduled to release its results April 20.
The first quarter for airlines typically is weak, as traffic dips after Christmas and doesn't pick up until spring and summer vacations.
However, it could be worse this year because of weather-related problems and competition from low-fare, start-up airlines.
Delta Air Lines said last week that revenue for the current quarter was falling below expectations because of winter storms and cheap fares.
Similarly, Continental Airlines' chief financial officer, Daniel Garton, said last month that the airline canceled 5% of its flights in January because of snowstorms -- and that was before a series of near-weekly Northeastern storms in February.
"The first quarter of 1994 is going to be weak," he warned.
USAir Group Inc. earlier this month blamed winter storms and a new low-fare program for a projected first-quarter loss of about $200 million before taxes, more than tripling its year-earlier loss.
Heavily concentrated in the Northeast, USAir said storms forced it to cancel fully 8% of its flights in January and February.
The AMR spokesman declined comment on the Dallas paper's report that AMR financial officials are projecting a full-year profit of $150 million.
That's below current estimates of $4.23 a share, compiled by First Call, which averages estimates of 16 analysts, but it would be AMR's first annual profit since 1989.
In 1993, AMR had a net loss of $200 million, or $2.66 a share.
AMR's stock fell $1 a share to close at $63 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, and the Dow Jones Transportation Index moved down, ending the day at 1747.53.
American's Mr. Crandall wasn't meeting with pilots to discuss quarterly results.
The chief executive was conducting a series of talks with pilots, whose contract is up for renegotiation later this year, on American's need to lower costs, particularly labor costs.
According to published reports, Mr. Crandall discussed changing work rules to boost pilot productivity, then using the savings to re-enter markets it stopped flying to last year.
For the 2,000 or so pilots who would be freed up by the possible changes, American would offer early retirement to some and promotions to others by adding planes to its fleet.
The company employs about 10,000 pilots.
