In his Jan. 26 Rule of Law column "Rebirth of the Ivy Cartel," Prof. Herschel Grossman -- economics, Brown University -- argues: (1) Ivy League colleges could give more financial aid; therefore, they must be colluding to hold aid down; (2) Colleges and universities earn profits; they then share their surpluses with faculty and administrators in the form of excess compensation.
He uses these arguments to support his preference for merit over need-based financial aid.
Let's examine his first hypothesis.
All colleges and universities, not just the wealthy ones, could give more financial aid.
To do this, they might, for example, double class sizes and hire fewer faculty, forgo building maintenance, offer no expensive lab courses, etc.
But because they could do this, does that mean that collusion is defeating the market?
The market is asking for small classes, well-maintained buildings, and a variety of courses.
Similarly, Prof. Grossman's second hypothesis is equally flawed.
Under his theory, anyone receiving compensation above some minimum level (that he would set?) is absconding with profits.
Consider this reductio ad absurdum.
Prof. Grossman's own institution could try to pay him a quarter of his current salary.
He might then, reasonably enough, decamp to another institution.
This suggests that a market is at work, not that a group of fat cats is dividing the spoils.
Colleges and universities have decided that a diverse class is important.
They seek diversity in many senses: academic performance, race, socioeconomic status, talent, interests.
Need-based aid is an efficient means of achieving this result, which happens not only to be socially and pedagogically desirable, but also an important means of competition.
Steven S. Manos
Medford, Mass.
Just what is "merit"?
Having once been a director of admissions for a very good liberal arts college, I observe that there is a dubious correlation between a 17-year-old's "merit" (i.e. grades and test scores) and subsequent performance or social contributions.
Perhaps we should bill everyone at age 40 for their post secondary education based on merit -- but then we would have to decide whether the meritorious achievers should pay more or less for the educational experience.
In such a system, I suggest inner-city school teachers should pay nothing for their education and Ivy League fees be assessed economists and lawyers.
Prof. Grossman asserts that need-based financial aid is a "reward" for being poor.
Some reward -- as if any family would opt for a lower income based on a chance for student financial aid.
It is bad enough that relatively poorer taxpayers subsidize the upper middle class in public higher education.
We ought not to advocate the same outcome in private education.
Thomas L. Anderson
Prof. Grossman is dismayed that the Justice Department has allowed an Ivy League "cartel" to be reborn.
The "cartel" was an annual meeting that agreed on the amount of scholarship money to be offered to each of those students applying to more than one university.
What was the heinous anti-competitive behaviour behavior Justice was seeking to eliminate?
These Ivy League colleges were jointly trying to establish the most effective way to give away money, their money.
Cartels (see Webster) are formed to create effective ways to increase income (i.e. to take in money) by artificially limiting the supply of something.
The original suit stood this definition on its head.
If this theory had survived, the United Way would have been the next logical target.
Stuart T. Martin
Burlington, Vt.
