Bayer AG Chief Executive Officer Manfred Schneider bolstered confidence in a German chemical-industry recovery with a bullish forecast for the current year.
"We expect Bayer earnings to rise substantially," Mr. Schneider said Friday at a news conference, which he opened with a reference to "a new cheerfulness in the chemical industry."
For 1994, Mr. Schneider predicted a pretax profit increase of 15% to 20% at Bayer after four years of declining earnings.
He said this "ambitious" target would be achieved "mainly by our own strength, but we also expect some stimulus from the market."
Economic recovery in North America and growth in East Asia will also be helpful.
Moreover, he added, Europe and Japan should now be on the rebound.
Mr. Schneider said an upward trend in the fourth quarter of 1993, when pretax profit rose by 18% to 552 million marks ($326.8 million) from 469 million marks in the same period of 1992, had continued with unexpected intensity in the first two months of the current year.
"Our operating result improved considerably in January and February," he noted.
Mr. Schneider didn't provide profit figures for the two months, but said sales rose by 6% to nearly seven billion marks ($4.14 billion).
Analysts support Mr. Schneider's prediction of a return to profit growth in the current year.
London-based CS First Boston analyst Albert Richards gave a number of reasons why he believes Bayer is in "an excellent position to capitalize on an upswing in world economic growth."
Mr. Richards said Bayer has pursued a successful strategy of consolidation and globalization.
This process has included the selling of marginal and unprofitable businesses, along with a continued strong emphasis on basic research and development.
He added, "Bayer now concentrates its resources on those areas where it either has, or can gain, a global leadership position."
Bayer's upbeat outlook for the current year came after similarly optimistic expectations expressed earlier last week by BASF AG Chief Executive Officer Juergen Strube.
Hoechst AG will report tomorrow.
German chemical-company results have been affected by economic weakness in Europe, recession in Germany, increasing international competition, overcapacity in many sectors, and high labor costs at home.
The industry has responded with international expansion in Asia and the Americas as they restructure and cut costs in Germany.
Bayer reported earlier this month that 1993 sales declined by 0.5% to 41 billion marks from 41.2 billion marks in the previous year, affected by lower prices.
Sales in Germany fell 11%.
By contrast, Mr. Schneider said, foreign sales expanded, bringing the share of foreign business to more than 80% of Bayer's total.
For 1993, Bayer reported a 13% drop in pretax profit to 2.35 billion marks from 2.69 billion marks in 1992.
In the same period, net profit fell by 12% to 1.37 billion marks from 1.56 billion marks.
Mr. Schneider said earnings were affected by extraordinary charges of 550 million marks for improving efficiency and restructuring operations, with staff reductions through early retirement accounting for most of the charges.
