President William Jefferson Clinton gave a barnburner of a State of the Union speech, judging from the glimpses available to those of us who live abroad.
This is a President who feels he is on a roll, an attitude that any football coach could tell him is fraught with danger.
For that matter, George Bush could warn that being popular after one year in office guarantees nothing at all.
Mr. Bush employed a splendid military organization, inherited from his predecessor, to win a war of vital importance to oil-consuming nations.
His poll ratings soared.
Mr. Clinton had the good luck to gain the oval office at the onset of economic recovery.
Thanks to Congress, he did no serious damage to the upswing in his first year.
It is perhaps too much to ask of any politician that he not take credit for anything good that happens on his watch.
So Americans will just have to grin and bear it while Mr. Clinton boasts about how he restored prosperity.
The White House, displaying a remarkable talent for courting trouble, chastised editors of the Washington Post last year for quoting a Dreyfus Corp. economist as saying that the economic recovery would have occurred "even if Bugs Bunny had been elected President."
At least the man didn't say Bugs Bunny would have done better, so what was all the fuss about?
Indeed, Mr. Clinton after beginning his term making scary protectionist noises, did some positive things for the economy.
Stiff-arming organized labor, he put his weight behind the Nafta and Uruguay Round trade liberalization deals, thus re-establishing the principle that America is essentially a free trade country.
Clearly the voters approved, opinion polls show.
It was an important victory over Ross Perot, Dick Gephardt and their ilk.
The President also set Al Gore to work "reinventing government," and if any significant economic deregulation or paperwork reduction comes of it, the Clinton-Gore team will deserve further applause.
With those achievements behind him Mr. Clinton is in remarkably good shape politically for a president whose record otherwise is strewed with broken crockery.
The bedroom and boardroom shenanigans of his Arkansas past are not going to be brushed aside as easily as the president's spin doctors had hoped.
His foreign policy team is so weak that Americans can only hope that no really serious threat to U.S. security presents itself in 1994.
The French have been awarded NATO and the Russians an invitation to restore the old Soviet empire.
Somalian and Haitian mobs faced down the U.S. military.
Bosnia continues to bleed and North Korea builds bombs with impunity.
But as every politician knows, an economic recovery can do wonders to keep the voters content.
Judging from opinion polls and informal samplings of voter attitudes, most Americans will overlook the president's shortcomings so long as the recovery continues.
Which is, of course, the crucial question.
Will it continue?
The short answer is that yes, it probably will, at least through most of this year, unless there is an outburst of inflation or a stock market crash, or both.
Economic cycles are powerful things.
It took this one a long time to get rolling but it now has some steam, as was evidenced by the nearly 6% growth rate in the fourth quarter last year.
The asset deflation that let the air out of real estate values and left homeowners and their bankers feeling poor as the decade began has mostly run its course from all appearances.
Household and bank balance sheets are healthier and consumers are confident again, as is evidenced by vigorous spending for used homes and new autos.
The inflation rate is low and the stock market is zooming upward.
As the Dreyfus man said, Bill Clinton had absolutely nothing to do with any of this.
George Bush didn't have much to do with it either.
But neither of them have interfered seriously in the last two years with the forces that brought it about, forces that included vigorous steps by business managers to reorganize their companies to sharply improve productivity.
Mr. Clinton's tax increases will diminish incentives for some of the country's most productive citizens and will impact retirees but his tax and spending ambitions were sufficiently modified by Congress to limit damage to the 1993 recovery.
Yet it is at the very moment of undeserved triumphs that a president should be most worried.
It is next year's State of the Union address that he should be thinking about now.
How the voters feel then, and in the year after, will be the real test of his presidency.
On that score the president's address last week was not especially encouraging.
His promise to put all the majesty of his office behind his national health plan, and wield the veto if he doesn't get what he wants, has special resonance in Europe.
Here there is every reason to wonder why a president seeking cures should be embracing the disease.
Western Europe's national economies are wallowing in recession and debt, with unemployment hovering around 11%.
The one thing that distinguishes these welfare states from the U.S. welfare state is national health.
They already have the kind of all-encompassing government-controlled bureaucratic health care systems the president seeks.
In the U.S. only about 40% of health care is government controlled through Medicare for the elderly and Medicaid for the needy.
If you ask Europeans how they feel about "free" health care, many will say it's nice, unless they have been in an Italian hospital lately or been put on a six-months waiting list for surgery in England.
If you ask them how they feel about high taxes and insolvent governments, they say it's terrible.
Yet the two things are inextricably linked.
For example, national health swallows some 40% of Italy's direct taxation, even though half the country now resorts to private care part of the time.
Europe's politicians know that national health isn't "free."
Every Western European government is trying to cut its costs, courting unpopularity in the process.
Sweden is trying to totally overhaul the welfare state to stave off national bankruptcy.
To pay for national health, Mr. Clinton promises to reform the American system of welfare doles.
It's a tidy idea, but lots of luck.
State governors figure he will simply dump most of the cost on them.
An Arkansas state trooper has been quoted as having heard the former governor say he had never met a tax he didn't like.
Come back to Europe, Bill, and meet some taxes nobody likes.
Talk with national leaders about voter revolts and prospective loss of their jobs.
It's a good cure for hubris.
