The Resolution Trust Corp. contends that transactions between Madison Guaranty Savings & Loan and the father-in-law of a former Clinton administration official contributed "to the insolvency and failure" of the thrift.

Madison is at the center of a controversy over Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton's real estate investment in Whitewater Development Co.

The RTC's comments about Seth Ward, an Arkansas businessman and father-in-law of Webster Hubbell, who recently resigned as associate attorney general, show that the government's investigation covers far more than the Clintons' dealings with the Little Rock thrift and its former owner, James McDougal.

In a letter to Sen. Dale Bumpers (D., Ark.) last year, an RTC official said that Mr. Ward "participated in a series of transactions involving Madison Guaranty {and Madison Financial Corp., a subsidiary} which enabled those entities to circumvent federal laws and regulations."

The letter from Peter Knight, the RTC's acting director of government relations, further stated that "these transactions involving Mr. Ward, among others, led to the insolvency and failure of Madison Guaranty in 1989."

The letter was obtained from the RTC, the federal agency formed to clean up the thrift industry.

Reached in Little Rock yesterday, Mr. Ward referred inquiries to his attorney, who said: "The statement is erroneous."

Mr. Knight's allegations suggest that Mr. Ward may be the subject of the government's efforts to pursue civil or criminal cases against people who may have contributed to Madison's failure, which cost U.S. taxpayers $68.8 million.

But Mr. Ward's attorney, Austin Jennings Sr., asserted that he doesn't believe his client is the subject of government investigations.

Mr. Knight is on leave this week and couldn't be reached for comment.

The RTC's letter came in response to a May 1993 complaint about the agency from Mr. Ward, who had just agreed to pay the RTC over $340,000 to settle a lengthy legal dispute.

Mr. Ward wrote to Sen. Bumpers, who sent copies of Mr. Ward's letter to three top White House officials from Arkansas: Chief of Staff Thomas McLarty, Associate Counsel William Kennedy, and Vincent Foster, who was deputy counsel when he committed suicide last year.

Sen. Bumpers sent a letter of his own to Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman and former White House Counsel Bernard Nussbaum.

John Lyford, Mr. Bumpers's press secretary, said copies of the letter went to top White House officials to call their attention to the senator's request for an administration review of the RTC's litigation policies.

Nobody in the White House responded to the Bumpers letter, Mr. Lyford said.

In fact, Mr. Altman, whose term as acting RTC chief ended yesterday, didn't respond for three months.

When he did, he used a government version of the old "dog ate my homework" excuse.

"The RTC dog apparently ate your letter of several months ago," he told Mr. Bumpers.

The RTC released the letters in response to a request under the Freedom of Information Act.

