Mr. Semel, who is 51, said that although he didn't request the change, he welcomed it.

Though typically no one in the top posts in Hollywood shares a title, industry executives noted that Warner is the most likely candidate for such an arrangement.

"They both do the same job and run the studio, so it seems very appropriate," said Ron Meyer, president of Hollywood's Creative Artists Agency talent firm.

The two executives say they rarely disagree and are close personally, even driving to work with each other two or three days a week.

Mr. Daly, 57, said Mr. Semel's promotion formalizes the equal role he and Mr. Semel have long had.

Mr. Meyer, 50 years old, has run the television side of Warner's operations and increasingly assumed Mr. Semel's administrative and personnel duties over the last three years, freeing Mr. Semel to work more closely with Mr. Daly on strategic matters.

Warner Bros. has held the top market share among movie distributors for the past three years.

The move appears intended to send the firm signal that both are planning to stay at Warner for the long haul.

Mr. Daly, a former top CBS Inc. executive, was wooed by Capital Cities/ABC Inc. to take the senior post there.

"They really are a left-hand, right-hand team."

Yesterday, Daily Variety reported that through March 27, Warner continued to hold the top box office spot with a 19.9% share.

Both decided to stay, saying they have no plans to leave the company.

And last year, Mr. Semel came close to leaving Warner to become an equity investor and the top executive at MGM/UA Entertainment Inc.

Mr. Semel will thus become chairman and co-chief executive officer; and Barry Meyer, an executive vice president, will get the additional title of chief operating officer.

Corporate executives and division heads who now report to Messrs. Daly and Semel will continue to do so, they added.

"The only reason I will ever leave here is if someone starts giving us a tough time," Mr. Daly said, noting that Gerald Levin, Time Warner's chairman and chief executive "lets us run our own show."

Messrs. Daly and Semel said Mr. Meyer's additional post is a recognition of his duties.

"We've always run the company as a partnership, and I thought Terry should get the recognition he deserves now, both on the inside of the company and on the outside."

"The only thing that wasn't equal was our titles, and Bob said, `Let's do something about it,'" Mr. Semel said.

Both Mr. Daly and Mr. Semel have been approached to take other jobs over the last two years.

Robert A. Daly, chairman and chief executive of the Time Warner unit, said yesterday that he has decided to share his corporate titles with Terry Semel, who has been president and chief operating officer.

After more than a decade of sharing management duties at Hollywood's most consistently successful studio, the two executives who run Warner Bros. are going to share the top title.

Indeed, the Daly-Semel management duo has been in place for more than a decade, compared with revolving doors in the executive suites of many other studios.

