On the first Wednesday in January, the word went out: Albuterol, a generic prescription drug used by thousands of Americans with breathing problems, was being recalled due to bacterial contamination.

The announcement by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and Copley Pharmaceutical Inc. carried the FDA's highest level of warning: a "class one" recall, meaning the contaminated albuterol -- sold nationwide under the Copley name and 10 private labels -- carried "a strong likelihood of serious adverse health consequences or death."

But in Casa Grande, Ariz., Wendy Lopez wasn't worried.

She didn't even hear about the recall until almost a month later, when she was informed by the wife of her ex-husband.

"Someone should have contacted us," says Ms. Lopez, a grocery cashier whose five-year-old son Troy began taking albuterol for asthma a year ago.

"I'm upset," she says, adding that her pharmacy "has all of our information on hand.

I don't think they took this seriously enough. . . .

I'm not hard to reach."

Eight weeks after Copley and the FDA issued the class-one warning, indications are growing that the recall net was full of holes.

Many patients say they weren't told about the problem and continued to use albuterol after it was recalled.

Pharmacists -- who generally inform patients about problem drugs -- say they were confused about the seriousness of the recall.

Physicians say they weren't notified quickly enough; some say they weren't notified at all.

What went wrong?

Nancy Sander, president of Allergy and Asthma Network/Mothers of Asthmatics Inc., a Fairfax, Va., consumer group, says: "Copley was grossly unprepared for this crisis.

They are in the business of bottling and distributing drugs.

Their customer is not the patient.

Their customers are wholesalers and distributors."

Copley sees things differently.

"I think we've done a remarkably responsible job," says Larry Friedman of Hill & Knowlton, the public-relations firm Copley hired to manage publicity about the recall.

"To say we were caught off guard, I don't think that's fair."

Copley's top executives themselves have said little.

Since the recall, they have issued a single news release and not responded to requests for interviews.

No one disputes that albuterol was a wonder drug for Copley.

Last year, Copley's total albuterol sales were about $14 million, 15% of all revenue.

A muscle relaxant, it is inhaled as a fine mist -- a highly efficient method of delivering relief to weary lungs but risky in cases of contamination.

Copley's woes began late last year (it won't specify the date) when its inspectors found a bacteria -- pseudomonas fluorescens -- in an unspecified number of vials in six manufacturing lots of albuterol, says Susan Cruzan, an FDA spokesperson.

A lot contains 40,000 vials of albuterol.

Copley and the FDA say the germ is unlikely to affect most people but could cause serious infections in people with cystic fibrosis, chronic obstructive lung disease and compromised immune systems.

The public wasn't informed at the outset.

Instead, Copley initiated a limited recall involving three private-label companies and 200 other wholesalers and customers.

The FDA says it was notified by Copley about the problem on Dec. 27.

In inspections triggered by the recall, the FDA found unsanitary conditions, poor quality control and improperly signed lab reports at Copley's albuterol plant in Canton, Mass.

On Jan. 5, the FDA upgraded the recall to class one.

With guidance from the FDA, Copley sent notices to 65,000 pharmacists and 223,000 physicians and notified the news media.

Copley also set up a special 800 phone line for questions and complaints.

And then the problems started.

"Doctors were about the last to hear about the recall," says Daniel Ein, an allergist in Washington, D.C., who heads a government-affairs committee for the American Academy of Allergy and Immunology.

He says patients heard about the albuterol recall through the media and bombarded their doctors with questions before many had heard about it.

Dr. Ein says brand-name companies, using sales representatives, "get to us in a way that the generic manufacturers don't.

They're probably more tuned into databases; they have bigger resources."

But Hill & Knowlton's Mr. Friedman says it is unfair to single out generics for criticism.

"Brand-name companies go through the same kind of stumbles that generics do," he says.

Another doctor, Martha White, director of pediatrics and research at the Institute for Asthma and Allergy at the Washington Hospital Center in Washington, D.C., says she learned of the recall when someone faxed her a newspaper article.

"If they're not notifying people who specialize in asthma care, who are they notifying?" she asks.

Says Mr. Friedman: "We feel bad if we missed her.

She should have been on the list."

Other problems were reported with Copley's 800 line.

"Most people we talked to said they could not get through on the phone and those that did felt they were treated rudely and their questions were not answered," says Ms. Sander, the asthma activist.

Copley denies such allegations.

More hang-ups took place at pharmacies.

In Tucson, Ariz., albuterol patient Sandra Anderson says she didn't hear about the recall until Jan. 31 when she saw a television commercial by the law firm of Jacoby & Meyers targeting albuterol users.

"I called my pharmacist" at a Kmart Corp. drugstore, says Mrs. Anderson, who suffers from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

"And I said, `How come you didn't tell me about this?'

And he said it must have slipped his mind."

Susan England, a spokesperson at Kmart's headquarters in Michigan, says Mrs. Anderson's pharmacy "tried to contact her and did, in fact, send a letter to her."

Mrs. Anderson, however, says she never received a letter.

At a Walgreen Co. pharmacy in Casa Grande, where Ms. Lopez purchased her son's albuterol, pharmacist Jerry Stein says albuterol "is a high-volume product.

There are a lot of patients on this medication.

That's what complicated it."

A Walgreen spokesman says the company followed Copley's recall instructions to notify patients and stop selling the product but won't comment further.

John Hammond, director of practice affairs for the American Pharmaceutical Association, says perfect recalls -- in which every patient is notified and every suspect product is returned -- are rare.

"However thorough they may be, there's a fair likelihood you're not going to catch everybody," says Mr. Hammond, whose group represents 42,000 pharmacists.

In the recall of albuterol, Mr. Hammond says, pharmacists were confused in part because of different messages from the FDA.

One message was the class-one ranking, he says.

The other was a Jan. 6 "talk paper" sent to pharmacist groups that said "no illnesses have been reported" to the FDA.

"Pharmacists have to make some kind of judgment," Mr. Hammond says.

"There was a little bit of a disconnect as to how serious this really was."

Dec. 27: Copley begins limited recall.

Public not notified.

Jan. 1: FDA begins inspection of Copley facilities.

Jan. 5: FDA declares a `Class One' recall.

Copley makes public announcement declaring `minimum risk.'

Jan. 6/7: Copley writes doctors and pharmacists.

Jan. 11: Two Chicago lawsuits blame albuterol for infants' pneumonia; the news is picked up by a local newspaper.

Jan. 24: TV ads in Arizona by the Jacoby & Meyers law firm seeking albuterol victims are given nationwide publicity.

Jan. 25: Florida lawsuit blames boy's death on albuterol and gets regional publicity.

Jan. 31: Albuterol user Sandra Anderson first hears of the recall through a Jacoby & Meyers ad.

Feb. 1: FDA report notes unsanitary conditions at Copley.

Feb. 2: Wendy Lopez, mother of albuterol user, learns of the recall.

Feb. 3: Copley says `reports of deaths and illnesses' unconfirmed.

