Certain women's colleges have proven vulnerable to this threat, especially those colleges with long familial ties to the two public military colleges.

Rather than embracing the court's generous spirit, however, VMI has chosen to act in the most cynical manner possible by proposing a "solution" that forces another college to change radically, but changes virtually nothing at VMI.

VMI is a very narrow case involving one unique school, and it should be decided on very narrow grounds.

Women's colleges do not exist to protect power and privilege, but to promote economic and social opportunity for women who might not otherwise have equal access to the benefits of education.

The federal district court in Richmond has already said that Virginia has no business maintaining a program that is unequal on the basis of gender, and it has directed VMI to admit women, to go private or to devise an alternative solution that is truly equal in practice as well as in intent.

Robert H. Halleck

This sacrifice costs too much: the child will die, anyway, and Solomon will go on his way, untouched.

We do not exist because we think that separation is necessarily better; we exist because inequality makes us necessary.

In your Feb. 3 editorial "The Battle for VMI," you agreed with the claim that "what is at stake in the VMI case is nothing less than the survival of the single-sex college."

You referred to VMI as the "nation's oldest military college."

In the meantime, VMI will remain unscathed, unchanged and unrepentant.

Like the good mother in the parable, the devoted leaders of these schools are willing to sacrifice everything in order to save the life of their child, the women's college.

The VMI case is not about women's colleges; the Mary Baldwin solution is not about "saving" women's colleges.

Hyattsville, Md.

The court should resist VMI's attempt to take women's colleges hostage.

Actually, Norwich University in Northfield, Vt., is the nation's oldest military colllege, founded in 1819 as the American Literary, Scientific and Military Academy by Alden Partridge.

Certain Solomons are auguring the legal death of women's colleges if federal courts force VMI and the Citadel to admit women.

Hence, a distinguished institution, Mary Baldwin College, is willing to create a pseudomilitary "leadership institute" as a "solution" to the VMI case.

Ever since King Solomon dangled that sword over the baby's head, men have used cruel emotional devices to force women to make unpalatable choices: threaten to kill their babies, and they will cave in.

This range is actually quite generous.

The Mary Baldwin solution will not protect women's colleges; in fact, it will corrupt the essence of one fine women's school and undermine, by implication, the purpose of others.

The proposed solution is about protecting the male-only access to the channels and corridors of power in Virginia and elsewhere that are available in unique ways to those who claim the secrets of VMI's unique aura.

Norwich is also coed and seems to have made the transition rather comfortably a number of years ago.

Women's colleges were founded because of the historic discrimination against women in higher education, and they continue because such discrimination continues.

By raising the spectre that women's colleges will be legally destroyed if VMI is forced to admit women, VMI's legal strategy attempts to divert attention from the real issues.

The Fourth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Richmond should not allow VMI to create such a cynical response to its earlier order.

Women's colleges will be glad to go out of existence on the day genuine equality of educational opportunity for women is a permanent feature of our society.

I take no sides in the VMI debate but I learned a long time ago as a member of the cadet corps at Norwich that a little flexibility never hurt anyone.

So it is with women's colleges in the VMI and the Citadel cases.

The real issue at stake in the VMI case, and at the Citadel, is whether states may maintain educational programs that are inherently discriminatory in favor of one sex.

Women's colleges got dragged into the case by the lawyers for VMI who devised a strategy worthy of the most primitive warlords: put the women at the front of the phalanx, and the enemy will think twice about attacking.

