A story may even judge a game an upset if the coach checked a box that says the opponent was "clearly superior to us."

Pop a disk into a PC, type in a few numbers and comments, and presto -- out come stories awash in clutch shots, runaway victories and at-the-buzzer heroics.

Each winter, as blizzards roared across the Great Plains, he covered as many as eight high-school basketball games an issue.

And a coach writing his own "quotes" stays out of trouble.

"I decided that the only thing my program was good at was making its own decisions," Mr. Helms says.

As a tutor, it was a dud.

Sportswriter was developed by Roger Helms, a 42-year-old freelance writer in Rochester, Minn.

Mr. Skwar says such automatic journalism "takes away creativity" that only real writers can provide.

Though "Sportswriter writes a little below the level of a beginning reporter," it clearly outclasses copy turned in by high-school "stringers," says Keith Isley, editor of the Chariton (Iowa) Leader and Herald-Patriot.

From the coaches' viewpoint, Sportswriter offers some obvious pluses.

But two months into using Sportswriter, "we recouped our cost and the stories were significantly better," he adds.

Dean Backes used to work as a sportswriter for the weekly Humphrey Democrat in Humphrey, Neb.

Mr. Backes, the displaced Nebraska sportswriter, certainly isn't mentioning the refs anymore: He's now selling farm equipment.

But it may be the future.

Then the coaches phone in or fax the form to the newspaper, someone types the data into a computer, and a few seconds later, Sportswriter prints out a story.

Penny-pinchers, however, have come to love it.

"They say it's not journalism if you don't generate all the information yourself," he says.

He dismisses that argument as "boo-hockey," noting that small papers often rely upon coaches to phone in information to reporters, anyway.

Scores are "knotted," and players make "charity tosses" from the foul line.

The papers had been shelling out up to $7 a game to stringers.

Sportswriter, as the program is called, costs $100.

Still, computer journalism raises more than issues of creativity: Sportswriter allows sources, not reporters, to choose the quotations that appear in print, violating what many see as a sacred tenet of journalism.

In one recent edition of the Humphrey Democrat, Sportswriter-crafted lead paragraphs varied considerably, including one that highlighted an individual player: "Jody Kosch made two free throws to put St. Francis up by four points and seal the win."

Each story also has a quarter-by-quarter scoring summary and a count of free throws and field goals.

But as a writer, it wasn't bad.

Mr. Helms wanted to buy a weekly newspaper and improve its sports coverage, so, using an Apple Macintosh program called Hypercard, he set out to design a program that would tutor high-school reporters on writing sports stories.

Such economies don't end at the sports desk.

"You just don't mention the refs," he adds.

"We have a very small staff here, and it allows us to do a fairly decent story," says John Edgecombe Jr., publisher of the Nebraska Signal, a weekly in Geneva, Neb.

Now Mr. Isley says he mainly goes to games "to take pictures.

Some 80 small newspapers in the Midwest have already bought Sportswriter, published by Zybrainics Software Inc., Rochester, Minn., to write high-school football or basketball games.

At Individual Inc. in Cambridge, Mass., computers sort through thousands of newspaper, magazine and wire-service articles and compile them into customized newsletters faxed daily to 3,000 subscribers.

"You get kind of addicted."

"Any sportswriter who is marginally competent can write much better and also much faster," he says.

The programs also don't dig into anything, or challenge the value or even validity of the data fed into them.

"It's scary, huh?" says Don Skwar, sports editor of the Boston Globe.

"A virtual TV weatherperson would be a natural," he says.

It works like this: Newspapers give coaches a form to fill out.

At a game's end, they write in the teams' records, the game score by periods, team statistics and individual statistics.

"I loved it," he says.

Mr. Helms, its inventor, wouldn't disagree.

Coaches are also asked to describe key points in the action -- the big play in a touchdown drive or a game-winning shot.

"You're never misquoted," says Mark Ortmeir, boys' basketball coach at Humphrey High School.

(It can only handle football and basketball.)

The hardball decision to replace a reporter with software was easy enough to justify.

But every lead includes the site of the game, something writers might save for lower in the story.

Mr. Helms hasn't discounted updating Sportswriter, but he is already thinking beyond sports.

At the Bloomberg L.P. financial news service in New York, computers write hourly stock-market summaries and foreign-market trends.

But two years ago, technology came roaring into the Democrat's newsroom.

Coaches can also provide a brief description of outstanding individual performances, and quotations.

But some users say software-generated prose enables them to write about events they would otherwise have to skip.

Indeed, Sportswriter is programmed with every possible sports cliche.

Though he shows surprisingly little animosity toward the technology that replaced him, he can't resist at least one dig: "I was better than Sportswriter."

Now they are replacing reporters.

The computer can't take pictures."

"You could create an image you couldn't tell from a real person."

Teams "jump in front."

Sportswriter doesn't focus on subtle disparities, such as a big rebounding edge, that might explain a victory.

The software didn't talk back and could write -- prolifically if not particularly well.

Mr. Isley concedes that he gets grief from purists.

The paper booted up a software program and booted out Mr. Backes.

Still, Sportswriter hasn't won any writing prizes, much less proved itself a match for talents such as the legendary Grantland Rice, who set Notre Dame's Four Horsemen against a "blue, gray October sky."

But they do prove that computers can produce serviceable stories in specialized domains.

Consider this lead paragraph: "The Humphrey Bulldogs fell victim to a second-half rally and dropped a close decision to the Leigh Lady Panthers 27-24 in girls basketball at Clarkson in the first round of the Cornhusker Conference Tournament."

"We were laying out $1,500 a month for the sports reporter," says Donald Zavadil, editor and owner of the 1,800-circulation weekly.

In newspaper offices around the country, computers have replaced typewriters.

Sportswriter is one of a new genre of software that can intelligently string words between facts.

And he and others point out that Sportswriter isn't being used to cover matters of local controversy or national importance.

"In 40 or 50 years a computer might be sports editor."

