Dwarfed by armored personnel carriers and 18-wheel United Nations trucks, the little Mitsubishi van seems out of place on the ferry steaming into this port.

So do its drivers.

As 55-year-old Leena Teittenen chases a stray hair back into her prim bun, hungover British soldiers stagger around in search of the washroom.

On deck, Mrs. Teittenen's husband, Teuvo, takes in the early morning scenery.

"Beautiful coast, isn't it?" he exclaims.

The soldiers alongside him eye each other incredulously.

"What's beautiful?" mutters one.

"All I can see are a bunch of mountains with guys running around on them waiting to shoot me."

Bringing supplies to the besieged city of Sarajevo isn't supposed to be a pleasure cruise.

But nobody has told Mr. Teittenen.

The retired Finnish sheet-metal worker and his wife are part of an odd aid pipeline that begins with an American French-horn player in the Vienna Symphony and ends with a handful of Jews running a soup kitchen and pharmacies in Sarajevo.

Often this winter, when the huge U.N. aid convoys have been halted by snipers, mined roads and the warring factions' intransigence, this free-lance aid effort has kept going, box by box of antibiotics and can by can of tuna.

Its success relies on the special status of Sarajevo's 500 or so remaining Jews.

As noncombatants in Bosnia's ethnic war, the Jews can bring supplies through front lines that others can't cross.

Their three dispensaries, organized by a Muslim pharmacist, distribute an estimated 40% of the medicine reaching Sarajevo's population.

Their soup kitchen serves about 350 hot meals a day to Muslims, Serbs and Croats, as well as Jews.

But someone has to get them the drugs and food.

One of several supply chains starts with a small woman searching for bargains in the low-rent shopping districts of Vienna.

"Getting a discount is tough here," says 48-year-old Eeva Huber, proudly displaying a carton of baby food nearing its sell date that she cajoled from a merchant.

Mrs. Huber, a Christian, has been an activist for a variety of Jewish causes ever since she moved to Austria from Finland in 1968.

"When my son, whose name is Samuel, applied for a job, his boss scratched out his name and wrote `Stefan,' saying that nobody who worked for that firm could have a Jewish-sounding name," Mrs. Huber says.

"The sense of what happened to Jews in the war here is still very real.

I know I can't turn back the clock and undo any of that, but what I can do is help Jews who are in trouble now."

That has included delivering vanloads of food to aged, impoverished Jews in Romania and smuggling banned Hebrew literature into the Soviet Union.

When war broke out in Bosnia, she heard of Jewish refugees living in hardship in Belgrade.

Packing her van with clothing, she drove to the Belgrade synagogue.

Jews there told her of relatives who had stayed behind in Sarajevo, and Mrs. Huber determined to help them.

At first, she raised the funds and made the long drives alone.

But slowly, a small band of volunteers gathered to help.

One was Eric Kushner, a Louisiana-born musician in the Vienna Symphony.

"When the stories about ethnic cleansing started coming out of Bosnia, it just seemed important to do something," says Mr. Kushner, who is Jewish.

But he wasn't sure exactly what a French-horn player could do, until he met Mrs. Huber.

Now, he and his Irish wife help raise the $3,000 it costs to fill the van each trip.

Mrs. Huber also receives money from Christian churches in Finland, where she travels to speak about her work.

The van drivers, Mr. Teittenen and his wife, read about Mrs. Huber in a Christian magazine in Finland.

Arthritis had caused Mr. Teittenen, 56, to retire early, and Mrs. Teittenen had been laid off from her job in a nursing home.

They wrote to Mrs. Huber and offered to help with the driving.

At 6:30 a.m. on a recent wintry morning, the Teittenens cram a last few bags of clothes into the overloaded van and, flicking a tape of Finnish hymns into the cassette player, nose their way into Vienna's early rush hour.

In the next 12 hours they cross two borders, driving through Slovenia to the Croatian seaport of Rijeka.

From there, an overnight ferry carries them down the Croatian coast, avoiding the chancy road to the city of Split, which serves as the jumping off point to Sarajevo.

In Split, the Sarajevan Jews accept the goods and carry them through the front lines into the city, in current conditions a two-day drive away.

Crossing the Slovenian frontier is simple enough.

Long out of the war itself, Slovenia facilitates the movement of aid to the other former Yugoslav republics.

But on roads much bumpier than Austria's smooth autobahns, the old van's engine whines in complaint.

By midafternoon, the Croatian border looms.

"The first time we made the trip, we didn't even realize where the border was," Mr. Teittenen admits cheerily.

"Suddenly, there we were with an army searching all the trucks for weapons."

The mood at the Croatian border is unpredictable.

As Mr. Teittenen waits in line to see the seventh in a seemingly endless sequence of officials, a truck driver in front is turned back because his paperwork is photocopied, not original.

Mr. Teittenen anxiously eyes the blurred fax he is carrying from the Sarajevo Jews.

The Croatians can be unhelpful to aid groups too closely identified as assisting Serbs or Muslims rather than Bosnian Croats.

Finally, the van is allowed through.

The delay looks as if it may have cost the Teittenens a place on the ferry.

Rumors of trouble on the road and a shipment of vehicles bound for British peacekeepers have combined to fill the available spaces.

The alternative is a perilous 10-hour drive through the dark down a coast road close to Serbian lines.

At the last minute, the ferry master runs out with a tape measure and checks the length of the van.

There is space, after all -- with four inches to spare.

But there are no vacant cabins.

The Teittenens spend the night slumped on a bench in the ferry's bar, as raucous British soldiers swill beer and play cards around them.

In the morning, the Finns nurse the van to its rendezvous with the Sarajevo Jews in a clothesline-draped courtyard of Split's old city.

The Jews' makeshift office is fragrant with bags of coffee -- a luxury in Sarajevo -- and piled high with goods such as surgical gloves that also are in short supply in the city.

Corners bulge with bags of mail from Israel, Sweden, Hungary and the U.S., all awaiting delivery to Sarajevans of all ethnic groups.

Croats, Muslims and even Serbs stop by to drop off goods for relatives or to arrange to use the Jews' radio, which is open to all groups and is one of the few ways for exiled Sarajevans to keep in touch with relatives in the city.

Jesua Abinun, a 74-year-old Sarajevan, greets the Teittenens warmly.

Mr. Abinun used to manage 24 hair salons in Sarajevo.

Now he waits out the war in a Split hotel.

In World War II, he was among some 13,000 Sarajevan Jews deported to concentration camps.

Many were shot or buried alive in mass graves.

After the war, some of the bodies were reinterred in Sarajevo's Jewish cemetery on the southern slope of Sarajevo's valley, now one of the principal battlegrounds of the current fighting.

"It's a ridiculous war," says Mr. Abinun, who is married to a Croat.

His stepdaughter is wed to a Muslim, while his own daughter, who remains in Sarajevo, is married to a Serb.

"It's normal," he says.

"Love finds a way.

It's wanting to separate everyone that isn't normal."

Back in Vienna, Mrs. Huber tells her own hopeful story of unity.

Recently, she opened the door to a Bosnian Muslim clutching a donation large enough to fund two vanloads of aid.

"I explained that our goods were delivered to the Jews, but he didn't care," says Mrs. Huber.

He told her that Muslims and Jews had always lived together in peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina.

"A Muslim bringing money to a Christian to buy food for Jews," she says with a smile.

"If individuals can make peace like that, there's hope that nations can, too." -- WSJ April 18, 1994)

