In 74 of these cases, it said, insider problems were the main cause of failure.

Insider problems consist of fraud by insiders such as bank officers and directors, insider abuse, and loan losses to insiders.

"As they had been in the failed banks, preferential interest rates on loans to insiders and insider loans that exceeded legal lending limits were the most frequently cited insider violations," the agency said.

Problems with insider transactions at banks are prevalent and frequently contribute to bank failures, the General Accounting Office said.

However, the FDIC and the Federal Reserve, while in substantial agreement with the GAO's report, said they "already have policies in place to address these recommendations," the GAO said.

Insider abuse, which falls short of fraud and occurs when an insider receives personal benefit from some action taken in connection with his or her role at the bank, was identified 41% of the time.

It urged regulators to ensure that bank directors understand their responsibilities and take corrective action where appropriate.

But the GAO reiterated that there are additional steps these two agencies can take.

The congressional watchdog agency said its analysis of the 286 banks that failed in 1990 and 1991 showed that insider problems were contributing factors in 175 of the failures.

The GAO also said that insider problems identified by federal bank examiners often went uncorrected from one examination to the next.

The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency said it agreed with the GAO's recommendations and plans to act accordingly.

For the Bank Insurance Fund, the federal agency that insures bank deposits, losses associated with the 175 failed banks totaled $5.4 billion, the GAO estimated.

Fraud, a criminal act, was found by Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. investigators in 36% of the 286 bank failures analyzed, the GAO said.

In reviewing 13 banks that are still open, the GAO said that 10 had been cited for insider violations.

The GAO, which conducted its insider study in response to separate requests from the chairmen of the House and Senate Banking Committees, recommended that federal bank regulators include a thorough review of insider activities in their next examination of each bank under their jurisdictions.

Loan losses to insiders were found in 28% of these failures.

