Smoking is everywhere under attack.

This week a House subcommittee considered the Smoke-Free Environment Act, which would ban smoking in almost all indoor locations except residences.

New York is poised to join many other cities across the country, including Los Angeles and San Francisco, that have recently enacted sweeping restrictions on smoking.

In the past year, Vermont, Maryland and Washington state have also adopted smoking bans, as have major public employers, including the Defense Department.

This flurry of antismoking activity is driven largely by a 1993 report from the Environmental Protection Agency that declared environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) to be "a known human lung carcinogen."

Testifying in favor of the Smoke-Free Environment Act last month, EPA Administrator Carol Browner noted that "in the year since publication of the EPA report . . . we have seen a rapid acceleration of measures to protect nonsmokers in a variety of settings."

Most supporters of such measures probably believe that the EPA report presents definitive scientific evidence that exposure to ETS causes lung cancer.

But those who have taken a closer look have come to believe that the EPA twisted the evidence to arrive at a predetermined conclusion.

The overriding motive was to discourage smoking by making it less acceptable and more inconvenient.

Indeed, the main benefit that Ms. Browner claims for the Smoke-Free Environment Act is its expected impact on smokers.

Yet coercing people for their own good still raises a few hackles in this country, so paternalists need to offer some additional justification.

That's why they've been pushing the idea that smoking endangers innocent bystanders.

The problem is, the evidence for this claim is weak, inconsistent and ambiguous.

The EPA's report seems designed to conceal that problem.

The agency's most blatant trick is to use an unconventional definition of statistical significance.

Epidemiologists generally call an association between a risk factor and a disease "significant" if the probability that it occurred purely by chance is 5% or less.

This is also the standard that the EPA had always used for risk assessment.

Yet for the report on ETS, the agency abandoned the usual definition and called a result significant if the probability that it occurred by chance was 10% or less.

This change in effect doubles the odds of being wrong.

Even according to the broader definition, only one of the 11 U.S. studies that the report analyzes found a statistically significant link between ETS and lung cancer (according to the usual definition, none of them did).

To bolster the evidence, the EPA combined data from these 11 sources into a "meta-analysis," a technique originally intended for randomized clinical trials.

UCLA epidemiologist James Enstrom says using meta-analysis with retrospective case-control studies, such as those examined by the EPA, is "fraught with dangers," because the studies are apt to differ in the way they define smokers, the types of lung cancer they include and the confounding variables they consider, and so on.

In any event, the EPA's conclusion -- that being married to a smoker raises a woman's chance of getting lung cancer by about 19% -- is justified only according to the looser definition of statistical significance chosen especially for these data.

By the conventional standard, the meta-analysis does not support the claim that ETS causes lung cancer.

Furthermore, the EPA excluded from its analysis a large U.S. study published in the November 1992 American Journal of Public Health that did not find a statistically significant link between ETS and lung cancer.

Had this study been included, the meta-analysis might not have yielded a significant result even by the relaxed standard.

Despite what a July 1992 article in Science described as "fancy statistical footwork," the EPA was able to claim only a weak association between ETS and lung cancer.

With a risk increase as low as 19%, it is very difficult to rule out the possibility that the association is due to other factors.

In 1991 Gary Huber, professor of medicine at the University of Texas Health Science Center, and two colleagues examined the 30 ETS studies discussed by the EPA in its report.

"At least 20 confounding variables have been identified as important to the development of lung cancer," they wrote in Consumers' Research.

"No reported study comes anywhere close to controlling, or even mentioning, half of these."

Furthermore, to come up with its estimate of 3,000 additional cancer deaths a year, more than two-thirds of which are supposedly due to exposure outside the home, the EPA relied on several controversial assumptions.

It assumed that cotinine, a nicotine metabolite, is a reliable measure of ETS exposure.

Yet nicotine is present in a number of foods, and the report itself concedes that "cotinine is not an ideal biomarker for ETS."

The EPA also assumed that lung-cancer risk is directly proportional to ETS levels and that no level of ETS can be considered safe.

Yet dose-response relationships vary from one substance to another, and many scientists believe that a carcinogen has to be present at a certain level before it can do any harm.

Given these and other contrivances employed by the EPA, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that policy has dictated science in the case of ETS.

This approach may be politically effective in the short term, but it is ultimately self-defeating.

By compromising the standards and methods of science, the experts also undermine their claim to authority.

Mr. Sullum is managing editor of Reason magazine.

