Olney, Md.

Usually your views are more acceptable to me than those of Laurence Tribe, but in the article about him you have missed the boat.

Prof. Tribe's billing the state was in part to deter the state from overly protecting and litigating improper laws.

Shame on you!

Laurence H. Tribe

They worked for a contingency fee and could have received nothing.

His clients obviously think Prof. Tribe is worth his fees since they all voluntarily retained him, and, as you noted, he makes full disclosure of fee structure.

It seems that nothing will satisfy you.

He is a brilliant scholar, proven appellate litigator, caring teacher, and a very decent human being.

I don't believe anyone has ever been been forced or coerced into a contract with Mr. Tribe.

It is ironic that you would now criticize the rewards of merit in a free market.

The article says that I "failed to get the lower-court decision overturned."

Of course, not all attorneys make big money, but why is a corporate or a trial attorney worth $300,000 a year and our public school teachers, for example, worth one-tenth of that amount?

The agreement makes clear, however, that my fees would be paid only out of any payment received by my client from the defendant.

This is not what capitalism and the free market system have wrought; this was created by a legal system out of control, playing by its own rules and running roughshod over virtually all other facets of American life.

One particularly disgraceful example was the associate attorney who billed a client $625 for a one-sentence letter.

Instead, you make a big deal about how much money he earns.

Last semester, despite a huge waiting list, I was able to take Prof. Tribe's Constitutional Law class.

Cambridge, Mass.

I am a third-year joint J.D./M.B.A. candidate at Harvard law and business schools.

Donald J. Riggin

The only reason he billed the state was that federal law specifically allows for states to compensate plaintiffs who successfully challenge the constitutionality of state laws.

The article also states that we would have received $6.5 million had we prosecuted our client's case successfully all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court but fails to mention that the client had originally offered me $10 million for doing this, and I reduced that fee by $3.5 million.

While we did not succeed in persuading the Court of Appeals to reinstate the punitive damages the trial court had thrown out, our client had never made the $2.8 million fee contingent on that part of the case.

I know he is a man with a passion for teaching and a strong sense of right and wrong.

His remark at the time was that it was a very long sentence.

With the Journal, I guess it's heads you win, tails I lose.

As a society we have no idea.

OK, you don't want him to be considered for the Supreme Court -- state your reasons.

But my colleagues and I prevailed in the Court of Appeals by persuading that court to uphold in full the $11.5 million awarded to our client by the trial judge, no mean feat in light of the many errors committed by our client's trial counsel.

In referring to the Grendel's Den litigation, you failed to mention that it was a groundbreaking case dealing with important First Amendment, separation-of-church-and-state issues.

The last time you criticized me was for making my legal services available free to government prosecutors ("Justice and Cowardice," Review & Outlook, June 28, 1988).

No commercial law firm in America can make this claim.

I believe the article creates numerous false impressions.

Now, you attack me because business clients in an open market offer to pay me very substantial fees to handle their cases, in light of the perceived value of my work ("Laurence Tribe's Fees May Work Against Him," March 17, 1994).

Prof. Tribe's defense of this bill was equally disgraceful: he said the associate thought about the issue all day before he wrote the letter.

That's what happens in a market economy.

In addition, the article fails to note that we would have received $6.5 million only if we had won at least $36 million for the client.

He did a magnificent job, with the assistance of Jonathan Massey and Ken Chesebro.

In some sense, this law is meant to prevent a state from using its deep pockets to oppress all who challenge it.

Your article refers to my "$750-an-hour fee," but when my pro bono work is factored in, my fees in fact average under $350 per hour.

I also know him to be fair.

Your article is a wonderful example of how the legal system in this country financially rapes American businesses.

He is definitely not the uncaring, money-focused man some of those quoted in your article depict him to be.

Moreover, I had agreed separately with two colleagues who worked with me on the case that I would receive just 40% of any fees paid, and they would receive the remainder.

Because there are no guidelines, and law firms generally are loathe to discuss the final anticipated cost of any legal work, the market determines the value of each legal transaction, fueled by the law firms themselves.

Most important for a true picture of my practice is that I do more than half my legal work free of charge, representing such clients as migrant farmworkers (Supreme Court 1990), patients at family planning clinics (Supreme Court 1991), cigarette smokers (Supreme Court 1992), pregnant women subject to gag order in South Carolina (earlier this year), and many others.

Cambridge, Mass.

In an arms-length transaction, I signed a detailed agreement with my client, a multimillion-dollar corporation experienced in legal affairs, and provided what I believe was outstanding service and an excellent result.

After watching, listening to and debating with Prof. Tribe for hours practically every day for weeks, I think I have a good idea of what kind of person he is.

He is constantly innovating his course syllabus to improve learning, he spends considerable time preparing for each class, he maintains consistent office hours, and he never missed a single class last semester.

You also failed to mention that he represented this very modest restaurant pro bono.

He does little yet significant things for his students that most other Harvard professors do not do, such as learning the names of his 150 students, inviting a different subset of them over to his house every Friday evening, bringing baskets of apples to every class, and spending a Saturday afternoon after the semester's end reviewing the answers to his final exam.

I'm a shareholder of a company Mr. Tribe successfully represented.

What is legal representation worth?

Fort Washington, Pa.

Prof. Tribe deserves the praise and compensation he is getting.

If he had lost, he would have received nothing.

For example, it states that my fee agreement provided that I was "guaranteed" a $2.8 million fee in one New Jersey case "regardless of decision."

