Behind yesterday's decline in the Treasury market was selling tied to other fixed-income markets, especially mortgage-backed securities.

He added that the debt likely would be sold "some time into next week."

Dealers ask for money as collateral -- a margin call -- when losses increase.

"There has been some clearing of positions for quarter-end that has been making the situation worse," said Cary Leahey, senior financial economist at Lehman Government Securities.

Sellers pounced on municipal bonds, forcing most prices down about a point.

Askin runs two "market-neutral" mortgage funds and one, new, "market-directional" mortgage hedge fund.

Some of the selling yesterday appeared to be related to continued adjustment of positions ahead of the end of the first quarter.

Thrifty officials didn't return telephone calls.

Bruce Frumerman, a spokesman for Askin, said the firm is still negotiating the valuation of its holdings.

The latest delays involved Dial Call Communications Inc.'s $300 million (proceeds) offering and Thrifty PayLess Inc.'s $600 million, two-part deal, according to market sources.

Prices for many junk bonds are off about five points so far this week and about nine points for the past month, traders said.

The future of the funds remains unclear at this point, Mr. Frumerman added.

The junk bond market got slammed again, spurring more delays in planned issues.

"That's why price levels and yields don't make a difference."

Askin's portfolios reportedly have dropped drastically in value since the beginning of the year.

The funds erred, market observers say, by taking leveraged bets on highly illiquid derivative instruments.

"People are just stunned," said one trader who noted dealers liquidating positions during yesterday's session.

The Fed has already raised the federal funds rate, which is the rate at which banks lend each other money, by half a percentage point since early February to 3 1/2%.

Also supporting the front end was some movement of cash out of the battered stock market into the Treasury bill sector, players said.

Traders are bracing for a strong set of data, with non-farm payroll employment expected to rise by at least 250,000 for March.

Standard & Poor's Blue List of Current Municipal Secondary Market Offerings, which gives an indication of dealer inventories and the muni market's general condition, climbed nearly $106 million Tuesday to $1.99 billion.

Golds eased 11/32 to 98 31/32, and Federal National Mortgage Association gave up 11/32 to 98 24/32.

But with sentiment so poor, there is little pressure to jump in, Mr. Siler and others said.

In addition, rising long-term interest rates have caused a slowing of prepayments on the underlying mortgages which in turn has led to a lengthening of effective maturities on mortgage-backed securities.

The mortgage securities were pushed lower when the market got hit with extensive bid lists of unwanted securities from Askin Capital Management.

As reported yesterday in this newspaper, David Askin disclosed to investors last Friday that the value of one $170 million portfolio was down 21.89% in February, not 1.5% as he initially disclosed.

"The market has been trading on nothing but fear," Mr. Siler said.

Meanwhile, some cash worked its way into short-term Treasury securities, whose prices are less vulnerable to rising interest rates than long-term Treasury securities.

The selling wasn't the only discouraging development.

"Everything's for sale," the official said.

Investors have also been reluctant to put new cash to work before they see what Friday's employment report will hold.

"There's a buyers' strike going on," said Van Siler, a managing partner at R.J. Walls & Co.

A directional fund takes either a predominately bullish or bearish view of the market; market-neutral funds balance bullish with bearish investments.

The junk bond new-issue calendar has been disrupted by rising yields in the secondary market.

Most analysts believe the Fed will take the funds rate to at least 4%.

In late trading, the Orlando Utilities Commission (Fla.) 5% of 2020 refunding bonds were down about 1 1/2 point from Tuesday afternoon at 84, yielding 6.19%.

With muni prices plummeting on jitters about the Federal Reserve's tightening mode, dealer inventories are building as investors flee the market.

"Until investors see the funds rate at a higher level, they are going to be afraid to commit," said Donald Fine, chief market analyst at Chase Securities.

Assuming that inflation stays contained near a 3% rate, "eventually there is going to be the realization that a 7% or 7 1/4% yield on a bond represents the best value of anything on the planet," said Mr. Siler of R.J. Walls.

Both issuers hope to sell the debt next week if the market calms down, sources added.

"Investors won't step in front of an oncoming train but they will chase after it once its left the station," he said.

Tuesday, Northwest Airlines said it was postponing a $350 million junk bond offering because of difficult market conditions.

The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond dropped nearly 1/2 point to 89 13/32 to yield 7.10%, up from 7.06% Tuesday.

To create a market-neutral fund with such investments would be nearly impossible, an official at a major primary dealer says.

According to an official at a primary dealership, every firm on Wall Street has a bid list of the Askin fund holdings, which is putting additional pressure on various mortgage derivatives.

Thrifty, a West Coast drugstore chain, is a unit of TPH Corp.

Overhanging all the bond markets are expectations that the Federal Reserve will continue to push short-term interest rates higher.

Mortgage securities closed down about a third of a point in volatile dealings.

"We're reviewing the situation on a day-to-day basis, hoping for some things to settle down," he said.

However, he hasn't yet seen selling from mutual funds because of redemptions.

Dial Call chief financial officer Tom Grina confirmed that the company was awaiting more favorable market conditions.

Much of the selling in the Treasury market appeared to originate in the mortgage-backed securities market, which has taken a pounding in recent weeks.

Among 7.5% issues for April delivery, Government National Mortgage Association fell 12/32 to 98 10/32, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.

Trading in the investment-grade market was extremely light, as yield spreads widened by 0.02 to 0.03 percentage point in sympathy with price declines in the Treasury and stock markets.

Duration is a measure of price sensitivity to interest rate changes, so the longer the duration of a portfolio, the greater the losses are when yields rise.

Yields rose again yesterday, as prices dropped about 1.5 points, or about $15 for a bond with $1,000 face value.

Participants continued to say that when yields are compared with the economic fundamentals, the market looks attractive.

The coupon-equivalent yields of Treasury securities maturing in a year or less fell 0.01 to 0.05 percentage point yesterday in reaction to the buying.

Trading was brisk and disorderly as market participants scrambled to unload more bonds after dumping munis earlier this week, traders said.

The market began the day moving higher, but by late morning prices collapsed.

But as the session wore on, a renewed burst of selling sent prices to their lows, where they finished the day.

Prices of longer-term Treasury securities continued to drop while shorter issues found some support, partly from cash fleeing the stock market.

At the same time, the price of the two-year note rose 1/32 to 99 29/32 to yield 5.16%, down from 5.18%.

Dial Call is an Atlanta-based telecommunications concern.

The first wave of selling took place at mid-morning, but prices were able to stabilize during the afternoon.

According to one of Askin's investors, these margin calls increased on Tuesday, putting additional pressure on the firm to liquidate its portfolio.

"There is a lot of cash that has piled up on the sidelines but that cash will not be deployed until after we see some stabilization," said Mr. Leuzzi of Warburg.

Fund managers in particular have been trying to shorten the durations of their portfolios before their positions are marked today.

Wall Street dealers also reportedly were pressuring the firm to meet margin calls against the weakening portfolios.

As has been the case so far this week, the sell-off was not sparked by any particular news.

Portfolio managers, looking to offset that trend, unloaded mortgage-backed securities along with longer-term Treasurys.

Margin deposits are collateral against potential losses.

