Even Wall Street, which is in the business of selling stocks, doesn't like them as much as it did just a few days ago.

The long-bullish Ms. Garzarelli suggests that rising rates, the very thing that many analysts blame for the stock market's retreat, contain the seeds for a big rally later this year.

But she adds her own little bit of sanguine analysis: "Don't people withdraw money this time of year to pay taxes?" she asks.

Trouble is, he doesn't know how to tell when the slump is over.

Consumer confidence is the strongest it has been in years, corporate earnings are swelling, inflation remains subdued, and jobs are being created at a good pace.

Part of that case, of course, is grounded in the changing psychology.

Individual investors began flocking to the stock market in large numbers in 1990, as the Fed, anxious to stimulate a flagging economy, began cutting interest rates swiftly and sharply.

The slide doesn't make much sense to Mark Huberman, either.

This week alone, three big brokerage firms have advised clients to reduce their stock holdings.

But Dr. Siegel, a dentist in the Riverdale section of New York's Bronx borough, is standing pat.

I'm just kind of standing on the sidelines, ready to sell."

Many analysts consider a dividend yield of less than 3% evidence of dangerously high stock prices.

If the slump stops now or even if it goes down another 5% or so, it will go in the history books as just another "correction," a brief interlude of declining prices in a continuing bull market.

"The real need to invest what had been an extremely high cash level doesn't exist as it did a few years ago," she says.

The more basic bear argument, which many bears have been making for two years or more, centers on stock prices that have risen far above levels they believe are justified by underlying factors.

Bears claim to see evidence of that waning appetite for stocks in the flows of new money into mutual funds.

He predicts that the flow of funds out of the market into less-risky investments will cost the Dow industrials another 500 or more points in coming months.

But if prices keep falling, gathering momentum as they roll downhill, this could become a full-fledged bear market.

Elizabeth Tan, a 29-year-old computer support specialist in New York, is holding firm, too.

"I'm sort of stunned at how things have changed so fast," says Ash Agboatwala, a 44-year-old engineer in Fremont, Calif.

"You just have to let it play out."

Like millions of investors around the country, she has watched the value of her stock portfolio skid since January.

And that doubt, more than anything else, is what is wrong with the stock market.

"Corporate profits are growing ahead of expectations and are likely to continue to do so," says Steven Einhorn, a stock market strategist at Goldman, Sachs & Co.

According to several mutual fund managers, cash flows into stock mutual funds in March fell from the torrid pace earlier in the year.

But once prices fall 7.2%, he says, there is an even chance that the decline will develop into a growling bear.

"If it goes lower, I'll probably buy more."

"The Federal Reserve created this financial mania and now it has destroyed it," says Michael Metz, chief investment strategist at Oppenheimer & Co.

Warren Smith, managing editor of BCA Foretrends, an investment research firm in Montreal, suggests that we have seen only the beginning of rising interest rates.

Laura Tyson, chief White House economist, says the market dive has occurred amid signs of continued economic growth with low inflation.

"Three weeks ago everybody loved stocks, and now no one wants to touch them."

"It definitely scares me," she says.

"You take a risk and you take the consequences."

Since hitting a high of 3978.36 on Jan. 31, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has skidded 351.61 points, or 8.8%.

The Clinton administration agrees.

What has shifted significantly is investor psychology, and interest rates are part of that psychology.

That, too, is evidence to analysts that the stock market has to fall.

Add to that the growing Whitewater problems facing the Clinton administration and a few international crises, and investors begin to get upset.

Her logic: Higher rates already are slowing the economy, setting the stage for long-term interest rates to once again decline.

Robert McGough and Sara Calian contributed to this article.

The economic recovery that took so long to begin is well entrenched.

Yet many of the fundamental forces that have pushed stocks higher over the past three years remain intact.

Things seem a whole lot better than they did a year ago."

Even the robust economic recovery that has developed feeds the bears.

But the Los Angeles physicist and inveterate investor has been selling stocks from his portfolio since January.

After five years of falling, ultimately to the lowest levels since the 1960s, rates are rising.

In the fundamental picture, about the only thing that has changed is interest rates.

This week alone it has fallen 3.9%, closing yesterday at 3626.75, a drop of 72.27.

Another chance for stock prices to reverse their declines comes in a few weeks when corporations begin reporting first-quarter profits.

If an investor bought all 30 stocks today, he or she would be paid a dividend amounting to about 2.8% of his total investment.

Despite the Dow's recent big drop, prices are still about 25 times the past year's earnings.

"Bull markets don't last forever," concedes Judy Blitman, a 54-year-old psychiatrist in New York.

But her bias is different from Mr. Agboatwala's.

And then there are the hopefuls.

Ned Davis, head of a stock-market research firm in Nokomis, Fla., says he has found that 5% corrections are commonplace.

Earnings figure into the bear case, too.

Bulls counter, however, that it was uncertainty, not surfeit, that slowed the flows and that a rebounding stock market will once again draw money to the funds.

In the end, whether the slump ends soon or turns into a prolonged and deep retreat depends to a large extent on the decisions of millions of individual investors.

Although few analysts argue that two minor rate increases are, by themselves, enough to unnerve investors and undo a strong three-year-old bull market in stocks, many point out that no one knows how much higher rates will go.

An optimist, Mr. Agboatwala is keeping a list of stocks he wants to buy when the market slump ends.

But if, as in the first quarter, the market is down, cash becomes king as the quarter ends.

"With less money pouring in from households, the market will be more volatile."

At the same time, an increasing number of companies adopted retirement plans that gave employees more control of their own retirement assets.

"I won't sell at the low," she vows.

Although Gail Dudack, a stock strategist at S.G. Warburg & Co., is looking for a modest correction that would take the industrial average to 3600 before another big rally, she points out that for the first time in 22 years households own more stock than they have cash.

Even some of the more optimistic observers think the public passion for stocks is waning.

"The psychology right now is very bad," says Jeffrey Malet, manager of the Pacific Horizon Aggressive Growth Fund.

"They've been dumping a lot of stocks to do that."

"The dynamics are there for a bear market," he contends.

But if neither the changing calendar nor strong first-quarter earnings stem the stock market's slide, the bears will have an easier time making their case for a sustained market slump.

"Even if it is a bear market, the stocks that will be the leaders in the next up-cycle often bottom early," he explains.

Historically the 30 stocks in the Dow industrials have carried an average price tag of about 13.6 times the earnings produced by those stocks in the previous four quarters.

A surging economy and lots of lean and mean companies that have gotten very efficient in the past few years should produce some good earnings reports that will prop up stock prices.

Unlike the stock market of the 1970s and 1980s, which was driven by big institutional and pension funds, the market these days is under the influence of the little guy.

"The `greater fool theory' is breaking down," says Earl Osborn, a financial adviser in San Francisco.

Six months from now, he predicts, investors will be fleeing stocks ahead of a slumping economy and falling earnings.

If the market has done well in a given quarter, money managers want to show lots of stocks on their books.

Some analysts are pointing to the heavy pace of selling as evidence that tough times are ahead.

I don't want to do any panic selling.

And he intends to continue to cut his holdings.

"Since we believe the fundamentals are strong and markets are known to overreact on occasion, we are satisfied that the economy is in a sound position," she says.

Besides, the stock-market downturn "doesn't make any sense to me.

"I have no idea whatsoever," says Jeff Vinik, the manager of Fidelity Investments' $34 billion Magellan Fund.

"That suggests to us that we still have a long-lasting bull market ahead of us."

"What I do have is a lot of uncertainty."

To hear individual investors tell it, many are just waiting, though they have their bias.

Take, for instance, the level of dividends that investors are paid by the 30 companies that make up the Dow Jones Industrial Average.

Monday's market activity, coming on the heels of a three-day weekend for many traders, could be the indicator.

Perhaps more worrisome to some investors is that Elaine Garzarelli, the Lehman Brothers stock-market guru, told the brokerage house's sales force yesterday that there is a "50-50 chance" the market's losses will widen to 10% to 15%.

"People want to look smart and show a lot of cash on their balance sheets," says Richard Berner, chief economist at Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh.

"I don't have the answer to the question `Is this the beginning of a bear market?'" admits Mr. Huberman.

The increase was minor, just a quarter of a point, but it touched off an avalanche of selling in both the stock and bond markets.

Caterpillar stock soared $3.25 to $119.50 and helped the broad stock market rise, too.

As other rates fell, investors sought the higher returns traditionally offered by stocks.

Even some of the savviest Wall Street wizards confess that they haven't a clue to what comes next.

They argue that a fast-growing economy breeds ever-higher interest rates that, in the end, wind up bringing the recovery to a halt.

A second quarter-point increase in the federal-funds rate last week further roiled the markets.

"A lot of people who had been buying expected the person after them to buy at an even higher price.

But now that the Fed has reversed course in its interest-rate policy, some analysts speculate that it won't be long before many investors begin to yank money out of the stock market to park in their bank.

On Feb. 4 the Federal Reserve Board raised short-term interest rates.

"I'm monitoring my stocks every day.

Susan Siegel is down, but not out.

Such a debilitating slide would sap investors' confidence and send them scurrying for the safety of such unsophisticated and low-paying investments as bank certificates of deposit.

But now everyone is saying, `Gee, maybe the person after me won't pay more than I did.'"

He remains confident, he says, that the Dow Jones Industrial Average will edge over the 4000 mark in the next 12 months.

That uncertainty isn't stopping him from adding stocks he likes to his massive portfolio.

Some of the most bullish investors suggest that the end of the stock-market slump could come as early as today, the end of the first quarter.

"They won't ring a bell," he says.

A hint of what may lie ahead came two weeks ago when Caterpillar Corp. said it expected to report especially healthy sales gains for the quarter.

