The contractor's rent is also reduced, since he needs only a small, no-frills shop to finish the garments before delivering them to manufacturers.

Home sewers fill that need nicely.

For example, Janey Fashions, based in Garland, agreed to comply with the law after admitting to using home sewers in 1992, according to the Labor Department report on the investigation, which was obtained by the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union.

But the garments didn't have labels and the sewers refused to speak, so regulators couldn't pursue the case.

In a dispersed version of the sweatshops of old, a growing number of illegal home-sewing operations are doing piecework for apparel contractors.

The retailers all say they aren't aware of any garments coming from illegal sources, noting that their contracts with suppliers or company policies forbid the use of illegal labor.

"We take care of ourselves."

To the Vietnamese woman in Garland, home sewing is a godsend.

And detection doesn't ensure enforcement.

Last spring, the Labor Department staged a sweep through apparel contractors' shops in eight cities, including some contractors who used home workers.

Many home-sewn garments go on to some of the country's biggest retailers, including, according to Labor Department documents, J.C. Penney Co.; Sears, Roebuck & Co.; Dayton Hudson Corp.'s Mervyn's department stores; and the Army and Air Force Exchange stores.

"This is the only way they know how to make a living," says Tom Ha, vice chairman of the Vietnamese American Community of Tarrant County, Texas.

"Nobody helps me."

Mr. Tsai says the ad must have been in error.

Some contractors are fairly bold about their home-sewing operations.

She moved to Texas last year when the factory closed, got an apartment with a friend, bought her sewing machines for $1,800 and went door-to-door seeking work from contractors.

The practice is squeezing out legitimate garment workers and contractors, according to regulators and union officials.

Her employers bring her pieces of women's jackets, blouses and dresses, for which she is paid as little as 15 cents to 25 cents each.

The union maintains that in the Dallas area alone, the home-sewing movement has devastated its ranks, claiming 30,000 of the 35,000 women's garment sewing jobs it estimates are available.

(Exceptions can be made for certain knitted outerwear and accessories, and for people who can prove they are confined to their homes.)

The Vietnamese woman won't give her name because she knows her work is illegal.

Yet in a recent Vietnamese-language publication, Janey's owner, Kyle Tsai, advertised for sewers who could work in his shop or at home.

Last year, Labor Department agents participated in a raid on an Orange County, Calif., apartment where two women were working on sewing machines, including one machine next to a toilet.

In her tiny apartment's cramped living room, whose furnishings include two industrial sewing machines and a Buddhist shrine, the woman stitches together women's garments from pieces of cut fabric.

Vietnamese community leaders say the practice should be protected, perhaps by allowing the workers to be classified as independent contractors, not employees.

But in recent years, the practice of using home sewers has been spreading rapidly again, the product of a growing influx of immigrant workers and increasing competition from abroad that has forced garment makers to cut costs.

But she was trained to design and sew in Vietnam, so she landed work in a garment factory in Boston.

Bill A. Belt, a Labor Department official in Dallas, says his office has conducted 487 home-sewing investigations in the past three years, found violations in 41% of the cases and obtained 54 injunctions against contractors, including one against Dallas dress designer Victor Costa Inc. in 1992.

But contractors using home workers are difficult to corner.

(A spokeswoman for the designer says he has since complied.)

For her efforts, she earns less than $7,000 a year.

"I think it's absolutely brazen that they take out newspaper ads," says Betty Boyer, assistant organizing director of the ILGWU in Dallas.

Smaller networks exist in northern Virginia and Miami and around large military bases, regulators say.

"I feel better here," she says.

Because home sewers fear the government and need the money, the Labor Department's Ms. Otero says, "they're very uncooperative witnesses."

Enforcement officials say they are intensifying their investigative efforts.

Still, while her income puts her well below the poverty line, she covers living expenses and sends money to her son in college and five other children still in Vietnam.

"We have money, we have food, we have housing," says a middle-aged Vietnamese woman who is a home sewer in the Dallas suburb of Garland.

And after the hardships she endured in her native land, this lifestyle is just fine with her.

The work leaves her exhausted and lonely.

The newspaper's owner, Bichphuong Pham, a former home sewer, says Mr. Tsai asked her to include the line about working at home.

"It's very hard," she says.

They work for rock-bottom wages (often less than the minimum wage and paid in cash) and supply their own machines.

Maria Echaveste, the Labor Department's top wage and hour administrator in Washington, met last month with 15 federal regulators from around the country to figure out how to deal with the garment industry and home sewers.

Regulators say the biggest pockets of home sewing are in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, where estimates of the home-sewing population range from 20,000 to 80,000, and in New York and California.

The General Accounting Office, Congress's investigative arm, has been investigating the link between home sewers in the Dallas area and brand-name garment makers and retailers.

The law was intended to protect workers from being underpaid and overworked, to ensure safe working conditions and to make it more difficult for contractors to use child labor.

But the home sewers, many of them otherwise unemployable immigrants, say sewing at home is the only way they can eke out a living.

In Los Angeles, for example, they deliver by night in vans -- after many regulators' shifts end, says Rolene Otero, district director of the Labor Department's wage and hour division.

When she came to the U.S., she spoke little English, had limited skills and no car.

Since the early 1940s, federal law has banned at-home production of certain types of apparel and jewelry, including women's apparel, for interstate commerce.

To union officials, this points to a lack of enforcement effort.

