Leading the move is Werner Enterprises Inc.

That situation could contribute to price increases in food, clothing and industrial goods.

The closely held Green Bay, Wis., carrier is slating the largest rate increases for those customers that habitually delay drivers at shipping docks.

"Shippers will have to pay more to get the truck service they demand," he said.

Schneider National Inc., another hauler of freight in truckloads, raised rates to some customers about 4% in January.

Moreover, the drivers, themselves, are increasingly compelled to unload their trailers and sort freight at receiving docks.

Mr. Delaney said he expects truckload rates to rise about two percentage points above the rate of inflation during the next 12 months.

The Omaha, Neb., company plans to raise its freight rates an unspecified amount to cover an 8% hike in its driver pay, which is effective May 1.

"Truck distribution represents a significant cost for various companies at retail and wholesale levels, and those companies will surely attempt to pass those cost increases on, if the market will bear it," said Allen Sinai, chief economist at Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York.

Truckload companies are hoping that improved pay rates will attract more drivers to a job with a long list of negatives.

"They ought to make $38,000 to $40,000 a year, but they are making $32,000 to $35,000 for an experienced driver with three years behind the wheel," he said.

Railroads, too, have boosted some rates on their shipments of truck trailers and containers on flatcars.

He said the rate increases will allow truck companies to attract better drivers and provide more timely service, allowing manufacturers to reduce their investment in inventories.

These labor costs are rising for truckload haulers just as demand for their services is running 6% ahead of year-ago levels, the fifth consecutive year of growing freight traffic.

Questions Surround Pay "We all have a tremendous turnover of drivers," said Michael Starnes, chairman and chief executive of M.S. Carriers Inc. in Memphis.

For now, Mr. Starnes said he is waiting and watching customer reaction to the rate hikes announced by his rivals.

Citing higher costs to attract, train and keep drivers, CRST International Inc., in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, plans to boost freight rates 3% this spring and another 2% to 3% in the fall.

"Trucking freight rates increased much slower than the rate of inflation over the past 12 years," said Mr. Delaney.

Long-haul drivers get paid on the basis of miles traveled; delays, therefore, are particularly aggravating to them.

Some major long-haul trucking companies, citing surging traffic and rising wages for a scarcity of nonunion drivers, plan to boost freight rates by 4% or more.

"It seems more likely this year that truck companies will have better success at getting and keeping price increases than in any year since trucking was deregulated in 1980," said Doug Rockel, an analyst at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.

Other sectors in the transportation industry, experiencing the same cost-and-demand pressures, also are lifting prices.

"With the economy heating up, the labor force that would normally become drivers is going into other areas like manufacturing and construction where the quality of life is better and they can be home at night," said Michael Blackwell, director of transportation and logistics at the Atlanta-based company.

Declining inventories "will counteract the higher short-term increases in transportation costs," he said.

Even the unionized less-than-truckload carriers increased rates 4.5% on average in January.

Rate hikes by truckload companies are "one of those early warning signs of potentially higher inflation down the road," he said.

About 10% of Georgia-Pacific Corp.'s shipments of building products are being delayed a day or two because of a truck shortage.

For example, nonunion long-haul drivers routinely live and work in their trucks for two or three weeks at a time.

"We are moving our product, but we're having to spend more time and devote more manpower to secure trucks."

Robert Delaney, executive vice president of Cass Logistics Inc., a St. Louis shipping information company, disagreed.

He added that "in today's environment, trucking companies are in a much better position to effect rate increases."

He added that Georgia-Pacific is resigned to paying truck rate increases ranging from 2% to 5% this year because of costs related to recruiting, training and retaining drivers.

Economic and competitive forces, the company said, "are making it increasingly more difficult to attract and retain" skilled drivers for on-time delivery.

However, Mr. Starnes isn't convinced that the driver pay raises, such as the two-cents-a-mile increase announced by Werner Enterprises, are sufficient to attract enough new drivers.

Shippers, accustomed to freight rate reductions, are bracing themselves for change.

"It's something we can't fight."

Analysts expect these carriers to incur additional wage and benefit costs after their three-year labor contract with the Teamsters union expires today.

The company now plans another rate hike to cover higher driver costs.

"There is definitely a shortage of drivers," said Richard Hanson, director of transportation at the Kraft General Foods division of Philip Morris Cos.

"But the overcapacity is gone, and shippers are coming to understand that they will have to pay higher prices to maintain and improve truck service."

