Unfortunately, the economic framework presented by the president's aides bears a striking similarity to that presented by previous Democratic economic advisers.

The current administration has subscribed to the same policy framework.

Lyndon Johnson's advisers, 1965: "The steady gains in productivity and the moderate wage increases have held unit labor costs practically unchanged in the . . . economy during the past four years and have resulted in a slight net reduction in manufacturing labor costs.

(Six months before inflation took off, the president's advisers were implying that low current inflation meant there was no cause for concern.)

The problem with bad economic analysis is that it often produces bad policy.

Mr. Johnson's advisers, 1965: "The degree to which fiscal policy should be stimulative or restrictive depends in part upon the monetary policies being pursued. . . ."

It will be extremely unfortunate if the lessons of the 1960s and 1970s have to be relearned in the 1990s.

Mr. Johnson's advisers, 1968: "The period {1965-67} was marked by a steep upward movement in both short- and long-term interest rates.

Reflections on previous mistakes from the Economic Reports to the President in the latter years of the Johnson and Carter administrations are painful to read.

Similarly, the implicit price deflators have risen very little. . ."

Mr. Carter's advisers, 1978: "Under current economic conditions, monetary and fiscal policy can reinforce each other in fostering stable economic growth and the increased rate of investment needed to avoid the emergence of capacity limitations in the future."

Mr. Johnson's advisers, 1965: "The economy today has room for -- and need for -- more employment and more production."

Mr. Clinton's advisers, 1994: "The Federal Reserve's shift toward reliance on a broader set of guidelines for setting monetary policy, including short-term interest rates, appears to be an appropriate adaptation to changing events.

Policy changes can be made quickly in response to changing signals.

Mr. Carter's advisers, 1978: "Interest rates moved up early in 1978; a level of short-term interest rates moderately higher than in 1977 would be consistent with a normal cyclical expansion of demands for money and credit relative to supplies.

Mr. Clinton's advisers, 1994: "1993 saw the best inflation performance in a generation."

Mistake No. 3: Believing that monetary stimulus can be offset by fiscal restraint.

Jimmy Carter's advisers, 1978: "The stability of the underlying inflation rate reflects, on the one hand, the continued high levels of unemployment and excess capacity, which have forestalled the acceleration of inflation that has often occurred in the course of extended cyclical expansion.

The rationale for maintaining low rates was laid out in the recently released Economic Report to the President, put together by the president's Council of Economic Advisers.

Mr. Carter's advisers, 1978: "The prospects for relatively stable long-term rates are greatly enhanced by the fact that supplies of both labor and capital are sufficiently ample to permit rising aggregate demand to be translated into real growth in output rather than a higher rate of inflation."

Mr. Clinton's advisers, 1994: "The evidence also suggests that today's unemployment rate exceeds the natural rate by a significant amount.

It should allow the overall condition of the economy to be carefully monitored, and an appropriate policy response to be crafted."

Mr. Genetski heads Robert Genetski & Associates Inc., Chicago-based economic and financial advisers.

This increase comes in the face of opposition from the Clinton administration, which argues that there is no inflation and that interest rates should remain low.

Mr. Johnson's advisers, 1967: "As a stabilization tool, monetary policy has some distinct advantages.

If the rise in short-term rates is limited, long-term interest rates may change very little."

Mistake No. 2: Assuming the economy has plenty of excess capacity so inflation should not be a problem.

Furthermore, as was evident in 1966, a restrictive monetary policy can reduce aggregate demand fairly promptly and sharply."

Therefore, wage-push price inflation is unlikely to be a factor constraining economic growth in the near future."

(Soon after this report appeared, inflation headed for double digits.)

Indeed, long-term rates reached the highest level in over 40 years during 1966, and after receding for a relatively brief period, advanced substantially further during the course of 1967, in some cases to the highest levels since the 1860s or 1870s."

This is what happened in the '60s and '70s.

Mr. Clinton's advisers, 1994: "With credible deficit reduction, the Federal Reserve will be able to achieve a given level of nominal demand with a less restrictive monetary policy."

On the other hand, inflationary expectations and institutional characteristics of modern economics have kept the inflation pace from declining."

And: "there appear to be few inflationary seeds from 1993 blowing into 1994."

By following a faulty economic framework, two previous Democratic administrations produced policies that damaged the economy.

Mr. Carter's advisers, 1981: "The Nation has for some time now experienced inflation that would have been unimaginable in earlier days."

Mistake No. 1: Using current inflation as a guide to future inflation.

The Federal Reserve moved yesterday to raise short-term interest rates for the second time in as many months.

Mistake No. 4: Assuming that, if necessary, monetary policy can quickly solve any inflationary problem.

