Ms. Birmantas adds that she once tried feeding diet food to her five cats but "they ate so much of it so fast, it really wasn't effective."

Nutritionally concerned consumers are buying more premium pet foods, such as the Iams and Hill's Science Diet brands, at pet stores.

Dogs are fed up with dieting.

Although some cats get chubby as they age, the problem is more common among dogs, which tend to be more gluttonous by nature.

It can also cause backaches for such breeds as dachshunds.

Lynda Birmantas, an executive secretary in Chicago, doesn't see a need for special diet food, either.

Taste is mostly to blame for the sales slump.

Whatever the pets are eating, most of them aren't getting skinnier.

During the 1980s, pet-food makers rolled out "light" or "lean" versions of such venerable brands as Alpo, Kibbles 'N Bits and Purina's Chuck Wagon.

Animal experts say at least 30% of U.S. pets are seriously overweight.

But the Lab and bloodhound mix wouldn't touch any of the five or six brands Ms. Leone tried, preferring to steal her cats' food instead.

Anita Leone of Lawrenceville, N.J., turned to diet dog food after Brendan tipped the scales at 126 pounds.

But dogs aren't easily fooled.

Some marketers have reformulated their products and reverted to pitching flavor rather than low fat content.

Some say many owners feel insulted if anyone suggests their animals are overweight.

"If my dogs get fat, I just give them less food," she says.

But consumers, losing interest themselves in light cuisine, also seem less inclined to buy diet pet food.

"Overweight pets often have overweight owners," says Jim Humphries, a veterinarian who is host of a nationally syndicated cable-television show called "Pet Care Magazine."

The company calls reduced-fat pet food a "late 1980s trend."

Supermarket sales of many diet pet foods are declining precipitously, according to Information Resources Inc.'s InfoScan service.

Some of the sales decline in diet pet foods reflect shifts in shopping habits.

To make tastier low-fat dog foods -- which typically have 15% to 25% less fat than the standard fare -- marketers often add such ingredients as garlic and cheese.

Marketers blame owners for fat pets.

Based on sales of selected brands in supermarkets during the 52 weeks ended Jan. 30

What's more, "It's a real trick for us to get owner compliance, and prevent them from giving in to begging eyes," says Mark Finke, director of nutrition research for Alpo.

Says Dr. Humphries: "They are often people whose mothers taught them that love is displayed through a good plate of food."

Because many people are tired of their own light foods, they are less likely to pick up such products for their pets.

Today, Brendan weighs a more respectable 113.

Like humans, most animals prefer high-fat meals, pet nutritionists say.

She ultimately switched back to Brendan's regular dog food brand but significantly reduced the size of his meals.

Ralston Purina Co., for instance, relaunched its Chuck Wagon Lean brand as Chuck Wagon Stampede, touting better chicken, beef and cheese flavors and claiming dogs prefer the new concoction 4 to 1 over the lean formula.

Dogs rarely suffer from heart disease, but obesity can exacerbate other canine health problems, including diabetes.

She says she feels her 11 dogs once a week to see if they're getting heavy.

