(Terms of IBM's previously existing debt don't make such demands.)

The debt-to-equity ratio would deteriorate further, perhaps undermining terms of the new $10 billion credit facility that IBM has lined up as a cushion against bad times.

One big worry: What happens if Big Blue's mainframes, which still provide one-third of operating profit, fare even worse than that?

Cash flow should be even better in 1994, they say.

But it leaves Mr. Gerstner and Chief Financial Officer Jerome B. York little room for error as they navigate through the shoals of product transitions this year.

By the bearish Mr. Ferguson's analysis, Mr. Gerstner will have to focus on just keeping the business afloat, rather than setting important strategy for how to get ahead.

But what if they're wrong?

It will be a kind of transition year."

The new figure amounts to a lot of leverage in the highly volatile technology industry, and it certainly isn't what analysts first think of when they think of a blue-chip stock.

Mr. York, in an interview, won't comment on the stock's outlook.

No problem.

A year ago the figure was at a respectable 46.5%; at year-end 1990, debt stood at less than 28% of equity.

The stock closed 58 1/4, off 3/8, yesterday after rising 1 1/2 on Monday.

Slippage in profit could hurt the stock price and perhaps make it costlier to raise cash in the commercial paper markets, where IBM must roll over short-term IOUs of about $12 billion a year.

Even IBM's harshest critics aren't predicting the end of IBM.

Analysts' average estimate for full-year earnings this year is $1.2 billion, or $2.10 a share.

In an interview, Mr. Ferguson predicts IBM's profit will come under severe pressure in the next six to 18 months as the mainframe business declines faster than anticipated.

The new credit line requires that IBM's annual cash flow be at least twice its net interest expense.

But a startling dose of reality is served up in IBM's new annual report.

But if the first quarter doesn't show a reasonable profit, he says he would take a hard look and the debt rating could fall again.

He figures all the "good news" is out and asks: "Where do they go from here?"

Even some IBM executives say privately they are a little nervous over whether the stock is outpacing realistic expectations for the business.

It indicates that before newcomers bet on a rebound at IBM, they might do well to brace for disappointments.

The deterioration, of course, is what happens when a company overexpands, misreads the market, and then takes charges that reduce its own net worth by $23 billion over the past three years.

That's why shares of International Business Machines have been bumping up against their 52-week high in recent days, buoyed by investors who want to believe that Big Blue has put the blues behind it.

Consultants Charles Ferguson and Charles Morris contend the debt-to-equity ratio is so high that it won't take much to trigger a crunch.

Battered by multibillion-dollar charges, IBM's net worth has declined so sharply that long-term debt has risen to the equivalent of 77% of shareholder equity.

It already has said that, despite the typical boost of a new line, mainframe revenue could drop by a daunting 50% this year.

IBM is expected to introduce a new generation of its mainframe family next month.

The bears on Big Blue see another danger: What if IBM has to take still more billions of dollars in charges to lay off more people and shutter more factories?

IBM is likely to post a small first-quarter profit of $57 million, or about a dime a share, estimates Jay Stevens of Dean Witter.

In 1993, IBM's cash flow of $3.1 billion was almost 2.4 times net interest expense of $1.3 billion, IBM officials point out.

While he says, "I feel pretty good about the business now," he won't discuss how much room he has for error.

Wall Street just loves a good comeback.

Yet IBM can't easily raise cash by selling off pieces; Mr. Gerstner has vowed to keep the business together and retreated from IBM's previous intention to start reporting separate results for individual lines.

When IBM Chairman Louis V. Gerstner Jr. holds his first major Wall Street briefing tomorrow, analysts will be sniffing eagerly for any hint of good news.

Chris Nawn, senior analyst at Dreyfus, a big mutual-fund concern that holds IBM shares, says "we're not buying" more now.

It could even take a little tumble tomorrow if Mr. Gerstner isn't sufficiently exuberant to please his fans.

A less melodramatic outlook comes from analyst Nicholas D. Riccio of Standard & Poor's, which rates IBM debt single-A: "We think IBM can earn some money in 1994.

Once a safe haven for cautious investors, IBM stock could be in for a rough-and-tumble ride this year.

Yet some supporters see little upside in the stock for now.

It remains a leader in many markets and retains impressive technology.

