When we finally looked back, we discovered that we had walked so far that we had left the main camp behind."

The local council of Efrat recently decided not to hook up Efrat's 5,500 residents to cable TV.

Israel's Jews have spent almost five decades warring with their Arab neighbors.

In the wake of the Hebron massacre, the country's Jews have been polarized.

Recently in the Jewish settlement of Elon Moreh, Rabbi Menachem Felix refused to help lead Sabbath prayers in the synagogue.

Many Israelis have begun to question whether the bitter division can be resolved without violence.

"In the beginning I thought keeping the settlements was worth it," he says.

Several dozen miles and a world away in the West Bank town of Efrat, Bob Lang, a religious Jew, watched the spectacle on television in his living room -- and felt utterly betrayed by his fellow Jews.

But his boisterous appearance so shortly after the massacre repelled some secular Israelis.

"Two Jewish nations will develop here, and the loser will be the country."

The debate over the settlements is coming to a head as the government weighs what to do with the 400 or so extremist settlers living in Hebron.

Many religious settlers, who once were heralded as heroes for staking claims in the West Bank, now speak of feeling abandoned by their secular counterparts.

Mr. Lang, who emigrated here from New York, wears a knitted skullcap; his Jewish marriage contract, written in elegant calligraphy, hangs in the living room.

Many in this group are open to territorial compromise on the West Bank in the interest of forging peace in the Mideast.

In Tel Aviv recently, 25,000 Israelis poured into the streets to protest the Hebron massacre of Palestinians in last month's rampage by a Jewish gunman.

His reason: He didn't want to recite the traditional prayer calling on God's protection for the leaders of the government, whose views on the West Bank clash with his own.

But the alliance began to waver even before Israel signed its accord with the Palestine Liberation Organization last fall, agreeing to cede control back to the Arabs in the West Bank city of Jericho and the Gaza Strip.

Mr. Harel also is the editor of Nekuda, a settlers' journal, where article submissions are taking on increasingly strident tones.

But a few months ago, while away from his two young daughters and his fields on military reserve duty, he was stationed as a guard outside the Cave of Patriarchs in Hebron.

Asked about the future of the West Bank settlements, he noted that "the PLO can give us very little.

One Tel Aviv columnist who favors compromising in the West Bank went so far as to declare that many Israelis feel less sympathy when a West Bank settler is killed than when an Israeli from a city like Tel Aviv is killed.

They are a picture in contrasts.

Many secular Jews were in an uproar, for example, when, shortly after the massacre in Hebron, a television crew filmed parliament member Hanan Porat joyously entering Kiryat Arba, the settlement where the gunman lived.

Squarely on the other side, though, stands a group made up mostly of religious Jews, including more than 45,000 who are among the 130,000 Jewish settlers in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.

And when Jewish extremist Baruch Goldstein entered Hebron's Cave of the Patriarchs with a rifle on Feb. 25 and opened fire on the Palestinians who were praying there, much of what was left of the alliance was shattered.

"Now it's not.

The challenge, he added, is to choose the right course without "splitting the nation beyond recognition."

Maybe we aren't going to be one nation anymore."

In the public mind, wrote Gideon Levy in the newspaper Ha'aretz, Israelis have already divided themselves into "us" -- those who live in Israel proper -- and "them" -- the settlers.

At one point, Ms. Harel buries her face in her hands, drained by emotion, and Mr. Lang reaches over and touches her head in a gesture of comfort.

Speaker after speaker denounced the bloodbath.

"Sometimes I think we are lying to each other.

With few exceptions, they, too, deplored the Hebron massacre -- but they oppose compromising on the West Bank.

In the wake of the massacre, "the Israeli public has lost its attachment to the settlements and its empathy for the settlers," says Yisrael Harel, chairman of the Council of Jewish Residents of Judea, Samaria and Gaza (Judea and Samaria are the biblical names for the West Bank).

The rift between the two groups is especially painful because it is so new; many of the secular Jews once fully supported the West Bank settlements.

Maybe it's already too late.

Leaving the house, Ms. Harel steps into a bitterly cold afternoon, an expression of despair on her face.

In another article, a rabbi argued that religious settlers should consider themselves opponents not just of the current government, but of the entire state of Israel.

Already leaders of the settlement are drawing up lists of people willing to help fight any evacuation.

But that moment of goodwill can't disguise what is evident to both of them: Their positions are utterly irreconcilable.

Among them was Boaz Shilo, a 31-year-old farmer from the Haifa area.

In one piece, a religious settler proposed giving up on the alliance with secular Jews, and instead building a separate education, culture and justice system in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.

"If God forbid we are evacuated from the West Bank . . . there will be a split in the Jewish people that could be as dangerous as the one that occurred in the time of the Second Temple," Mr. Harel says, referring to the civil unrest that led to the expulsion of the Jews from Israel almost 2,000 years ago.

"You've abandoned us," he told an acquaintance who participated in the rally, fairly spitting out the words.

Much damage already has been done.

"Do you know what makes me really scared?" she says.

If Israel leaves Hebron, a city so deeply connected to Jewish religion and the most important events in Jewish history, asks Mr. Zell, then what right do Israelis have to Tel Aviv, a city that is less than 100 years old and was built on land where Palestinians also were once the majority?

As Mr. Raz sees it, the settlements represent occupation, inequality between Jews and Arabs, and the denial of basic rights to the Palestinians -- values that have no place in democratic Israel.

At an American-style house not far from the center of town, Mr. Lang, who works as a spokesperson for the settlements in this area, serves chocolate cake to Yehudit Harel, a psychologist from Tel Aviv, who has traveled here to try to start a dialogue between peace activists and settlers.

Yesterday morning, Foreign Minister Shimon Peres admitted as much in a meeting with foreign journalists.

Israel, he vowed, must never withdraw from Hebron or anywhere else in the West Bank.

Mr. Lang complains about his bitterness at being rejected by an Israeli society that urged him to settle the land and once revered him as a pioneer.

Jews on the other side of the settlement debate also describe a nation divided.

But by then it was too late.

Town leaders worried that their children would be exposed to secular values, and feared the sex and violence common in foreign programs.

Later, Mr. Porat publicly condemned the massacre, and explained his seemingly inappropriate behavior by saying that on Purim a Jew is commanded to be happy no matter what.

Ms. Harel refused to have a rabbi even at the funeral of her son, who was killed recently in a traffic accident.

The division isn't always along clear lines, but in general, one group is made up primarily of secular Jews and includes most of the government, which wants to pull Jews out of Hebron.

"I used to think that we didn't have to return any land, that the settlers were right," he says.

But for Mr. Zell, a Jewish presence in Hebron is at the heart of his Jewish self-identity.

Spend some time in the West Bank and the depth of the rift becomes all too clear.

Ms. Harel describes her fear and anger at being verbally abused by settlers after she participated in the Tel Aviv rally calling for the removal of Jewish settlers from Hebron.

The rift seems only to have widened in recent days.

Seven of Israel's 15 cabinet ministers this week publicly called for the immediate removal of the settlers, saying that painful as it is to leave the place where the Bible says Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and their wives are buried, it is almost impossible for the Israeli army to protect the settlers there.

We are negotiating with ourselves."

The people living there don't understand that there needs to be peace."

(In truth, the majority of settlers aren't devout and aren't necessarily opposed to territorial compromise; many moved to the West Bank because housing is cheaper.)

"The settlers have been like scouts sent out into the land.

Though both men are about the same age and read many of the same Israeli authors, they may as well be living in two different countries.

In a Tel Aviv cafe, L. Marc Zell, a religious lawyer who lives in a West Bank settlement, tries to make some sense of the split as he discusses the Jewish settlements with Avi Raz, a secular journalist living in Tel Aviv.

To the cheers of spectators, many of whom were secular Jews, the protest leaders called for the removal of Jewish settlers from the politically charged West Bank town.

The passionate, informal Mr. Porat had always played the role of the quintessential West Bank pioneer.

Now they are facing a different, but equally formidable, adversary: themselves.

The toughest foes he faced there weren't Arabs, but Jews like him: Radical settlers castigated him as a "Nazi" and a "self-hating Jew" because they felt that he was siding with the Palestinians during disputes.

They have no land, they have no authority, they have no means.

Holding a bottle of wine, Mr. Porat -- a founder of Gush Emunim, a group of religious Jews that spearheaded the Jewish settlement drive -- wished everyone in a merry voice, "Happy Purim," the Jewish holiday being celebrated that day.

"If we have no place in Hebron," he says, "then we don't have a right to be anyplace else in this country."

On the drive south of Jerusalem, the Jewish West Bank settlement of Efrat suddenly rises out of the brown and green landscape, a row of identical rose-colored houses perched on the Judean hills.

As the heated discussion unfolds, each one spins his or her vision of how the future borders of Israel should look.

The two groups have shared a sometimes uneasy partnership since Israel was created in 1948.

