Such economies don't end at the sports desk.

But they do prove that computers can produce serviceable stories in specialized domains.

Pop a disk into a PC, type in a few numbers and comments, and presto -- out come stories awash in clutch shots, runaway victories and at-the-buzzer heroics.

Mr. Backes, the displaced Nebraska sportswriter, certainly isn't mentioning the refs anymore: He's now selling farm equipment.

From the coaches' viewpoint, Sportswriter offers some obvious pluses.

Coaches are also asked to describe key points in the action -- the big play in a touchdown drive or a game-winning shot.

Sportswriter doesn't focus on subtle disparities, such as a big rebounding edge, that might explain a victory.

"I loved it," he says.

Coaches can also provide a brief description of outstanding individual performances, and quotations.

But two months into using Sportswriter, "we recouped our cost and the stories were significantly better," he adds.

At the Bloomberg L.P. financial news service in New York, computers write hourly stock-market summaries and foreign-market trends.

Scores are "knotted," and players make "charity tosses" from the foul line.

"It's scary, huh?" says Don Skwar, sports editor of the Boston Globe.

"We were laying out $1,500 a month for the sports reporter," says Donald Zavadil, editor and owner of the 1,800-circulation weekly.

Mr. Helms wanted to buy a weekly newspaper and improve its sports coverage, so, using an Apple Macintosh program called Hypercard, he set out to design a program that would tutor high-school reporters on writing sports stories.

(It can only handle football and basketball.)

Sportswriter was developed by Roger Helms, a 42-year-old freelance writer in Rochester, Minn.

"I decided that the only thing my program was good at was making its own decisions," Mr. Helms says.

"You get kind of addicted."

"A virtual TV weatherperson would be a natural," he says.

But two years ago, technology came roaring into the Democrat's newsroom.

The paper booted up a software program and booted out Mr. Backes.

The software didn't talk back and could write -- prolifically if not particularly well.

A story may even judge a game an upset if the coach checked a box that says the opponent was "clearly superior to us."

Still, Sportswriter hasn't won any writing prizes, much less proved itself a match for talents such as the legendary Grantland Rice, who set Notre Dame's Four Horsemen against a "blue, gray October sky."

But some users say software-generated prose enables them to write about events they would otherwise have to skip.

In one recent edition of the Humphrey Democrat, Sportswriter-crafted lead paragraphs varied considerably, including one that highlighted an individual player: "Jody Kosch made two free throws to put St. Francis up by four points and seal the win."

Still, computer journalism raises more than issues of creativity: Sportswriter allows sources, not reporters, to choose the quotations that appear in print, violating what many see as a sacred tenet of journalism.

The hardball decision to replace a reporter with software was easy enough to justify.

The programs also don't dig into anything, or challenge the value or even validity of the data fed into them.

Sportswriter is one of a new genre of software that can intelligently string words between facts.

"Any sportswriter who is marginally competent can write much better and also much faster," he says.

"We have a very small staff here, and it allows us to do a fairly decent story," says John Edgecombe Jr., publisher of the Nebraska Signal, a weekly in Geneva, Neb.

Now they are replacing reporters.

The computer can't take pictures."

And a coach writing his own "quotes" stays out of trouble.

Though "Sportswriter writes a little below the level of a beginning reporter," it clearly outclasses copy turned in by high-school "stringers," says Keith Isley, editor of the Chariton (Iowa) Leader and Herald-Patriot.

Dean Backes used to work as a sportswriter for the weekly Humphrey Democrat in Humphrey, Neb.

"In 40 or 50 years a computer might be sports editor."

Now Mr. Isley says he mainly goes to games "to take pictures.

Then the coaches phone in or fax the form to the newspaper, someone types the data into a computer, and a few seconds later, Sportswriter prints out a story.

But as a writer, it wasn't bad.

He dismisses that argument as "boo-hockey," noting that small papers often rely upon coaches to phone in information to reporters, anyway.

Each winter, as blizzards roared across the Great Plains, he covered as many as eight high-school basketball games an issue.

Mr. Isley concedes that he gets grief from purists.

Sportswriter, as the program is called, costs $100.

Penny-pinchers, however, have come to love it.

And he and others point out that Sportswriter isn't being used to cover matters of local controversy or national importance.

Mr. Helms, its inventor, wouldn't disagree.

Some 80 small newspapers in the Midwest have already bought Sportswriter, published by Zybrainics Software Inc., Rochester, Minn., to write high-school football or basketball games.

The papers had been shelling out up to $7 a game to stringers.

At a game's end, they write in the teams' records, the game score by periods, team statistics and individual statistics.

Teams "jump in front."

"They say it's not journalism if you don't generate all the information yourself," he says.

"You just don't mention the refs," he adds.

Indeed, Sportswriter is programmed with every possible sports cliche.

It works like this: Newspapers give coaches a form to fill out.

But it may be the future.

Mr. Skwar says such automatic journalism "takes away creativity" that only real writers can provide.

At Individual Inc. in Cambridge, Mass., computers sort through thousands of newspaper, magazine and wire-service articles and compile them into customized newsletters faxed daily to 3,000 subscribers.

"You could create an image you couldn't tell from a real person."

Consider this lead paragraph: "The Humphrey Bulldogs fell victim to a second-half rally and dropped a close decision to the Leigh Lady Panthers 27-24 in girls basketball at Clarkson in the first round of the Cornhusker Conference Tournament."

Each story also has a quarter-by-quarter scoring summary and a count of free throws and field goals.

As a tutor, it was a dud.

Though he shows surprisingly little animosity toward the technology that replaced him, he can't resist at least one dig: "I was better than Sportswriter."

But every lead includes the site of the game, something writers might save for lower in the story.

Mr. Helms hasn't discounted updating Sportswriter, but he is already thinking beyond sports.

In newspaper offices around the country, computers have replaced typewriters.

"You're never misquoted," says Mark Ortmeir, boys' basketball coach at Humphrey High School.

