Price controls produce shortages, black markets and reduced quality.

In 1930, 1,028 economists foresaw the Depression in a letter they sent President Herbert Hoover warning against the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act.

In the 1970s, government tried to regulate the price of a simple homogenous product, gasoline.

People were forced to waste hours waiting in lines to purchase gasoline.

This has been the universal experience in the 4,000 years that governments have tried to artificially hold prices down using regulations.

Long waits for surgery and other medical care will have far more serious consequences.

We urge you to remove price controls, in any form, from your health care plan.

In countries that have imposed these types of regulations, patients face delays of months and years for surgery, government bureaucrats decide treatment options instead of doctors or patients, and innovations in medical techniques and pharmaceuticals are dramatically reduced.

It was released at a news conference at the National Press Club in Washington yesterday.

Here in America, the threat of price controls on medicines has already decreased research and development at drug companies, which will lead to reduced discoveries and the loss of life in the future.

Your plan sets the fees charged by doctors and hospitals, caps annual spending on health care, limits insurance premiums, and imposes price limitations on new and existing drugs.

We respectfully disagree.

You insist that your health care plan avoids price controls.

Today we print a similar letter -- along with the names of some of its 562 signatories -- warning against the economic consequences of the Clinton health care plan.

These controls will hurt people, and they will damage the economy.

We will instead end up with lower-quality medical care, reduced medical innovation, and expensive new bureaucracies to monitor compliance.

The result was a social and economic disaster.

Caps, fee schedules and other government regulations may appear to reduce medical spending, but such gains are illusory.

