"No, let's wait," said Hally, with the masochism of a budding critic.

Eric Rohmer, the French director and writer, has carefully framed Felicie's every move, so that everything she does seems to hold some hidden significance -- even the way she slips her coat onto a hanger.

Yet the film is curiously flat considering its fanciful theme -- that Felicie's story is meant to parallel the romantic fantasy of Shakespeare's "A Winter's Tale."

Certainly Mr. Pesci can't be blamed for all that is wrong with "Jimmy Hollywood."

Jimmy wanders through this netherworld with his half-wit friend William (Christian Slater), dreaming about becoming a star.

Now it's been confirmed in "Jimmy Hollywood": A little Pesci goes a long way.

Mr. Rohmer has found in Ms. Very the right actress to play Felicie.

The movie is filled with moody shots of the seamy side of Hollywood, with the Sunset Strip subbing for Times Square.

We have learned that he is also the father of their little girl, though he doesn't know it.

Jimmy reacts to the false dreams of Hollywood by becoming a video vigilante.

So we waited.

With her pouty prettiness and air of distraction she gives the impression that she is totally indifferent to how people may react to her.

So they are separated.

"I can't tell yet if it's really terrible or not."

She breaks up with the nice man who loves her and moves in with the strong man who loves her.

"I don't like this movie."

I should have known better.

Even when the movie was over I felt the reverberations of that voice, the way you keep hearing that car-alarm noise long after it's been turned off.

It was natural that he might want to overlook the unwatchable "Toys."

I noticed these bad feelings just at the point when his voice began to remind me of the squeal of a car-theft alarm.

Then she dumps him, too.

He and William stalk the streets waiting to film thieves and drug dealers, then turn the videos in to the police.

They endured at least a half-hour before they weighed in with an opinion.

Mr. Levinson seems to have wanted to make an L.A. version of "Midnight Cowboy" -- an upbeat comedy version.

"A Tale of Winter" is the story of a beautiful woman and a handsome man who meet and fall madly in love while they are on vacation.

She is both offputting and appealing, very much like "A Tale of Winter" itself.

She becomes like a friend you've outgrown but who continues to draw you into her problems.

Then, mercifully, it's over.

Barry Levinson did that.

VIDEO TIP: "Aladdin" is great but most adults can't watch it a million times, the way their kids can.

And, in all likelihood, Mr. Pesci wasn't responsible for the grotesque blond coloring in his hair.

Probably no one could have played the misbegotten Jimmy better.

And that's a bit of a problem for his fans.

"I want to go home!" offered Roxie, loudly.

He advertises himself on a bus-stop bench and spends his days waiting by the run-down pool next to his apartment building.

Joe Pesci is the perfect sidekick.

Still, the monotony on the road to Felicie's epiphany becomes strangely pleasing, like a lulling ride on a scenic highway.

My girl companions did love the idea of the movie -- a story about a girl the size of a thumb.

But I told my four-year-old daughter Roxie and her five-year-old friend Hally that they were going to love "Hans Christian Andersen's Thumbelina."

The film takes place during a three-week period around Christmas, at the moment when Felicie tests her faith in the power of love.

This precision remains compelling even after you realize Felicie really isn't going to develop into a very interesting character.

Yet it was impossible not to start feeling angry with him, however irrationally, during the course of the film.

He didn't write it or direct it.

He became a leading man.

It was noticeable in "My Cousin Vinny" and obvious in "The Super."

Short and squat, with that raspy whine of a voice, he's a walking sight gag, a human cartoon character.

Two tiny thumbs down for "Thumbelina."

Poor Mr. Pesci.

Mr. Rohmer so relentlessly and methodically details even her most mundane thoughts and actions you start to feel obligated to pay attention to Felicie's fate.

The girls were generous.

After they part she discovers she left him with the wrong address and she doesn't know how to reach him either.

He probably thought he was in good hands with Mr. Levinson, who has directed original and quirky films like "Diner" and "Tin Men" as well as big mythic pictures like "The Natural" and "Bugsy."

Take a break with "The Music Man," the terrific 1962 adaptation of Meredith Wilson's show about a musical instrument salesman in the heartland.

They become folk heroes for a moment.

"No swords, no fights."

A complication makes it impossible for them to locate one another the various ways one might try in real life.

She is both flaky and manipulative.

You can probably guess their final verdict.

But after winning the Oscar for supporting actor in "Goodfellas," and his crucial part in the hugely successful "Lethal Weapon" films and the "Home Alone" movies, Mr. Pesci met his destiny.

It's all very romantic, and very French, filled with earnest chat about religion, the supernatural and the nature of love.

She decides that the only man for her is the father of her child and she'll be faithful to him, even in absentia.

They were even more excited when I told them there would be songs, just like in "Aladdin."

Five years later the woman, Felicie (Charlotte Very), is still yearning for her lover, who has never found her.

She acts on impulse and then is annoyed when the people dislodged by her move get upset when she changes her mind again.

I felt confident because a fellow critic had disclosed that his six-year-old boy dismissed the movie like this: "For girls," he said.

The phone doesn't ring.

Everyone hopes for the best in Hollywood.

