It said, "Fr. J.P. Horrigan, S.J., the executive director of the Canadian Jesuit Missions, did not travel to India in March with the American singer Rosemary Clooney.

But if you happen to have a wall calendar from the Jesuit Seminary and Mission Bureau, it also falls on April 10.

Another said the goofs showed "We're all human -- even occasionally the S.J.'s.

There's more.

American Express Co.'s pocket diaries this year had four of nine Jewish holidays, including Passover and Hanukkah, off by a day.

At least Father Ryan isn't alone.

President's Day is down for the 14th of February, which led one of the 25,000 recipients of the calendar to take a long weekend in Florida a week ahead of time.

Father John Ryan, S.J., director of the Manhattan-based Mission Bureau, isn't saying who.

In the Christian world, Easter Sunday falls on April 3 this year.

Actually, it was the work of a printer's devil who was given proofed copy.

Pope Gregory XIII had reformed the calendar in 1582 by trimming 10 days to match the true length of the solar year.

He went with Gerry Cooney, of the Montreal Consulting Group, Universalia."

The company sent out an errata memo last month to card holders and employees who had purchased the date books.

How could the Jesuits, the Roman Catholic order of priests known for their scholastic acumen, be so off base?

In a letter correcting the errors, he poked fun at himself and asked for continued support for the work of the Mission Bureau.

And then there was the matter of those two extra days the calendar included in February, the 29th and 30th.

One reply told Father Ryan not to feel bad because he still "got St. Patrick's Day correct."

Some may have suspected the dual Easters to be a Jesuitical plot to boost church attendance.

And, catching the irony of adding days to the year, a writer said, "Even Pope Gregory would have laughed."

The order's 23,466 priests, scholars and brothers serve in 122 countries.

So, too, the one extra day in April, the 31st.

And then there was the correction in the Canadian Jesuit Mission newsletter, noted last year by the New Yorker magazine.

[Society of Jesus.]"

