The battle over whether banks can offer annuities as well as more traditional types of insurance is being fought in several courts around the country, and banking industry leaders claim the 6-0 decision by the New York Court of Appeals will encourage other states to allow the practice.

Generally, annuities offer a steady stream of payments in return for an upfront lump-sum amount.

Although the Charlotte-based bank is almost certain to petition the U.S. Supreme Court, it isn't yet known whether it will be joined by the comptroller.

Mr. Smith estimates that half of the New York's 98 state-chartered institutions already sell annuities in their branches through third-parties who share their commissions with the banks.

Annuities, a $90-billion-a-year business, are an increasingly popular investment alternative because they offer a tax-sheltered means of retirement savings.

The comptroller agreed, but a federal appeals court, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans, came down on the side of the insurance industry last year.

Without the comptroller's participation, which must be approved by the solicitor general, experts say the Supreme Court is less likely to take up the case.

The decision also may make the U.S. Supreme Court more likely to take up the issue of whether federally chartered banks should have the right to sell annuities.

NationsBank Corp. began challenging restrictions on annuity sales in 1989 by asking the comptroller's office, which regulates nationally chartered banks, to permit it to sell annuities.

New York insurance groups, which protested the encroachment of banks on their turf, downplayed the extent to which yesterday's decision would affect activity in other states.

NationsBank is on the verge of appealing the decision to the next and final level, the U.S. Supreme Court, a move that must be taken by April 13.

Added David Roderer, a banking regulation expert with Winston & Strawn, a Washington law firm, "If New York will allow banks to sell annuities, many other states will do the same."

In an important victory for banks, New York's highest court gave state-chartered institutions the right to sell annuities, one of the insurance industry's fastest-growing products.

However, until yesterday's court decision the banks were unable to sell the products directly.

The New York State ruling comes as a parallel battle is taking place on the federal level.

Mr. Roderer, who is meeting with the solicitor general on Monday on behalf of the banking industry's trade groups, said, "The New York case does a lot to strengthen our case" that the solicitor general should join the case.

"This is a very significant decision for New York's banking industry, and it may have national ramifications," said Michael P. Smith, the executive vice president of the New York Bankers Association, a party in the state case.

Banks, meanwhile, are scrambling to increase the variety of financial and insurance products they offer as consumers flee low-yielding certificates of deposits for investments offered elsewhere.

The ruling "opens up the whole situation of banks selling (other forms of) insurance," said Mark Yavornitzki, executive vice president of the New York State Association of Life Underwriters, who said banks would "unfairly take business away from the insurance industry."

The New York battle began in 1991 when the state's banking department decided to let banks sell annuities, a decision challenged by New York State Association of Life Underwriters.

But they are worried about the near-term effects in New York.

Moreover, annuity sales pay big commissions and offer banks a means of expanding their relationships with clients to more than just bank accounts.

The insurance industry estimates that at least half the states restrict the sales of insurance by banks.

But the court held that banking regulators acted properly in view of "the ever-changing demands of the banking business," arguing that annuities are investment products rather than insurance products.

"It will greatly impact the ability of the agents to sell annuities, and the agents' profitability," said Jeff Myers, a spokesman for the Independent Insurance Agents of America.

Scott Sinder of Jenner & Block, the insurance trade groups' attorney, said his research shows that 31 states "generally restrict the sale of all forms of insurance, including annuities," with some exceptions.

Insurance agents may be hurt even more than insurers because banks would still be barred from underwriting insurance products.

The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency has authorized national banks to sell annuities throughout the country, but the rights of banks remains murky because of legal challenges at both at the state and federal level.

The insurance industry argued that banks shouldn't sell insurance products because New York state law doesn't specify it as a banking activity.

"Now that the cloud has been lifted, I expect that many of them will take the extra step and beginning selling them," Mr. Smith said.

Among states allowing the sales is Delaware, where some bank-holding companies are headquartered, he said.

