While their presence isn't new -- top prep schools have been recruiting abroad for years -- the purpose at many institutions no longer is simply to diversify campuses.

"I'd like to be able not to use them.

At times, I feel so bad."

"We spend time with so many Koreans," complains Bo Na Yoon, a 16-year-old from Seoul, South Korea, "we don't play with the other people."

Banking on foreign students isn't risk free.

"The risk is that as the percentage {of international students} rises, you make the school unattractive to the normal American student," says Earl A. Samson 3rd, chairman of the board of trustees at Darrow School.

"I think most schools are trying to keep the percentage {of foreign students} at a 20% to 25% level."

Sojourn's director, Geoffrey T. Robbins, says Mr. Hikosaka "has had more difficulty than some but not as much difficulty as others. . . .

"We in schools have the obligation to prepare our kids to be global citizens," says Diederick van Renesse, admissions director at Darrow School in New Lebanon, N.Y., where 45 of its 115 students are foreign.

In Korea alone, there are more than 150 agents, many of whom have sprung up in the past three years.

Agents often charge hefty fees -- up to a year's tuition -- to families for preparing applications, obtaining visas and making travel arrangements, school officials say.

Some school officials warn that boarding schools are relying too heavily on too few countries for their international students, with more than a third coming from Korea, Japan and Hong Kong.

When J. William LaBelle became headmaster six years ago, the Winchendon School faced sinking enrollment, a trickle of cash flow and rising debt.

The assumption is that once they learn English everything will be fine, but it's much more complicated than that."

Taking such fees violates an ethics code for placement counselors in the U.S. "Schools should not be the client; the client should be the family," says Virginia deVeer, admissions director at Tabor Academy in Marion, Mass.

In the past two years, Shinsaku Hikosaka, an 18-year-old from Japan, has been kicked out of two prep schools -- the Putney School in Putney, Vt., and the White Mountain School in Littleton, N.H. -- for smoking, tardiness and other infractions.

Ung Sik Kim, manager of Han Kook Education Center in Seoul, which charges schools fees for placing students, says many of his recruits have problems in the U.S. because they are too quickly put in classes with American students.

He says foreign students should take only English-language courses for a few months before entering regular classes.

"We can't understand some English words so sometimes they make jokes that we don't know the words.

"They get a paper profile of a student saying he's a good student {and} speaks English well," says Mrs. Rapp, "and the student arrives on their doorstep and doesn't speak a word."

Only 5% of foreign students receive financial aid, while 29% of U.S. students do, says Rick Cowan, director of the boarding-school association.

"I'm not too excited about admitting it," he says.

Once on campus, the students complain the schools offer little help in making the difficult transition to American academic and social life.

Each year about 10 of the 15 Koreans leave after one year, and a handful of other foreign students get expelled for disciplinary reasons.

He says the foreign students are well-served, they are able to improve their English, and virtually all who graduate go on to college.

"If I'm paying an agency to find me three kids from Spain, that agency won't have the kid's interest in mind, it'll have my interest."

Moreover, he says, "In a boarding school that's tuition-driven, you've got to pay the bills."

In 1989, Pedro Arango, then headmaster at South Kent School in South Kent, Conn., launched a plan to recruit hundreds of foreign students, teach them English, and then funnel them into South Kent and other boarding schools.

"This kid wasn't a Seventh Day Adventist," says Mr. Nolan.

The situation at Winchendon is developing at prep schools all over the country.

Fees go toward his advertising costs in Korea, he says.

"Even though we receive a commission from Hebron Academy, I think Hebron is very famous and very good," he says.

To combat such fraud, the Association of Boarding Schools has begun offering workshops on "credential assessment," says Mr. Cowan.

Meanwhile, some schools that have loaded up on foreign students are beginning to cut back on their international enrollees.

Since 1988, the number of international students at prep schools has nearly doubled to about 5,000, with the average school's foreign enrollment now at 12.4%, according to the 267-member Association of Boarding Schools.

Their ability to pay the school's $22,750 in tuition and fees is enabling Winchendon to pay off a $1.2 million mortgage on its gym and become debt free.

Most schools insist their main motivation for recruiting foreign students isn't money, but to provide an international experience for American students.

Of particular concern is the use of overseas agents for recruiting.

She says many institutions are treating foreign students "like a commodity."

But Mr. LaBelle soon found a solution for the small, private boarding school: well-to-do foreign students, mainly from Asia.

But critics say many schools aren't prepared to handle the influx of foreign students.

The few students who did go to the camp generally hated the setting and wrote home to their parents that they were living in huts.

But sitting in a lounge area at Winchendon, several Japanese and Korean students complain about feeling isolated, and of teachers showing little understanding.

He now attends a public school in Winslow, Maine, and lives at Sojourn International, a residential program founded six years ago to help foreign students suffering academic and other problems.

"You end up with a clique of 10 or 20 kids and they just hang together and talk Japanese," adds Mr. Robbins.

And the Secondary School Admission Test Board, which administers entrance exams, this year offered a version for international students, with a section on English proficiency.

With a decline in the number of American families who can afford rising tuitions that now average more than $17,000 a year, schools are aggressively recruiting students from Japan, Korea, Hong Kong and other far-off lands whose parents want them to study in the U.S. and don't flinch at the bills.

He signed a five-year lease on a summer camp in western Connecticut.

Norman D. Farwell, director of admission at Hebron Academy in Hebron, Maine, says he is troubled by the fact that he paid $1,650 to Korean agents for each of the seven Korean students at the school.

Then, the outbreak of the Gulf War created a fear of travel, some countries restricted high-school students from studying abroad, and schools in Australia and Canada began aggressively wooing Asian students with cheaper programs.

Admissions directors and consultants say they often can't trust student transcripts sent from agencies.

When he first arrived in the U.S., he says, he found the food was so "different" that "I couldn't eat. . . .

"Sometimes they are rude," says Eun Kil Jang, 18, from Seoul.

"This is not a quick fix," says Mrs. Rapp, the consultant.

At Winchendon, sitting in his office -- once part of the main lodge of a vacation resort -- headmaster Mr. LaBelle says he sees no problem with Winchendon's 41% foreign-student population.

"They do not understand what the teacher is saying," he says.

They say the schools are risking a repeat of the late 1970s when schools loaded with Iranian students had to rush to fill slots after the Shah was overthrown and students were barred from leaving Iran.

But critics say such programs are insufficient.

Jim Nolan, a Philadelphia consultant, says he represented a Korean boy last year who had been placed by a Korean agency in a Seventh Day Adventist boarding school.

Paying agents finder's fees for students is criticized by some schools, and an embarrassment to others that engage in the practice.

To accommodate the influx of foreign students, many prep schools have established intensive English-as-a-second-language courses and orientation programs focusing on American culture.

"Many schools would rather use that budget to support needy families here," he says.

"The agent will tell the family it costs $30,000 to attend the school," says Mr. Cowan.

"It's a combination of greed and naivete," says Diane Rapp, a Scarborough, N.Y., educational consultant who has placed dozens of Japanese students in U.S. prep schools.

Some kids are so overwhelmed that they end up simply not functioning."

But things aren't so simple for Winchendon's foreign students.

So the program closed in 1991.

John M. Niles, head of admission at Groton School in Groton, Mass., where just nine of the 325 students are foreigners, says some schools admit so many students from one or two countries that there develops "a kind of Balkanization where kids don't really mix."

The schools are so hungry for paying, foreign students that often scant attention is paid to enrollees' qualifications, language proficiency and knowledge of life in the U.S.

At Winchendon, Yoshitaka Minami says an agent back home in Japan, whom he paid $2,000, told him the school had 10 Japanese students and horseback riding.

Mr. Hikosaka says he could have been a better student, but blames some of his troubles on culture shock, homesickness, alienation and a tobacco habit acquired at home where high schoolers are allowed to smoke.

The problems aren't just at Winchendon.

I was always hungry."

More than a few of the students drop out, get expelled, or bounce from school to school.

Some educators are disturbed by what they see as an unseemly scramble to fill boarding-school beds.

Mismatches are common, U.S. educational consultants say.

Peter Nah, also from Seoul, who was expelled from a boarding school in Michigan for drinking, says Americans "don't even try to understand" Korean culture in which all elders are shown respect and swearing can be considered a sin.

Some agents are said to charge exorbitant fees to families, demand commissions from schools, fudge student transcripts and place students in completely inappropriate schools.

Moreover, many schools exclude foreign students from receiving financial aid, says Meade Thayer, financial-aid specialist at the National Association of Independent Schools.

Asian students are drawn to U.S. prep schools primarily out of a desire to learn English and attend American colleges, which tend to be easier to get into than the universities back home.

One problem is that many of the students have such trouble with English that their studies suffer and their opportunities to mix with the Americans on the woodsy, hillside campus are lost.

Mr. Kim, the agent in Seoul, who has received fees from Hebron Academy, says he is more likely to send a student to the school because of the fee, but sees nothing wrong with it.

Admissions directors say they regularly receive unsolicited faxes and mail from overseas agents offering their services who often turn out to be travel agents with little knowledge of American schools.

On the other hand, they do supply us with good students."

"They collect the cash, and send our schools $17,000."

"There're people in New York City who would pay through the nose for this experience," says Mr. Arango, "but it didn't sell in Seoul."

Today, tuition paid by foreign students subsidizes Americans.

Upon arrival he found there were 36 Japanese students and no riding.

Now, 51 of Winchendon's 125 students are foreigners, a fourfold increase from 1988.

"He was uncomfortable socially {and} wasn't allowed to listen to music."

Foreign students complain that agents misinform them about schools.

Campuses with foreign-student populations above 25% aren't uncommon.

After four months on campus, she says she has no close American friends.

"True, they are full-pay, but they also need a lot of extra care.

