He began designing his dream trap, testing "about 12 or 15" models before finally getting it right.

"He is excellent at what he does," says Alan Weber, director of contract administration at the University of Miami, who has had pigeons removed from campus.

"It's just word of mouth, because the trap works so darned well."

Mr. Krenson has trapped since he was a boy, but his interest in pigeons dates to the late 1970s when he brought home two baby birds he found while fishing.

He says the most pigeons he ever caught in a single day was 458, with one trap in various locations.

She is referring to pigeons.

A gray pigeon flutters down and begins pecking at the seed.

"So I took them downtown and released them in Bayfront Park," he says.

Mr. Krenson's work carries a one-year guarantee; if birds return within that time, he will clear them out again.

Then he withdraws.

He has trapped pigeons for the Dade County Public Schools and the Fort Lauderdale Police Department, for Miami's Metrorail transit system and the Justice Department's correctional center here.

But New York isn't Florida.

Mr. Krenson typically charges $7 a pigeon for trapping and says he averages another $2 per bird in the trading-and-selling process.

Last year, he raised prices in hopes of slowing his business -- "I mean, I was going to have an ulcer," he says -- but the pace continued, with 12 to 14 new calls a day.

However, he says he sympathizes with their concern.

He says he hopes eventually to market his invention -- "possibly to a major pest-control company" -- but hasn't figured out how to do it.

He says that happens in "maybe 20%" of cases.

So, in June 1979, "I quit my job as a house painter and started doing this," he says.

Intrigued, he began learning more, and his interest turned into a hobby.

Lately, however, he hasn't been earning anywhere near that, because last summer he tired of the pace and has been cutting back.

Alan Krenson gently lowers the world's most-effective pigeon trap, as he calls his invention, from the top of his 1983 Chrysler station wagon.

Soon, more than a score of pigeons are on the ground, pecking their way up the birdseed trail and into Mr. Krenson's patented pigeon trap, an unexceptional-looking wire-mesh cage that measures four feet by five feet and is one foot high.

At age 39, Alan Krenson is by all indications one of the great -- and one of the few -- pigeon trappers of his generation.

On Oct. 25, 1988, he finally received a patent for his "Trap Assembly for Birds."

He is in huge demand.

There is no legal prohibition to trapping pigeons here, but anyone hiring a trapper in New York would first have to obtain from the Health Department a Request for Permission to Trap Pigeons, in accordance with Section 11-0513 of the New York State Fish and Wildlife Law, and send a copy of the completed form to the law-enforcement division of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, Mr. Matthews says.

That seems to be its secret ingredient.

It might be New York's, as well.

"If I work steadily, I can average $630 a day, working alone," he says.

"Here they come," whispers Mr. Krenson.

Mr. Krenson says his record with a single trap, set about a year ago, is 72 pigeons in 16 minutes.

Its door is fixed so pigeons can enter but can't exit.

Finally, he cut back on his own, and these days he often works only a few days a week.

If the pigeon market is saturated, he says, he will "relocate" the birds, far from home.

"I don't know how well he's doing down there, but I guarantee you he'd become a millionaire up here," says Steven Matthews, associate commissioner for external affairs -- and "designated pigeon expert," he says -- in the city's Department of Health.

"It's the most-effective pigeon trap in the world."

He did the same for a visit by Queen Elizabeth II in 1991.

In time, he found there was good money in trapping and trading the birds.

"And when I got home, they were there waiting for me."

He says he usually trades his catch to breeders for better pigeons, such as fantails or racing homers, then sells those to pigeon fanciers.

"I have never been to New York in my life," he says.

He cleared the pigeons from Vizcaya, an Italian Renaissance-style villa and gardens on Biscayne Bay, the day before a 1987 meeting there between President Reagan and Pope John Paul II.

He adds that the reappearance of pigeons -- whether old ones or new ones -- usually means "something is wrong," such as food being left out.

"I'm not exaggerating," he says.

"I love pigeons, too," he says.

Another time, on Miami Beach, a pigeon fancier threatened him with a knife.

More typically, people simply berate him -- one reason he usually hides his traps on the roofs of buildings, away from the eyes of pigeon folk.

"I would be just as protective of them as those people are.

I don't fault them at all."

His record for a single building is 938 pigeons -- trapped over a period of nearly four weeks on the roof of a now-demolished downtown hotel.

He has trapped for the Miami Seaquarium, where Flipper lives.

Pigeon lovers also are a hazard.

He -- Alan -- is A, and his wife, Beverly, is B. The company is a one-man operation, because the only helper who has ever worked out is Beverly, and she now stays home with their two children.

He found a demand for street pigeons among breeders, who use them to tend the eggs and young of fancier breeds, thus freeing them to lay more eggs.

Curator Joan Caron lauds his "compassion" for "these troublesome, pesky, possibly-contagious-to-humans, diseased animals."

Mr. Krenson says he hasn't ever gotten ill from the birds, but when working near nests or other dirty areas he wears gloves and a mask.

In an era of poisons, repellents and antipigeon devices, his hands-on approach to nuisance birds is an oddity.

He says he "absolutely" doesn't kill pigeons, although he sometimes sells them to bird-dog trainers.

Nearby, pigeons roost, unaware.

After the birds were grown, his wife insisted he get rid of them, because they were dirtying the patio.

"That is my dream come true."

Pigeons can be hazardous to health, transmitting such diseases as cryptococcal meningitis to humans.

Although his business is confined to South Florida, Mr. Krenson traps pigeons for fun on trips elsewhere.

But, like his trap itself, it seems to work.

Mr. Krenson says he once had a gun pulled on him while trapping outside a produce market by a man who fed the pigeons.

Although his biggest customers are condominiums, he traps amid the very pillars of civilization.

After the pigeons are trapped, Mr. Krenson transfers them to plastic carrying cages and hauls them off for recycling.

Mr. Krenson has parlayed his talent into a thriving business, called A&B Bird Trappers Inc.

"I haven't been to Vizcaya since the Queen was there," Mr. Krenson says.

He sets it on a side of a sandy lot, near palm trees and sea grape, and scatters birdseed and bread crumbs about.

"I don't advertise," he says.

