Alan Krenson gently lowers the world's most-effective pigeon trap, as he calls his invention, from the top of his 1983 Chrysler station wagon.

He sets it on a side of a sandy lot, near palm trees and sea grape, and scatters birdseed and bread crumbs about.

Then he withdraws.

Nearby, pigeons roost, unaware.

"Here they come," whispers Mr. Krenson.

A gray pigeon flutters down and begins pecking at the seed.

Soon, more than a score of pigeons are on the ground, pecking their way up the birdseed trail and into Mr. Krenson's patented pigeon trap, an unexceptional-looking wire-mesh cage that measures four feet by five feet and is one foot high.

Its door is fixed so pigeons can enter but can't exit.

That seems to be its secret ingredient.

After the pigeons are trapped, Mr. Krenson transfers them to plastic carrying cages and hauls them off for recycling.

He says he usually trades his catch to breeders for better pigeons, such as fantails or racing homers, then sells those to pigeon fanciers.

If the pigeon market is saturated, he says, he will "relocate" the birds, far from home.

He says he "absolutely" doesn't kill pigeons, although he sometimes sells them to bird-dog trainers.

Mr. Krenson typically charges $7 a pigeon for trapping and says he averages another $2 per bird in the trading-and-selling process.

"If I work steadily, I can average $630 a day, working alone," he says.

Lately, however, he hasn't been earning anywhere near that, because last summer he tired of the pace and has been cutting back.

At age 39, Alan Krenson is by all indications one of the great -- and one of the few -- pigeon trappers of his generation.

In an era of poisons, repellents and antipigeon devices, his hands-on approach to nuisance birds is an oddity.

But, like his trap itself, it seems to work.

"He is excellent at what he does," says Alan Weber, director of contract administration at the University of Miami, who has had pigeons removed from campus.

Mr. Krenson says his record with a single trap, set about a year ago, is 72 pigeons in 16 minutes.

His record for a single building is 938 pigeons -- trapped over a period of nearly four weeks on the roof of a now-demolished downtown hotel.

He says the most pigeons he ever caught in a single day was 458, with one trap in various locations.

"I don't advertise," he says.

"It's just word of mouth, because the trap works so darned well."

Although his biggest customers are condominiums, he traps amid the very pillars of civilization.

He has trapped pigeons for the Dade County Public Schools and the Fort Lauderdale Police Department, for Miami's Metrorail transit system and the Justice Department's correctional center here.

He has trapped for the Miami Seaquarium, where Flipper lives.

Curator Joan Caron lauds his "compassion" for "these troublesome, pesky, possibly-contagious-to-humans, diseased animals."

She is referring to pigeons.

He cleared the pigeons from Vizcaya, an Italian Renaissance-style villa and gardens on Biscayne Bay, the day before a 1987 meeting there between President Reagan and Pope John Paul II.

He did the same for a visit by Queen Elizabeth II in 1991.

"I haven't been to Vizcaya since the Queen was there," Mr. Krenson says.

Mr. Krenson has parlayed his talent into a thriving business, called A&B Bird Trappers Inc.

He -- Alan -- is A, and his wife, Beverly, is B. The company is a one-man operation, because the only helper who has ever worked out is Beverly, and she now stays home with their two children.

Mr. Krenson's work carries a one-year guarantee; if birds return within that time, he will clear them out again.

He says that happens in "maybe 20%" of cases.

He adds that the reappearance of pigeons -- whether old ones or new ones -- usually means "something is wrong," such as food being left out.

He is in huge demand.

Last year, he raised prices in hopes of slowing his business -- "I mean, I was going to have an ulcer," he says -- but the pace continued, with 12 to 14 new calls a day.

Finally, he cut back on his own, and these days he often works only a few days a week.

Pigeons can be hazardous to health, transmitting such diseases as cryptococcal meningitis to humans.

Mr. Krenson says he hasn't ever gotten ill from the birds, but when working near nests or other dirty areas he wears gloves and a mask.

Pigeon lovers also are a hazard.

Mr. Krenson says he once had a gun pulled on him while trapping outside a produce market by a man who fed the pigeons.

Another time, on Miami Beach, a pigeon fancier threatened him with a knife.

More typically, people simply berate him -- one reason he usually hides his traps on the roofs of buildings, away from the eyes of pigeon folk.

However, he says he sympathizes with their concern.

"I love pigeons, too," he says.

"I would be just as protective of them as those people are.

I don't fault them at all."

Although his business is confined to South Florida, Mr. Krenson traps pigeons for fun on trips elsewhere.

"I have never been to New York in my life," he says.

"That is my dream come true."

It might be New York's, as well.

"I don't know how well he's doing down there, but I guarantee you he'd become a millionaire up here," says Steven Matthews, associate commissioner for external affairs -- and "designated pigeon expert," he says -- in the city's Department of Health.

But New York isn't Florida.

There is no legal prohibition to trapping pigeons here, but anyone hiring a trapper in New York would first have to obtain from the Health Department a Request for Permission to Trap Pigeons, in accordance with Section 11-0513 of the New York State Fish and Wildlife Law, and send a copy of the completed form to the law-enforcement division of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, Mr. Matthews says.

Mr. Krenson has trapped since he was a boy, but his interest in pigeons dates to the late 1970s when he brought home two baby birds he found while fishing.

After the birds were grown, his wife insisted he get rid of them, because they were dirtying the patio.

"So I took them downtown and released them in Bayfront Park," he says.

"And when I got home, they were there waiting for me."

Intrigued, he began learning more, and his interest turned into a hobby.

He found a demand for street pigeons among breeders, who use them to tend the eggs and young of fancier breeds, thus freeing them to lay more eggs.

In time, he found there was good money in trapping and trading the birds.

So, in June 1979, "I quit my job as a house painter and started doing this," he says.

He began designing his dream trap, testing "about 12 or 15" models before finally getting it right.

On Oct. 25, 1988, he finally received a patent for his "Trap Assembly for Birds."

He says he hopes eventually to market his invention -- "possibly to a major pest-control company" -- but hasn't figured out how to do it.

"I'm not exaggerating," he says.

"It's the most-effective pigeon trap in the world."

