If your great aunt left you her fortune in trust, there is good reason to make sure the trust taxes are done early this year.

It's the 1993 Tax Act, and it significantly increases the tax on any ordinary income accumulated in a trust.

Indeed, anything over $7,500 will be taxed at a stiff 39.6%.

The old top trust rate of 31%, which used to apply to the income over $11,250, now kicks in at only $3,500.

"It's really pretty harsh," says attorney Joseph H. Newberg, tax partner with Sullivan & Worcester, Boston, noting that 39.6% is the same rate paid on ordinary income by people earning more than $250,000 a year.

But folks who don't dawdle may have some room for maneuvering.

For one thing, trustees have 65 days from year end -- until March 6 -- to make distributions and have them be treated as if made on Dec. 31, 1993.

That means a trustee could distribute income to a beneficiary in a lower tax bracket, getting a 1993 deduction for the distribution.

The beneficiary, in turn, would pay taxes on that income, but at his or her tax rate.

That could result in a substantial tax savings.

Trustees have only a week and a half to take advantage of this strategy for the 1993 tax year.

"There is certainly still time to act," says Mr. Newberg.

"But do it now."

In some cases, trustees may not want to give money to the beneficiaries.

"Maybe the beneficiaries don't need the income, or perhaps they might squander it," says Stuart Kessler, senior partner with Goldstein Golub Kessler & Co., New York.

Trustees might still be able to take advantage of this strategy, if the trusts allow distributions "for the benefit of the beneficiary," says Martin M. Shenkman, a New York attorney and financial adviser.

As such, the trustee might be able to pay school tuition or medical bills or even make an investment in a beneficiary's name.

But before trustees make any distributions, they had better take a good look at the beneficiaries' taxes.

There is no savings if they are already in the 39.6% bracket.

Even minor children can be in this bracket, since those under 14 years old are taxed at their parents' rate after the first $1,200 of unearned income.

Trustees also need to read the trust agreement.

Many trusts don't allow any distributions of income, or allow distributions only if the beneficiaries need the income.

Moreover, a distribution simply may not make any sense for many trusts.

In many generation-skipping trusts, a distribution of income would defeat the goal of protecting assets from even higher taxes as part of a beneficiary's estate.

The distribution strategy also doesn't work for short-term capital gains.

In general, unless a provision has been made in the trust and is consistent with local law, Mr. Newberg says, short-term capital gains will be taxed to the trust as ordinary income, even if a distribution is made.

If you can't or don't want to distribute, there are still ways to cut this year's trust taxes, such as changing the investment mix to reduce taxable income.

And the sooner you make the change, the less taxes the trust will pay for 1994.

Municipal bonds, for example, don't produce taxable income.

Some life insurance products may offer similar advantages.

Long-term capital gains aren't taxed until the investment is sold, and then only at a top rate of 28%.

Mutual funds are already targeting this market, designing portfolios that produce the least possible amount of tax, Mr. Shenkman says.

This seemingly simple strategy, however, can turn into a quagmire for the unwary trustee.

Think about what happens in a trust designed to provide income to a surviving spouse for life, with the remainder going to the children.

Investing only in the stock market would favor the children over the spouse, while moving strictly to tax-free bonds would benefit the spouse to the detriment of the children.

"Whenever someone does something just to avoid taxes, they run the chance of running afoul of something else," says Sandra A. Ciullo, director of estate and trust services for Grant Thornton in New York.

And in this case, it may be the trustee's fiduciary responsibilities.

That means many people may just have to swallow hard and watch Uncle Sam take a bigger bite.

In that case, advisers say, it is important to remember why a trust was set up in the first place.

"Income taxes are not the major reason trusts are set up," explains Mr. Shenkman.

"The primary reason is protection of people and assets.

And that hasn't changed."

Act, but also kick in at much lower income levels, creating a double whammy for many trusts.

