All sorts of businesses are experimenting with the devices.

But the Postal Service, citing lower than expected revenues, pulled the plug last fall and the company collapsed.

The red-white-and-blue machines, which were more than six feet tall, created personalized business cards, stationery and post cards.

The kiosks -- developed in conjunction with a unit of Bell Atlantic Corp. -- use compact-disc interactive technology to entice shoppers with electronic pictures of wine accessories, gourmet foods and clothing.

"I'm sure people in the telephone business had lots of ups and downs in the beginning too," Mr. Goodman says wistfully.

That attitude explains why Marty Goodman of Postal Buddy says he hopes to return to the interactive industry with another investment.

It is uncertain whether New Leaf Entertainment Corp., the joint venture created to market the new technology, will ever have a chance to sell the latest sounds from, say, Canadian singer Mae Moore or the raucous Stone Temple Pilots.

But as a number of blue-chip players are learning, most consumers still prefer to shop in stores, not from fancy vending machines.

"You can even specify whether you want your cheese thinly sliced or broken into chunks," says a spokeswoman.

Kroger Co., the big supermarket chain, has just begun testing kiosks in its Dallas stores that answer questions about 120 different medical ailments, ranging from coughs to hives.

"I'm still optimistic that there is money to be made here."

"You listen, you watch and you touch. . . ." says Michael North, president of the company.

Recently, at an HMV record store in Manhattan, small clusters of teenagers stood in line to use kiosks manufactured by San Francisco-based Intouch Group Inc.

Postal Buddy is now going out of business.

At Stop & Shop Cos., based in Boston, harried customers use the touch-screen Deli Express to place orders they can pick up 20 minutes later.

The idea created enormous public interest -- along with jeers from the record industry, which has little interest in allowing an outsider to manufacture and distribute its products.

This is better," says Larken Kade, a 15-year-old high school student who says she visits HMV once or twice a week.

Mr. North says revenues have doubled in each of the past three years to about $l5 million.

The most ballyhooed interactive-kiosk venture was unveiled last May, when International Business Machines Corp. and Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. announced plans to manufacture and market in-store machines that made compact discs on the spot.

American Greetings Corp. and Hallmark Cards Inc. each have thousands of kiosks that enable customers to personalize their greeting cards.

Interactive kiosks typically house touch screens that can access photographs and other information stored electronically.

"Sometimes you buy an album, get home and realize that only one song is any good.

"The kiosks didn't live up to expectations, so we're focusing on home-shopping opportunities," says Mr. Spong, who adds that MicroMall will continue operating its kiosk system.

As providers of information, kiosks have a better track record.

"That's where interactive kiosks can really play a beneficial role."

In letters received by the Postal Service, shoppers complained that certain products offered by Postal Buddy were too expensive, that the machines sometimes malfunctioned and that Postal Buddy dispensed a "money card" usable for future purchases instead of providing actual change.

"We're reaching people with fourth-grade literacy levels."

Inteco estimates that the 87,000 kiosks now in use will grow to more than 500,000 by the end of 1997.

Muze machines, for instance, manufactured by Muze Inc., a New York City-based company, enable music buffs to find an album's title and inventory number by entering the artist, a song name or even a key lyric.

Postal Buddies, though, won't be among them.

Many have video and audio features and can accept and verify credit cards.

Customers also used them to register change-of-address requests.

Adult shoppers may be leery about using interactive technology, but some kids are not.

The devices let customers sample 30-second tracks from different compact discs.

"It's much easier to ask someone how much a pair of shoes costs than to work your way through a kiosk," he says.

Kiosks can also bring a variety of merchandise to towns where selection may otherwise be limited, he adds.

The primary allure of kiosks is their convenience, says Charles Spong, president of MicroMall Inc., a unit of Des Moines-based Microware Systems Corp.

Similarly, North Communications Inc. an interactive firm based in Santa Monica, Calif., provides government agencies with kiosks that answer questions from the public on such topics as licensing, motor vehicle requirements and Medicare benefits.

Nine months later, plans for additional machines have been shelved because of disappointing sales.

"One day we had a contract with the U.S. Postal Service to install more than 10,000 units, and the next thing we knew our agreement was terminated," he says.

The problem, says Tom Leonard, an analyst with Inteco Corp., a Norwalk, Conn.-based research firm, is that most shoppers want to talk to a live person before making a purchase.

"Most sales people are uneducated about products in depth," says Mr. Leonard of Inteco.

One of the most promising interactive kiosk efforts was launched last May by Mr. Spong's MicroMall, which put 25 machines in office buildings and hotels in Chicago and Wilmington, Del.

Marty Goodman, executive vice president of San Diego-based Postal Buddy Corp., says $40 million went down the drain in only three years.

The big-screen interactive kiosks popping up in malls and airports may be touted as the very latest way to shop, but so far they have been more like money pits than money makers.

