Sick of sports coupes, bored with econoboxes and tiring of minivans, baby boomers are shopping for a new kind of car.

"Boomers are going through lifestyle changes which are affecting their automotive needs," says Steven Torok, the general manager of Chrysler Corp.'s Chrysler-Plymouth division.

And since baby boomers dictate consumer trends, as they have done all their lives, the auto industry is racing to provide them with a new generation of cars.

This time it's an ill-defined category intended for people in their 40s and 50s.

The new generation of cars generally has high-powered engines, lots of legroom and head room and such safety features as dual air bags, antilock brakes and traction control.

Entries include the new full-size Toyota Avalon and Oldsmobile Aurora and the compact Mercury Mystique.

Chrysler's two-year-old LH cars -- the Concorde, the Eagle Vision and the Dodge Intrepid -- were the first of the new generation.

Clearly, these aren't your father's Oldsmobiles.

Today's 40-to-60-year-olds want "performance and handling with added room and safety," says Chrysler-Plymouth's Mr. Torok.

That's a little different from the sluggish, soft-riding domestic boats that middle-aged Americans used to want.

But then this generation has always challenged convention and for years has been driving sexy sports coupes and zippy compacts provided largely by Japanese and German car makers.

Stephan Pietro, a 41-year-old dentist from Deerfield Beach, Fla., recently went shopping for a car with dual air bags, antilock brakes, a powerful engine and an integrated child seat for his two-year-old daughter.

He bought a Dodge Intrepid because it had everything he wanted.

"I wanted high performance and lots of room," Mr. Pietro says.

"I wanted the ride and tightness of a Japanese car."

Winning over consumers like Mr. Pietro is crucial for car companies.

"Boomers are pivotal in the auto business," says Mr. Torok.

"If we hit it right for the 45-year-old boomer, there's a high likelihood his father and mother will come on board."

Toyota Motor Corp.'s Avalon, which will go on sale this fall, is the company's first attempt to lure older buyers in the U.S.

The Avalon is intended to offer something for Toyota drivers between 44 and 57 years old who have outgrown the Camry.

The Avalon is wider, longer and has more interior space.

Toyota says it gave the car a V-6 engine rated at 192 horsepower to satisfy boomers' demand for high performance (compared with a four-cylinder engine rated at 130 horsepower in the standard Camry).

The Avalon also comes equipped with dual air bags.

Toyota hasn't yet announced the price of the Avalon, but it will likely cost more than the top-of-the-line Camry and less than the entry-level Lexus.

Analysts speculate that will put it around $25,000.

Part of the trouble with trying to build a car for this group is that they are so diverse.

"We don't need one car for older people," says Carol M. Morgan, president of Strategic Directions Group Inc., a Minneapolis marketing consulting firm.

"We need three or four or five."

That's why Ford Motor Co. thinks it can sell its smallish Mercury Mystique to baby boomers.

Ford research showed that boomers are more concerned than ever about safety, so it equipped the Mystique with standard dual air bags, optional antilock brakes, traction control and seats designed to keep passengers in place during an accident.

Ford also gave the car a curvy body because "boomers don't want boxy sedans with poor styling," says Keith Magee, vice president and general manager of Ford's Lincoln-Mercury division.

"They want vehicles that are fun and feel good to drive."

Recognizing the differences among aging boomers, Chrysler targets each of its three LH sedans at a specific subgroup.

The Concorde is intended for older, professional boomers who accept mainstream social values.

The Vision is aimed at consumers who are intensely interested in technology.

These people are attracted to European and Japanese cars because of their styling, performance and technological advances.

Meanwhile, the Intrepid targets the biggest boomer market -- people with families who want stylish, dependable transportation.

All LH sedans are equipped with V-6 engines and have more interior space than their predecessors.

"Boomers may not be able to move around as easily as they used to," says Chrysler's Mr. Torok.

"Also, many are carrying older children rather than toddlers."

With the Olds Aurora, General Motors Corp. is trying to sell boomers on a "car-buying experience."

Every Oldsmobile dealer and some of the dealer's staff must attend a seminar to learn about the car's attributes and how to better satisfy the customer.

"We have to prove that American cars have as good or better quality than the Japanese," says Knox Ramsey, Oldsmobile's general manager of marketing.

GM has a lot riding on this effort.

It has been largely unsuccessful in attracting baby boomers over the years.

Now that boomers are entering midlife, analysts say, GM must attract them or face continued erosion of market share.

GM products "need to be more modern, better-equipped and more attuned to the specific tastes of these buyers," says John Casesa, an analyst at Wertheim, Schroder & Co.

But GM isn't the only one in that boat.

"Large, full-size sedans have been industry orphans," Mr. Casesa says.

"The industry needs to apply the same level of attention and technology to this segment that it does to other segments."

