Other documents show that some Prudential mutual-fund shareholders have been sold tax-free municipal-bond funds for their individual retirement accounts.

Prudential also hired a former executive from rival Merrill Lynch & Co. to buttress its registration controls.

Mr. Karp couldn't be reached for comment.

A Feb. 22, 1990, memo entitled "Registration, Etc.: New Company Policy," told unlicensed Prudential brokers they would get paid if they arranged side deals with other brokers.

"We've had our share of problems with registration," says John P. Murray, Prudential's director of corporate-risk management.

These include so-called Series 6 tests for selling mutual funds and Series 7 tests for selling stocks.

In an Aug. 4, 1993, memo, Ms. Whelan, the fund compliance chief, said: "It has come to my attention that there may be instances when Prudential mutual-fund shareholders are holding Prudential municipal-bond mutual funds in IRA accounts."

Any failure to report problems of unlicensed brokers typically is viewed harshly by regulators.

"If you do a trade in a state that you are not registered in and turn the trade over to another broker for commission purposes, these commissions are nonrefundable.

To be sure, many large Wall Street brokerage firms have a number of unlicensed brokers at any given time.

Prudential says the Whelan memo shows that the firm was concerned about the practice.

As for any discussions with regulators, Mr. Murray said: "I don't know whether we go around and make announcements to regulators about this.

The memo, to Frank Giordano, Prudential's mutual-fund general counsel, added that Mr. Karp informed Ms. Whelan that the unlicensed brokers "are getting paid."

Instead, the firm appears to have paid brokers who improperly sold mutual funds without proper licenses, according to an internal memo.

Prudential Insurance recently commissioned a study by the accounting firm Coopers & Lybrand examining, among other things, the registration department at Prudential Securities.

The internal documents suggest that lax oversight and compliance aren't confined to Prudential's highly publicized partnership scandal.

But the issue is particularly problematic for Prudential, which is operating under intense regulatory scrutiny as a result of its limited-partnership woes.

Scores of Prudential Securities Inc. brokers are selling mutual funds and stocks without proper brokerage licenses in various states, internal Prudential compliance documents show.

Mr. Giordano didn't return a telephone call seeking comment.

In view of this, you may wish to consider taking advantage of our free exchange privilege into another member of our fund family."

Besides these requirements, brokers must be registered in states in which their clients live, or where they are doing business.

We're trying to make sure everybody in the place is licensed," he says, adding that he doesn't believe the problem is widespread.

As previously reported, federal and state regulators have accused Prudential of improperly selling $8.15 billion of partnerships in the 1980s.

Prudential says it dismissed Mr. Karp last year, after the memo was written, for performance reasons.

The issue of unlicensed brokers doesn't appear to be new at Prudential.

She declined to comment further.

As part of the review, independent accountants will come in and study the firm's registration effort.

Ms. Smith added: "When you have unlicensed agents selling securities, one would expect the firm to offer full rescission to the investors."

But it said that practice wasn't company policy.

As a result, Prudential ultimately could face the possibility of rescinding, or canceling, trades executed by the unlicensed brokers, regulators say.

Brokers and others who sell securities must pass required tests before doing business.

"I have been informed by Bruce Karp of Prudential's Registration Department that trades will go through even if the broker isn't properly licensed," says an Aug. 16, 1993, memo from Anita Whelan, Prudential's mutual-fund compliance director.

When asked yesterday whether the practice of paying unlicensed brokers for their trades is a problem, she replied: "That's a valid concern, but I don't handle licensing."

"We're in the process of tightening up and fixing it.

It isn't a secret around here, by any stretch."

Speaking generally, Nancy Smith, New Mexico's securities director said: "If true, having unlicensed brokers sell securities is a very significant failure, and if it's compounded by a failure of the supervisory system and the lack of reporting on those violations, then that makes it a failure of even greater dimensions."

This practice raises questions of investor suitability, the same issue at the heart of Prudential's limited-partnership debacle.

The brokerage arm of Prudential Insurance Co. of America says it has a total of about 50,000 broker registrations for its roughly 6,000 brokers.

"We're not in the business of paying commissions to people without licenses," said Mr. Murray.

Prudential says it is looking into the matter.

We have started on the process of coming up with a whole bunch of ways to fix up the problems in registration.

The firm has prepared a letter to investors saying that as IRAs "include tax deferment until withdrawals commence, the choice of tax-free municipals are generally not as beneficial as other members of our mutual-fund family.

On the municipal-bond issue, Prudential says it has taken steps to inform investors of the problem.

In her memo, Ms. Whelan didn't urge that any steps be taken to correct the situation.

But Prudential hasn't yet informed regulators of the predicament, people familiar with the matter say.

At a meeting of branch managers in New York late last year, Mr. Murray said he told managers: "Nobody should have a laissez-faire attitude toward licensing -- either you are or you're not, there's no in-between."

State securities regulators currently are examining the allegations of unlicensed Prudential brokers selling mutual funds and are preparing requests for document from Prudential on the matter, people familiar with the issue say.

Indeed, the Securities and Exchange Commission last year found that the U.S. units of Japan's Big Four brokerage houses had, among other violations, unregistered brokers.

The internal documents show that some Prudential brokers are operating without passing their required series tests, and others without their proper state licensing.

You can `make a deal' with the broker to pay the commissions in a personal check, but New York will not journal the commissions over after you are approved in that state."

(Investors aren't taxed on IRA funds until they start withdrawing money from such accounts.)

Prudential said it isn't familiar with the memo, which apparently was written by an Atlanta sales manager.

