It's not uncommon to find people who invested half or three-quarters of their retirement-plan dollars in partnerships, financial advisers and attorneys say.

Like other types of partnership investors, retirement plans often get brokerage statements and other financial reports that show their partnerships at original cost, rather than oftenlower current values.

That can cost $100 or more for each program.

Because getting out of these long-term, illiquid investments is often difficult, older investors who bought lots of limited partnerships for their IRAs a decade ago may find it hard to make the minimum IRA withdrawals required by tax law after age 70 1/2.

And those business owners who serve as trustees of their plans face legal as well as financial risks: They could be sued by employees or the Labor Department for investing imprudently in violation of the federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act.

Employee lawsuits appear to be few, but the department has taken companies to court to force them to compensate retirementplan participants for losses due to unsuitable and overly concentrated partnership investments.

Some cash-short IRAs and company plans are unloading partnership units in the informal and low-volume partnership resale market, says Laura Lacey, vice president of Nationwide Partnership Marketplace, a resale-market firm in Bel Marin Keys, Calif.

Indeed, the possibility of a department investigation or employee lawsuit is one of the biggest headaches for business owners who invested retirement-plan funds heavily in partnerships that went bad.

But many of those investments have produced little or no income because of the long real-estate recession, tax-law changes and excessive fees.

Business owners who run retirement plans have a special incentive to pay money to get what is often bad news: The financial reports that plans file annually with the Labor Department ask if nontraded securities such as partnerships have been valued by an independent appraiser.

The Investment Program Association, a Washington trade group for partnership organizers and sellers, is organizing a central clearing house for valuations that it says will bring down the costs.

Limited partnerships, which make their investors part-owners of commercial real estate, cable-television systems and other business ventures, were hot investments in the 1980s.

Meanwhile, a number of business owners are moving to straighten out their retirement plans before regulators get involved.

Compounding the problems for both IRAs and small-business plans is the scarcity of information about what partnership holdings are really worth.

Lousy performance isn't the only worry for people with limited partnerships in their individual retirement accounts or other retirement plans.

"What the business owner will typically do is make the employees whole," and take the bum investments for himself or herself, says Mr. Mason, the Tucson benefits specialist.

Individuals with multiple IRA accounts can fulfill their annual withdrawal requirements from the IRA of their choice.

A Labor Department complaint alleged that Mr. Barr and CBS Marketing, a food-brokerage concern not related to CBS Inc., had improperly invested an inordinate amount of profit-sharing plan assets in real-estate partnerships.

David E. Manch, an attorney for CBS Marketing and Mr. Barr, said the consent order represented a negotiated settlement in which his clients didn't admit to any wrongdoing.

Last year, for instance, a federal district court in Arizona ordered CBS Marketing Inc. of Phoenix and company President Richard Barr to pay a total of $375,000.

There are numerous small-business retirement plans and IRA holders among the ranks of investors that have initiated arbitration actions or filed lawsuits against the securities firms that got them into partnerships in the first place.

Getting out is tough because partnership securities were never designed to be actively traded, like stocks and bonds.

Alternatively, some people are taking their distributions "in kind," in the form of some partnership securities.

Where that is not the case, financial advisers say, retirement plans and other investors with large sums in partnerships should check resale-market prices and consider having their securities appraised by a partnership specialist.

Many of these people "are in for an ugly surprise," warns Michael Stalker, a Eugene, Ore., financial adviser.

But people who invested predominately in partnerships, or have only partnerships left, are in a bind.

A retiring business owner who doesn't need the cash immediately might transfer some partnership units from the company plan to an IRA.

While many were set up as tax shelters, others were aggressively marketed to tax-deferred retirement plans with projections of high annual income.

"That's probably the best solution they have for damage control."

They can end up being taxed on, say, a $10,000 distribution -- the holding's original cost -- while the current value might be only $5,000 or less.

Some partnership sponsors do supply estimates of current value to their investors.

But taking distributions in kind from an IRA can be unpalatable because those distributions are generally taxable.

Many more companies have quietly agreed to such payments to their plans or plan participants, Mr. Lerner says.

Such reporting can penalize IRA holders who take a distribution in kind.

Many partnerships that were expected to liquidate profitably after seven to 10 years are dragging on indefinitely.

If cost exceeds current values, early retirees get more than their fair share of accumulated funds and "the later retirees get the short end of the stick," says Robert W. Mills, a San Rafael, Calif., lawyer.

Small-business owners may also have to scramble to pay people who are retiring or are otherwise entitled to payments from a company retirement plan that is loaded with partnerships.

But there aren't any buyers for the weakest partnerships, and market participants say sellers often receive far less than they would if they hold to liquidation.

"You are taking a distribution of an illiquid asset, but you have to pay tax on the distribution in liquid cash," explains C. Thomas Mason III, a benefits specialist in Tuscon, Ariz.

At small-business profit-sharing plans, meanwhile, carrying partnership holdings at cost can result in incorrect payments being made to participants who retire or leave the company.

In addition, high transaction costs make it particularly uneconomical to sell the smaller-than-usual $2,000 partnership holdings that were specifically marketed for IRAs.

The lack of an appraisal "may, along with other factors, generate an investigation," says Charles Lerner, director of enforcement for the Labor Department's Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration.

It hopes to have numbers on 1,000 partnerships by year end.

