Salespeople can use computer software to prospect for leads, get data on customers and make instant presentations.

Retail sales remains a land of low pay for both genders, with women earning $11,928 and men earning a bit more.

The drive for quality explains the trend, says Hewitt's Tom Mott.

Industries such as furniture and apparel are slow to embrace the idea, though.

Carlson Travel Network in Minneapolis closes its field offices and has its 25 sales reps operate from home with laptops.

Consultant Hewitt Associates says 27% of companies use some measure of customer service in their sales-incentive programs; another 23% weigh doing so.

THE CHECKOFF: Like father, like son: David Hilton Sr. and David Hilton Jr., top-selling Northwestern Mutual Life agents, team up to motivate sales forces.

Eastman Kodak's office-imaging division figures high-tech selling costs $14,000 a sales rep initially, plus up to $5,000 a year to maintain.

Indianapolis Power & Light asks major customers to grade their account reps from A to F; incentive pay hinges on the results.

SLOW ROAD: Certifying sales professionals makes snail-like progress.

Pfizer found its younger sales reps spent too much time on the computer system, while older reps -- many of whom could not type -- were resistant.

Some critics claim many high-tech gadgets go unused.

HIGH-TECH SELLING eliminates some sales offices.

MORE COMPANIES LINK sales pay to customer satisfaction.

Median income for saleswomen rose 63% from 1982 to 1992, Census Bureau figures show, while gaining only 43% for men.

Female commodities sales reps recorded the biggest pay gains: 71% vs. 40%.

Their presentation: "Some Things Never Change." . . .

Women made bigger strides in all major sales occupations except for salaried sales supervisors.

THE GENDER GAP narrows in sales pay, but it is still very wide.

Still, men in sales earn, on average, $31,346, while women get $17,924.

IBM bases 40% of salespeople's commissions on its assessment of customer fulfillment.

But automation is not cheap or without headaches.

"One person can't do it all anymore," says Mark Blessington, sales-practice national director for consultant Sibson & Co.

Moreover, industry consolidation trims the number of sales accounts but makes contented customers that much more critical.

With big egos and lots of drive, the best salespeople "are competitors, not cooperators," adds Robert Lavery, a New York management consultant.

Profitable times: MMD Inc. in New York, suppliers of part-time sales reps, sees billings quadruple in two years; 90% of its 1,450 sales reps are women.

While the number of saleswomen earning more than $50,000 jumped sevenfold to 141,000 in 1992, men in that elite group number 801,000, three times the decade-earlier figure.

"Once you could make a living working in a store," says Ms. Kennedy, "but you can't anymore."

TEAM SELLING catches on, but is sales really a team sport?

One high-tech gizmo salespeople hate is voice mail.

In September, the International Association of Sales Professionals begins a college program leading to an "International Certified Sales Professional" designation.

"The pay gap is definitely narrowing because a lot of saleswomen are working so hard at it," says Marilyn Moats Kennedy, a Wilmette, Ill., career counselor.

"Just landing the sale isn't everything that counts these days," says Michael Shriner, Indianapolis Power vice president of marketing.

"Salespeople typically work best as the Lone Ranger without Tonto," contends Jack Falvey, a Londonderry, N.H., sales-management consultant.

The disks use sound and video to show interviews with 23 female supporters of Playboy, including columnist Liz Smith, feminist author Betty Friedan and New York ad exec Mary Fritz-Wilson.

SEX, GUYS & VIDEOTAPE: Playboy magazine arms sales reps with interactive compact disks and multimedia players to show advertisers that women are not offended by the publication's nudity.

A growing number of companies follow the lead of DuPont, Digital Equipment, Data General and Tandem Computers in putting sales reps, engineers, technicians, and production managers on teams to serve customers and win new accounts.

Co-sponsored by the American Medical Association and Sprint, the network enables salespeople to connect with 66,000 doctors -- eventually rising to 260,000.

Only 800 of 150,000 U.S. auto salespeople have completed the National Automobile Dealers Association's four-phase certification program in the two years it has been available.

"The good ones love it and the marginal ones are scared to death," says Bruce Hale of National Fuel Distribution in Buffalo, N.Y.

They complain they can not reach prospective customers as quickly as before.

How do salespeople react?

The travel franchise concern figures it saves up to $10,000 a rep in overhead.

THE SALES FAX: To get the required doctors' written permission to send them drug samples, Steritek Inc., Moonachie, N.J., launches Physicians Fax Network.

