American teenagers spend nearly $90 billion a year, and magazine publishers hope they'll spend even more.

Arriving on newsstands this week is Mouth2Mouth, a hip new magazine, funded by Time Warner Inc. and aimed at the MTV generation.

It follows by just a few months the launch of two competitors, Tell and Quake.

The new magazines enter a field that already includes Seventeen -- the leader -- YM, Sassy and Teen, plus a host of specialized magazines like YSB (Young Sisters and Brothers), aimed at black teens, and Young Scholar, for nerds.

As baby boomers' children reach adolescence, the teen market is expanding.

In 1992, for the first time in 17 years, the population of teenagers increased, says Peter Zollo, president of Teenage Research Unlimited of Northbrook, Ill.

Mr. Zollo says there are about 28.5 million Americans between the ages of 12 and 19.

For advertisers, this age group is particularly attractive because, as teenagers explore their own identities, they experiment with new brands of consumer products.

"Teenagers don't just buy more magazines every year, they buy more of everything, and advertisers have woken up to that," says Valerie Muller, media director for DeWitt Media Inc.

Attractive as they are to advertisers, teenagers are slippery customers.

Over the years, teens have become a whole lot more sophisticated, some would say cynical, and are put off by the old Pollyanna platitudes.

Both Sassy and YM have helped turn the whole genre cheekier (Sassy's idea of a service piece is "How to Drink in College Without Puking Every Night"), but there is a fine line to walk.

Mademoiselle recently dumped an editor the magazine thought had aliented readers by going too kinky.

Advertisers get skittish when magazines are too edgy and dark, but they also want their ads in a context considered trendy by teens.

If trendiness is the yardstick, then Mouth2Mouth stands tallest among the latest batch of competitors.

Described by its founders as a cross between Mad and Vanity Fair, the magazine is loaded with pop-culture celebrities and marked by an offbeat sense of humor.

In the first issue, for example, Amy Fisher, convicted of shooting her lover's wife, gives advice on sex.

Each issue will end with a photo of an actual teenager's room, a sort of Dewar's profile for the Beavis and Butt-head set.

"We want the magazine to be as outspoken, gutsy and loud as teenagers are," says editor in chief Angela Janklow Harrington, 29 years old, who has spent much of her career writing for Vanity Fair.

"I want it to be celebrity-driven but not an insult to the reader's intelligence.

It's about lifestyle, not 62 different ways to twirl your hair."

What sets M2M apart is its goal of appealing to both males and females, a strategy that YSB is also trying but that has rarely worked with magazines for this age group.

"Nobody has ever successfully created a dual audience for teen magazines, because there is a huge maturity gap between 16-year-old boys and girls of the same age," says New York City-based magazine consultant Martin Walker.

"Most of the magazines are aimed at girls, partly because they are seen as the bigger spenders, and these magazines make most of their money on fashion and cosmetics ads."

But Ms. Harrington says she believes this generation is different.

"Everybody in this generation watches MTV and wears the same grunge clothes," she says.

"I think they're more mature and media-inundated; the media has demystified sexual differences for them."

In its first issue last summer, Quake tried to position itself for a dual audience, but has already redirected itself more to girls.

A fashion spread in the premiere issue on what to wear on a first date featured both sexes, but the second issue, out last month, carries a piece on "Prom Style" showing 12 outfits for girls and only two for boys.

Tell has been squarely aimed at girls from the start, with articles like "Girls Talk Sex" and "Why Can't I Be a Model?"

It's still too early to predict whether boys will buy a magazine, however hip, that carries lipstick and nail polish ads, but many of the early reviews for Mouth2Mouth have been raves.

Mouth2Mouth starts out with extra pull not just because its editor, Ms. Harrington, has Hollywood connections and a famous father (literary agent Morton Janklow), but because it is published by deep-pocketed Time Warner.

Developed by the company's Ventures division, which also publishes the very slick Vibe and Martha Stewart Living, M2M has already gotten the green light for a second issue, due in August.

But most of the competitors also have deep pockets and a strong commitment from their publishers.

Quake, jointly apublished by Welsh Publishing Group and Cowles Magazines, has decided to publish six times a year.

Tell, published by Hachette Filipacchi in partnership with NBC, has agreed to go quarterly this year and then evaluate circulation.

But none of these new titles will have an easy time, given the competitiveness of the established teen magazines.

In fact, the rivalry is about to intensify between the two giants of the teen genre, Seventeen and YM.

Seventeen, owned by K-III Communications Corp. has a circulation of 1.85 million, but the irreverant YM is yapping at its heels as never before.

YM now has circulation of 1.8 million, up 90% over the past three years.

Seventeen has a brand new editor, Caroline Miller, and YM will appoint a new one in the next few weeks.

Still, the newcomers believe there's room in the expanding teen market for new voices.

"There has been an idea that the adult market is segmented, but teens are one big mass market," says Webb Howell, publisher of Young Scholar.

"We believe that there are lots of niches in this market, and that some kids care about more than Luke Perry and 90210."

