And Mr. Engle, the former Air Force sergeant, comments, "You get out in the business world, and it's money, money, money -- and people are dirt.

Currently, 11% of Army officers are black, and the black drill sergeant portrayed by Lou Gosset has become a stock figure in U.S. culture.

Some branches of the military spelled opportunity for young people with only modest education and, with firm policies against racial discrimination, especially offered the best deal around for many blacks.

But a recent study by two Army officers teaching at West Point found that the shrinking of the military has reduced the commitment to the service even of the "survivor" officers who have stayed in.

Vietnam excepted, the veterans of most wars found a warm reception in the civilian world.

Yet he says he goes out of his way to look at retiring officers, especially minorities and women.

And other traditional employers aren't doing much hiring.

"I think the greatest culture shock I'm going through right now is, I'm looking for something to believe in," says retired Navy Capt. Anthony Mitchell.

"I'm not looking forward to it," the 44-year-old vet says.

Last year, the unemployment rate for veterans under age 44 ran well over one percentage point higher than that for the general population.

"It's almost like they consider us all bumbling buffoons."

Successful job seekers agree.

Today's veterans rarely face the open hostility that met Vietnam vets, who often bore the brunt of American unhappiness with the war itself.

But most military retirees experience a jarring re-entry, and some especially dislike the baby boomers who now do much of the corporate hiring.

That isn't just a gibe at the Clinton White House, which has few staff members with military experience.

He's making $400 a week -- and sounds like a new man.

Indeed, as defense companies search for new markets, they are less inclined to offer any openings they do have to military types.

Like Mr. Engle, former military people emerge, blinking and a bit disbelieving, into an economy that doesn't seem to need them and a culture that often doesn't seem to understand them.

They didn't care that he was a seasoned diesel mechanic who had fixed boats, tested new equipment and trained Nicaraguan contras at Homestead Air Force Base near Miami.

The military is a lot more people-oriented these days."

He found a job straight out of the military working as a diesel mechanic in North Carolina but left after the company, lacking work, cut him back to $8 an hour and a 10-hour week.

One is the nuclear-power industry, a natural destination for veterans of the Navy's nuclear-propulsion program.

Moreover, many vets have reached an age -- say, 40 or so -- at which anyone, whether former military or not, is likely to run into difficulty finding a job, especially in a new line of work.

He quickly discovered that potential employers didn't much care that he had just completed 12 years of military service, including a stint with Operation Just Cause in Panama.

"You don't have anything in common with them," she says.

"It's not that they're being picked on, it's just that there's no demand," says Alan Ewalt, senior vice president for human resources at National Medical Enterprises Inc., in Santa Monica, Calif.

People who have put in at least 15 years sometimes qualify for a reduced pension, and some others get an incentive payment to leave before that.

American Telephone & Telegraph Co., for example, sparked headlines last month by announcing that it might cut 15,000 jobs over the next two years; meanwhile, the Defense Department is shedding 11,000 military and civilian jobs a month.

After once serving as the chief engineer on a ship and supervising 165 sailors, Lt. Cmdr. Bata was surprised to be offered only entry-level jobs.

But he remains bitter about his harsh re-entry into the civilian world.

"That's just not available now."

Hank Johnson, a former Army officer who now runs a corporate outplacement service, counsels military retirees that the best strategy for finding work is to locate "one of us" on the other side of the table.

He stopped when he heard his four-year-old daughter coming home.

"After 27 years of bringing my work home," retired Col. Jim Ridenour says, "I was happy to punch a clock and leave work."

That's a sharp departure from American tradition.

Another is the airlines, which used to snap up squadrons of former military pilots.

And veterans' job woes cast doubt on how much the military will continue to serve as a sturdy ladder of upward mobility for black America.

Not every former military officer is unemployed and despondent, of course.

They just don't have an understanding of what the military is all about."

"The key is: Does the person bring skills that will be effective in your environment?" says John Zimmerman, senior vice president for human resources at MCI Communications Corp.

"I'm not a religious person, but I prayed that night," he says.

So now, in contrast to the aftermath of World War II and the Korean War, there are no crowds of people in uniform antsy to demobilize.

In short, most corporations seem to want people with different backgrounds than military personnel offer.

"It's just on commission," he says, but there is a glee in his voice as he says it.

Many joined the military because they saw it as a way out of dying small towns and into the mainstream of modern life.

The military could well become increasingly isolated from the democracy it is supposed to protect.

Looking around a roomful of military retirees, he adds, "There's not one of us who worked for the money."

The gap carries disturbing implications.

Last June, in the bedroom of his mobile home, Mr. Engle lifted a Taurus .357 Magnum pistol to his head.

"The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit," that emblem of 1950s corporate life, was, in Sloan Wilson's novel, himself a World War II veteran whose boss and father were veterans of World War I.

Many military retirees who do find work are disappointed by their drastically reduced status.

That indifference, or noncomprehension, of corporate America toward the military struck retired Lt. Cmdr. Joseph Bata when a private-sector interviewer dismissed him by saying, "All you have is military experience."

In addition, people forced out of the military short of 20 years don't get a full pension.

To bring in some cash and maintain his sanity, he even tried stand-up comedy, making $200 for four shows at a Radisson hotel in Macon, Ga.

In corporate life, too, there is a dwindling number of captains of industry who were once corporals in the Marines.

On Aug. 24, 1992, Staff Sgt. Gregory Engle's house was flattened by Hurricane Andrew.

"It used to be, in the good times, most any officer could get a job in the defense industry," says retired Air Force Col. Doug Carter, now a career counselor at the Retired Officers Association.

Although many employers are squeezing down their work forces as fast as possible, the contraction in the military has been especially severe.

But the worst was his search for a civilian job.

The military is, in fact, America's only major institution in which blacks routinely boss whites.

The gap separating the military and corporate cultures has widened as companies have dropped hierarchical management structures for less formal "team" approaches.

David Lewin, director of the Institute of Industrial Relations at the University of California at Los Angeles, notes "an increasing disconnect between the way the military is organized and gets its work done, and the way business is organized and gets its work done."

Instead, many are clamoring to stay in -- and failing.

Many, though not all, recently mustered-out men and women are finding themselves conscripted into a huge army of the unemployed and underemployed, mostly civilians ranging from people desperately seeking their first job to people laid off after working for one employer for years.

Moving to Florida, he applied to the Orange County sheriff's office.

"It's not that they're antimilitary or pacifists.

"I said, `We need something.'"

Chief Petty Officer Linda Nelson, preparing for post-military life, recently tried socializing with civilians -- and didn't like it.

The next day, he sadly took an incentive payment and left the Air Force -- a decision that he had made months earlier because his unit seemed likely to be eliminated.

"The governing elite no longer has a personal knowledge of what military service is all about," worries Col. Charles Dunlap, an Air Force lawyer who has studied civil-military relations.

William Hauser, a retired Army colonel who went on to spend 12 years in executive development at Pfizer Inc., says the unreceptive attitude toward the military risks enlarging the pool of disaffected middle-aged "interruptees" who feel that America has turned against them and who may be drawn to political extremism.

"I've already got a lot of sea time."

Some, especially junior officers who left after only a decade or so in the service, are finding jobs as salespeople, stockbrokers and shift managers in fast-food restaurants and warehouses.

Some ex-military job seekers admit that they don't mix easily with the civilian world they are trying to break into.

Two weeks ago, he was hired by an Army vet to sell motorboats.

In the process, highly computerized companies have shed the middle-management jobs that retiring officers historically had secured after leaving the service.

"Whether or not they've been in the military is irrelevant."

In 1987, some 2.2 million people were on active military duty; today, fewer than 1.7 million are, and hundreds of thousands more jobs are still to be cut -- unless, perhaps, a deterioration in the international climate makes further shrinkage seem dangerous.

Now, he is chipping paint in a Louisiana boatyard and planning to ship out as an ordinary deckhand.

With the end of the Cold War, tens of thousands of ex-military men and women across the U.S. are facing a cold equation: Their supply is increasing as demand for them is dropping.

He now golfs during the day and works as a night supervisor in a Marriott hotel in Melbourne, Fla.

The opportunities aren't being shut off completely.

"The people in the 35-to-45-year bracket are probably the worst offenders," retired Army Lt. Col. Charles Faure says.

Military people say they can't always understand what motivates people in the private sector.

Moreover, the discharged military personnel aren't just changing jobs but are leaving a tightknit society that provided housing, companionship, health care and schools.

There's a structural problem in middle-management jobs, and the military guys are getting hit by that right between the eyes."

Also, there still are a few hot areas, such as environmental work -- especially cleaning up old military bases marred by fuel spills, chemical dumps and buried ammunition.

Even as the military watches roughly 250,000 leave this year, it will recruit about 185,000 new people to keep its forces young.

And some ex-officers are happy to swap the burden of command for a reduced station in life.

For 18 months, Mr. Engle, like many former service people, ran smack into America's corporate down-sizing.

And while hiring a vet was once deemed patriotic, doing so now is often seen as neutral -- at best.

The one industry where military personnel fit in quickly -- the defense sector -- is itself losing an estimated 20,000 jobs a month.

According to retired Army Lt. Col. Ed Ettner Jr., a former chemical-defense officer now working as a distributor of environmental and health-care equipment, about a third of the people at his new employer, National Safety Associates, are ex-military.

"We didn't expect to be handed everything on a silver platter," he says, "but we didn't expect to run into brick walls, either."

What today's ex-military job seekers frequently encounter is simple indifference.

And, underscoring her distaste for many civilians, she adds: "They don't even know enough to talk, half the time."

One day in late January, his mail brought both his last unemployment check and a rejection letter from the sheriff.

The gap between the military retiree and corporate America may partly reflect a gap between the military and the people who run the nation.

In 1969, two-thirds of the members of Congress were veterans; now, two-thirds aren't.

Adding to many vets' bitterness is the fact that after two decades without a draft, almost everyone in the U.S. military today volunteered -- some for jobs in which they routinely risked their lives.

"Companies are taking out the kinds of jobs these guys aspire to.

Now he has something.

This strategy may even work for Mr. Engle.

