On balance, it's understandable that Mr. Cuomo has been transformed into a born-again tax cutter.

In New York City, capital gains are taxed at an astonishing 39.75% rate, the highest in the nation.

As I sat in the New York State Assembly listening to Gov. Mario Cuomo's State of the State address two weeks ago, I had the impression the governor was auditioning for a part in yet another remake of "Invasion of the Body Snatchers."

Since Mr. Cuomo became governor in 1983, the tax rate has indeed gone down as he reports.

According to this month's Money magazine, if one considers a two-income family of four with income of roughly $80,000, the tax bill in New York state, leaving out federal taxes, is $11,020, as opposed to a $1,694 tab in Alaska.

In the past four years, counting the suspension of the last year of the promised tax cut, taxes have gone up more than $1 billion each year.

Mr. Cuomo has noted, accurately I might add, that government jobs have been reduced since November 1990.

This is precisely what has been done in the past 11 years.

But he neglects to point out to unwary audiences that he has been governor since 1983.

New York has the highest combined state and local taxes per capita in the nation -- $3,267 -- a rate that is 62% higher than the national average.

The state discourages business activity with its high corporate taxes; it also does so with an effective capital-gains rate of 36.5%.

In his address, the new, improved Cuomo said the way to create jobs is to lower corporate taxes and have a more hospitable environment for business.

He and his staff have noted that New York's income-tax rate is at its lowest level in 30 years; that New York ranks 24th among states in the percentage of income tax paid in state taxes; that government jobs have been reduced by 13% since November 1990; and that New York held the line on taxes through the past four budget years.

From 1983 to 1993, the private-sector job force increased by 4% in New York and close to 25% nationwide.

These arguments represent the governor's mantra about his performance and the basis on which his next campaign will be organized.

New York has 621.9 state and local employees per 10,000 in the population, the highest among industrial states and 19% above the national average.

Since 1990, the state work force has been reduced by 17,414 jobs, mostly through attrition.

Of course, Mr. Cuomo claims that fees aren't taxes.

But are these arguments accurate?

It has 34% of the nation's welfare recipients (1.1 million in New York City alone).

In the 1980s, New York ranked 47 out of the 50 states in job production.

Forty percent of all the jobs lost in this country since 1989 were lost here; 572,000 jobs were relocated or disappeared.

For roughly one hour it seemed that Ronald Reagan inhabited the body of Mario Cuomo.

Had New York been at the mean, it might well have paid its bills despite the governor's insatiable appetite for spending.

In part this is due to state mandates that force localities to bear the financial brunt of government requirements.

New York has 7.2% of the nation's population and 15% of the nation's accumulated debt.

For 12 years, New York has been in a metaphorical firestorm.

Of course, that was Mr. Cuomo before his recent transformation.

He is a professor of humanities at New York University.

Mr. London, a Republican, ran for governor of New York in 1990 and is a candidate for 1994.

But actual taxes for each individual have gone up dramatically.

Despite two tax cuts during his tenure and a reduction in the tax rate, there still has been an increase of $1.37 in taxes for every tax dollar cut.

These statistics also indicate why New York lags significantly behind the rest of the nation in job production.

That man argued that supply-side economics -- lowering taxes to promote investment -- was voodoo economics.

The state's 10.35% corporate tax is the second highest in the nation after Connecticut -- the difference, by the way, is negligible -- and 53% above the national average.

He orchestrated the failure of New York and now is groping for a remedy.

Even after this reduction is calculated, the state government has had an increase of 15,256 jobs, or a 7.43% increase, since 1983.

Even if one doesn't view mandates as an enforced local tax increase, there is still the matter of state taxes and fees.

This claim obviously was made by the Cuomo facsimile, since the real Mario Cuomo spoke at the Democratic Convention in 1992.

Gov. Cuomo recently has presented himself as a low-tax governor.

New York's 7.875% income tax is 54% above the average of contiguous states.

Nonetheless, this week Mr. Cuomo proposed a $62.5 billion budget for 1994, the largest in the state's history and probably the largest in the U.S.

Those numbers suggest why private capital is being crowded out of existence by the expansive public sector and why many people are leaving the state.

Last is the claim that New York held the line on taxes.

It has 18.5% of the Medicaid expenditures, with only 8% of the Medicaid recipients.

If he accepts that premise, then he can discuss holding the line on taxes with a straight face.

In response to these state demands, localities have two options: raise property taxes or sales taxes.

