The assistant secretary who will head the new bureau is an experienced ambassador.

He will be in the mainstream chain of command within the State Department, not in an adjunct office in a big bureaucracy.

President Clinton and Secretary Christopher have stated publicly that still stronger international measures against Libya -- including a world-wide oil embargo -- should be enacted if Libya continues to defy the demands of justice and the international community.

Last December, for example, right after the new sanctions took effect, we froze $90 million in Libyan funds in the U.S. belonging to a key Arab financial institution based in Bahrain.

Timothy E. Wirth

Our policy is to increase multilateral sanctions incrementally, steadily increasing the pressure on Libya to comply with the U.N.'s demands.

The latest sanctions took effect just three months ago.

Given the close ties among drug trafficking, international terrorism and other international criminal issues, it makes sense to bring the department's resources on these important issues into one bureau under a single senior manager with rank, title and clout.

This decisive action sends a strong message that we are serious about enforcing these sanctions.

The families of the victims of these murderous acts deserve no less.

If there is an opportunity being missed, it is the opportunity for Libya to comply with the U.N.'s demands.

Currently, we are aggressively enforcing these sanctions.

The enhanced sanctions already in place include freezing Libyan assets world-wide, banning equipment for refining and transporting oil, and tightening the international air embargo against Libya.

We remain determined to ensure that the perpetrators of the bombings of Pan Am 103 and UTA 772 are brought to justice.

We will press other governments to join us in additional sanctions against Libya, if necessary, regardless of the state of the international oil market.

Your Feb. 28 Washington Insight column missed the mark when it accused the administration of missing an opportunity to punish Libyan terrorism.

As a result of this enforcement action and diplomatic pressure, that institution severed all ties to Libya.

Strengthening our counterterrorism operation illustrates the high priority the Clinton administration has placed on fighting international terrorism and the threat it poses to the American people.

Concerns about the proposal to relocate the counterterrorism office at the State Department are also misplaced.

