"I'm very lucky to be in this apartment 32 years," Ms. Mason says, marveling that "a six-room apartment in this building recently rented for $4,500."

The Republican mayor says he is standing by regulation because it helps preserve middle-class housing in the city.

Says Mr. Grubman: "Apartments become available, and if you find out about them, you get them.

"We've rented inexpensive apartments to overly wealthy people," says Brian Edwards, a broker for Halstead Property Co.

"The Rudins like to cooperate in making rent-stabilized apartments available to former public officials," says Barbara Fife, a deputy mayor in charge of housing under Mr. Dinkins and a strong advocate of rent regulation.

Abolishing rent regulation "is the only way in the long run to increase housing supply," contends Anthony Downs, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution.

Yet lately, it has run into increasing skepticism.

Alice Mason, who makes her living selling million-dollar apartments, rents an eight-room East Side apartment for $1,700 a month.

While former Mayor Dinkins has a rent-stabilized apartment, his predecessor, Edward Koch, long had one of the most prized deals, a rent-controlled apartment.

Some inherit them.

In the case of a rent-controlled apartment, a member of the extended family can become the new tenant.

Mr. Koch has since moved to a new-unregulated-two-bedroom place.

In some poor neighborhoods, there isn't any real subsidy, because incomes limit market rents.

The citizens group concluded: "The poor get the least benefits from regulation and many may get no protection."

And succession rights are widening.

She ran an "escort service" out of a rent-controlled place on Manhattan's West Side.

In Manhattan, 3% of rent-regulated apartments are occupied by households earning more than $100,000 a year and 15% by households earning more than $50,000 annually.

"This comfort" of paying little in rent, he says, "is one of the few upsides of being old."

The couple pay around $350, according to rent records.

Most of the renters reached wouldn't comment, and those who did had little to say.

In the borough of Manhattan, about 85% of residents rent apartments, and 69% of these are rent-regulated.

Landlords, who obviously oppose rent regulations, say the statistics don't tell the whole story.

(Mr. Haberman declines to discuss the amount.)

Messrs. Cooke and de Montebello didn't return phone calls seeking comment.

Their rents tend to be higher, but often still are far below unregulated places, because increases are limited.

Ms. Farrow pays about $2,900 a month for 10 rooms on Central Park West, a fraction of the market value.

"That's who the landlords wanted in their buildings."

It currently is 5%.

And besides, "The couple down the hall from us pay only $462 a month for their apartment," he fumes.

He says he would be willing to pay more for improved maintenance.

Unusual housing distortions can result.

Across town on Park Avenue, Paul Haberman, a private investor, and his wife live in a spacious, two-bedroom apartment with a solarium and two terraces.

His rent, slightly under $2,000 a month (less than half the market rate), would be considered a steal by some.

Knowing he wouldn't qualify to keep renting it because of his high income, Mr. Blasband moved out and "I put the lease in Paula's name"; she can keep it because her income is less than $250,000.

It is illegal to run a business from a rent-controlled pad, and the Mayflower Madam's landlord turned her in.

Today's City Council session, while certain to extend the general guidelines, isn't expected to be without fireworks.

"The dollar impact in terms of potential tax collection forgone is large," says Arnold Goldstein, a landlord whose rent-regulated tenants include Mr. de Montebello and writer Alistair Cooke.

Some tenants say there is a price to pay for having a good deal on rent: shoddy maintenance.

Other times, would-be tenants make payments, known as "key money," to prior tenants or to landlords.

Among those who, in the past, have squared off against landlords in court to keep paying below-market rent: Bernard-Alexis Poisson de Menars, a French marquis who is a descendant of Charlemagne; a granddaughter of John Philip Sousa, the composer; and a late nephew of former Taiwanese leader Chiang Kai-shek, who spent thousands on legal fees to retain a $700-a-month apartment that his landlord said was worth more than $4,000.

When rent-stabilized tenants move out, landlords, in most years, get to impose a small extra increase.

Although developers are allowed to build rental buildings whose rents won't be regulated, they forfeit tax abatements if they do so.

Sherwin Belkin, a lawyer for the owners, won't comment.

A recent ruling allowed the Resolution Trust Corp., which inherited some buildings from failed savings and loans, to cancel some rent-regulated leases.

So it is that Philippe de Montebello, director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, pays about $1,985 a month for a seven-room apartment on Fifth Avenue.

And it helps the poor, he says, who would otherwise be forced to live farther out.

A further 355,300 apartments are "rent-stabilized."

Meanwhile, there has been ferment in the courts.

I don't want to talk about it."

The market rate would be about $6,000, according to Feathered Nest, a local rental agency, based on the apartment's floor plan, location and other information.

But evictions are difficult.

Other rent-regulated tenants, like former New York Mayor David Dinkins and Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau, knew the landlord, in their case New York's Rudin family.

Michael McKee, chairman of the New York State Tenant and Neighborhood Coalition, which supports regulation, says it "protects the housing stock and keeps it affordable."

An astronomical sum, it would seem.

Young families, unable to get in on such a deal, end up in smaller places at higher rent.

Mr. Asher says he and his wife have lived in the Belnord for 30 years.

But one thing Mayor Rudolph Giuliani won't be challenging is rent regulation.

After the war, city politicians retained rent regulation, ruling that as long as the vacancy rate remains below 5%, a housing emergency exists.

And Jack Futterman, chairman of Pathmark Stores Inc., pays $1,336.82 a month for an apartment on tony Central Park South, according to rent records.

"If I were in charge," he says, "I would decontrol all regulated apartments that are vacated."

New York City is facing a $2.3 billion budget deficit and its worst fiscal crunch in 20 years.

People from all walks of life have lucked into rent-regulated New York apartments: actresses Mia Farrow and Cicely Tyson; Baroness Ingrid Thyssen; Sidney Biddle Barrows, the so-called Mayflower Madam; State Senate Democratic leader Manfred Ohrenstein; leveraged-buyout specialist Todd Goodwin; and also some employees of the company that publishes this newspaper, Dow Jones & Co.

The Council will face several proposed changes, among them to let rents jump 25% when apartments are vacated and to deregulate vacated apartments entirely.

His landlord says it is the size of four large two-bedroom apartments, and real-estate agents say they could rent it for $20,000 on the open market.

I found out about it, so I got it."

The rules get complicated from here.

Entertainment lawyer Allen J. Grubman, who has done deals for the likes of Billy Joel, Madonna, Michael Jackson and David Geffen, struck one for himself, too.

"We are subsidizing their rent."

And there are ways around it.

The rent stays the same.

These apartments are the real plums, because any rent increases are severely restricted.

Of the 581,241 rental apartments in Manhattan, 47,000 are "rent-controlled," which means they were built before 1947 and the same tenants (or close relatives) have lived in them since 1971.

The rent system is something countless New Yorkers are passionate about.

An elderly tenant whose children have left home may remain in a sprawling apartment because it is cheaper than a smaller, but unregulated, place would be.

Some landlords prefer to rent to the well-to-do because they will spend on the apartment's upkeep.

Her mother, Maureen O'Sullivan, who also was in the Woody Allen film, first signed the lease 40 years ago.

Any advice from him now?

A state housing agency, backed by a state appeals court, has expanded them to surviving members of gay couples, in a ruling that also applies to certain unmarried heterosexual couples.

The apartment in an elegant building on the prestigious avenue is worth at least $5,000 a month, real-estate professionals say.

"Removing rent guidelines would result in a short-run increase in many rents.

The legislature ultimately did vote to take it from tenants earning over $250,000 a year if their rent is $2,000 or more.

But Mr. Grubman gets the entire 17th floor of a graceful old Park Avenue building that spans half of a city block.

The new law deregulating $2,000-plus apartments of $250,000-income tenants affects less than 1% of rentals.

The actress grew up in the apartment, which was the setting for one of her movies, "Hannah and Her Sisters."

The reason for this disparity: New York rent regulation.

One official in the mayor's office suggests there is another reason: bad politics.

The reason for the disparity?

The apartment's estimated free-market rent is three times what they pay.

She lost the apartment and pleaded guilty in 1985 to a misdemeanor prostitution charge.

Dozens of rent-regulated tenants in the Belnord, a stately prewar building on Manhattan's West Side, have gone on rent strike to protest peeling paint and cracked walls.

Asked whether this means that he, unlike other developers, supports rent regulation, Mr. Resnick says, "I'm in the real-estate business.

Landlords must offer tenants new rent-stabilized leases when they expire, with whatever increase is permitted (currently 3% on a one-year lease or 5% on a two-year lease).

Critics also say the restrictions deter construction of new rental buildings and force landlords -- and, indirectly, taxpayers -- to subsidize those tenants lucky enough to have one of the regulated apartments.

In the 1980s, the last time there was new rental-housing construction in Manhattan, practically every developer chose the abatements and therefore regulation -- but built luxury, not middle- or lower-income, housing.

Not by him.

The average household income of occupants of rent-regulated apartments in New York's five boroughs was less than $20,000 last year.

Mr. Koch paid about $400 a month for his one-bedroom in Greenwich Village -- and held onto it for 12 years while living in the mayor's official residence, Gracie Mansion.

A grandmother can pass the apartment on to a grandchild when she dies, for example, if the grandchild has lived with her for at least two years.

These were built after 1947, or built earlier but vacated and re-rented after 1971.

Yet the well-to-do reap a disproportionate share of rent regulation's rewards, at least by some calculations.

Public-relations agent John Scanlon has lived in the Belnord in his three-bedroom rent-stabilized apartment for seven years.

A report by New York's Citizens Budget Commission, a nonpartisan watchdog group, calculated that in 1987, the subsidy from rent regulation averaged $345 monthly for tenant households with annual incomes above $75,000, and only $176 for households with incomes between $10,000 and $19,000.

He pays about $9,000 a month for his rent-stabilized apartment.

The apartment was considered his permanent residence, so he was eligible to keep it.

Having a cheap deal wasn't so fortunate for Sidney Biddle Barrows.

But in the long run, rents of unregulated apartments would come down as the competition gets stronger," he says.

Last year the state legislature, whose laws provide the underpinning of regulation, got into a long wrangle over a proposal to strip the law's protection away from those tenants seemingly least in need of it, namely, the rich.

So apartments that have "turned over" a lot have higher rents.

That's about half Feathered Nest's calculation of the free-market value.

Meanwhile, the city, by various estimates, forfeits $100 million or more in property taxes annually because suppressed rents hold down the cash flow, thus the assessed value, of residential buildings.

A regulated tenant can add to the lease the name of a spouse, who then has the same future lease rights.

For instance, developer Burton Resnick pays about $1,275 a month for a one-bedroom apartment on Park Avenue, according to rent records.

The rate is 3.44% now.

Today, New York's City Council will take up the issue again.

The rent is about $1,500, according to the landlord.

This would be about $1,000 below its market value.

That couple, Aaron and Linda Asher, a former book publisher and an editor at the New Yorker magazine, respectively, won't confirm how much they are paying.

"It kept the girls in shape," she confides.

Mr. Cooke, the former host of Public Broadcasting's "Masterpiece Theatre," lives in an eight-room apartment on Fifth Avenue overlooking Central Park.

This year, the city has a new, free-market-oriented mayor who is moving to privatize some inefficient city-owned hospitals, offer tax incentives to keep business in the city and cut thousands of jobs to close the budget gap.

They separated last June.

The Fifth Avenue apartment of attorney David Blasband and his wife, Paula, isn't in jeopardy.

The $314.41-a-month one-bedroom was in a five-story walk-up building.

Rent regulation in New York began as an emergency measure during World War II to ensure that transient, well-paid wartime workers didn't outbid local residents for the limited supply of apartments.

So how do tenants get these deals?

It will vote on a triennial extension of the rent guidelines.

