Past first ladies have influenced the decisions of their husband presidents, but Mrs. Clinton's different influence is not merely of degree but of kind.

"You are also counsel to the presidential office," says Boyden Gray, who held Mr. Nussbaum's job under President Bush.

Also unlike Mr. Nussbaum, he is well versed in the ways of Washington.

They see themselves as inherently good people who are doing good things for the country, and they could not possibly do anything wrong.

Finally, Mr. Cutler's job may be complicated by the unprecedented phenomenon of a de facto plural presidency.

A Clinton-Nussbaum legacy is that it will be easier to subpoena top White House officials.

Mr. Nussbaum proved unable to cope effectively with the culture of scandal that has emerged since the late '60s and especially Watergate.

This is a very dangerous spot to be in as a lawyer.

Also central to this culture is the notion that executive officers are supposed to avoid even the "appearance" of impropriety.

Mr. Cutler says he will serve the presidency and not be Mr. Clinton's private attorney.

More broadly, it will be harder for the president's lawyers to defend what Hamilton called "the constitutional rights of the executive."

As his friend Leonard Garment, who served as counsel to President Nixon in 1973-74, sympathetically puts it, he was "not very well versed in the ways of Washington."

Mr. Nussbaum was right, in complicated and ironic ways.

"And it's your responsibility to leave the institution as strong as it was when you went in."

For one thing, he will arrive not knowing whether the president or the first lady has violated any laws.

He knows the basic work of the office -- examining legislation sent to the president, vetting presidential nominations, judging pardon petitions, reviewing all the official remarks of the president, considering ethics questions, and so on.

But Mr. Nussbaum was made to draw the first black bead because he, as the White House counsel and its designated agency ethics officer, should have known better.

He probably would have been a fine White House counsel -- sometime before the 1970s.

Unlike Mr. Nussbaum, he has a public record of engagement with constitutional issues -- although note well that Mr. Cutler, a strong advocate of independent counsel legislation and a critic of the Constitution's separation of powers, has not been a strong proponent of executive power.

Still, he will find this job more difficult than the one he had under President Carter.

In fact, Mr. Nussbaum should have known better, although the reason is not just to satisfy the modern appearance standard.

It is not unthinkable that Mrs. Clinton's interests might diverge from her husband's, in Whitewater if nowhere else.

No first lady has ever been in charge of the most important policy initiative of her husband's presidency, and no first lady has had a political constituency within and outside the administration.

Mr. Nussbaum conceived of his job as that of protecting his client, the president, and were he in the private sector his Whitewater-related actions would have caused no problems.

Mr. Nussbaum wasn't the only one guilty of this infraction, and sooner or later most of the others who participated will be made to pay, with their jobs and reputations.

The culture of scandal that embraces that idea is defined by the ethics laws and regulations (most put in place in the past 30 years) that govern the executive and that are enforced by Congress, government ethics officers and, in its own loud and visible way, the press.

In his letter of resignation to President Clinton, Bernard Nussbaum blamed his decision to quit on the controversy created by those "who do not understand, nor wish to understand, the role and obligation of a lawyer, even one acting as White House counsel."

But the White House counsel's job involves more than that.

Found in an executive order issued by President Lyndon Johnson in 1965, this standard is especially endorsed by the press, which tends to regard any appearance infraction as a possible first step on the slippery slope to another Watergate.

Central to this culture is the independent (or special) counsel, who is summoned to conduct criminal probes of executive officers even in contexts in which ordinary prosecutors would find no reasonable basis to proceed.

By that standard, the most important one, Mr. Nussbaum failed spectacularly.

Actions, however unremarkable in a previous era, that today can provoke subpoenas of many high-ranking White House officials cannot be regarded as excellent public service.

The White House has denied interfering with the criminal investigation of Whitewater, but the mere fact that Mr. Nussbaum met on three occasions with Treasury Department officials to discuss the case was universally judged a violation of the appearance standard.

For another, Mr. Cutler will discover people on the White House staff and elsewhere in the administration who seem to think themselves a step above other mortals involved in politics.

By all accounts, Mr. Nussbaum, who spent 27 years as a top corporate litigator in New York City, is an excellent lawyer.

Mr. Nussbaum's successor, Lloyd Cutler, will have to grapple with this legacy.

Mr. Eastland is editor of Forbes MediaCritic and a fellow at the Ethics and Public Policy Center in Washington.

If part of Mr. Nussbaum's job was to serve Mrs. Clinton, the "role and obligations of a lawyer," especially one asked to serve in this White House as its counsel, are more demanding and much trickier than anyone -- save Mr. Nussbaum himself -- has yet to understand.

Ironically, Mr. Nussbaum served (along with Hillary Rodham Clinton) on the House Judiciary Committee during its investigation of Watergate, and it is more his party than the GOP that over the past 20 years has harped on the importance of "ethics in government," especially by the president and the executive branch.

Whether Mr. Cutler -- no personal friend of Bill's or Hillary's -- can change this attitude is obviously doubtful; leadership must come from the president, whose public pronouncements so far would not appear to have encouraged penitence on the part of arrogant subordinates.

But if he advises the president to do certain things and the president disagrees and Mr. Cutler doesn't know why he disagrees, Mr. Cutler could be drawn into a coverup.

But which part of the presidency will he serve?

The bad people were those Republicans who gave us the "greed decade," Iran-Contra and, long ago, Watergate.

She has in effect wielded the president's constitutional appointment powers, as her allies hold high positions in Justice and other agencies.

Mr. Cutler will have to assume his client has done nothing wrong.

This is the second time around for Mr. Cutler, who served as Jimmy Carter's White House counsel.

