For instance: If South Padre Island issues a permit allowing a developer to build a retaining wall, the council can reverse the decision if it determines the structure could damage dunes.

At issue is the proposed Coastal Management Plan, a pet project of Mr. Mauro that offers a blueprint for the use and oversight of 370 miles of Gulf coastline.

A fight over Texas' beaches is kicking up sand in the state capital.

"There's this little gnawing suspicion in my mind that Garry's looking at coastal residents, smiling and saying, `Trust me,'" Mr. Perry says.

The two men, who work in the same building, have exchanged impersonal, sometimes caustic letters about the plan.

The legislation also created the Coastal Coordination Council to develop and enforce a plan.

"When people come in here to talk about developing and buying land, the street talk is you can't do anything because the plan is so restrictive," says Jack Ponton, owner of Coldwell Banker Island Realtors in Port Aransas.

Austin political watchers see a feud developing between the two men.

"I'm not going to go down there and hit him on the knee with a club or anything."

"We talk all the time," Mr. Perry says.

Enter Mr. Perry, who this month held a news conference attacking the plan.

As for the agriculture commissioner's continuing opposition, Mr. Mauro says, "One might think politics had something to do with it.

In 1991, the Texas Legislature approved a sweeping coastal-management bill giving the Land Office power to curtail erosion, guarantee public access to beaches and protect dunes.

Adds George Shipley, a Democratic political consultant: "Garry perceives Perry as someone who is acting unconscionably, someone who is willing to trifle with the degradation of Texas beaches."

Leading the fight is Mr. Perry, once a Democrat like Mr. Mauro, now a Republican who claims the plan would create a superbureaucracy that would threaten private-property rights.

The plan, approved in concept during the 1991 Texas legislative session, appeared until recently to be quietly on its way to final approval.

"I know there's a rift over this issue -- a very strong rift," says Republican political consultant Karl Rove.

County and city leaders say Mr. Mauro's Coastal Coordination Council, which drew up the plan, has overstepped its bounds.

Mr. Mauro says the council won't establish any new laws, but will merely coordinate existing agency rules.

The plan also gives the state new authority to overrule local decisions, where in the past it had to resolve issues in court.

The scuffle, which could have significant environmental and economic impact, pits Texas Agriculture Commissioner Rick Perry against Land Commissioner Garry Mauro -- former Texas A&M schoolmates and two of the state's highest-profile politicians.

Mr. Williamson says he, too, believes the plan's reach is too broad.

What does the council's plan do?

I am not going to politicize this."

For starters, supporters say, it tries to resolve conflicting rules administered by state agencies.

Though it is unlikely Mr. Perry will be able to derail the plan, his opposition could aid Mr. Williamson's effort to slow it down or at least win more changes.

While groups representing environmentalists and many coastal residents support the plan, some landowners and farmers along the coast say they fear it will strangle development and interfere with water and pesticide use.

In one example, state law requires Corpus Christi to release freshwater into its bay to reduce salt levels, but the Texas Railroad Commission has authorized oil companies to discharge highly saline wastewater into the same bay.

The council now even refers to one section of the plan as the "Perry amendment," he says.

"I think we're going to end up eliminating red tape, end up eliminating the delays and confusion all these myriad agencies have created by not working together," he says.

His concerns are shared by Railroad Commission member Barry Williamson, a fellow Republican who sits on the coastal council.

"There was a deliberate effort on Mauro's part to cut Rick Perry out of this commission."

They say the uncertainty already has hurt their business.

Though they traveled in the same student-government circles at Texas A&M, their relationship apparently deteriorated when Mr. Perry switched parties before running for agriculture commissioner in 1990.

Moreover, Mr. Mauro argues, the Coastal Council has addressed Mr. Perry's specific objections.

The only remaining hurdle was a half-dozen public hearings.

Now, though the plan may still be adopted, its path won't be so quiet.

The rivalry has served to frame the debate about the future of Texas beaches, which the Land Office estimates are eroding at a rate of about 50 feet a year.

Mr. Perry now has asked the state attorney general for a ruling on questions about how much power Mr. Mauro's council has.

Last spring, Gov. Ann Richards, with Mr. Mauro's support, vetoed legislation that would have put Mr. Perry on the beach-planning panel.

"If Rick's dealing in good faith, we'll be able to come up with a plan that will satisfy his concerns," Mr. Mauro says.

But the plan has some coastal residents worried.

Afterward, will there be hard feelings?

