"One of our grandfathers was Lebanon's first prime minister.

Before the war, the Daouks controlled about 13,000 square feet of downtown space in what was a crazy quilt of souks.

"You found, for the first time in this country, little guys buying shares in Solidere just to do something for Lebanon," says Mr. Kabbani, the urban planner.

He built his own state within the state.

(The state is supposed to repay Solidere for the infrastructure work.)

"Our family has been rich for four generations," Mr. Shatila says.

Such a realignment was enshrined in the 1989 pact that ended the civil war and strengthened Muslim politicians at the expense of Christians.

Mr. Hariri's assets, estimated at $3 billion to $4 billion, put him among the world's 100 richest people, according to Forbes magazine.

Now, the Lebanese people who used to mix there will never be able to go back.

The same gripe, and others, are heard in Christian East Beirut.

"Solidere isn't for the benefit of the state but for the benefit of Rafic Hariri," Haj Mohammed Bejawi, a Hezbollah parliamentary deputy, says before speeding off from a downtown rally in his Mercedes-Benz limousine.

He has filled many senior government posts with employees of his own corporations.

They are slated to get about $4.8 million in Solidere shares for it; Mr. Daouk says it's worth $39 million, even though demolished.

"We sold dollars for the first three months of the Hariri government to overcome a wave of currency speculation," confides the aide, explaining how Mr. Hariri, after taking office, used his own cash to boost the Lebanese pound by about 30% against the dollar.

Not that he's equal; nobody is equal to the Saudi king.

What particularly galls many large landowners are Mr. Hariri's plans for rebuilding downtown Beirut.

When he returned to Lebanon as premier, one of the construction tycoon's first moves -- after stabilizing the currency -- was to install his own corporate executives in nearly every senior government post connected to finance or reconstruction.

"There's no other reason."

He has spent a fortune buying Lebanese real estate and dispensing college scholarships and charity to the masses.

He then worked in Boston before going to work for Solidere.

Along with stability, Mr. Hariri has imposed his own imperial bearing on Lebanon, a republic that has never suffered emperors lightly.

"But it won't work.

In the trendy Sadat Tower in West Beirut, several dozen well-groomed university graduates peck away at PCs, producing models of the Lebanese economy.

Solidere's remaining shares, valued at $650 million, were recently sold to the Lebanese public to raise cash for infrastructure.

"After a 17-year war, the first thing you should do is re-establish the credibility of official institutions," says Assam Salam, an architect and nephew of a former premier.

"Who is this nouveau-riche Hariri?" asks Mahmoud Shatila, heir to one of Beirut's biggest Sunni family fortunes.

"If they had let us rebuild it ourselves, 70% of downtown Beirut would have already been built by now," he contends.

Solidere, the company he founded for the job, has expropriated most of the bombed-out urban core.

The civil war between Muslims and Christians ended in 1990, thanks to 40,000 Syrian troops who still haven't gone home.

Mr. Hariri, who comes from Sidon, in the impoverished south, is considered an outsider in clubby Beirut.

But though the so-called Taif agreement also called for ending Lebanon's sectarian system of power sharing, Mr. Hariri hasn't introduced any secular reforms.

What dollars?" barks Mr. Hariri upon his return to the room.

It is nearly sunset in Rafic Hariri's fortified palace, and the Lebanese prime minister excuses himself to get dressed for dinner.

"You don't do that by creating your own parallel machine."

At another, a man in a European suit audits Lebanese customs branches.

He and King Fahd became close friends.

He launched Solidere with his own money.

The premier himself offers a plainer reason for his entry into the hornet's nest of Lebanese politics: "I am a simple Lebanese guy who made a fortune in Saudi Arabia and didn't forget his people.

Mr. Shatila says the premier recently offered him $30 million for his 26,000-square-foot compound abutting Mr. Hariri's palace in West Beirut.

Nayla Bustros Sehnoui hails from one of Lebanon's oldest and wealthiest Greek Orthodox families.

The Shiite group has many followers among the 15,000 or so squatters downtown.

Her great-uncle was hanged for opposing Ottomon rule.

Banks, in particular, thrived under Lebanon's Swiss-style secrecy laws.

He glares at Mr. Razian, chairman of the billionaire's two Lebanese banks.

The corporate jet that recently took him to London on a state visit had Saudi markings.

Many of their members spent the war in Europe and the U.S., hoping to return someday to rebuild the country.

Steering -- and largely bankrolling -- the revival is Mr. Hariri, a politician whose only aim, he says, "is to be the one who made a difference."

Mrs. Sehnoui offers a theory popular among the Lebanese elite for why, since as far back as 1983, Mr. Hariri has committed himself and his Saudi sponsors to rebuilding downtown Beirut: "He wants to prove something to King Fahd.

Now Lebanese officials say they are planning for a new era in which Beirut must vie for business with growing commercial hubs such as Cairo, Bahrain, Dubai, Tel Aviv and Nicosia, Cyprus.

She and her husband owned nine buildings in the Solidere district.

He owns real estate on four continents, including Houston's 75-story Texas Commerce Tower.

The aide stares at the floor.

He has helped steer the project away from its early blueprints of a grandiose, modern city toward an older, more Levantine design, with open spaces and excavations of Beirut's 4,000-year past.

Beirut's water and electricity are sporadic -- much like at the end of the war.

The two-tier government bothers some Lebanese.

At one desk, a young woman calculates the effect of government salary increases on state coffers.

Mr. Kabbani is a Hariri believer.

In clan-conscious Lebanon, Mr. Hariri also is widely suspected of trying to channel the spoils of power to his own religious community, Sunni Muslims, to build himself a political base.

Downtown will be only for the very rich foreign companies, the very rich Arabs in the Gulf and the very rich Lebanese abroad."

But the greater public good of rebuilding Lebanon's economy outweighs any unfairness, they say.

But he wants to prove he's a real member of the royal family."

But the job of rebuilding the country after 17 years of self-destruction didn't begin in earnest until the 49-year-old Mr. Hariri was appointed premier by President Elias Hrawi in October 1992, in what many Lebanese considered the last chance to save their country.

He wouldn't part with it for less than $50 million, however.

In much of the country, jobs and shelter are scarce.

Over the next 20 years, Mr. Hariri's Oger Enterprises built dozens of projectsfrom airports to palaces, hospitals to hotels -- for the Saudi royal family and other Persian Gulf emirs.

"We were protected for 20 years before the war," says Oussama Kabbani, chief urban planner for Solidere, a private company created to rebuild central Beirut.

As compensation, the area's landlords and tenants received 65% of Solidere's shares, a stake valued by a judicial committee at roughly $1.2 billion.

The number crunchers work for Mr. Hariri's "private" center for economic research, an office connected to the ministry of finance but staffed entirely by employees of Hariri-owned firms.

Their government salaries start at less than 60% of what Mr. Hariri pays.

The justice minister is Mr. Hariri's lawyer.

Even if Mr. Hariri's ambitious reconstruction plans succeed -- he recently signed a $380 million contract with three European companies to overhaul the national telephone system -- Lebanon will never have the same panache it had before the war.

In the mid-1980s, the 32-year-old Beirut native fled the war to study urban design at Harvard on a scholarship from the Hariri Foundation.

It isn't the loss of property she laments, however, but the loss of Lebanon's cosmopolitan soul.

Tourism flourished at its beaches and mountain resorts.

Fifteen years ago, this Hariri was nothing."

For his deeds, the son of poor Lebanese farmers was awarded a coveted prize for a foreigner in the desert kingdom: Saudi citizenship.

And, when various coffers were low, he stepped in to pay the salaries of university professors, street cleaners, even stewardesses of the state-owned airline.

"Mr. Hariri definitely wants to go down in history as the man who rebuilt his country," Mr. Kabbani says.

The ministers of finance, economics and telecommunications are Hariri-company men; so are the chief of Beirut's port and the director of the Council for Development and Reconstruction.

At the nearby ministry itself, few people have access to phone lines that work, let alone to computers.

Mr. Hariri speaks Arabic with a Saudi accent.

Mr. Hariri has launched a 10-year, $12 billion reconstruction program, which is attracting foreign investment and aid.

He has become Lebanon's biggest media baron, with newspapers, radio stations and two television networks, including his 50% stake in state-run Tele Liban.

"The Beirut center was the result of decades and decades of Lebanese culture," she says.

As crown prince in the mid-1970s, the Saudi ruler adopted Mr. Hariri, then an ambitious accountant, as the royal court's favorite building contractor.

Then, Beirut's open port and liberal, European atmosphere made it an ideal hub for doing business in the repressive but affluent Mideast.

Beyond clan conflict, though, the rise of Mr. Hariri and his "financial militia," as his subordinates are known here, threatens the status of elite Muslim and Christian families who have run Lebanon for decades.

"All confessions and classes worked and lived downtown -- the petty functionaries, the textile merchants from Tripoli, the lawyers . . ..

He owns several banks in the Mideast and Europe, a fleet of private jets and one of Saudi Arabia's biggest publishers of the Koran, among other companies.

This is Lebanon."

Of the public shares, Mr. Hariri bought 19%, making him Solidere's biggest shareholder.

The sewerless streets turn into rivers in the rain, except where big potholes create small lakes.

"For once, there's a functioning legal framework for government policy," concedes economist Kamal Hamdan, an adviser to two previous finance ministers and a tough Hariri critic on most issues.

Mustafa Razian, who has worked for Mr. Hariri for 16 years, sits down to provide a few last details on what Mr. Hariri calls "the restoration of confidence" in Lebanon.

"Now we'll have to create a world-class product to compete."

"But what it looks like is up to us."

Despite the Syrian presence, security remains dicey, as a pair of recent bombings targeting Christians attest.

Now, with the Mr. Hariri in control -- backed by his oil friends in the Persian Gulf -- those hopes have largely been dashed.

"I call it the theft of the century," says Mr. Daouk, the wealthy scion, gazing at his two-acre palm and flower garden in the heart of teeming West Beirut.

The more my wealth grew, the more I helped my country.

His sons greet their father by kissing his hand, common in Saudi Arabia but rare in Lebanon.

Rafic Hariri has lifted Lebanon, if not to its feet, at least to its knees.

At that, he has already succeeded.

The central-bank governor is his stockbroker.

"He's trying to re-create the kingdom of Saudi Arabia," says Omar Daouk, scion of one of Beirut's traditional ruling families.

Last year, the capital inflow helped the economy grow 7% as the inflation rate fell below 10% for the first time in a decade.

Credit the man, his money, or both.

RAFIC HARIRI, Lebanon's wealthy prime minister, didn't help pay the salaries of Middle East Airlines' stewardesses.

They probably weren't, staff planners admit.

Because of a translation error, a page-one article March 29 erroneously reported that Mr. Hariri had personally helped the airline in a pinch.

The work ahead remains enormous.

"The currency has stabilized because I became prime minister," Mr. Hariri snaps.

At the Solidere headquarters, there isn't much argument about whether the landowners and tenants were fully compensated.

This is in my blood."

The Iranian-backed Hezbollah has also come out against Solidere, arguing that Islamic law protects people from giving property against their will.

Since then, a combination of conservative economic policy and a stable political climate has lured back nearly $2 billion of Lebanese savings that had fled overseas, lifting bank deposits by more than 20%.

"Did we sell dollars?

The commercial heart of Beirut is still an eerie, minelaced mountain of rubble, inhabited by Syrian laborers and the hardiest of squatters from bombed-out villages in the countryside.

Mr. Hariri understudied for his job with no less than King Fahd.

"I'd never work for the ministry," sniffs one Hariri analyst.

