He figures all the "good news" is out and asks: "Where do they go from here?"

Mr. York, in an interview, won't comment on the stock's outlook.

But if the first quarter doesn't show a reasonable profit, he says he would take a hard look and the debt rating could fall again.

It remains a leader in many markets and retains impressive technology.

Wall Street just loves a good comeback.

Consultants Charles Ferguson and Charles Morris contend the debt-to-equity ratio is so high that it won't take much to trigger a crunch.

It could even take a little tumble tomorrow if Mr. Gerstner isn't sufficiently exuberant to please his fans.

The stock closed 58 1/4, off 3/8, yesterday after rising 1 1/2 on Monday.

In an interview, Mr. Ferguson predicts IBM's profit will come under severe pressure in the next six to 18 months as the mainframe business declines faster than anticipated.

Even IBM's harshest critics aren't predicting the end of IBM.

Analysts' average estimate for full-year earnings this year is $1.2 billion, or $2.10 a share.

Battered by multibillion-dollar charges, IBM's net worth has declined so sharply that long-term debt has risen to the equivalent of 77% of shareholder equity.

The new credit line requires that IBM's annual cash flow be at least twice its net interest expense.

It will be a kind of transition year."

Slippage in profit could hurt the stock price and perhaps make it costlier to raise cash in the commercial paper markets, where IBM must roll over short-term IOUs of about $12 billion a year.

Cash flow should be even better in 1994, they say.

The debt-to-equity ratio would deteriorate further, perhaps undermining terms of the new $10 billion credit facility that IBM has lined up as a cushion against bad times.

The deterioration, of course, is what happens when a company overexpands, misreads the market, and then takes charges that reduce its own net worth by $23 billion over the past three years.

When IBM Chairman Louis V. Gerstner Jr. holds his first major Wall Street briefing tomorrow, analysts will be sniffing eagerly for any hint of good news.

Yet some supporters see little upside in the stock for now.

Chris Nawn, senior analyst at Dreyfus, a big mutual-fund concern that holds IBM shares, says "we're not buying" more now.

IBM is expected to introduce a new generation of its mainframe family next month.

Even some IBM executives say privately they are a little nervous over whether the stock is outpacing realistic expectations for the business.

A year ago the figure was at a respectable 46.5%; at year-end 1990, debt stood at less than 28% of equity.

The new figure amounts to a lot of leverage in the highly volatile technology industry, and it certainly isn't what analysts first think of when they think of a blue-chip stock.

Once a safe haven for cautious investors, IBM stock could be in for a rough-and-tumble ride this year.

While he says, "I feel pretty good about the business now," he won't discuss how much room he has for error.

By the bearish Mr. Ferguson's analysis, Mr. Gerstner will have to focus on just keeping the business afloat, rather than setting important strategy for how to get ahead.

But a startling dose of reality is served up in IBM's new annual report.

Yet IBM can't easily raise cash by selling off pieces; Mr. Gerstner has vowed to keep the business together and retreated from IBM's previous intention to start reporting separate results for individual lines.

One big worry: What happens if Big Blue's mainframes, which still provide one-third of operating profit, fare even worse than that?

It indicates that before newcomers bet on a rebound at IBM, they might do well to brace for disappointments.

A less melodramatic outlook comes from analyst Nicholas D. Riccio of Standard & Poor's, which rates IBM debt single-A: "We think IBM can earn some money in 1994.

No problem.

But it leaves Mr. Gerstner and Chief Financial Officer Jerome B. York little room for error as they navigate through the shoals of product transitions this year.

IBM is likely to post a small first-quarter profit of $57 million, or about a dime a share, estimates Jay Stevens of Dean Witter.

That's why shares of International Business Machines have been bumping up against their 52-week high in recent days, buoyed by investors who want to believe that Big Blue has put the blues behind it.

But what if they're wrong?

It already has said that, despite the typical boost of a new line, mainframe revenue could drop by a daunting 50% this year.

The bears on Big Blue see another danger: What if IBM has to take still more billions of dollars in charges to lay off more people and shutter more factories?

In 1993, IBM's cash flow of $3.1 billion was almost 2.4 times net interest expense of $1.3 billion, IBM officials point out.

(Terms of IBM's previously existing debt don't make such demands.)

