Hillary Rodham Clinton's commodities broker was disciplined by regulators for a variety of wrongdoing both before and after Mrs. Clinton's successful foray into cattle-futures trading in the late 1970s.

Robert L. "Red" Bone, Mrs. Clinton's broker at the Springdale, Ark., office of futures brokerage firm Refco Inc., was accused, among other things, of allocating trades to investors in his branch office after he had determined whether the trades were winners or losers, regulators say.

"Our concern at the time was that he could have been allocating trades," said John Troelstrup, then a vice president in charge of compliance at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, where Mrs. Clinton's cattle-futures trades were processed.

"We had occasional complaints from customers at the Refco Springdale office, and some of those complaints made allegations about allocations of losing trades to their accounts."

In December 1979, the Chicago Merc disciplined Mr. Bone for "serious and repeated violations of record-keeping functions, order-entry procedures, margin requirements and hedge procedures."

The action against Mr. Bone was first reported by Securities Week, a newsletter published by McGraw Hill.

Mr. Bone agreed at the time to a three-year suspension of his Merc registration as a commodity broker.

The Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Merc's federal regulator, also disciplined Mr. Bone twice for various infractions.

But Mr. Troelstrup, now an attorney in private practice, said the Merc received no allegation that Mrs. Clinton, who was a novice to commodity trading, directly benefited from allocation of profitable trades to her Refco account during the period when she earned about $98,000 trading cattle contracts.

Mr. Bone couldn't be reached for comment.

In an interview, James Blair, general counsel for Tyson Foods Inc., said that Mrs. Clinton started trading cattle futures at his suggestion because he himself had made money in the cattle market.

But Mr. Blair strongly denied that Mrs. Clinton benefited from allocation of profitable trades to her account while losing cattle trades were dumped in other investors' accounts.

"It couldn't have happened," Mr. Blair said.

"She'd take a position.

She'd get a confirmation, and she'd close it out, maybe when I advised her to do so, maybe not."

The interview with Mr. Blair shed new light on the amount of money Mrs. Clinton actually invested in commodities.

"My recollection is she started with at least $1,000," Mr. Blair said, adding that Mrs. Clinton's trades were "relatively modest, five or 10 contracts."

"Mrs. Clinton used her own money and assumed the full risk of her trades," said John Podesta, a White House aide.

"She had then -- and still has -- absolutely no knowledge about her broker's alleged allocation of trades."

Another aide said the White House is working to determine the exact amount of Mrs. Clinton's investment.

The success of Mrs. Clinton, who parlayed her small investment into a $98,000 profit, may have resulted simply from good timing and good advice from Mr. Blair, Mr. Troelstrup said.

"Being on the right side of the market at that time would have been easier for having a contact with a Tyson lawyer," Mr. Troelstrup said.

"Access to that kind of advice and opinion could help a novice jump into the market at the right time."

At the time, Mr. Blair was outside counsel to Tyson, which then had no cattle operations.

Mr. Blair has said it was his personal success in trading cattle futures that prompted him to recommend the investment to Mrs. Clinton, his friend and tennis partner.

He referred her to Mr. Bone, who was also his broker, he said.

A month before Mrs. Clinton began trading cattle futures in 1978, Mr. Bone had completed a one-year prohibition on trading commodities for his own account.

He had agreed to the prohibition to settle CFTC allegations that he participated in an attempt to manipulate the Chicago Merc's egg-futures market in 1970.

The CFTC later disciplined Mr. Bone a second time, alleging that he violated the terms of the first one-year prohibition by trading for personal profit through another broker's account.

In the second CFTC proceeding, Mr. Bone agreed to a $100,000 fine, a one-year revocation of his broker's license and a three-year personal trading prohibition.

