Wall Street just loves a good comeback.

That's why shares of International Business Machines have been bumping up against their 52-week high in recent days, buoyed by investors who want to believe that Big Blue has put the blues behind it.

The stock closed 58 1/4, off 3/8, yesterday after rising 1 1/2 on Monday.

When IBM Chairman Louis V. Gerstner Jr. holds his first major Wall Street briefing tomorrow, analysts will be sniffing eagerly for any hint of good news.

But a startling dose of reality is served up in IBM's new annual report.

It indicates that before newcomers bet on a rebound at IBM, they might do well to brace for disappointments.

Once a safe haven for cautious investors, IBM stock could be in for a rough-and-tumble ride this year.

It could even take a little tumble tomorrow if Mr. Gerstner isn't sufficiently exuberant to please his fans.

Battered by multibillion-dollar charges, IBM's net worth has declined so sharply that long-term debt has risen to the equivalent of 77% of shareholder equity.

A year ago the figure was at a respectable 46.5%; at year-end 1990, debt stood at less than 28% of equity.

The new figure amounts to a lot of leverage in the highly volatile technology industry, and it certainly isn't what analysts first think of when they think of a blue-chip stock.

The deterioration, of course, is what happens when a company overexpands, misreads the market, and then takes charges that reduce its own net worth by $23 billion over the past three years.

But it leaves Mr. Gerstner and Chief Financial Officer Jerome B. York little room for error as they navigate through the shoals of product transitions this year.

Even some IBM executives say privately they are a little nervous over whether the stock is outpacing realistic expectations for the business.

Mr. York, in an interview, won't comment on the stock's outlook.

While he says, "I feel pretty good about the business now," he won't discuss how much room he has for error.

IBM is expected to introduce a new generation of its mainframe family next month.

It already has said that, despite the typical boost of a new line, mainframe revenue could drop by a daunting 50% this year.

One big worry: What happens if Big Blue's mainframes, which still provide one-third of operating profit, fare even worse than that?

The bears on Big Blue see another danger: What if IBM has to take still more billions of dollars in charges to lay off more people and shutter more factories?

The debt-to-equity ratio would deteriorate further, perhaps undermining terms of the new $10 billion credit facility that IBM has lined up as a cushion against bad times.

The new credit line requires that IBM's annual cash flow be at least twice its net interest expense.

(Terms of IBM's previously existing debt don't make such demands.)

In 1993, IBM's cash flow of $3.1 billion was almost 2.4 times net interest expense of $1.3 billion, IBM officials point out.

No problem.

Cash flow should be even better in 1994, they say.

But what if they're wrong?

Consultants Charles Ferguson and Charles Morris contend the debt-to-equity ratio is so high that it won't take much to trigger a crunch.

In an interview, Mr. Ferguson predicts IBM's profit will come under severe pressure in the next six to 18 months as the mainframe business declines faster than anticipated.

A less melodramatic outlook comes from analyst Nicholas D. Riccio of Standard & Poor's, which rates IBM debt single-A: "We think IBM can earn some money in 1994.

It will be a kind of transition year."

But if the first quarter doesn't show a reasonable profit, he says he would take a hard look and the debt rating could fall again.

IBM is likely to post a small first-quarter profit of $57 million, or about a dime a share, estimates Jay Stevens of Dean Witter.

Analysts' average estimate for full-year earnings this year is $1.2 billion, or $2.10 a share.

Slippage in profit could hurt the stock price and perhaps make it costlier to raise cash in the commercial paper markets, where IBM must roll over short-term IOUs of about $12 billion a year.

Yet IBM can't easily raise cash by selling off pieces; Mr. Gerstner has vowed to keep the business together and retreated from IBM's previous intention to start reporting separate results for individual lines.

By the bearish Mr. Ferguson's analysis, Mr. Gerstner will have to focus on just keeping the business afloat, rather than setting important strategy for how to get ahead.

Even IBM's harshest critics aren't predicting the end of IBM.

It remains a leader in many markets and retains impressive technology.

Yet some supporters see little upside in the stock for now.

Chris Nawn, senior analyst at Dreyfus, a big mutual-fund concern that holds IBM shares, says "we're not buying" more now.

He figures all the "good news" is out and asks: "Where do they go from here?"

