Many elementary schools equip each classroom with a few computers and use them for team projects.

But many educators and users say computers are so flexible that understanding and enjoying them is likely to benefit the user.

Some 84% of women and 74% of men "think computers are fun."

But most people who are concerned about the gender gap in computing say that social pressure, teaching bias and child rearing are the key factors in leaving women behind men.

Many women who love computing have decided against letting it overwhelm them.

After all, a computer is a tool; it isn't an end in itself.

Sixty percent of men but only 46% of women say, "I want a PC that can talk, hear and see just like me."

It's good that girls tend to use computers to get things done, says Ms. Sanders of the gender equity project in New York.

I know the jargon.

"I get done what I have to and get out," she says.

They're there for a purpose," says Katie Payne, president of Delahaye Group Inc., a market research concern in Portsmouth, N.H.

She wants to type it and be done with it."

User groups like the Boston Computer Society are two-thirds or more male.

"The guys want to solve the problem."

Indeed, a survey by SBT Accounting, Sausalito, Calif., found women were more likely to ask for help, while men floundered around without asking directions.

Invariably the little boys push their way onto the keyboard, educators say, while the little girls stay in the back.

Though women may not like their computers as much as men do, women may actually be better at getting their work done on them.

And a cadre of 100 women programmers operated ENIAC, one of the first modern-day computers, during World War II.

Historically, women have played key roles in the development of computers.

Girls and women, they say, tend to have dominant right brains where emotions rule, which could help explain why many women prefer cooperative work with other people to solitary computer work.

Joan could care less.

But when it comes to their computer, the two are very different.

Men also spend more of their spare time on their computers.

But, she says, "when boys mess around just to see what it will do, that leads to a sense of confidence and mastery that you don't get if you just try to get something done."

Of course, many men never become computer savants and some women do, but the broad patterns are the reverse.

Barbee Teasley, a computer science professor at Bowling Green State University in Ohio, studied junior high school students using a program called Dinosaur Adventure.

Both are also deeply involved in fixing up their 1870 mansard-roofed house in Somerville, Mass.

They're much more take charge -- `hey computer, you're going to do what I want you to.'"

Both restore art, and both are experts in art history, chemistry and materials science.

As computers and their operating systems become simpler, understanding how they work becomes less important.

Her husband, however, enjoys buying new software, plays games with their seven-year-old son and experiments with optical character recognition, a technology that allows a computer to turn a scanned document into computer-readable text.

"They don't waste time just messing around or gluing themselves to the screen and using the computer as a substitute for interaction with people."

Now, she says, she works in marketing, where she mixes her technical background with "interfacing with people," using her computing skill "as a tool to be more productive."

"The greatest predictor of success with computers is experience-mucking around," says Shelly Heller, a computer science professor at George Washington University in Washington, D.C., who has developed a successful program for teaching inner city girls about computers.

"I am the one in the family who solves the operating system problems," she says.

Just as men are more likely than women to be enraptured by stereo systems, men seem more likely to be captivated with the computing machine itself.

Robin Jeffries, an interface designer with Sun Microsystems Inc. in Sunnyvale, Calif., is married to a physicist who knows little about computers.

"I don't find it relaxing."

Some theorists contend that the left hemisphere of the brain, which is logical and analytical, tends to dominate in men, making it easier for them to relate to computers.

Joan and Jim Wright have a lot in common.

But men seem to want computers to be their friends.

Mrs. Wright writes reports and articles using an old-fashioned version of WordPerfect.

Noting the differences, some people have looked for a genetic basis.

"It's scientifically irresponsible to say there are genetic differences."

Boys tend to do a minute of this and 30 seconds of that.

Melinda LeBaron, a product manager with 3Com Corp., a computer networking company in Santa Clara, Calif., has a background as a programmer and a computer repair person.

"I enjoy the challenge of learning the next technology," he says.

While girls start falling behind boys in math and science in junior high school, they start falling behind in computer skills even earlier.

She wants it to work.

Computers may seem neuter, but men and women relate to them in very different ways.

"I've found that though I don't use the computer that much, I have a theoretical base.

At one point, she says, "computer science and electrical engineering were such an intellectual challenge that I got sucked into a black hole and didn't have a life."

Even women who are computer experts often have different attitudes toward their PCs.

She found "girls tended to stick with the one thing they started with, even if they seemed bored.

"I've never heard of a computer gene," says Jo Sanders, who works on computer equity at the City University of New York.

And CompuServe says just 20% of its on-line subscribers are women.

Even when the girls get to the keyboard, they do less with it.

While women use computers, men love them.

Ziff-Davis, the computer magazine giant, says the readership of its biggest magazines, such as PC Magazine, Computer Shopper and PC Week, is 80% male and 20% female.

The Defense Department's computer language is named ADA after Augusta Ada Lovelace, a 19th century technology buff who was among the industry's pioneers.

But her husband and sons are the ones "who go to the computer for 15 minutes and find they're engrossed for hours."

Some people might argue that gender differences in the use of computers are irrelevant.

But these days, many girls see computers as a boy's thing.

Prodigy Services' female membership has grown from 20% to 40% in the past three years, but half its users are men (10% are children).

She says she doesn't even have a computer at home.

"Women consider computers the way they consider Cuisinarts.

In her office, she says, when women's computers crash, they are quick to get help so they can get back to work.

A survey by mouse-maker Logitech Inc. of Fremont, Calif., found that 82% of women thought computers had made their jobs "much easier," while only 67% of men felt that way.

