Fully 71% of those polled in the Venture Capital survey said they were more reluctant to discuss company performance with analysts, 61% reported increased liability-insurance costs, and 30% said they had difficulty retaining outside directors.

"This run-to-the-courthouse phenomenon needs to be examined," Mr. Levitt said in a speech in San Diego.

"It's extortion," fumes Adaptec's chairman, John Adler.

"If you talk to anybody in Silicon Valley, you'll see that this is an enormous issue, perhaps the No. 1 public-policy issue," says John Endean, vice president for policy at the American Business Conference, which represents the chief executives of 100 of the country's fastest-growing companies.

Its 1994 liability insurance premiums have more than doubled over 1992 rates.

A new set of investors has taken control of the company and, says Mr. Texido, they're "trying to figure out what to do."

Legent's chief financial officer, Mr. Burton says, was spending nearly 90% of his time to prepare a defense.

The company has spent more than $100,000 in legal costs.

In addition, law firms shy away from huge corporations because shareholder-notification requirements now can cost more than $1 million in mailings alone, he adds.

We're not making any projections because by their very nature we could be wrong."

But the lawsuits went on.

To comply with all the requests for information, he says, Adaptec produced 1,500 boxes of documents.

The difficulty comes in separating legitimate from meritless cases, he says.

But in the quarter ended December 1990, profit fell short of expectations -- and Adaptec was sued.

An avalanche of shareholder suits followed.

The company, which sells reverse mortgages to mostly elderly homeowners, went public in 1992 and its stock soon was an impressive performer, reaching a high of $27 a share.

Over the next two weeks, eight suits were filed against the company and its officers and consolidated into one, with charges ranging from securities violations to insider selling.

As the trial date came closer, Legent says it tried to settle.

But the impact of these shareholder class actions goes beyond those businesses that take direct hits.

And sometime next week, Sens. Christopher Dodd (D., Conn.) and Pete Domenici (R., N.M.) plan to introduce legislation to curtail class-action litigation abuses.

And although the case was dismissed by a judge in June 1993, the repercussions have been widespread, Mr. Behrendt says.

They often target small or fast-growing companies -- exactly the ones that can least afford the pain.

At the advice of their lawyers, entrepreneurs and directors are discussing potential problems in their public documents more fully while toning down the hype in their discussions with analysts; and they're bringing in outside auditors more frequently.

Then 20 employees each spent a day answering questions from the plaintiffs' lawyers.

Scouring the media for lower-than-projected earnings, a small number of law firms and their "professional plaintiffs," who own shares in many companies, file complaints that typically allege the defendant company fraudulently withheld or misrepresented important information.

"We're afraid to talk about the upside," says Mr. Behrendt about the company's prospects.

And "there is no way the Securities and Exchange Commission can go after everybody -- they need the help of the private bar," says Boris Feldman, a partner with Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati in Palo Alto, Cal., which has represented the defense in about 75 class-action shareholder suits.

Judges are cracking down on frivolous shareholder lawsuits, throwing out as many as 40%, according to Bob Mednick, a partner at Arthur Andersen in Chicago.

One corporation lobbying hard for reform is Adaptec Corp. of Milpitas, Calif., which agreed to pay $4.3 million in 1993 to settle a suit brought by the San Diego firm of Milberg Weiss Bershad Hynes & Lerach.

Milberg Weiss is known as the king of class-action securities lawsuits.

Forbes Magazine estimated recently that the firm's San Diego office had generated more than $90 million in fees from shareholder class-action suits over the past five years.

"And it would so encumber and complicate class-action procedures that there would no longer be an effective remedy for defrauded investors."

Over the eight to 10 weeks following the announcement, Legent found itself providing 290,000 pages of documents to respond to plaintiffs' subpoenas.

He declines to say how much his firm makes in fees from shareholder suits and vows to fight the Dodd-Domenici bill to his "dying breath."

But the company hasn't recovered.

Providential's offer to settle was rejected by the plaintiffs.

Says Mr. Mednick of Arthur Andersen: "These suits aren't brought by investors.

It cost Legent nearly $2 million in legal fees and several millions in so-called "soft dollars."

In a survey of 212 companies released last week by the National Venture Capital Association, more than one in six young, publicly traded companies said they had been defendants in such suits, some more than once.

As the direction of the case became clearer, "we began to spend more money on outside counsel," recalls John Burton, Legent's president.

When the SEC eventually reversed its decision, the suits were dropped.

But the plaintiffs' lawyers wanted "an egregious amount for something we didn't do," says Mr. Burton.

Providential says its business was at a standstill.

"We got sued six times in 24 hours," says William Texido, its chief executive officer.

"These suits are a major threat to entrepreneurial companies," says Peter Behrendt, chief executive officer of Exabyte Corp., a Longmont, Colo., maker of computer-data storage devices.

In court, a federal judge dismissed the charges against Legent.

Securities Class Action Alert says that last year the firm initiated 40 such complaints, more than any other firm.

He rejects Mr. Adler's accusations, saying the Adaptec CEO "doesn't want to be called to account."

In 1992, Exabyte was sued after it reported that its third-quarter earnings would be lower than analysts' projections -- because of the introduction of a new product, it says -- and its share price dropped to $14 from $23.

The shareholders, critics say, receive just pennies on the dollar from these huge settlements.

To be sure, some companies do give false information to their shareholders.

They accused us of fraud and lying and cheating," says Mr. Adler.

In January, Arthur Levitt, chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, announced that the SEC would become more active in trying to curb unnecessary shareholder lawsuits.

And more senior executives began to focus on the suit.

The company tried to persuade the SEC that it had misinterpreted Providential's business and asked it to reconsider.

"The suit was a blanket fishing expedition.

"The bill would grant government immunity to accountants -- a shocking departure from their historic responsibilities," he says.

Source: Securities Class Action Alert, Cresskill, N.J.

And it has had a difficult time recruiting new board members and senior executives.

They're brought by lawyers."

Legent Computer, a Vienna, Va., software firm also got sued within hours of acknowledging last July that it would have quarterly earnings lower than expected and a 60% drop in its stock price.

His company, which makes computer hardware and software, has been profitable every quarter since it went public in 1986, he says, and for several years it met every earnings projection it made.

In the same period, the number of suits settled jumped to 144 from 53, and the average cash settlement increased to $10.8 million from $6.1 million.

While Adaptec recovered from its legal skirmishes, Providential Corp., a San Francisco financial services company hasn't.

Of cases settled in the Venture Capital survey, for example, defendants said they paid an average of $4.5 million, with 39% of that going to the plaintiffs' law firms.

In the company's upcoming annual report for 1993, he says, "there isn't a single line that says what we're aiming for.

Some small-company executives are fighting back.

The class-action newsletter estimates that total cash settlements of shareholder class-action lawsuits against companies of all sizes nearly quintupled to $1.55 billion in 1992 from $324 million in 1988.

The legal system is also giving them some help.

But the suit took its toll, says Mr. Burton.

Accountants, perhaps understandably, dispute that view.

Now lawyers are focusing on smaller companies because they're more likely to show big swings in their stock prices, says James Newman, editor and publisher of Securities Class Action Alert, a newsletter based in Cresskill, N.J.

But once a lawsuit goes to court, the vast majority of defendants end up paying millions in settlements to escape years of costly litigation and to shield themselves from liability exposure.

But an announcement by the SEC that it was looking into Providential Corp.'s accounting methods sent the stock plummeting.

The suits -- most of which are still pending -- have already eaten up an average of 1,055 hours of management time each and $692,000 in legal fees.

In the 1980s and early 1990s, many shareholder suits took aim at large companies involved in spectacular takeovers and mergers, as well as those affected by the collapse of the junk-bond market.

When a small or midsize company reports disappointing earnings these days, a class-action shareholder lawsuit may not be far behind.

William Lerach, who runs the Milberg Weiss San Diego office, says he is protecting the rights of shareholders who get "blindsided" by unexpected bad news.

Finally, after spending more than $1 million in legal fees, it settled.

The company even staged a mock trial to prepare.

