Steven Cook's voluntary dismissal of his sexual abuse lawsuit against Chicago's Cardinal Joseph Bernardin has freed a good man from terrible accusations.

The problem with the suit was that it was filed in the first place.

The complaint itself was dynamite -- that the leader of the largest Roman Catholic archdiocese in the U.S., while he served as archbishop of the Cincinnati archdiocese 20 years ago, abused a teenage seminarian.

Whatever its eventual outcome, the suit meant that the cardinal would have to endure, in public and daily, the status of being an accused wrongdoer, relegated to the role of emphatically asserting his innocence.

Although "probable cause" alone will legally support a criminal indictment, we bar prosecutors, as an ethical matter, from seeking an indictment unless they are convinced in good faith that the contemplated charges can be proved beyond a reasonable doubt.

But neither our civil law nor our system of legal ethics does much to restrain plaintiffs and their lawyers from bringing questionable private claims -- claims that are often more damaging than criminal charges.

The filing fee for Steven Cook's $10 million federal lawsuit was only $120.

The total out-of-pocket cost of commencing the suit could not have been very much and was obviously not a deterrent.

Some say that meritless lawsuits are deterred by the fact that the plaintiff/accuser knows that he too will have to go through the ordeal of the ensuing litigation.

But for poor Mr. Cook, for whom one can feel only sympathy, the "ordeal" of litigation did not appear to weigh very heavily.

Nor was Mr. Cook deterred by the need to find a lawyer who would be paid only if his suit were successful.

In theory, that plaintiffs like Mr. Cook are usually forced to seek attorneys who will work on a contingency-fee basis should deter frivolous lawsuits.

This is because lawyers presumably will sift through proposed suits and take on only those with some real merit and thus some real possibility of success.

But that theory ignores the fact that there are "loss leaders" in law just as in retailing; there will always be lawyers willing to take on hopeless causes just for their publicity and client-generating value.

Because of the so-called American Rule, Mr. Cook also did not have to fear being saddled with Cardinal Bernardin's attorneys' fees if the jury found for the cardinal.

Defenders of the American Rule argue that the alternative English Rule, under which the attorneys' fees of the winner are shifted to the loser, would put too much of a burden on plaintiffs, in effect threatening them with punishment if they happen to lose on claims brought in good faith.

But in the U.S. we have provided by statute for awards of attorneys' fees to victorious plaintiffs in the kinds of lawsuits from which society as a whole benefits -- in the civil-rights area, for instance.

What about Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, under which a federal judge may impose sanctions on parties and attorneys for presenting meritless claims and legal positions?

Media reports indicate that Mr. Cook and his attorneys were motivated to dismiss their case in part by the prospect of Rule 11 sanctions after the flimsiness of Mr. Cook's accusations became apparent in the pretrial investigation and discovery process.

Doesn't the dismissal of the case against the cardinal show that Rule 11 works to protect the falsely accused?

The short answer is that Rule 11 did nothing to deter Mr. Cook and his attorneys from filing suit against the cardinal.

The old Rule 11, which was still in effect when Mr. Cook filed his suit in November, required lawyers to certify that their clients' claims were "warranted" by law and "well grounded in fact."

But Mr. Cook and his attorneys sued the cardinal despite the fact that there was a substantial technical question whether the suit was filed too late under applicable Ohio law.

More tellingly, the old Rule 11 did not deter the suit even though Mr. Cook's allegations were based on memories that first came to him in hypnosis sessions with an unlicensed practitioner of "repressed memory" recovery; those memories did not surface in earlier hypnosis sessions.

The new Rule 11, which became effective on Dec. 1 and presumably came to govern Mr. Cook's allegations, represents an intentional weakening of the former Rule 11.

Under the relevant provisions, a plaintiff's attorney may choose to certify only that his client's factual claims are "likely to have evidentiary support after a reasonable opportunity for further investigation or discovery."

Moreover, now a motion for Rule 11 sanctions is served on the allegedly offending party but not filed with the court for 21 days, during which time the accused party gets a chance to withdraw the frivolous pleading or other filing.

In other words, under the new Rule 11, a plaintiff and his attorneys can bring suit on flimsy facts, hope that favorable facts develop pretrial, and then escape Rule 11 sanctions altogether by dropping the suit if their hopes for supporting facts (or for a settlement offer) are dashed.

Perhaps it is not possible for us to set our filing fees, modify the American Rule and tailor Rule 11 in ways that do not chill civil rights but yet impose real restraints on private litigants wishing to assert explosive but questionable claims for large money damages.

Maybe we just cannot write our laws and our rules so they distinguish the wheat from the chaff.

But one would think that we should be able to rely on lawyers, our alleged professionals at the gate, to draw the distinctions and to make the judgment calls that this area of the law demands.

But that is precisely where our system most fails us.

The codes of professional conduct and responsibility for lawyers talk about attorneys being officers of the court and having special responsibilities to the public and for the quality of justice.

But in reality lawyers are all too ready to accept the notion that an attorney's only allegiance is to his client and to his client's wishes and interests.

Never mind the implications of the fact that the lawyer's own narrow self-interest also weds him to his client's cause.

Our system of legal ethics insists that the adversary system, in which each lawyer looks out only for his own client, is our most practical path to just results.

The Cardinal Bernardin case shows why that argument for the adversary system is unpersuasive.

A lawyer's blind devotion to his client not only can seriously injure the innocent but also can make our legal system appear devoid of moral ballast, not to mention common decency.

Mr. Scorza is a former assistant U.S. attorney in Chicago and teaches legal ethics as a lecturer at the University of Chicago Law School.

