Edward W. Eichel and J. Gordon Muir have unearthed some provocative statements from "obscure journals and academic treatises" to prove how radical the gay agenda really is ("The Assault on Heterosexuality," Letters to the Editor, March 18).

Apparently, we also should discredit the efforts of black and Jewish people to protect their civil rights because of the extreme statements of Rev. Farrakhan and Rabbi Kahane.

The "radical" gay agenda strives to achieve for gay people the same rights to work, rent an apartment and pursue committed relationships that heterosexuals enjoy.

The authors worry that sex educators want to "recruit" young people to be gay.

In fact, affirming homosexuality is far more likely to keep gay teenagers from committing suicide than it is to "recruit" their heterosexual peers.

Gay activism is not about promiscuity and "fierce opposition to the traditional view of family."

Many gay couples can apply, alongside their straight, married colleagues, for employee benefits, as this newspaper reported on March 18.

An Illinois court recently held that a lesbian couple could adopt the child of one of the women.

I realize that the idea of two such loving, committed parents raising a child seems radical given the ever-increasing rates of divorce and teenage pregnancy.

It's a shame the authors haven't met the many gay people of all backgrounds who struggle to protect their civil rights.

If they had, they would not have relied on obscure academic sources for a distorted picture of the gay-rights movement.

As a 34-year-old gay man involved in the political process on a local and national level, I must respond to Messrs. Eichel and Muir, who obviously have no firsthand knowledge of the enormous diversity of gays and lesbians.

They infer (from the many March 3 Letters reacting to the Feb. 24 editorial-page article "Morality and Homosexuality") that gays and lesbians are the ones engaging in "viciousness, intolerance and bigotry."

Anyone with eyes and a brain can observe that most of the violence, legal attacks and personal hatred has been aimed at homosexuals from heterosexuals and certainly not the other way around.

Because the gay community is uniting and not simply accepting these attacks, the authors infer that we are vicious, intolerant bigots.

They also use the term "heterophobia" in another attempt to promote their belief that gays and lesbians are out to get heterosexuals.

This paranoia continues with indictments of a conspiracy between "an academic sexological elite in consort with gay activism."

No doubt there is a minute amount of this type of activism; however, this thinking is very limited in comparison with the general goals of the entire gay community.

And then Messrs. Eichel and Muir launch two contemptible attacks using the same old lies couched in intellectual language to pretty them up.

First, they say that gays and lesbians are in fierce opposition to traditional family values and are endorsing "deviant" behavior.

Second, and most odious, is this statement: "If promiscuity was part of the gay faith, what is the Holy Grail?

In its truest form it is `anything goes' and, yes, that includes `educating' (read `recruiting') kids."

When this statement isn't primped and powdered it goes like this: They are out to get your children.

Gay and lesbian activists know firsthand how young homosexuals are terrorized, and are insistent that those young people who are coming to grips with their homosexuality not be tormented by teachers, civic leaders and those with so-called "family values."

They also insist that these young people be allowed to observe strong, valuable gay role models.

This is not recruitment, it is merely education.

Messrs. Eichel and Muir assume that this concern for young people is an attempt to sexually molest them.

The gay community is very diverse -- as diverse as the American population in general.

As a community, we are not promoting an attack on heterosexuality.

We have only one general goal: the elimination of hatred and bigotry toward homosexuals.

