Pigeon lovers also are a hazard.

So, in June 1979, "I quit my job as a house painter and started doing this," he says.

He sets it on a side of a sandy lot, near palm trees and sea grape, and scatters birdseed and bread crumbs about.

Although his business is confined to South Florida, Mr. Krenson traps pigeons for fun on trips elsewhere.

His record for a single building is 938 pigeons -- trapped over a period of nearly four weeks on the roof of a now-demolished downtown hotel.

He is in huge demand.

However, he says he sympathizes with their concern.

In an era of poisons, repellents and antipigeon devices, his hands-on approach to nuisance birds is an oddity.

Curator Joan Caron lauds his "compassion" for "these troublesome, pesky, possibly-contagious-to-humans, diseased animals."

"I haven't been to Vizcaya since the Queen was there," Mr. Krenson says.

"I would be just as protective of them as those people are.

Soon, more than a score of pigeons are on the ground, pecking their way up the birdseed trail and into Mr. Krenson's patented pigeon trap, an unexceptional-looking wire-mesh cage that measures four feet by five feet and is one foot high.

Pigeons can be hazardous to health, transmitting such diseases as cryptococcal meningitis to humans.

"I'm not exaggerating," he says.

He has trapped pigeons for the Dade County Public Schools and the Fort Lauderdale Police Department, for Miami's Metrorail transit system and the Justice Department's correctional center here.

"He is excellent at what he does," says Alan Weber, director of contract administration at the University of Miami, who has had pigeons removed from campus.

He cleared the pigeons from Vizcaya, an Italian Renaissance-style villa and gardens on Biscayne Bay, the day before a 1987 meeting there between President Reagan and Pope John Paul II.

There is no legal prohibition to trapping pigeons here, but anyone hiring a trapper in New York would first have to obtain from the Health Department a Request for Permission to Trap Pigeons, in accordance with Section 11-0513 of the New York State Fish and Wildlife Law, and send a copy of the completed form to the law-enforcement division of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, Mr. Matthews says.

A gray pigeon flutters down and begins pecking at the seed.

If the pigeon market is saturated, he says, he will "relocate" the birds, far from home.

It might be New York's, as well.

Its door is fixed so pigeons can enter but can't exit.

Finally, he cut back on his own, and these days he often works only a few days a week.

He says he usually trades his catch to breeders for better pigeons, such as fantails or racing homers, then sells those to pigeon fanciers.

"It's just word of mouth, because the trap works so darned well."

Alan Krenson gently lowers the world's most-effective pigeon trap, as he calls his invention, from the top of his 1983 Chrysler station wagon.

"I don't advertise," he says.

"I don't know how well he's doing down there, but I guarantee you he'd become a millionaire up here," says Steven Matthews, associate commissioner for external affairs -- and "designated pigeon expert," he says -- in the city's Department of Health.

"So I took them downtown and released them in Bayfront Park," he says.

On Oct. 25, 1988, he finally received a patent for his "Trap Assembly for Birds."

Mr. Krenson's work carries a one-year guarantee; if birds return within that time, he will clear them out again.

He has trapped for the Miami Seaquarium, where Flipper lives.

That seems to be its secret ingredient.

I don't fault them at all."

Mr. Krenson has parlayed his talent into a thriving business, called A&B Bird Trappers Inc.

He says he hopes eventually to market his invention -- "possibly to a major pest-control company" -- but hasn't figured out how to do it.

He says the most pigeons he ever caught in a single day was 458, with one trap in various locations.

Another time, on Miami Beach, a pigeon fancier threatened him with a knife.

Mr. Krenson says he hasn't ever gotten ill from the birds, but when working near nests or other dirty areas he wears gloves and a mask.

After the birds were grown, his wife insisted he get rid of them, because they were dirtying the patio.

"And when I got home, they were there waiting for me."

She is referring to pigeons.

"It's the most-effective pigeon trap in the world."

Mr. Krenson has trapped since he was a boy, but his interest in pigeons dates to the late 1970s when he brought home two baby birds he found while fishing.

He says that happens in "maybe 20%" of cases.

More typically, people simply berate him -- one reason he usually hides his traps on the roofs of buildings, away from the eyes of pigeon folk.

"If I work steadily, I can average $630 a day, working alone," he says.

Intrigued, he began learning more, and his interest turned into a hobby.

But, like his trap itself, it seems to work.

At age 39, Alan Krenson is by all indications one of the great -- and one of the few -- pigeon trappers of his generation.

"I have never been to New York in my life," he says.

He says he "absolutely" doesn't kill pigeons, although he sometimes sells them to bird-dog trainers.

Nearby, pigeons roost, unaware.

He began designing his dream trap, testing "about 12 or 15" models before finally getting it right.

Lately, however, he hasn't been earning anywhere near that, because last summer he tired of the pace and has been cutting back.

He found a demand for street pigeons among breeders, who use them to tend the eggs and young of fancier breeds, thus freeing them to lay more eggs.

In time, he found there was good money in trapping and trading the birds.

"That is my dream come true."

Mr. Krenson typically charges $7 a pigeon for trapping and says he averages another $2 per bird in the trading-and-selling process.

Although his biggest customers are condominiums, he traps amid the very pillars of civilization.

After the pigeons are trapped, Mr. Krenson transfers them to plastic carrying cages and hauls them off for recycling.

"I love pigeons, too," he says.

Mr. Krenson says he once had a gun pulled on him while trapping outside a produce market by a man who fed the pigeons.

He adds that the reappearance of pigeons -- whether old ones or new ones -- usually means "something is wrong," such as food being left out.

Mr. Krenson says his record with a single trap, set about a year ago, is 72 pigeons in 16 minutes.

Then he withdraws.

But New York isn't Florida.

He -- Alan -- is A, and his wife, Beverly, is B. The company is a one-man operation, because the only helper who has ever worked out is Beverly, and she now stays home with their two children.

"Here they come," whispers Mr. Krenson.

He did the same for a visit by Queen Elizabeth II in 1991.

Last year, he raised prices in hopes of slowing his business -- "I mean, I was going to have an ulcer," he says -- but the pace continued, with 12 to 14 new calls a day.

