Those who think immigrants are a threat to the American way of life might take a look at a recent study on how the children of immigrants perform in school.

Seems they've adopted an old-fashioned way of life that a lot of Americans have abandoned.

It's called after-school homework.

It should come as little surprise to learn that immigrant children outperform their American classmates.

It should also come as little surprise to learn that the main reason is that, like their parents, they work hard.

Ruben Rumbaut of Michigan State University and Alejandro Portes of Johns Hopkins researched the homework habits of the children of immigrants from 77 countries, presenting their findings last month at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

They found that immigrant children in the eighth and ninth grades devote between two and three hours a day to homework.

By contrast, American eighth- and ninth-graders average less than an hour a day on homework.

As the table shows, there is a direct corollation between the time an immigrant child spends on homework and his grade point average.

The study found that boys and girls who study less than an hour a day consistently earn grades of C or lower, while those who devote more than three hours a day to homework earn Bs or better.

The immigrant children with the highest grade point averages (the Vietnamese) also spent the longest amount of time on homework.

Recently arrived children spend more hours on their studies than do U.S.-born children of immigrants, a finding that prompts Prof. Rumbaut to note: "The longer you are in the United States, the more you learn, among other things, the bad habits such as wearing headphones while studying or waiting to the last minute to study for a test."

This is one kind of Americanization immigrants, or anyone, would be better off without.

There are other reasons besides hard work for the scholastic success of immigrant children.

One is help with their school tasks.

The Rumbaut-Portes study found that three-quarters of immigrant children receive assistance with their studies, mostly from their families.

It also discovered that the children who perform best tend to come from homes where both the mother and father are present and that they have close friends who are, like them, the children of immigrants.

In other words, high academic performance is linked to strong ties with family and community.

All this sounds like common sense.

Boys and girls imbued with these values will grow up to be productive citizens, whether their parents are Korean-born shopkeepers or Russian-born taxi drivers.

In fact, it would seem that the immigrants have some things to teach other about-to-be members of the American work force.

