It is so sensitive that the British won't tell.

How will logistics experts manage the massive movement of people and vehicles?

The official events begin Saturday, June 4, with an exclusive garden party near here at Southwick House, where Gen. Dwight Eisenhower ordered the invasion to begin.

The answer: metal tracking.

Plymouth, where many U.S. troops embarked for Normandy, is especially miffed.

So far, it hasn't managed to get any American bigwigs for its ceremonies.

"We've got three-star admirals who aren't going to get anywhere near here kicking up a fuss," says Mr. Steels.

For months, the Allies have been marshaling their forces.

The U.S. vets, who parachuted into Europe in 1944, want to re-enact their heroics in Normandy on June 6.

In the battle of the bands, the U.S. wanted to wear white, but finally agreed to wear blue, like its musical Allies.

Platoons of PR men, squadrons of protocol officers and divisions of tourism boosters have been scurrying from London to Washington to Paris, not to mention Weymouth, Bournemouth and Bovington.

"No, let's say the great esteem that they're held in is not going to get them in."

And the planning for the June 6 anniversary of the Allied invasion seems almost as elaborate as the preparations for the real thing.

Where will the flotilla of warships anchor in the English Channel?

"We never talk about menus," answers Mr. Steels.

Will the "facilities" be good enough for her?

On Sunday, dignitaries, veterans and civilian visitors will gather for a memorial service on Southsea Common, a large green expanse on the waterfront.

D-day plus 50 -- years, that is -- is rapidly approaching.

But tourism promoters are planning scores of other events: a 1940s-style big-band dance, clandestine operations reenactments, a Miss 1944 competition, propaganda-film showings and the "world's largest ever military vehicle rally."

"They say, `Don't worry, it will happen.'"

One thing no one can control is the notoriously fickle English weather.

It could be stormy, just as it was in 1944, when it caused the invasion to be delayed.

What uniforms will the military bands wear?

Nothing must go wrong.

"You can't do that now, because it wouldn't be the anniversary," says a spokesman at the U.S. Embassy in London.

While there has been a lot of cooperation among Allied planners, just like 50 years ago, there also has been political squabbling and needling at each others' expense.

Everything has got to be bigger and better, just like 50 years ago," says Mr. Steels, citing an example of the "friendly ribbing" he has overheard.

Every contingency is being anticipated.

In 1944, military planners only had to worry about their own people.

And toilets at Southwick House have been closely inspected to ensure they are good enough for the queen and other dignitaries.

President Clinton, of course, is expected instead.

To prove their fitness, members of his Return to Normandy Association have taken at least three qualifying jumps in recent months.

A group of septuagenarian paratroopers also is annoyed.

Perhaps most important, where should the television cameras be allowed to set up to make the journalists happy?

Just as in 1944, the main events here in Portsmouth, where the British troops were launched, will require military precision and, in some cases, secrecy.

U.S. officials say there isn't time for the president to visit everywhere.

"We're not only hurt, we feel a little bit snubbed," says city councilor Peter Wood, a 68-year-old D-day veteran.

In 1994, there will be 14 heads of state, hundreds of VIPs, thousands of military personnel and hundreds of thousands of veterans and civilian visitors -- raising the specter of a logistical nightmare in this cramped seaport on England's southern coast.

Another issue concerns how many vets from each nation will attend the major events, especially the limited spots at the garden party and state dinner.

"It's typical of the bloody Americans, bringing their biggest ship [the aircraft carrier USS George Washington] over.

The memorial preparations have been going on for so long, says retired Col. Bill Stevens, a city official whose D-day work started in 1992, "that originally I invited President Bush to be in Portsmouth."

The commemorative service on Southsea Common has been planned to the second.

A "fly past" of four groups of planes, led by vintage World War II aircraft, will commence at 12:42 p.m., so that they will fly directly over the Royal Yacht Britannia as it passes a war memorial.

But other details must be addressed: Whose hands will Queen Elizabeth II shake at the garden party?

What formations will the aircraft fly?

"The execution of that has to be a very slick operation," says Lt. Steve Dargan, a Royal Navy reservist called up for PR duty.

No way, says the Pentagon, fearing some might get hurt.

"When the 50th anniversary was on the horizon, we decided to look at what events could go on to market, I mean mark, the anniversary," says James Corrigan, who is coordinating festivities in towns and villages in the county of Devon.

(What food will be served at the state banquet?

Other spats are being settled behind the scenes.

"I want big publicity," Mark Steels, head of public relations for the World War II Commemoration Team, says later in London while stabbing at photographs on a wall showing the strategic sites.

But the French have yet to say which of their bands will take part.

That will be followed by a ceremony on an island in Portsmouth's harbor and a state dinner.

Then at least 80 ships will sail across the channel for observances in Normandy, France, on June 5 and 6.

"Security reasons.

These questions already have been decided.

"After all that, they probably won't even use the loos," grumbles a navy man.

"God help us -- we better have good weather."

"In many respects, this is far more difficult," says Mr. Steels.

For example, how can planners be sure Mr. Clinton's armored limousine doesn't get stuck while crossing the grassy field to the stage on Southsea Common?

"If there's anybody entitled to do this in commemoration, it's the men who were there before, whose buddies died," contends Richard Mandich, 68, of San Diego.

Just back from a reconnaissance mission in France, a Defense Ministry agent huddles with high-level officials drawing up the final plans for the invasion.

There will be 45-second intervals between groups, with the last cluster of modern jets passing at exactly 12:45.

Paris has smoothed feathers with Bonn, however, by agreeing to a joint celebration on June 8 in Heidelberg to commemorate not the war but the "history" that binds the countries.

So the group -- a British army brigadier, Royal Navy officers, a contingent from Buckingham Palace and assorted advisers -- scrutinizes the preparations, leaving nothing to chance.

Some Germans are unhappy, too, because they weren't invited to the remembrance ceremonies.

"The French aren't being very cooperative," complains a Royal Navy officer.

