Perhaps biotechnology lends itself to the Irish gift for subtlety.

Yes, and Irish scientists fear that there may be too much myth and superstition in this world today, possibly endangering such endeavors as the creation of modern medicines through the splicing of genes.

Our singular tribe will celebrate its achievements today, and quench terrible thirsts.

If Ireland's sons and daughters in the New World could only be in Dublin to see what's really happening, it might be a merrier St. Patrick's Day all around.

Ireland's laboratories excel in microbiological science and want to keep it that way.

Of course, one can't avoid Ireland's dark side after a week in which the Irish Republican Army harassed Britain again by lobbing some mortar shells over the boundary fences of Heathrow Airport.

They take childish delight in a culture that speaks of leprechauns and "the little people."

The gentle St. Patrick would have found them appalling.

Just like Sioux Falls, Ireland has parked its cottage industry on the information superhighway.

"Ah, and sure it's another contract from Massachusetts Mutual to take on a wee bit more back-office claims processing.

The gentle legends will live on.

Aren't they good to us in Massachusetts?"

In the Irish Republic and even Northern Ireland, disgust with the IRA's bloody doings is rising.

But don't let me spoil the fun that will enliven hospitable and boozy venues in New York and other American towns and cities today.

Mr. Melloan is deputy editor (international) of The Wall Street Journal.

They arrange bits and bytes to bring to life on computer screens games that delight children or data streams that dismay adults when stock prices are plunging.

I fondly remember the night I joined my Irish kinsmen in a pub in Waterville, harmonizing on "Rose of Tralee."

They weep over Bing Crosby's tender touch with the crotchety Barry Fitzgerald in "Going My Way."

The "little people" Irish scientists study are molecules, and they can be taught to perform miracles.

Ireland sells some $3.4 billion of software annually to the rest of the world.

We Irish -- as we call ourselves on March 17 to the neglect of lesser roots into the likes of France, Germany or the Cherokee Nation -- are a romantic breed.

Indeed they are, but data processing jobs also come to Ireland because of its advanced telecommunications, first-rate computer skills and industrious people.

Ireland's telecommunications system is one of the world's best, some 70% digitalized.

What does Barry Fitzgerald have on his fax today?

Ireland is doing well in other sciences, too, in particular those that have a cultural relationship to the art of spinning a good yarn.

I'm one of 45 million Americans who claim Irish ancestry.

In the room next door, the Waterville Gaelic football team, newly crowned national champions, honored their great victories, and dulled the pain of their bruises, by stolidly consuming quantities of Bushmills and John Jameson.

One root of my family tree, assiduous research has shown, sprang from the green hills of County Tyrone.

And in the pubs of Dublin there are some who will raise a glass today to the future of a new, modern Ireland, with little place for the ancient hatreds of Sinn Fein and the IRA.

At a forum in Dublin Castle, I heard Ireland's then minister of science and technology, Michael Smith, describe a plan to "circularize all our second-level schools with booklets and charts on the role of biotechnology."

That should be no surprise in a country where communication, direct or indirect, is an art form, something to be nourished and treasured.

But on my most recent visit to Ireland, in 1990, I noticed interesting changes.

Irish-Americans revel in reruns of the epic fight waged by John Wayne with Victor McLaglan for the hand of Maureen O`Hara in "The Quiet Man."

But judging from weekend manifestations in San Francisco and Boston, most of the IRA's remaining support comes from America's lunatic fringe.

Irish lads and colleens are adept at designing computer software.

According to the ninth-century "Book of Armagh," St. Patrick himself once wandered thereabouts, converting the heathen Irish to Roman Catholicism.

