About a year ago, Humana began a new policy that allows physicians who prove themselves fiscally prudent to refer a patient to a specialist without the HMO's permission.

"Texas is a hard sell."

Sources: Figures for Sanus's Houston membership were supplied by Sanus, figures for Pacificare's San Antonio membership were supplied by Pacificare, all other figures by Texas Department of Insurance.

A handsome rancher trots his horse around a sun-drenched field, then faces the camera and proclaims PacifiCare's health-maintenance organization "the best thing that ever happened to me."

And some HMOs are giving doctors more authority over treatment methods.

Austin is a particularly vibrant market, for instance, with roughly 22% of its citizens enrolled in HMOs.

The reason: Low membership prevented economies of scale.

Because the healthiest people were in HMOs, and the statistically riskier patients were huddled in the university's self-insured indemnity plan, the managed-care plans weren't saving the university any money, he says.

"Individualism is part of the Texas persona," says Gary Brantz, a principal at the Dallas office of Towers, Perrin, Forster & Crosby Inc., a benefits-consulting firm based in New York.

Another is FHP International Corp. of Fountain Valley, Calif., which set up a Houston office last fall and expects to begin selling its HMO plan by July.

Despite such drawbacks, there's no shortage of HMOs that are eager to break into Texas.

During that same period, U.S. enrollment jumped to 16.3% of the population from 15.1%.

A final challenge facing HMOs in Texas is that they are competing with hot-selling point-of-service plans.

But when the same ads ran in Houston and San Antonio last fall, the phones were silent.

One big loser was Travelers Insurance Cos., a unit of Travelers Inc., New York.

HMOs say they are finding it easier to recruit doctors to networks than it was several years ago.

"If I were to yell real loud, we could have a staff meeting."

Harris Methodist Health Plan, an Arlington-based affiliate of Harris Methodist Health System of Fort Worth, plays up the fact that it is the only HMO in the Metroplex that isn't a subsidiary of an out-of-state company.

In Houston focus groups last year, one business owner called HMOs "socialized medicine," and another cited their "lower-quality care."

Part of the problem, the company says, is that it hasn't tried hard enough.

"Our sense is that Houston is 50% underpenetrated," says Patrick Stewart, president of FHP's Texas subsidiary.

That television spot, and others like it, were successful in California, signing up thousands to the Medicare HMO run by PacifiCare Health Systems Inc. of Cypress, Calif.

HMOs in Texas also have been trying to improve their relationships with doctors, a sticking point for years.

In the process, it dropped three HMO plans, including Physicians Corp. of America in Austin and Travelers in Houston and Dallas.

Nine of the 27 HMO plans in Texas lost members last year, according to records filed with the Texas Department of Insurance.

Low membership, in turn, leads to a Catch-22 for many Texas HMOs: It makes it harder for them to undersell traditional plans, because they don't have the bargaining power with doctors and hospitals to force down costs.

Even Houston's Sanus Health Plan, a subsidiary of New York Life Insurance Co. in New York, promotes the autonomy of its local HMO.

FHP's response will be to sell itself mainly on price.

Still, some of FHP's early research suggests that the going won't be easy.

One ad depicts a patient who keeps getting put on hold and transferred from department to department.

The result: Membership of senior citizens shot up in the last few months of 1993 -- contributing to the year's 30% rise in the membership of the company's Texas HMO, to 82,700.

Aetna's Texas membership, which declined in 1992, rebounded last year, in part because of a radio ad campaign that addressed common doubts about HMOs.

This year, the Aetna HMO plans to broadcast ads debunking the belief that HMO doctors are mostly foreigners, and that they don't have time to spend with patients.

Many plans are also doing their best to emphasize their connections to Texas.

Six of the 27 Texas HMOs were unprofitable on a pretax basis last year, according to insurance records.

Travelers had a $5.3 million pretax gain in the Austin-San Antonio area, where most of its members are concentrated, but that was nearly offset by losses totaling $4.6 million in Houston and Dallas.

"The entire management structure of this plan is within the sound of my voice," says Patrick Spears, Harris's managing director of business development.

But overall, Texas is a disappointment.

Moreover, says Dr. Guckian, an employee survey found that many people -- including those in an HMO -- were "very concerned that if they got sick they would not be able to choose to whom they go."

Last fall, the university put nearly all of its employees in a point-of-service plan.

So it is adding 28 salespeople dedicated entirely to HMO sales; until now, the sales force has sold many kinds of insurance products.

"I thought it would work here, but I'm just a dumb Yankee," says Russ Gantos, the company's Texas marketing director.

Nationally, the firm found, HMOs saved companies $224 per employee.

After six years, the Houston HMO had signed up only 21,000 members, leading to high administrative costs per patient.

"But their reputation is hard to shake," he adds.

Though these generally cost employers more money, they also provide an "opt-out" provision: Employees are assigned a "gatekeeper" physician as in an HMO, but they can go outside the network by paying higher deductibles and co-payments.

Many HMOs here have concluded that the key to winning new members is education.

In the past year, five organizations have filed applications to start new plans here, including Foundation Health Corp. of Rancho Cordova, Calif., which applied for a state license to market HMOs in Austin and San Antonio; Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas, which expanded its El Paso "Rio Grande" plan into Austin in 1992, and has now applied to add San Antonio, Houston and Dallas-Fort Worth; and Humana Inc., Louisville, Ky., which lost members in San Antonio and Corpus Christi last year, but plans to expand into Houston and Dallas anyway.

Some ads are tackling anti-HMO sentiments head-on.

"Twenty thousand members is too few to be cost-effective," says Robert L. Dawson, the Houston HMO's president.

Another HMO that struggled last year was Aetna Life & Casualty's Houston plan, which had $2.7 million in pretax losses.

Travelers has supplemented its billboard campaign ("The HMO Under America's Umbrella") with print ads that, under a picture of a Band-Aid, read, "We're stuck on Texas."

Before, only about a quarter of its 62,000 employees -- mostly the younger, healthier ones -- had chosen to join HMOs, says James Guckian, a health-policy planner at the university.

"It may be our West Coast bias, but we think there's more that can be done to manage costs," says Mr. Stewart, who predicts the FHP plan will have 14,000 members in a year.

Most notably, Humana's HMO, whose bitter feud with doctors in San Antonio helped spark the formation of the national anti-HMO organization Physicians Who Care, appears to be making progress.

PacifiCare's Mr. Gantos, after failing with his first round of commercials, switched to a more basic campaign that listed advantages of the HMO: "No paperwork; no deductibles; $6 doctor visits."

All over Texas, HMOs are discovering just how hard the sale can be.

They are convinced the potential market is huge.

The company based its decision largely on studies showing that only about 12% of Houstonians belong to HMOs.

Though Travelers has been marketing HMOs in Austin, San Antonio, Houston and Dallas since the mid-1980s, its Texas membership totaled only 39,600 at the end of 1993 -- down 26% from a year earlier.

According to a survey by A. Foster Higgins & Co., a New York benefits-consulting firm, Texas employers paid an average of $3,437 in 1993 for each employee on a traditional fee-for-service plan, compared with $3,434 for an employee in an HMO, a saving of only $3.

"There has been a real interest from Humana management in profiting from earlier mistakes: They now have more of an idea of how to sustain physician relationships," says John Holcomb, a lung specialist who is past president of the Bexar County Medical Society, and not a member of any HMO.

But they are running up against a population with a deep philosophical resistance to any health-care plan that restricts which doctors patients may see.

DALLAS AREA Total members: 514,478 Its share of those two markets is based on company estimates of how its total breaks down.

Foster Higgins found that 19% of Texas employers offered such plans, compared with 15% in the U.S. as a whole.

"We give you clear answers without the red tape," the ad promises.

Last July, only 8.8% of Texans belonged to HMOs, up slightly from 8.6% in January 1992, according to InterStudy Publications, the managed-care division of Decision Resources Inc., a Waltham, Mass., research organization.

Financial performance of Texas HMOs is also less than healthy, even after recent slight improvement.

Consider the University of Texas.

"The HMO delivery process takes away some control, and people here have the attitude that they don't want to give up that control."

"All our underwriting is done locally," says Houston HMO Chief Executive Officer Thomas S. Lucksinger.

HMOs haven't been completely shut out of the state.

