Researchers also found a nearly two-fold increase in risk of brain cancer among the 10% of workers with the highest EMF exposures, but the number of cases was too small to be statistically significant.

However, when the researchers began looking at specific types of cancer they found an "association" between magneticfield exposure and a group of leukemias called acute nonlymphoid leukemia.

The University of North Carolina's Dr. Savitz said he thinks the results strengthen "a bit" the case for an association between some leukemias and magnetic fields.

And he cautioned against applying the findings to exposure of the general public to EMFs.

"Frankly, it's a sigh of relief," said Mark Warnquist, partner at LeBoeuf Lamb Greene and MacRae, a Denver law firm that represents utilities in EMF court cases.

But the University of Toronto's Dr. Miller said at Ontario Hydro, where, according to the data, risk of getting the cancers was highest, officials are expected to take several months analyzing data to determine whether specific jobs, working conditions or other factors might have heightened the risk.

One possible explanation, he said, is that researchers haven't identified patterns of exposure to magnetic fields that might lead to cancer.

One weakness of the study was that the risk estimates differed from utility to utility.

Overall, the 50% of the utility workers with the highest exposures to magnetic fields didn't run any higher risk of cancer than the 50% with the lowest exposures.

The study will appear in the next issue of the American Journal of Epidemiology.

"Maybe the truth has been uncovered and the truth is murky."

Instead, it underscored how difficult it can be to find -- or rule out -- relationships between some cancers and potential environmental hazards.

The scientists said -- and the utilities emphasized -- that that the findings weren't conclusive.

But he said, "we're not much closer to being able to say precisely what circumstances of exposure if any, are hazardous."

The study failed to find any evidence that the risk of cancer rose as the degree of exposure to EMF increased, a so-called dose-response effect, which would have been a strong hint that magnetic fields might cause cancer.

Of the more than 4,000 cases of cancer over 20 years, there were 60 cases of acute nonlymphoid leukemia.

During the 20-year study, researchers said, 4,151 new cases of cancer occurred among workers at the three utilities-Electricite de France, Ontario Hydro and Hydro-Quebec.

In any event, the study indicated that the risk of getting the cancer is very small.

The research team was headed by Gilles Theriault of the department of occupational health at McGill University in Montreal.

Moreover, he said, "the association comes through" even after adjusting for exposures to chemicals and other potential cancer-causing substances that utility workers might encounter at work.

Researchers, utility industry officials, policy makers and putative victims of EMFs all had hoped the report would help resolve a public controversy over the possible health impact of exposures to EMFs and what should be done about them.

"The mystery is, given the quality of the study, why didn't it emerge very clearly?" he said.

When the researchers looked at the 50% of the workers with the higher exposures to EMF, the risk of developing this kind of leukemia was 2.4 times greater than among the half of the workers with the lower exposure to EMF.

A large Canadian study sponsored by three major utilities found a link between at least one rare type of leukemia and occupational exposure to electro-magnetic fields.

The study is the most ambitious effort yet to address whether the electro-magnetic fields, or EMFs, emanating from sources ranging from huge power transmission lines to household electrical appliances can cause cancer.

But the report, based on the experience of more than 200,000 workers in Canada and France, didn't show that exposure to such fields causes the cancer, known as acute nonlymphoid leukemia.

However, the researchers failed to find any other cancer to be associated with exposure to magnetic fields.

A.B. Miller, chairman of preventive medicine and biostatistics at the University of Toronto, a co-author of the report, said, "Our study adds to the body of evidence that suggests there is an association, possibly a causal one, between some forms of leukemia and electro-magnetic fields."

Utility industry representatives in the U.S. and Canada said the failure of the study to show a "definitive association" between magnetic fields and cancer was welcome.

As a result of such inconsistency, reactions varied among the utilities.

"The failure of results to be definitive is bad news," said David Savitz, an epidemiologist at the University of North Carolina School of Public Health who is leading a similar study at five U.S. utilities.

