However, many of these efforts are marked by misleading and sometimes fraudulent tactics, law-enforcement officials say.

LLCs offer owners the liability protections of a traditional corporation and the tax advantages of a partnership.

In the past few years, thousands of small businesses have been formed as so-called limited liability companies, or LLCs.

The LLC says it is developing a wireless cable system in the WilkesBarre/Scranton area of Pennsylvania.

There were no guarantees of future profits and investors were warned they could lose their entire investment, says Mr. Schiffman.

Last week, Georgia securities regulators won support for that position when a state hearing officer ruled that four LLC offerings did qualify as securities.

Mr. Schiffman, the defendants' attorney, says his clients have been very careful to give every potential investor "extensive disclaimers" on the risks of the venture.

Currently, 38 states allow the formation of LLCs, compared with only eight in 1991.

Regulators counter that it is unrealistic to expect hundreds of disparate individuals, usually with no background in the business, to take an active management role.

"If I try to use a case from Georgia, I have to show that Georgia's statute is similar to ours.

Promotional literature allegedly touted returns of as much as 400% within three years.

The battle over LLC regulation has been raging in more than a dozen states.

Many wireless firms that have sprung up in recent years offer investors the opportunity to buy into a wireless telephone or television franchise for a particular geographic area.

The suit is the agency's first involving the LLC issue.

Howard Schiffman, an attorney for the defendants, denies the SEC charges of misconduct.

He also argues that ownership interests in his LLC client don't qualify as a security and therefore don't come under the jurisdiction of the SEC.

Paul Huey-Burns , an SEC attorney working on the case, says the agency also is currently investigating several other LLCs to see if they qualify as securities.

If true, this would exempt the entity from securities laws.

State regulators say that the SEC's entry into the fray could be a big boost to their efforts.

But regulators say some promoters are abusing the LLC form by claiming exemption from securities laws even though they often have hundreds of investors spread around the country.

Besides the LLC, defendants in the SEC suit are Vision Communications Inc. of Irvine, Calif., and Vision's co-owners, William L. Clemens Jr. and Michael Imbesi.

The state actions are aimed at closing down the LLCs' investment-sales operations.

Vision provided marketing and financial services to the wireless LLC and in return planned to take as much as 60% of the money invested in the wireless venture "as compensation for its services," says the SEC suit.

In the lawsuit, the SEC charges the defendants with violating securities laws while raising about $1.25 million from people nationwide through "high pressure sales techniques" and "numerous false statements."

Federal actions tend to be more widely followed and carry more weight than similar state actions, says Michael Morehead, assistant director for enforcement with the Illinois Securities Department.

Investigating LLCs In a move that may widen that regulatory battle, the SEC last week filed suit in Washington federal court against four defendants, including Wilkes-Barre-Scranton L.C.

But our state securities statute is patterned after federal law," he says.

That's because most LLCs are small businesses with no more than a handful of owners, who are legitimately seeking the tax benefits and liability protections that an LLC can offer.

He declines to describe the current operating status of the Pennsylvania wireless system.

State securities regulators concede that the debate will probably never matter to most of the LLCs being formed.

Messrs. Clemens and Imbesi have received state cease-and-desist orders in connection with other wireless firms, the SEC says.

The Securities and Exchange Commission has joined the battle to tighten government control of a potentially major new business tool for entrepreneurs.

Some regulators feel particularly spurred to attack the LLC question because of concerns about possible widespread fraud in the wireless field.

A number of those investigations, he adds, are in the wireless-communications area.

The promoters argue that each of these owners is directly involved in the management of the firm.

The SEC suit charges that the defendants sold to many retirees and blue-collar workers, who were often induced to use some of their retirement funds.

In its recent suit, the SEC alleges that investors were falsely told that they would be putting their money into an already operating wireless cable system with 20 channels and all necessary Federal Communications Commission licenses.

As reported, several states have filed civil actions against a number of LLCs offering investment opportunities in "wireless cable" and related communications technologies.

Though backers tout LLCs as the hot new business form of the '90s, and many of the businesses are uncontroversial, many regulators suspect some investment promoters are using the form to avoid securities laws.

