Laurence H. Tribe has been discussed as a potential Supreme Court nominee for more than a decade.

When Republicans occupied the White House, his liberal reputation disqualified him.

Now, ironically, his preeminence as a legal entrepreneur and his high fees threaten to undermine his reputation.

Mr. Tribe, a professor at Harvard Law School, is facing a fee challenge that raises ethical questions about his bills, which can run to several million dollars for handling an appellate case.

Ralph Venuto, a client who ran a string of quick-lube shops in New Jersey, is seeking a reduction of Mr. Tribe's $2,750,000 fee.

"I'm sorry I ever learned his name," Mr. Venuto says.

Mr. Tribe is considered by many to be too liberal to be appointed to the Supreme Court even by President Clinton.

But the controversy over his fees makes the possibility even more remote.

Mr. Tribe's bill to Mr. Venuto "pushes things right to -- and maybe past -- the point of unconscionable," says Charles Wolfram, a law professor at Cornell University Law School.

Says Rex E. Lee, a former U.S. solicitor general who will argue his 59th case before the Supreme Court next week, "If Larry gets nominated, there will be enormous opposition, and those opposed to him will look for any possible argument they can find and these kinds of fees will certainly be among them."

John Thorne, associate general counsel for Bell Atlantic Corp., which Mr. Tribe represents, says Mr. Tribe's $750-an-hour fee "is more than I would bill if I were in private practice."

Most top lawyers for companies and wealthy clients bill at about $400 an hour.

But Mr. Thorne adds that Mr. Tribe is "the modern-day Daniel Webster.

There's nobody better on his feet."

In arguments before the U.S. Supreme Court, Mr. Tribe's win-loss record is 16-6, among the best in the business.

Mr. Tribe says that for each case that pays him handsomely, there are as many that don't pay at all.

The 52-year-old professor says that his paying clients "in every case -- except for Ralph Venuto -- seem pleased with what they're getting."

Mr. Tribe is generally regarded as one of the best lawyers in the country.

He began teaching at Harvard in 1968 and, a decade later, published a treatise on constitutional law that is widely read by law students and frequently cited in court opinions.

His early courtroom work was cause oriented, and he did much of it pro bono.

He took on abortion, sodomy and the right of Hare Krishnas to solicit donations at a state fair.

As the 1980s progressed, Mr. Tribe's corporate work grew and his fees ballooned.

His stunning 1987 Supreme Court victory on behalf of Pennzoil Co., in its $11 billion fight with Texaco Inc., won him about $4 million in fees, making him the top choice of companies looking for an appellate lawyer.

But Mr. Tribe's illustrious career matters not at all to Mr. Venuto or to Steven M. Kramer, formerly Mr. Venuto's attorney.

Each has a legal complaint about Mr. Tribe's fees -- and his performance.

Mr. Kramer represented Lightning Lube Inc., Mr. Venuto's company, in a 1992 civil trial against Witco Corp., alleging that Witco, a competitor and a supplier, spread malicious rumors among Lightning Lube franchises that caused the company's demise.

A jury awarded Lightning Lube $11.5 million in actual damages and $50 million in punitive damages, but the federal judge presiding over the Camden, N.J., trial threw out the punitive-damage award.

Mr. Kramer says he and Mr. Venuto retained Mr. Tribe to handle the appeal.

Mr. Tribe and his associate Jonathan Massey failed to get the lower-court decision overturned.

Mr. Kramer is suing Mr. Tribe in Camden federal court for breach of contract, fraud and slander, among other charges, and is seeking damages of more than $5 million.

Mr. Kramer says Mr. Tribe never mastered the record and overlooked a technicality that could cost Lightning Lube $630,000.

Mr. Tribe says Mr. Kramer's lawsuit is "frivolous."

He notes that Mr. Venuto fired Mr. Kramer over a fee dispute, and that as a part of that settlement Mr. Kramer stands to gain 25% of the amount by which Mr. Tribe's fees get reduced.

Mr. Tribe says he did a fine job for Mr. Venuto.

"How hard I worked isn't the issue," he says.

"There was an agreement that keyed the fees to a product."

Mr. Tribe says he took the case because at the time he was interested in punitive-damages issues.

Moreover, he says, "I tend to be sympathetic with little companies who get crushed by big Goliaths."

Mr. Tribe's elaborate 14-page fee contract with Lightning Lube Inc. is contained in the court records.

In it, Mr. Tribe lays out a 15-stage fee plan: Had Mr. Tribe won the case in the U.S. Supreme Court, he and his two associates would have collected $6.5 million.

Last week, in a separate filing, Mr. Venuto challenged the $2,750,000 in legal fees.

In a request to the New Jersey Supreme Court's arbitration committee, he wrote, "I feel the fee asserted by Mr. Tribe is unconscionable based on the amount of work involved and the result obtained."

Mr. Venuto paid Mr. Tribe a $50,000 retainer at the outset and put $2,750,000 into an escrow account.

Mr. Venuto says that, at the last minute, Mr. Tribe asked permission to share the appeals-court argument with his associate Mr. Massey, a former student who confirms that he had never before argued an appeal.

Mr. Tribe won't comment on the arbitration request.

Whether Mr. Tribe will get his Lightning Lube fee will ultimately be decided in arbitration sometime this year.

The American Bar Association's rules of professional conduct set no maximum for legal fees, saying only that "A lawyer's fee shall be reasonable."

Mr. Wolfram, of Cornell, recalls that in 1975, antitrust lawyer Moses Lasky charged Telex Corp. a shocking $1 million for filing a petition to have the company's case against International Business Machines Corp. heard before the Supreme Court.

But Mr. Lasky's appearance in that case is credited with forcing IBM to initiate settlement talks.

"Tribe gets $1 million in a month," Mr. Wolfram says.

"And his involvement in Lightning Lube didn't push anyone to settle."

While Mr. Tribe says this is his first fee challenge by a client, interviews with other lawyers and clients suggest that Mr. Tribe has aggressive billing practices.

In one case, Mr. Tribe acknowledges that he said he would quit unless he got more money.

According to letters provided to this newspaper, Mr. Tribe was retained in May 1991 to represent Elliot Fineman, a New Jersey businessman who had just won a $239 million verdict from Armstrong World Industries Inc., a Lancaster, Pa., maker of floor coverings.

That 11-stage fee agreement called for Mr. Tribe to earn fees ranging from a minimum of 1.25% to a maximum of 10% of any damages paid by Armstrong, depending on how far he could take the case.

Soon after the fee agreement was signed, however, the trial judge threw out the award and ordered a new trial.

Mr. Tribe demanded more money, guaranteeing him between 7% and 14% of the money Armstrong might eventually pay.

Mr. Tribe says he asked for more money because the case became riskier after the verdict was rejected, and he didn't feel obliged to remain involved.

Mr. Fineman says he agreed because of the changed circumstances, and says he is pleased with Mr. Tribe, who still represents him.

The case is scheduled to be retried in federal court in Newark next month, and Mr. Tribe plans to handle possible appeals.

Mr. Tribe's bills have raised eyebrows as far back as 1983, in the case of Grendel's Den, a restaurant near Harvard that challenged a state law allowing churches to veto liquor licenses of nearby eateries.

After Mr. Tribe won the case in the Supreme Court, he billed the state of Massachusetts $264,000 under a federal act that allows plaintiffs lawyers to bill states for unconstitutional laws.

When Massachusetts challenged the fee, it was revealed that one of Mr. Tribe's associates billed the state $625 to write a one-sentence letter.

"It was a long sentence," the associate was quoted as saying at the time.

Even now, Mr. Tribe says the allegation of overbilling in that case was a "cheap shot."

He concedes it was a short letter.

But the associate "did spend a day thinking about it."

Eventually, an appeals court awarded Mr. Tribe about half the amount he had sought.

All Mr. Tribe's legal fees supplement the $140,000 annual salary he gets for teaching a full course load at Harvard Law School.

Harvard permits its law professors to spend 20% of their time on private matters, and Mr. Tribe says he finds time for his private law practice by sleeping only five hours a night and working weekends.

If Mr. Tribe is nominated and confirmed for a Supreme Court post, one thing is certain, says Mr. Lee, the former solicitor general: "He'd have to take a cut in pay."

Lightning Lube, Inc., June 23, 1992 (amount to be received in millions of dollars)

Flight attendants who say they were forced to breathe second-hand smoke can pursue a class-action lawsuit against the tobacco industry, a Florida appeals court said.

The proposed class consists of 60,000 current and former flight attendants who do not smoke but were exposed to passengers' cigarette fumes before Congress banned most in-flight smoking in 1989.

The lawsuit claims that these flight attendants have become ill or have otherwise been harmed by their forced exposure to smoke.

The appeals-court panel in Miami reversed a trial-court judge who had told 30 flight attendants from various airlines that they would each need to pursue separate lawsuits.

The appeals court, ruling on Tuesday, said the flight attendants have similar claims and together could adequately represent the larger class of 60,000.

"As a practical matter, it's monumentally significant, because if I had to go individually, I would have to go to different states," said Stanley M. Rosenblatt, a Miami attorney representing all the flight attendants.

"You would get involved in very complex statute-of-limitations and jurisdictional issues."

Although the court did not certify a class action, "that is a formality" at this point, Mr. Rosenblatt said.

But the ruling was played down by tobacco companies, which stressed that the flight attendants have not formally won class certification.

William S. Ohlemeyer, an attorney for defendant Philip Morris Cos. at the Kansas City, Mo., law firm Shook, Hardy & Bacon, said, "All the appellate court has said is that the class-action claims can withstand a motion to dismiss."

Philip Morris and RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. said the flight attendants still have to persuade the trial court to allow them to proceed as a class.

Besides New York-based Philip Morris and RJR Nabisco, the defendants are Loews Corp., New York; American Brands Inc., Old Greenwich, Conn.; Brooke Group Ltd., Miami; and Dosal Tobacco Corp., a small Miami company.

A Loews representative was unavailable for comment on the ruling.

The other companies had no comment.

Lawsuits over second-hand smoke rose after the Environmental Protection Agency in January 1993 linked the smoke to lung cancer and other ailments.

Most of the resulting litigation is aimed at employers that allowed smoking in the workplace, but another lawsuit against the tobacco industry -- filed by a Mississippi barber-shop owner -- is slated to go to trial in September.

(Norma R. Broin vs. Philip Morris, District Court of Appeal of Florida, Third District, 92-1405)

The U.S. Senate overwhelmingly voted to prohibit the filing of lawsuits involving crashes of older light aircraft, in what proponents said was a breakthrough in the effort to change liability laws at the federal level.

The measure, which still must be considered in the House, would bar suits alleging flaws in the design of light aircraft that are 18 years or older.

The general aviation industry has been lobbying for such protection since 1986, saying it has been swamped with frivolous suits involving 30-year-old or 40-year-old planes.

Yesterday's 91-8 vote was the first time either the House or Senate had ever formally considered such legislation.

Consumer groups and trial lawyers decried the action.

"I fail to see how this is going to keep the planes from falling out of the air," said Barry J. Nace, president of the Association of Trial Lawyers of America.

Mr. Nace said he expects "wiser heads will prevail" in the House.

The bill provides three exceptions, including where manufacturers have provided false safety information about an aircraft to federal regulators and where the crash involves an emergency medical evacuation or a victim on the ground.

The bill was sponsored by Republican Sen. Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas, home to the three largest U.S. manufacturers of light aircraft.

Except in cases involving nuclear accidents and childhood vaccines, Congress hasn't enacted legislation generally affecting rights to bring suits involving defective products or personal injuries since the turn of the century.

A federal bill that limits punitive damages in product cases faces a likely Senate vote this spring.

Law Note . . . .

MURDER ACQUITTAL: A man who was accused under a novel legal theory of destroying a woman's will to live by raping her was acquitted of murder.

But a California state-court jury found Jose Alonso Garcia, 20, guilty of rape and five counts of sexual assault, the Associated Press reported.

The 79-year-old rape victim died a month after the attack, and many criminal-law specialists had questioned whether case law would support a murder charge in such circumstances.

One juror said the jury concluded that the woman died of cancer unrelated to the rape.

Junda Woo in New York and Richard B. Schmitt in Washington contributed to this article.

A GRAPH published with a March 17 article about Laurence Tribe's legal practice stated that Mr. Tribe was guaranteed payment of $2.8 million in fees in a federal court case if the case were to be settled, regardless of the decision by the court of appeals.

Mr. Tribe's fee agreement for his appellate work provided that the fee, whether more or less than $2.8 million, was contingent on his client's winning a court judgment or settlement and was subject to other limitations keyed to the size of any payment to the client.

