Critics of the U.S. position in the Framework talks with Japan question their central premise namely, that Japan's distinctive trading behavior harms its partners.

Often such criticisms begin by pointing out that the bilateral trade imbalance between any two nations does not matter.

But the bilateral imbalance between the U.S. and Japan is not what the talks seek to remedy.

Rather, they are designed to address Japan's multilateral current-account surplus and structural barriers to Japan's markets, both of which matter very much to Japan's trading partners.

Japan is currently running a current-account surplus of about $130 billion, or 3% of its gross domestic product.

This huge surplus depresses global demand and slows the pace of economic expansion and job creation in other nations.

A reduction of $50 billion in Japan's multilateral trade surplus -- which would still leave Japan with a current-account surplus of $80 billion, or about 2% of its GDP -- would mean an additional $50 billion in demand for the goods and services of Japan's trading partners.

America's share of this $50 billion might be in the $5 billion to $15 billion range, or about 100,000 to 300,000 jobs.

Can Japan do anything to reduce its current-account surplus?

Luckily, yes.

Increases in public spending and tax cuts can stimulate domestic demand, increase imports and reduce the trade imbalance without jeopardizing Japan's fiscal stability.

Japan's own consumers and businesses, reeling from the effects of the worst economic slowdown since World War II, would be the major beneficiaries of more expansionary fiscal measures.

But Japan's trading partners would share in the benefits.

Fiscal expansion is a win-win strategy for Japan and the rest of the world -- and it was a major focus of the Framework talks.

Japan's current-account surplus is only one of the distinctive features of its international performance.

Another is the comparatively small share of manufactured imports in total Japanese consumption.

Over the past 20 years, the share of manufactured imports in total consumption has increased steadily and perceptibly in all of the advanced industrial countries, except one: Japan.

Today this share is only about 6% in Japan, compared with more than 15% in the U.S. and Germany.

Japan also has a distinctively low level of intra-industry trade -- that is, trade in differentiated manufactures within a given industry.

Japan does import -- but it tends not to import very much in industries in which it is a major exporter.

Japan is a major exporter of automobiles, for example, but it imports very few of them.

In contrast, the U.S. and the other advanced industrial countries that trade with one another tend to buy and sell in the same product lines, thereby reaping the benefits of enhanced product competition and lower prices for their consumers.

If the Japanese markets were truly open, as many Japanese claim, traded goods would sell at "international prices" adjusted for transportation costs.

In fact, however, traded goods sell at far higher prices in Japan than in other countries.

For example, two recent studies, jointly conducted by the U.S. Commerce Department and Japan's Ministry of Trade and Industry, found that prices of traded goods were on average 37% higher in Japan than in the U.S.

Japan's distinctive differences are no accident; they are the result of a host of structural impediments to imports.

These include, to name but a few: a reliance on nontransparent and capricious bureaucratic control to ensure product safety, domestic cartels, discriminatory practices by the keiretsu, weak enforcement of competition policies, inadequate intellectual property protection, and restrictive distribution practices.

All of these barriers have the same effect: They discriminate in favor of Japanese suppliers and against foreign suppliers.

And to date none of these barriers are effectively covered by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

But does it matter that many of Japan's markets are largely closed to foreign competitors?

The answer once again is yes.

One recent comprehensive study indicated that if Japan were to eliminate all its formal and informal barriers to trade, American exports alone would increase initially by between $9 billion and $18 billion.

This means that American merchandise exports to Japan might be as much as one-quarter to one-third greater in the absence of such barriers.

And this is only the immediate effect.

Structural barriers to the Japanese market have had subtle but pervasive effects on the behavior of both Japanese customers and foreign suppliers.

The oft-cited preference of Japanese customers for Japanese goods is partly the result of the inadequate availability of foreign alternatives.

And the oft-cited unwillingness of foreign producers to mount the efforts necessary to sell in Japan is partly the result of frustration with the myriad barriers that such efforts have encountered in the past.

In a world without such barriers, Japanese customers would develop a greater appreciation for foreign goods, and foreign producers would develop a greater commitment to their Japanese clientele.

In such a world, Japan's import share would rise gradually over time, and this would mean substantially greater sales for Japan's trading partners.

As an illustration, if Japan had the same import share of GDP as the U.S., its imports would be about $160 billion more a year, and this would mean about $20 billion to $30 billion more in U.S. exports to Japan.

Moreover, forgone American exports to Japan are not the only cost posed by structural barriers in Japan.

Such barriers have also created large, lucrative and protected domestic markets that have provided Japanese companies the experience, the scale and the profits they needed to compete with American companies in other markets around the globe.

An example illustrates the point.

Motorola's cellular telephones are among the best in the world.

By blocking Motorola's access to Japan's rapidly growing market, Motorola's Japanese competitors have been able to keep their prices up, earn high profits and develop competing products.

Based in their sanctuary at home, they have been able to launch competitive strikes against Motorola in the U.S. and in third-country markets.

Similar stories apply to competition between American and Japanese producers in several other industries, including automobiles, machine tools, color television, semiconductors, construction and financial services.

Japan's structural barriers are frustrating and costly for all of Japan's trading partners, but they are particularly damaging for the U.S. because Japan is a major market for what American companies and workers produce best: sophisticated manufactured goods and advanced services that provide high-skill, high-wage jobs for American workers.

Both the level of trade and its composition matter to U.S. living standards.

And Japan's structural barriers cause continuing injury on both counts -- by depressing the level of trade between the two countries and by distorting its composition away from the sectors in which the U.S. has a strong competitive advantage.

Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa remarked on his trip to Washington last month that Japan is now grown up.

He is certainly correct -- Japan has the world's second-largest economy and one of the richest in the world.

But grown-ups have many responsibilities.

They must provide leadership, set a good example, cooperate with one another and not take advantage of other family members.

It is time for Japan to act like a grown-up by opening its borders to fair foreign competition and by reducing its multilateral surplus.

Both are essential to preserving the health of the global trading system.

Ms. Tyson is chairwoman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers.

