Dr. Yale Kramer's March 9 editorial-page piece "Schizophrenia and Psychiatry's Limits" does a great disservice to the mentally ill, to his own profession (psychoanalysis), and to the public.

An engaging writing style cannot obscure the confusion and factual errors that run through Dr. Kramer's article.

His views on the diagnosis and treatment of mental illness hark back to the prevailing wisdom of a generation ago, before the scientific revolution in psychiatry.

Two decades of research have established that the major mental illnesses can be diagnosed accurately and, for the most part, treated effectively.

His essay seems locked in the past in another way, too; when he confuses a failed 30-year-old policy -- deinstitutionalization -- with contemporary psychiatric practices.

Let me be specific.

Dr. Kramer feels "bedeviled" by "diagnostic ambiguity," but in fact diagnostic reliability in psychiatry (the likelihood that multiple independent observers will arrive at the same diagnosis) is equal to or better than most diagnoses in medicine.

By way of example, Dr. Kramer laments that he doesn't know where to "draw the line" between clinical depression and normal moods.

In fact, most psychiatrists do that every day and research shows they can do it quite accurately in most cases -- that is, when multiple clinicians are asked to diagnose a given patient, they will agree on where to "draw the line" about 80% of the time.

In saying that it's "difficult to prove the effectiveness of treatment," Dr. Kramer seems unaware of decades of treatment research.

In fact, the effectiveness of modern treatments for mental disorders -- specific medications, short-term psychotherapies, and combinations, have been evaluated in hundreds of controlled studies which are as well-designed and scientific as any in medicine.

These studies show success rates in the 60% to 80% range for the five serious major mental illnesses, which compares favorably to the approximately 50% success rate for three widely used (and reimbursed) treatments for cardiovascular disorders -- arthrectomy, angioplasty and antihypertensive medication.

With respect to his implication that the cost of treating mental disorders is higher than that for "physical" disorders, our research indicates that modern treatments for serious mental disorders are, indeed, cost-effective.

For example, careful econometric analysis shows that providing equitable coverage for treatment of the 2.8% of the population with severe mental illness would save an estimated $2.2 billion a year in indirect costs and that does not even include the savings in federal disability payments to the severely mentally ill, now totaling about $14 billion a year.

Finally, Dr. Kramer seems to be saying that health care coverage for mental illness -- even severe mental illness -- must wait until "cures" are found.

Would anyone dare apply that standard to the treatment of scores of medical illnesses for which today's treatments are, at best, palliative?

Should coverage for the treatment of cancer or multiple sclerosis be withheld until a cure is found?

Getting rid of this glaring double standard is what Mrs. Gore, Mrs. Ford and Mrs. Carter have been talking about.

Frederick K. Goodwin, M.D.

Where has Dr. Kramer been?

In his article, he emerges Rip Van Winkle-like, applying a philosophy of the 1950s and '60s to a major national health issue of the 1990s, while ignoring all the scientific and clinical advances in between.

For people who suffer from schizophrenia, and their families, Dr. Kramer's statement is a stigmatizing reinforcement of outmoded stereotypes.

He suggests that treatment for mental illnesses should not be included in national health systems reform because we do not fully understand the cause of these illnesses and therefore cannot accurately diagnose and "cure" them.

We believe his argument is flawed in two ways:

First, health insurance coverage has never been limited only to illnesses for which there is a clear understanding of cause and which can be cured.

Would he apply the same standard to certain forms of cancer, arthritis, diabetes, multiple sclerosis, cystic fibrosis, epilepsy, Parkinson's disease, psoriasis and dozens of other medical illnesses?

Second, his statements about the diagnosis and treatment of schizophrenia and other illnesses are out of date, misleading and needlessly pessimistic.

There is nothing ambiguous about severe mental illnesses.

Their psychiatric diagnosis is reliable and most psychiatrists routinely use the APA's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual.

Studies show that different psychiatrists evaluating the same patient with a severe disorder such as schizophrenia will agree on the diagnosis with the same reliability as other physicians agree on the diagnosis of other medical illnesses.

Dr. Kramer's pessimistic and outdated view that because people with schizophrenia cannot be "cured" in the medical sense, they should be written off as an expensive social problem, worthy only of humane sheltering.

Yet we, as families and physicians, know that there are thousands of people with schizophrenia who have graduated from college and hold tax-paying jobs, thanks to state-of-the-art medical care and community-based rehabilitation programs such as Fountain House in New York City.

Schizophrenia, major depression, manic-depression, panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder and other severe illnesses are real, they cause great pain and suffering, they can be treated effectively, and people suffering them deserve the same degree of insurance coverage as persons with other medical illnesses.

John S. McIntyre, M.D.

While Dr. Kramer correctly detailed the $3 billion cost of deinstitutionalization, residents in my Upper West Side neighborhood in New York City could offer further insights into the cost and the devastating impact of the Community Mental Health Center Act.

Simply put, our neighborhood has been held hostage by an extraordinarily large population of mentally ill homeless people.

Created by an inordinate number of outpatient facilities and treatment centers, their presence has given new meaning to the term "urban nightmare": A simple visit to the local elementary school, post office or grocery store, for instance, can be a Dantean journey through the dark underside of our society.

Violence, harassment and an astonishing list of antisocial behaviors are commonplace: One individual earned a sadly accurate sobriquet as "The Mad Man of 96th Street" and his case (chronicled on "60 Minutes") symbolizes the failure of the Community Mental Health Center Act.

In addition, it illustrates the shocking disinterest of local politicians ostensibly elected to serve and protect our community.

Also, in direct conflict with their salaried positions, many key officers and employees of social-service organizations sit on community boards and city councils that make decisions as to where and how their own agencies receive government funds and site programs.

According to Dr. Kramer, psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and paranoid sociopathy are frequently misdiagnosed, misunderstood and not easily cured, even under the best of circumstances.

In light of this, the placement of potentially dangerous patients into community-based facilities should be immediately re-evaluated, particularly the misguided belief that people who suffer these debilitating illnesses are still somehow able to guide their own therapy and decide whether or not to follow their prescribed medical protocol and whether or not to attend programs designed to help them cope with their illnesses.

Dr. Kramer was correct in stating that the 1963 Community Mental Health Centers Act has been a failure, but not, as he implied, because people with serious mental illness are incapable of living in the community.

John F. Kennedy's vision failed because too few centers (789 instead of 2,000) were created, and those that did open largely ignored those with serious illnesses and wound up serving as multipurpose family service centers instead.

Some of the $3 billion funneled to these programs went to pay for swimming pools and tennis courts.

Follow-up studies found that only 5% of the centers were serving those targeted by the original legislation.

Our 45 years of experience in working with people with major mental illness has shown that with appropriate housing, medication and support, the vast majority of this population -- no matter what the specific diagnosis -- can live dignified, independent, and productive lives in the community.

This does not mean a life of quiet desperation, but a fulfilling life.

Members of Fountain House live and work in New York City, which includes jobs at The Wall Street Journal.

Kenneth J. Dudek

In the March 30 Letters to the Editor, Laurie Flynn is misidentified.

She is executive director of the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill., based in Arlington, Va.

