As a tutor, it was a dud.

She won her case in an administrative hearing, but a commission appeals panel overturned the decision.

It depends whom you ask.

"You get kind of addicted."

The computer can't take pictures."

Mr. Backes, the displaced Nebraska sportswriter, certainly isn't mentioning the refs anymore: He's now selling farm equipment.

"It's a fiefdom," says Richard Levy, Texas AFL-CIO's staff counsel.

In addition, critics say, the use of deductibles primarily helps large companies, which can better absorb big losses.

"I loved it," he says.

In a recent survey by the National Federation of Independent Business, nearly a third of Texas small businesses that are in the system saw their rates fall in the past year.

Many companies instead pay for employees' injuries out of pocket or by purchasing standard health and disability policies, along with an indemnity policy to guard against catastrophic claims.

Employers in Texas can buy workers' compensation insurance from among some 260 private insurers, or from the Texas Workers' Compensation Insurance Fund, a private fund capitalized by a state bond issue.

Some feel they are rushed back to work too soon, or that hard-to-verify injuries such as back pain are downplayed.

A case in point: Southern Foods Group Inc., a Dallas milk-processing company with 2,200 employees, which decided two years ago to operate without workers' comp insurance.

For their part, insurers insist they need to recoup losses incurred under the old system, while many remain reluctant to lower rates while the reforms still could be reversed by the courts.

He dismisses that argument as "boo-hockey," noting that small papers often rely upon coaches to phone in information to reporters, anyway.

The paper booted up a software program and booted out Mr. Backes.

But Texas is also one of three states that allow employers to "go bare" -- not provide any workers' compensation coverage at all.

But two years ago, technology came roaring into the Democrat's newsroom.

It concluded the AMA guidelines are irrelevant in determining how much a specific injury is likely to impair job performance, and that the limits on jury trials denies access to the courts.

Still, Sportswriter hasn't won any writing prizes, much less proved itself a match for talents such as the legendary Grantland Rice, who set Notre Dame's Four Horsemen against a "blue, gray October sky."

At a game's end, they write in the teams' records, the game score by periods, team statistics and individual statistics.

According to a study by Texas A&M University, 44% of businesses in the state don't provide workers' comp insurance.

Pop a disk into a PC, type in a few numbers and comments, and presto -- out come stories awash in clutch shots, runaway victories and at-the-buzzer heroics.

Each winter, as blizzards roared across the Great Plains, he covered as many as eight high-school basketball games an issue.

Sportswriter was developed by Roger Helms, a 42-year-old freelance writer in Rochester, Minn.

Moreover, $1 billion of the $1.1 billion decline in premiums stems from the fact that under the new law insurance companies can offer deductibles; the costs, in other words, have been shifted from the front end to the back.

"If you don't have an attorney, you can't do anything.

Certainly Tom Weekley, owner of Whalen Furniture Inc. in McAllen, hasn't seen his rates fall.

The papers had been shelling out up to $7 a game to stringers.

Mr. Helms wanted to buy a weekly newspaper and improve its sports coverage, so, using an Apple Macintosh program called Hypercard, he set out to design a program that would tutor high-school reporters on writing sports stories.

"You're never misquoted," says Mark Ortmeir, boys' basketball coach at Humphrey High School.

For many of the state's largest businesses, the reforms, designed to lower costs and improve benefits, have worked well.

"There isn't a system to insure that the worker's rights are protected."

In one recent edition of the Humphrey Democrat, Sportswriter-crafted lead paragraphs varied considerably, including one that highlighted an individual player: "Jody Kosch made two free throws to put St. Francis up by four points and seal the win."

Indeed, Sportswriter is programmed with every possible sports cliche.

No takers.

"Any sportswriter who is marginally competent can write much better and also much faster," he says.

And injured workers are even more upset, complaining that they are cast adrift in a complex hearing process -- outgunned by company lawyers and abandoned by plaintiffs' attorneys who won't work under limits on legal fees.

Teams "jump in front."

Most recently, the Fourth Court of Appeals in San Antonio upheld a state district judge and found the workers' comp reforms unconstitutional.

But it may be the future.

Sportswriter is one of a new genre of software that can intelligently string words between facts.

And even with a favorable court decision, industry expects a tough lobbying effort by trial lawyers and organized labor to gut the law.

Instead, the company pays injured workers' medical expenses and 80% of lost salary for as long as an injured employee is off work (compared with 70% to 75% for no more than two years under workers' compensation), and it buys an indemnity policy to cover catastrophic losses.

Mr. Helms hasn't discounted updating Sportswriter, but he is already thinking beyond sports.

Sportswriter doesn't focus on subtle disparities, such as a big rebounding edge, that might explain a victory.

(It can only handle football and basketball.)

Now they are replacing reporters.

But they do prove that computers can produce serviceable stories in specialized domains.

Sportswriter, as the program is called, costs $100.

But every lead includes the site of the game, something writers might save for lower in the story.

Many remain outside the system, arguing that costs haven't come down nearly as much as promised -- if they have come down at all.

Perhaps, but until rates come down significantly, many companies will continue to opt out of the system.

"I decided that the only thing my program was good at was making its own decisions," Mr. Helms says.

That wasn't the way it was supposed to be four years ago, when legislators approved sweeping changes in the 75-year-old system for compensating employees for workplace injuries.

Though "Sportswriter writes a little below the level of a beginning reporter," it clearly outclasses copy turned in by high-school "stringers," says Keith Isley, editor of the Chariton (Iowa) Leader and Herald-Patriot.

Concedes Dick Brown, an insurance-industry lobbyist: "It's going to take a colossal struggle to get the system through intact."

A story may even judge a game an upset if the coach checked a box that says the opponent was "clearly superior to us."

In newspaper offices around the country, computers have replaced typewriters.

Taking aim at runaway costs that threatened to chase insurers and businesses from the state, legislators set standards based on American Medical Association guidelines for determining disability, tied attorneys' fees to actual time and expenses, and put limits on lump-sum settlements.

"But it hasn't been established yet that the benefits have been improved for injured workers, or that costs have gone down for most businesses, especially small businesses."

Some 80 small newspapers in the Midwest have already bought Sportswriter, published by Zybrainics Software Inc., Rochester, Minn., to write high-school football or basketball games.

"For those of us who have really good alternative programs, going back would be devastating," she says.

Now Mr. Isley says he mainly goes to games "to take pictures.

Witness a recent case in Houston, in which a truck driver slipped out of his truck, injuring his back and sustaining $17,000 in medical costs.

When Texas legislators overhauled the workers' compensation system in 1989, the new law was hailed as a model for other states.

"In 40 or 50 years a computer might be sports editor."

The hardball decision to replace a reporter with software was easy enough to justify.

Big enterprises also can use their clout to negotiate rates below the state-established benchmarks.

"You just don't mention the refs," he adds.

At Individual Inc. in Cambridge, Mass., computers sort through thousands of newspaper, magazine and wire-service articles and compile them into customized newsletters faxed daily to 3,000 subscribers.

In a 4-to-3 decision, which has been appealed to the state Supreme Court, the court found it was "arbitrary and irrational" to make it hard for only one side to hire a lawyer.

Penny-pinchers, however, have come to love it.

Mr. Isley concedes that he gets grief from purists.

I think the law is very unfair."

They complain that the new limits on fees and lump-sum settlements have made compensation cases unaffordable.

"When you have an attorney, they know the law, they know when to move fast, and they will fight for you," Ms. Flores says.

"You could create an image you couldn't tell from a real person."

"It's scary, huh?" says Don Skwar, sports editor of the Boston Globe.

And while claims for damages under the workers' comp law are capped, outside the system they are limitless.

But two months into using Sportswriter, "we recouped our cost and the stories were significantly better," he adds.

Moreover, plaintiffs' lawyers, who in the past did very well pressing workers' compensation claims, have all but abandoned the field.

Backers worry that a less-than-resounding rejection of the lower courts' arguments could cast a pall over the Legislature's sunset review of the workers' comp commission.

Still, computer journalism raises more than issues of creativity: Sportswriter allows sources, not reporters, to choose the quotations that appear in print, violating what many see as a sacred tenet of journalism.

And instead of sending permanently disabled workers a check to compensate for the loss of wage-earning capacity, Southern retrains its employees for new jobs.

A company without workers' comp insurance has to be only partly negligent to be fully liable for damages.

The programs also don't dig into anything, or challenge the value or even validity of the data fed into them.

Nonsubscribers, however, face substantial risks.

Coaches are also asked to describe key points in the action -- the big play in a touchdown drive or a game-winning shot.

"This is about the worst law I've ever seen the Texas Legislature pass," says Phil Hardberger, a San Antonio attorney whose workers' compensation case load has plunged to two from 400.

Nonsubscription also does away with the insurance-company middleman, Ms. Bush says, allowing her to communicate directly with the injured worker and giving her greater control over treatment.

"We were laying out $1,500 a month for the sports reporter," says Donald Zavadil, editor and owner of the 1,800-circulation weekly.

Nearly half of those surveyed small businesses, for instance, said their workers' comp rates rose in the past year.

In fact, a state appeals court in August ruled the law unconstitutionally deprives workers of their right to fair compensation for workplace injuries.

Mary Flores, a cardiac nurse in San Antonio, didn't have a lawyer when she pressed her claim for a chronic foot injury through the Texas Workers' Compensation Commission's new hearing process.

So far, state courts have agreed.

"The Texas reforms have been touted as a model for other states," says Deece Eckstein, a member of the state Board of Insurance.

Coaches can also provide a brief description of outstanding individual performances, and quotations.

And a coach writing his own "quotes" stays out of trouble.

Then the coaches phone in or fax the form to the newspaper, someone types the data into a computer, and a few seconds later, Sportswriter prints out a story.

Mr. Skwar says such automatic journalism "takes away creativity" that only real writers can provide.

Dean Backes used to work as a sportswriter for the weekly Humphrey Democrat in Humphrey, Neb.

Such economies don't end at the sports desk.

Mr. Helms, its inventor, wouldn't disagree.

Scores are "knotted," and players make "charity tosses" from the foul line.

"They say it's not journalism if you don't generate all the information yourself," he says.

But look a little closer, and the gains become less impressive.

Each story also has a quarter-by-quarter scoring summary and a count of free throws and field goals.

A model?

Though he shows surprisingly little animosity toward the technology that replaced him, he can't resist at least one dig: "I was better than Sportswriter."

Still, if businesses are unhappy with the new law, injured workers are devastated.

It works like this: Newspapers give coaches a form to fill out.

She then scoured page after page in the telephone book looking for a lawyer willing to appeal her case in state court.

And he and others point out that Sportswriter isn't being used to cover matters of local controversy or national importance.

And even if the law is upheld by the state Supreme Court, it has to survive a concerted attack by legislative enemies in the 1995 session.

But some users say software-generated prose enables them to write about events they would otherwise have to skip.

The appeals court found much in the law to fault.

Large employers also can self insure, while keeping the law's protection against large legal judgments.

"We have a very small staff here, and it allows us to do a fairly decent story," says John Edgecombe Jr., publisher of the Nebraska Signal, a weekly in Geneva, Neb.

From the coaches' viewpoint, Sportswriter offers some obvious pluses.

The software didn't talk back and could write -- prolifically if not particularly well.

At the Bloomberg L.P. financial news service in New York, computers write hourly stock-market summaries and foreign-market trends.

That may change.

At the same time, compensation for some workers has improved: The average weekly benefit has increased to $250 from $190 under the old law; maximum benefits have nearly doubled to $464 a week.

By many measures, the reforms, which have the support of most of the state's business associations, helped.

His rates jumped 8.8% in 1992, leaving his annual premiums at twice their 1990 level -- even though he hasn't had a claim in 14 years.

But ask small businesses, and it's a different story.

Since leaving the system, she says, premiums that were "in the millions" have been eliminated.

Double-digit increases in premiums paid by businesses to insurance companies have been curbed, and total premiums dropped by 25% in 1992 -- to $2.9 billion from $4 billion.

Consider this lead paragraph: "The Humphrey Bulldogs fell victim to a second-half rally and dropped a close decision to the Leigh Lady Panthers 27-24 in girls basketball at Clarkson in the first round of the Cornhusker Conference Tournament."

But as a writer, it wasn't bad.

The big reason, says Pamela Bush, the company's occupational-injury benefits manager, was cost.

"A virtual TV weatherperson would be a natural," he says.

Little wonder, then, that 88% of businesses with more than 1,000 employees have chosen to remain in the system, compared with 60% of those with two to five employees.

His jury award: $3.5 million.

For many injured workers, nonsubscription can mean they are at the mercy of not-always-benevolent employers.

The Texas Workers' Compensation Commission is considering asking for a legislative review of mandatory coverage; commissioners could decide tomorrow to include the issue in a list of topics for consideration by the Texas Sunset Commission.

Southern's annual costs now: less than $1 million.

