Like me and my sister old Janet used to skate there all the time, and so did a lot of other people.

I don't know why, exactly, maybe the greenhouse effect or whatever.

They were all in a secret place.

It showed that you were a sensitive kid, Holden, it really did, your caring about the ducks and everything.

I didn't have one.

When he calls "Missy, Missy!" one of the two Missys always comes.

Kids used to actually ice skate on the old rowboat lake.

Well, all these years I've kind of wondered about your question myself.

My friend Bill DeGraphenreid found them.

Ms. Winn is a writer in New York.

If you stand there facing Fifth Avenue and throw down a lot of bread, you'll see them, all right.

I mean he really cares about the ducks and he brings them huge amounts of food all the time.

It's this structure that is actually a part of the West Drive, somewhere around 77th Street.

The lakes in Central Park hardly ever froze over during the past few decades, not solidly so you could skate on them, and not all over so anybody had to worry about the ducks.

Would you believe it, Holden -- that clock isn't there anymore.

Because there's an actual natural spring that runs into it, while most of the other streams in the park turn on and off with a faucet, for chrissake.

Something, I guess, because I never got kicked out of school, either.

All of them.

Because things have changed since the 1940s or '50s, when you were getting kicked out of that phony prep school and meeting old Sally Hayes under the clock at the Biltmore.

All the lakes and even the Reservoir in Central Park have frozen solid.

Hundreds of ducks, including Missy and Missy's sister.

I hope I'm not giving away any secrets or anything, but "Catcher" has been out for 43 years, just about, and I guess most people know how it ends by now.

They've taken down the whole damn hotel, for chrissake!

People have been skating on the rowboat lake, for chrissake, and I haven't seen anybody do that for about 500 years, not since I was a little girl.

There's this one female mallard he calls Missy, and there's all Missy's children -- she had eight ducklings last spring -- and there's Missy's sister -- he calls her Missy too -- who was slightly crippled from getting tangled in a fishing line.

I'm not kidding, it's absolutely amazing.

So Holden, I'm going to tell you how to find the secret place where the ducks in Central Park go when all the lakes are frozen over.

In those days, I'm sorry to tell you, Holden, I didn't worry about the ducks like you did -- I honestly never gave the ducks a single thought.

You were worried about what happens to those ducks when all the lakes freeze over.

And imagine this: He actually knows those ducks.

I remember Central Park in the '40s and '50s.

Here's how I figure it: In 1945, when your author, J.D. Salinger, published the first story about you in Collier's magazine, you were a junior in high school.

I don't know what was wrong with me.

By the time I grew up and began to really care about ducks and stuff the winters stopped being so cold.

Really I have.

But that's not what I mean when I say things have changed.

Besides, all the girls there had these little skating dresses with white fur at the hem and sleeves.

You remember your question, the one about the ducks in Central Park.

It'll make you so damn happy it'll just about kill you.

It really will.

But not very hard.

Because this has been one unbelievably cold winter.

No wonder you ended up in a loony bin in the last chapter.

You should come and do it, Holden.

From its west side you're facing the Natural History Museum.

Finally he found them.

Hundreds of ducks right under old Balcony Bridge.

It was pathetic.

Well, all the ducks are right there and nobody hardly notices them.

You're probably in some crummy retirement community in Florida or Arizona or somewhere, for crying out loud.

So Bill's been going there just about every day and feeding Missy I and Missy II and all the other ducks just heaps of food, even though it's been so cold and the roads in the park have been horribly icy and besides, he's had this painful foot condition, bone spurs, that makes it hard to walk.

Of course we didn't have much choice if we wanted to skate, because they didn't have any skating rinks in the park in those days.

So your question began to really bother me.

I know it's probably too late and you don't give a damn about such things any more.

I mean, you really wanted some information, and in chapter 12 all Horwitz the taxi driver would say was, "How the hell should I know?"

I mean, most people just don't give a damn about the animals in the park and all.

I actually found out what happens to the ducks in Central Park when everything freezes over.

They'll all come out and push and shove and gobble up every crumb.

If you stand on its east side you get a fantastic view of the rowboat lake and the Central Park South and Fifth Avenue skylines.

And a big bunch of other ducks.

I mean that it hasn't been so cold these winters.

You wondered whether some guy came in a truck and took them away to a zoo or something.

In those days it got really cold in January or February.

He's this nice older guy with a big shock of white hair who feeds the ducks all year.

Anyhow, when all the lakes froze this year Bill began to worry about the ducks.

But it's the truth.

Just about the only place in all of Central Park that hadn't frozen over.

But recently I've been thinking about you a lot, Holden.

And I can tell you that nobody comes with a truck and takes them away to the zoo or anything.

So he looked all over the park for them.

There was only the rink at Rockefeller Center, and that one was too expensive.

So you're going to get your Social Security in the next couple of years.

Do you know where Balcony Bridge is?

I mean it's been really cold.

And guess what, Holden?

But all through "The Catcher in the Rye" you kept asking a question, a really good question, and nobody ever gave you an answer.

