A fight over Texas' beaches is kicking up sand in the state capital.

The scuffle, which could have significant environmental and economic impact, pits Texas Agriculture Commissioner Rick Perry against Land Commissioner Garry Mauro -- former Texas A&M schoolmates and two of the state's highest-profile politicians.

At issue is the proposed Coastal Management Plan, a pet project of Mr. Mauro that offers a blueprint for the use and oversight of 370 miles of Gulf coastline.

The plan, approved in concept during the 1991 Texas legislative session, appeared until recently to be quietly on its way to final approval.

The only remaining hurdle was a half-dozen public hearings.

Now, though the plan may still be adopted, its path won't be so quiet.

While groups representing environmentalists and many coastal residents support the plan, some landowners and farmers along the coast say they fear it will strangle development and interfere with water and pesticide use.

County and city leaders say Mr. Mauro's Coastal Coordination Council, which drew up the plan, has overstepped its bounds.

Leading the fight is Mr. Perry, once a Democrat like Mr. Mauro, now a Republican who claims the plan would create a superbureaucracy that would threaten private-property rights.

Austin political watchers see a feud developing between the two men.

Though they traveled in the same student-government circles at Texas A&M, their relationship apparently deteriorated when Mr. Perry switched parties before running for agriculture commissioner in 1990.

Last spring, Gov. Ann Richards, with Mr. Mauro's support, vetoed legislation that would have put Mr. Perry on the beach-planning panel.

Mr. Perry now has asked the state attorney general for a ruling on questions about how much power Mr. Mauro's council has.

The two men, who work in the same building, have exchanged impersonal, sometimes caustic letters about the plan.

"I know there's a rift over this issue -- a very strong rift," says Republican political consultant Karl Rove.

"There was a deliberate effort on Mauro's part to cut Rick Perry out of this commission."

Adds George Shipley, a Democratic political consultant: "Garry perceives Perry as someone who is acting unconscionably, someone who is willing to trifle with the degradation of Texas beaches."

The rivalry has served to frame the debate about the future of Texas beaches, which the Land Office estimates are eroding at a rate of about 50 feet a year.

In 1991, the Texas Legislature approved a sweeping coastal-management bill giving the Land Office power to curtail erosion, guarantee public access to beaches and protect dunes.

The legislation also created the Coastal Coordination Council to develop and enforce a plan.

What does the council's plan do?

For starters, supporters say, it tries to resolve conflicting rules administered by state agencies.

In one example, state law requires Corpus Christi to release freshwater into its bay to reduce salt levels, but the Texas Railroad Commission has authorized oil companies to discharge highly saline wastewater into the same bay.

The plan also gives the state new authority to overrule local decisions, where in the past it had to resolve issues in court.

For instance: If South Padre Island issues a permit allowing a developer to build a retaining wall, the council can reverse the decision if it determines the structure could damage dunes.

Mr. Mauro says the council won't establish any new laws, but will merely coordinate existing agency rules.

"I think we're going to end up eliminating red tape, end up eliminating the delays and confusion all these myriad agencies have created by not working together," he says.

Moreover, Mr. Mauro argues, the Coastal Council has addressed Mr. Perry's specific objections.

The council now even refers to one section of the plan as the "Perry amendment," he says.

As for the agriculture commissioner's continuing opposition, Mr. Mauro says, "One might think politics had something to do with it.

I am not going to politicize this."

But the plan has some coastal residents worried.

They say the uncertainty already has hurt their business.

"When people come in here to talk about developing and buying land, the street talk is you can't do anything because the plan is so restrictive," says Jack Ponton, owner of Coldwell Banker Island Realtors in Port Aransas.

Enter Mr. Perry, who this month held a news conference attacking the plan.

"There's this little gnawing suspicion in my mind that Garry's looking at coastal residents, smiling and saying, `Trust me,'" Mr. Perry says.

His concerns are shared by Railroad Commission member Barry Williamson, a fellow Republican who sits on the coastal council.

Mr. Williamson says he, too, believes the plan's reach is too broad.

Though it is unlikely Mr. Perry will be able to derail the plan, his opposition could aid Mr. Williamson's effort to slow it down or at least win more changes.

Afterward, will there be hard feelings?

"If Rick's dealing in good faith, we'll be able to come up with a plan that will satisfy his concerns," Mr. Mauro says.

"We talk all the time," Mr. Perry says.

"I'm not going to go down there and hit him on the knee with a club or anything."

