Meanwhile, corporations are continuing to take measures to cope with the downturn, which has dragged on longer than most had anticipated.

Weaker stock prices are especially bad news now for Japan's financial institutions, which rely on the year-end value of their massive stock portfolios to dress up their balance sheets.

On Wednesday, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry said Japan's industrial output in February grew a weak 0.2% from January -- well below the ministry's forecast 2.6% growth rate.

Last year, the Clinton administration talked up the yen, making Japanese exports less competitive while encouraging U.S. imports into Japan.

Such conflicting signals bear a resemblance to the same period a year earlier.

Nippon Steel Corp., the largest of Japan's steel makers, released details of a plan Wednesday to reduce jobs by 7,000, to a total of 20,000.

"We've seen it all before," said Chris Calderwood, an economist at Barclay's de Zoete Wedd Securities.

But some analysts say this year-end push will fall short of expectations.

The negative implications a strong yen has for Japan's export-driven economy caused Japanese stock prices to decline for two days running just as corporations were preparing to close books for the fiscal year end.

Since the plan's release, the dollar has fallen more than two yen.

Many analysts say that while any recovery probably will be moderate, the worst is over.

But the news quickly turned sour again.

Friday will provide a key test.

Such signals are buoying those who believe the worst is over.

The outlook for Japan's sluggish economy is decidedly mixed.

The news followed more-bullish indicators earlier in the week.

Other recent surveys have shown that business sentiment is improving.

Japan's automobile dealers will release car-sales data for March.

Amid the mixed signals, Japan's release earlier in the week of a plan to ease trade tensions with the U.S. has, if anything, further clouded the nation's economic outlook.

Analysts expect a strong showing as dealers offered steep discounts to meet year-end targets.

Japan's Economic Planning Agency said its key index of forward-looking indicators came in above the so-called boom-or-bust line of 50 for the first time in nine months.

Then, industrial output was on the rise, money supply was expanding and car sales were jumping as companies made lastditch efforts to move inventory before closing their books for the year.

Meanwhile, the yen continued to surge against the dollar amid signs of increasing trade tensions -- another worrying sign for Japan's exporters.

Even Wednesday's small rise in industrial production is good news, they said.

What's more, Wednesday's report showed bloated inventory levels at manufacturers fell 1% in February while shipments rose 1.2%.

That February production came in below expectations may be a sign that "expectations are a little too high," he said.

Because it fell short of U.S. expectations, the plan drove the yen higher in anticipation the U.S. may seek a strong Japanese currency as a means of narrowing Japan's huge trade surplus with the U.S.

"We don't expect any more periods of negative growth" in Japan's gross national product, said Peter Morgan, economist at Merrill Lynch Japan Ltd.

