A young American who confessed to a 10-day spree of vandalism here has been sentenced to six strokes of the cane, a $1,400 fine, and four months in jail.

In response to the caning sentence, President Clinton said: "This punishment is extreme and we hope very much {that} it will be reconsidered."

The American charge d'affaires in Singapore has protested as well.

But instead of howling in sympathy with the bad guy, American officials should admire the swift, strong arm of Singaporean justice.

Eighteen-year-old Michael Fay from Dayton, Ohio, pleaded guilty after police charged him with vandalism for spray-painting 18 cars and throwing eggs, bricks and flower pots at them.

Police also found stolen Singapore flags and street signs in Mr. Fay's home.

He was convicted on March 3 of vandalism and possession of stolen property, and his sentence is less than the maximum.

Many Americans in Singapore say Mr. Fay, who is out on bail pending appeal, got what he deserved.

By contrast, U.S. Charge d'Affaires Ralph Boyce opposed Michael Fay's caning, arguing the youth was a first offender.

The diplomat also pleaded that caning would leave a permanent scar on Mr. Fay -- while Mr. Fay left only soluble marks on the cars he spray-painted.

Mr. Fay has done more permanent harm than the charge d'affaires is willing to acknowledge, however.

As all victims of crime can attest, criminal acts cause emotional as well as physical damage.

When Michael Fay spray-painted those cars, he violated his victims' sense of security and tore away at Singapore's identity as a safe place to live.

This fact is not lost on the Singapore government.

To keep crime at bay, first offenders are treated harshly so that they don't become second offenders.

A whack on the backside with a bamboo stick leaves a permanent scar on criminals so that they don't forget the power of the law.

Caning is not among Singapore's notorious practices, like the ban on chewing gum.

It is a legitimate way for a society to protect itself.

Singapore prides itself on being a Confucian society, where collective rights are more important than the rights of the individual.

The opposite is frequently true in the U.S., where the rugged, rebellious individual holds an honored place in folklore.

Some might argue that Michael Fay is not a criminal but a teenage rebel, like James Dean in "Rebel Without a Cause."

That's plain wrong.

In this era of rising crime rates and quiet, desperate fear in much of the American populace, it would be an act of political bravery and societal salvation to recognize that beating a criminal is sometimes the smartest thing to do.

The U.S. legal establishment, partial to jail sentences and monetary fines, considers caning to be "cruel and unusual punishment," something which is specifically banned in the Constitution.

But what constitutes "cruel and unusual punishment" is constantly being debated.

It took years of debate before the U.S. Supreme Court decided that the death penalty did not constitute "cruel and unusual punishment," and clearly the Singapore government (though not bound by U.S. laws) makes a similar argument in favor of caning.

A Singapore government spokesman noted that the city-state treats criminals firmly to avoid the fate of New York.

He knows what he's talking about.

In 1959, when Singapore became self-governing, it was little more than a British military base.

It had no natural resources.

Crime was rampant, secret criminal societies had considerable power, prostitution and drug addiction were widespread.

The country was poor, its slums notorious.

Singapore was on nobody's list of "most likely to succeed."

The People's Action Party, still in power today, cleaned up the country block by block.

It did it by passing laws that are strictly enforced: Litter and you will be fined more than $300.

Traffic in drugs and you will receive the death penalty.

The result has been astonishing: Singapore is one of the safest cities on Earth and its people among the most prosperous.

Laws need to be strictly enforced.

Americans have heard too many stories about turnstile justice: Juveniles are arrested and released on the same day; children who admit killing their parents are not convicted of the crime.

There have been far too many exceptions to the rules, and these exceptions make a mockery of the rules themselves.

According to Singapore law, Michael Fay's judge could have sentenced him to 16 strokes rather than just six -- but he was lenient.

Mr. Fay's crime spree took place over 10 days.

It was premeditated and calculated.

Mr. Fay and his friends did not simply get drunk one night and decide to raise hell.

They soberly and deliberately decided to wreak havoc.

The public debate has made it seem that Singapore law is rigid and unyielding.

It is not.

The judge meted out the punishment that he felt would both fit the crime and prevent its recurrence.

Many Americans here agree with the judge, and Americans at home should take notice.

Mr. Holburt, an American executive, has lived in Singapore for six years.

