Metallgesellschaft AG indicated that it would file a countersuit against former U.S. executive W. Arthur Benson, who is seeking $1 billion in compensatory and punitive damages for alleged defamation and civil conspiracy.

Chairman Kajo Neukirchen announced the company's response during a turbulent shareholders meeting.

It would become the latest legal twist in a rancorous dispute over blame for the huge oil-trading losses in the U.S. that nearly bankrupted the big metals, mining and engineering group in December.

The company also disclosed narrowing operating losses for the first five months of the fiscal year ending Sept. 30, but only when excluding losses at MG Corp., the group's chief U.S. unit.

Metallgesellschaft's group operating loss narrowed to 50 million marks ($29.8 million) in the period from 80.2 million marks a year earlier.

But shareholders focused on the oil-trading losses at MG Corp. totaling nearly 2.3 billion marks ($1.37 billion).

Former MG Chairman Heinz Schimmelbusch and most of his board were fired on Dec. 17.

Mr. Benson, president of MG Refining & Marketing Inc. and head of MG's U.S. oil trading, was dismissed in February.

Mr. Benson alleged in a suit filed this month against MG and big shareholder Deutsche Bank AG that oil-trading losses of 770 million marks in the fiscal year ended September 1993 and 1.5 billion marks in the current fiscal year could have been avoided if the company's new management hadn't interfered with his hedging strategy.

His suit also seeks damages for public defamation.

Mr. Benson's suit, which would bankrupt the company if successful, is "arbitrary and lacking any chance of success," Mr. Neukirchen told shareholders.

Moreover, he said, "we ourselves intend to vigorously raise claims against Mr. Benson."

He didn't elaborate.

MG also plans a damage suit against Mr. Schimmelbusch and MG's former finance director, Meinhard Forster.

Shareholders overwhelmingly approved a slate of proposals by the supervisory board, including a formal censure of Messrs. Schimmelbusch and Forster.

