These days, there's a fresh story heartening the shareholders of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

Fifteen minutes into his first day as president in October, Jacques de Larosiere called in his predecessor's budget chief and said he must go.

The fellow protested that he had found another job within the bank.

Find one outside the bank, replied Mr. de Larosiere.

And so, the last compatriot of Jacques Attali, the EBRD's contentious founder, departed for Paris, where Mr. Attali took refuge after resigning from the EBRD under fire last summer.

Mr. de Larosiere is significantly changing the EBRD, cutting costs, merging divisions and espousing a humbler, narrower mission for the once visionary institution.

"De Larosiere has cleared up the mess and brought order to the organization," says H. Onno Ruding, a vice chairman at Citibank and former Dutch finance minister who also was considered as a possible successor to Mr. Attali.

The EBRD, says one high-level U.S. official, "may go from one of the worst-run international financial institutions to one of the best-run."

Rather than push a political agenda, Mr. de Larosiere is focusing on finding and funding private-sector deals.

He has targeted financial-services businesses as a place where the bank can efficiently funnel money to budding entrepreneurs.

Deals that don't involve Western partners are being sought.

Equity, not just loans, is being stressed.

East-West trade will be backed.

"We have a clear organization with objectives and a budget that reflects that," says a senior banker at the EBRD.

"Like every other organization I ever worked for."

But these changes, while applauded by most, raise questions about whether the EBRD can accomplish what many hoped it would.

Better run it may be, but this retooled financial institution will never live up to Mr. Attali's original vision as the major force driving the former Communist world toward democracy and free markets.

The biggest successes in the region so far, Poland and the Czech Republic, got there without much access to EBRD expertise or its ECU 10 billion ($11.5 billion) in capital.

With Mr. Attali gone, the political edict of the bank to foster human rights and pluralism has gone by the wayside.

Despite wide support for Mr. de Larosiere's frugality in the wake of Mr. Attali's extravagance, some worry he may be going too far.

Those among the bank's 700 employees who didn't wallow in the Attali era of private planes and fancy meals complain that they are being punished for a style they never enjoyed.

A huge cry of pain went up last Christmas when the bank announced salary increases would be restricted to 1.5% this year.

While being forced to fly more in search of projects on the Eastern frontier, staffers are traveling less comfortably, flying through connecting cities instead of direct because it's cheaper.

At least 10 bankers have quit to join investment banks.

Given its history, it is less surprising that EBRD is being revamped than that it has survived at all.

Like many regional development banks, it was born in controversy.

Many Western powers argued that funds to help the East could be more efficiently channeled through existing institutions such as the World Bank, its International Finance Corp. private investment arm, the International Monetary Fund and the European Investment Bank in Brussels.

Regional development banks such as the Asian Development Bank and the African Development Bank had a history of difficult start-up times.

But Mr. Attali, then chief adviser to French President Francois Mitterand, argued that a special, separate institution was needed to focus on the region, which was undergoing historic political and economic change.

The shareholders of the bank, which are the major Western governments and the Eastern client states, still believe this.

Although he had no banking background or management experience, they made Mr. Attali the EBRD's first president.

He soon found himself completely out of synch with the bank's backers.

They just wanted to encourage market economies by lending money to nascent private enterprises.

Mr. Attali wanted to influence.

He interpreted the political element of the bank's charter as a mandate to actively promote democracy.

At the EBRD, Mr. Attali created a political department to implement his agenda.

"I wrote to some prime ministers, and I even called some presidents in order to tell them I was very shocked about a specific action in terms of minority rights or press freedoms, and that these would have consequences in terms of investments of the bank," he says.

Mr. de Larosiere's first move when he arrived last fall was to dismantle this same political department that Mr. Attali held dear.

"The bank's political activities should not be prominent," says an internal EBRD newsletter, summing up the results of a task force defining the bank's new mission.

"They should be confined to basic monitoring and the knowledge about political conditions necessary for operational purposes," it says.

The bank's political goals may now be fulfilled through "moral suasion," suggests one director.

Projects in Croatia are on hold, he says.

A letter granting financial concessions to a Central Asian republic diplomatically suggested democracy was flagging.

Within the EBRD itself, those who joined to push political change now are fish out of water.

The merchant bankers are thriving.

To execute the bank's scaled-down purpose, Mr. de Larosiere merged the merchant and development banking departments, reorganizing them into country teams with chiefs responsible for developing deals within their territories.

He cut operating costs to 8% below budget by halting approved staff increases and banning business and first-class air travel.

Funding for roads, telecommunications, power plants and the like should focus on projects that "mobilize private-sector finance and have significant benefits," says an internal bank report.

Government loans for projects that don't directly support private business should be left to institutions such as the World Bank, the report says.

Utilities are a priority for restructuring and privatization.

Meanwhile, the EBRD last year approved 91 projects for ECU 2.28 billion in loans and equity, nearly double the 51 projects approved in 1992 for ECU 1.09 billion.

The IFC, which also funds private enterprise, approved only 10 East European projects in its fiscal year ended June 30, 1993, down from 13 in fiscal 1992.

Much of this activity, of course, began under Mr. Attali.

Moreover, bankers within the institution say that the furor over the small amount of money that the bank has actually given out -- a total of ECU 557 million -- is misplaced.

Because many of the projects approved earlier finally began operating last year, the amount the bank disbursed went up from ECU 122 million in 1992 to ECU 435 million in 1993.

The bank adds that few of its deals have actually gone sour.

It has written off 30% of its most visible failure, the partnership with Air France in Czechoslovak Airlines.

But under the Air France agreement, the French airline is obligated to repay the EBRD 70% of its investment.

Meanwhile, the EBRD's investments in Cokoladovny, a Czech chocolate and biscuit company, and in Wielkopolski Bank Kredytowy SA, a Polish bank, have soared in value.

Bank directors, who represent shareholders, say that lending this year won't rise at all.

The number of projects will grow because the bank is emphasizing private deals, which tend to be smaller than government projects.

Government lending is being reduced.

Still, East Europeans say the bank seems more receptive.

"They are much more flexible and much more oriented to do some business," says Dimitar Guergiev, the commercial counselor at the Bulgarian embassy here who recently met with bank management in Sofia.

To do deals beyond the countries which have rapidly privatized -- Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary -- the EBRD's dozen field offices are flushing out private projects instead of attending government receptions.

Nestor Gayowsky, the EBRD representative in Kiev, Ukraine, says the bank is sending out more missions.

His office probably will expand.

Previously, the EBRD's deals were concentrated on countries close to Western Europe where Western companies wanted financing for their joint ventures.

Most EBRD money went to Hungary and Poland, senior bankers say.

This year, Russia will be the biggest recipient.

Under Mr. de Larosiere's direction, it's clear that the EBRD is fast becoming a taxpayer-funded Merrill Lynch & Co. for the East, though minus the big bonuses and perks.

While some mourn the new apolitical approach, shareholders are happy.

Bank staff who have spent their careers as bankers are relieved, too.

