However, after 74 days of imprisonment, I was unconditionally released.

Shortly after I received that evidence, an attempt was made on my life, foiled only because I was not traveling in my usual vehicle.

In 1992, the Venezuelan Senate, inspired by U.S. Senate investigations, created an Anti-Money-Laundering Commission.

But the day before the meeting, Mr. Gomez Lopez's secretary canceled it.

The evidence of the attack was unmistakable even after nearly 30 days.

The result of the beating was verified and photographed by an Amnesty International representative (a medical doctor) sent from England a month after the event.

At the time, I was sitting in a room in the homicide department.

Neither my home nor my offices were searched by the police.

I immediately left for New York to meet with Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau.

More than 90% of Venezuelan international wire transfers go through Manhattan and are consequently in his jurisdiction.

"Thor, the doors to my office will always be open to you," he responded.

Carlos Andres Perez was Venezuela's first re-elected president.

However, the brief was taken from that car.

The new president, Rafael Caldera, has shown strength and courage in his efforts to expose the scandal behind Banco Latino and other banking institutions.

His 1989 comeback had the makings of a new era in the development and restructuring of Venezuela.

The next day, I was arrested by the Venezuelan Technical Judicial Police and charged with masterminding a series of bombings that had rocked Caracas during the summer.

A Treasury agent in New York warned me that it might be a trap.

Fortunately, the police had not bothered to fabricate evidence, and "lack of evidence" was the official reason given for my release.

I want you to get the feeling of it."

The next day, and on two other occasions, I told the acting interior minister, Carlos Delgado Chapellin, that I was under surveillance and thought it was due to the Banco Latino investigation.

After one year, my reports on money-laundering and drug-trafficking were no longer welcomed by the president.

When in New York, I received a call from Jesus Abreu, right-hand man of Banco Latino Chairman Gustavo Gomez Lopez.

The only thing used to keep me in custody was testimony extracted under torture from one of my alleged co-conspirators.

Those charged include Gustavo Gomez Lopez, who resigned last December as chairman of Banco Latino, and the country's top banking regulator, Bank Superintendent Roger Urbina.

No member of my family was interrogated.

In March of that year I was appointed special overseas investigator for that commission.

The justice minister, Fermin Marmol Leon, who had declared me guilty hours after my arrest, now stated that my life could not be guaranteed while I was in custody.

He is currently a regional director of the International Society for Human Rights based in Frankfurt.

A few weeks after taking office, President Perez designated me anti-drug czar.

No evidence was brought forth against me -- not even fabricated evidence.

The largest amount of evidence concerned Banco Latino.

I was in Cell 417.

Mr. Yallop began a media campaign to counter the one being waged against me.

I alerted the U.S. Federal Reserve and the New York District Attorney's Office of my suspicions.

I flew back to Venezuela.

But this is a scandal that will not go away until those responsible are punished, their influence in Venezuela wiped out, and their ill-acquired wealth confiscated.

I believed the bank was being used in a Ponzi scheme that sooner or later would have to fall.

I asked for his support.

While in the hands of the police chief, Orlando Jordan Petit, I was psychologically and physically tortured and sent to a maximum security jail, Reten de Catia.

His efforts were halted when uniformed members of the police forced him -- at gunpoint -- to leave the country.

I suspected that they wanted to come to an agreement for a plea bargain.

He then pummeled my rib cage, fracturing three ribs.

His son, Orlando Castro Castro, a board member of several banks and insurance companies, came with him.

While in the prison, I was put in a section known as "the pit," a punishment cell.

Two days after my arrest, Orlando Castro Llanes, a man I had investigated, went to the police with "evidence" trying to link my supposed involvement in the bombings with some of his banking rivals.

In September 1993, an informant gave me a brief with incontrovertible evidence of money-laundering in Venezuelan banks.

A meeting was set for Oct. 8 at 11 a.m.

It seemed inconceivable to me that this bank could move the enormous amounts of money that it did without being involved in some kind of money-laundering scheme.

He and I had been working on a book about money-laundering in Venezuela.

My life was to be taken when I was in custody.

However, I was not dismissed, so I continued my investigations.

In fact, international pressure exerted by Mr. Yallop, the Manhattan district attorney, British parliamentarians and human-rights groups saved my life.

I had served in his first term and was excited about the potential of his second.

The assassins, prison inmates from another wing, were sent to Cell 407, where they took the life of the two inmates imprisoned there.

Among the banks I was investigating was the now-defunct Banco Latino.

I took no heed of this warning.

My knight in white armor arrived in the form of British writer David Yallop, an old friend.

Mr. Abreu asked if I could come to Venezuela right away for a meeting with the bank's chairman.

Orlando Castro Castro entered the room and struck me in the head and neck.

Editor's note: On Wednesday, a Venezuelan judge charged 83 of the country's top bankers and businessmen with fraud, criminal association or other crimes stemming from the Jan. 13 collapse of Banco Latino, the country's second-biggest bank.

He instructed me: "Tell the Americans that mine will be a term known for its commitment in the drug war."

This deplorable, unabashed violation of human and civil rights demonstrates the extent to which members of a corrupted banking system are willing to go to eradicate those who oppose them.

Another attempt was made on my life there.

Mr. Halvorssen was the Venezuelan Presidency's Commissioner for Anti-Narcotic Affairs, with the rank of ambassador.

Suddenly I was handcuffed and the four officers assigned to guard me left the room.

The young banker then left me bleeding on the floor.

It is clear today that there was never any intention to convict me.

After the beating, he said: "This is just the beginning before the cemetery.

