"It sounds kind of like crocodile tears to me," says journalist Robert Wright, author of a recent New Republic cover story about the implications of Prozac on healthcare reform.

Dr. Paul cited government statistics suggesting that only about a third of the roughly 12 million Americans with serious depression are receiving treatment.

The drug ran up an astonishing $1.3 billion in sales from 1993, about a 30% gain from 1992.

It depicts a grinning Karl Marx declaring "Sure!

Seeking to control the tidal wave of celebrity for its antidepressant drug Prozac, Eli Lilly & Co. is launching an unusual ad campaign to deplore the media's role in exaggerating the drug's power and making light of depression.

"Anything that confuses the appropriate use of Prozac or any of the antidepressants in the mind of the public might scare people away from using the medication, or perhaps even scare physicians from prescribing it," said Steven Paul, the Lilly vice president in charge of central nervous-system research.

But he added: "I don't think the people in my book have trivial indications.

But Lilly officials said they have serious cause to try to rein in the Prozac publicity.

Dr. Kramer, the author of "Listening to Prozac," said Lilly has never criticized him or his book directly, but he understood the company's concern.

They also worry that publicity belittling or overselling Prozac could hurt efforts to include mental illness in a national health plan.

The book sparked much of the recent fascination with Prozac -- and untold sales of the drug -- by describing patients who aren't clinically depressed but still feel happier, more productive and "better than well" on Prozac.

The new ad campaign is an unexpected step for the drug giant, since all the publicity is hardly hurting Prozac's sales.

Whether or not they rise to the level of diagnosis under our current system, the people I write about are seriously suffering, have been for a long time, and the difference the drug makes is important.

Since Prozac's launch six years ago, the Church of Scientology has assailed the drug as a "killer drug" linked to murder and suicide.

"In this kind of atmosphere, you get anecdotal reports of someone who has had a `better-than-well' experience, and people expect that as being the norm and in reality that doesn't happen."

The campaign also comes amid continuing assaults on Lilly by a wide range of critics.

"I can see them wanting to distance themselves from that sort of usage even if, let's say, they're secretly pleased to see it go on," he said.

Mr. Weber said Lilly is particularly concerned about the depiction of the drug in Peter Kramer's bestseller "Listening to Prozac."

The ad, a full page of text, began running this week in Psychiatric News, a biweekly newspaper, and will appear in half a dozen other top medical journals and trade publications.

The ad, headlined "Trivializing a Serious Illness," calls Prozac the subject of an "unprecedented amount of media attention in recent weeks" and declares: "Much of this attention has trivialized the very serious nature of the disease Prozac was specifically developed to treat -- clinical depression."

"Lilly may be sensing that if the discussion of this drug as a personality-changer or life-enhancer becomes the predominant way people think about it, then it will be very vulnerable to attacks as something new and dangerous that society ought to fear and regulate," said Frederick Goodwin, head of the National Institute of Mental Health.

"I can't believe Lilly is bothered by the fact that some people are suggesting that everyone go try Prozac," he says.

The campaign follows mounting concern inside Lilly's Indianapolis headquarters about proliferating references to Prozac in jokes and cartoons, and in articles that Andrew Weber, a Lilly spokesman, called "happy-pill kinds of stories, the ones that talk about the fact that you can pop a pill and change your personality."

Lilly officials said they worry these sound bites will deter patients with grave clinical depression from taking their disorder seriously and seeking treatment.

More than 10 million people have taken Prozac, and some industry statistics rank it the No. 2 best-selling drug in the world (behind Glaxo Holdings PLC's ulcer-healing blockbuster Zantac).

"We cannot find any basis in our clinical work to support some of the things he discusses," said Mr. Weber.

He also singled out a New Yorker cartoon that read: "If They Had Prozac in the Nineteenth Century."

It continues: "Prozac is intended -- as are all Lilly medicines -- for use only where a clear medical need exists and when the scientific data have determined safety and effectiveness."

Getting "bogged down" in the debate over whether Prozac offers subtler personality changes was interfering with efforts to reach serious depression patients, Dr. Paul said.

As examples of other Prozac references that worry Lilly, Mr. Weber mentioned a "Life in Hell" comic strip about a preternaturally happy character who discovers someone put Prozac in his cornflakes.

Capitalism can work out its kinks!" and Edgar Allan Poe saying "Hello, birdie!" to a raven.

Even though the phrase `cosmetic psychopharmacology' is in the book, I don't think the usage is in any way not medical."

He noted that Lilly could conceivably face liability for adverse effects to the legions of new Prozac patients who aren't clinically depressed.

