All this passion and fervor will be present this weekend with a dazzling diversity: First-time Final Four entry Florida is the Cinderella team, perhaps the Villanova or N.C. State of this year; Duke, whose basketball program combines the academics of Yale with the athleticism of UCLA and is led by a genius coach, returns to its seventh Final Four in nine years; Arkansas, perhaps the most talented team in the tournament, will be spurred on -- probably in person -- by its number one fan, Bill Clinton; and Arizona is an exceptionally talented team that's finally playing up to its potential.

Schools that graduate most of their players would be rewarded, while colleges where the classroom is more like a foreign country would be penalized.

How had we so lost our values?

A few years ago the NCAA put the Kentucky basketball team on probation.

Today Kentucky is back into big-time winning ways.

This pressure to win produces the pressure to cut corners or cheat.

And while the number of scholarships shouldn't be reduced, they should be tied to graduation rates.

The battles are pitched because the stakes are high.

One expert estimates that about 10% of the colleges cheat big time -- big cash and cars -- and that, of the rest, about 99% cheat small time, bending rules, many of which are petty and unnecessary.

But the current system can be improved.

It's not uncommon for humongous underdogs -- North Carolina State in 1983 or Villanova in 1985 -- to walk away with all the marbles.

The college football bowl games have lost their splendor as they've multiplied and become marketing vehicles for their sponsors.

And colleges ought to go back to not playing freshmen.

Which brings us back to Charlotte.

For starters, the NCAA ruling body is a travesty and ought to be replaced by some organization that is run by educators but sympathetic to sports.

If some of the stars were rewarded above the table it might reduce below-the-table cheating.

There should be no backsliding on tougher academic requirements.

At the same time Notre Dame celebrates Lou Holtz, a great football coach but a terrible role model for young kids; when a star high school placekicker chose to go to Florida State last year instead of Notre Dame, Coach Holtz assailed the kid for wrecking his life.

The president's escape, however, will be short-lived; in a sensational game the Blue Devils will win by two.

Notre Dame remains among the best of the big-time sports schools, but it'll never regain its luster as long as it has an athletic director who cares more about dollars than values.

Moreover, any sanctions ought to mean the automatic dismissal of coaches; that's a powerful incentive not to cheat.

The television-driven big bucks give new resonance to the old saw about building a university the football team can be proud of.

Three years ago Notre Dame fired basketball coach Digger Phelps, who, after taking this traditional football school to a post-season tournament for eight straight years, had a losing season.

But there's almost never a bad Final Four.

For sure, some tension between the academy and athletics is inevitable.

After a great semifinal, the Monday night game should be a classic: Duke vs. Arkansas.

What forces blinded us to our excesses and our greed?"

But the most illustrious example of the institutional impurity of college athletics is not Kentucky, where what you see is what you get, but Notre Dame, which really had been the showcase of success and integrity in college sports.

"Freshmen should have a year to make that adjustment before being exposed to the pressures."

The excitement of this tournament provides a welcome escape from the political infighting and animosities that plague college athletics.

Even the outcome of baseball's revered World Series is all-too-frequently predictable.

Journalist John Feinstein, who's one of the country's most perceptive basketball analysts -- despite his inability to appreciate the virtues of John Thompson's admirable program at Georgetown -- thinks it's desirable and only equitable that the players who produce these big bucks share some of the dividends.

The class of college basketball (a confession: my wife is a Duke alumna and current trustee) against the appealing upstarts, with the president of the United States in the stands yelling for his hogs.

It's all supposed to be policed by the NCAA, an institution that privately draws contempt from most outside experts.

The black coaches insist that limits on athletic scholarships hurt young African-Americans, and similar battles rage over requiring minimal college board scores -- Proposition 48 -- for athletes to play in their freshman year and over who controls the games, the educators or the athletic boosters.

"The games are much better than the people who control them," says Mr. Feinstein.

"You made a 40-year mistake," Sports Illustrated reported the Notre Dame coach told the 18-year-old, adding "you let me down and you let your father down."

The NCAA, they say, is arrogant, arbitrary and not eager to disrupt the cash cow of big-time college sports.

Schools not only get directly rewarded for making the basketball tournament, or football bowl games, but enjoy enormous residual benefits: bigger crowds and, more important, more TV exposure, and increased overall alumni giving.

These games offer the excitement, suspense, romance and even the innocence we like to associate with college athletics.

"There is a big adjustment between high school and college," notes Sen. Bill Bradley, a former All-American basketball player at Princeton.

Since football and basketball are the only real revenue-generating sports, the difference between an athletic program breaking even or ending up deeply in the red often hinges on making the Final Four or a football bowl game.

He proposes that a portion of all proceeds from the NCAA basketball tournament and college bowl games be put into a trust fund to be distributed to the players -- after they have received a college degree.

Some of the most spectacularly hyped sports events fizzle; pro football's Super Bowl is invariably a dud.

With the president and Congress on vacation, the best spectator sport this weekend will be in Charlotte, N.C., site of college basketball's Final Four championship tournament.

Terry Phelps, a Notre Dame Law School professor and wife of the former basketball coach, has written a marvelous book, "The Coach's Wife," in which she says: "I think that we will years hence look back on college sports of the nineties much as we look back on the Wall Street of the eighties.

It'll be a nightmare for politically correct conservatives who, oddly, see Duke as a bastion of intolerant liberalism and Arkansas as the team and culture of Bill Clinton, whom they despise.

