The Diversified indictment was handed down late last month and first reported by the Long Island, N.Y., newspaper Newsday last week.

They have all pleaded innocent but face a maximum of seven years in prison if found guilty of the charges.

"We jokingly say that one out of every two civil suits filed name Mr. Chuggerman as a defendant," says the executive's attorney, John Case.

Mr. Chuggerman, who also was a vice president of Towers, has been named in civil suits against that company.

"We're now talking about roughly $1 million in funds allegedly stolen," said Nina Pozgar, director of the district attorney's white-collar crime unit, which investigated Diversified for four months.

"The money that Diversified creditors are missing was taken from the company by Mr. Hoffenberg," the attorney added.

According to the district attorney's office, all of them also worked at one time or another for Towers Financial.

Mr. Leo said that Mr. Hoffenberg wrote one check for $500,000 to fund Diversified's operations and invested "at least $1 to $2 million" more in the company.

Law enforcement officials have described this alleged $450 million fraud as one of the largest Ponzi schemes in U.S. history.

Though Mr. Hoffenberg and his attorneys have acknowledged that the entrepreneur has been a consultant to Diversified, they have repeatedly denied that he controls it.

Mr. Hoffenberg and his current attorney, Jeffrey Hoffman, couldn't be reached for comment regarding the Diversified indictment.

It follows months of complaints by scores of small businesses concerning alleged abuses by Diversified and lends further credence to escalating charges of wrongdoing in the commercial debt-collection business.

Attorneys for the four other executives deny the allegations contained in the indictment.

"Needless to say, I still don't have my money."

But the Suffolk County District Attorney's office said Friday that the actual figure is proving to be much higher.

Mr. Hoffenberg was arrested last month and charged with criminal securities fraud by the U.S. Attorney's office in Manhattan in connection with another of his companies, Towers Financial Corp.

Mr. Hoffenberg, who apparently continues to operate here through two companies, Stratford Credit Corp. and Haley Capital Corp., has also controlled or been affiliated with a chain of commercial debt-collection companies that has bilked dozens of small businesses over the years, according to civil court and regulatory agency rulings.

The indictment by a state grand jury in Suffolk County, N.Y., is the first criminal charge focusing primarily on debt-collection abuse by a company associated with Mr. Hoffenberg.

The letter asked the businesses to approve a filing for protection under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code and to accept stock in the company in lieu of receiving the money owed to them.

But many of those companies now say they regret ever doing business with Diversified.

"And that's only what's come to our attention so far."

"Mr. Lowy was reassured repeatedly by Mr. Hoffenberg from day one that he could make good on any payments necessary because he was bankrolling the corporation," the attorney, Donald Leo, said Friday.

In a suit filed late last year in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan, trustees for Towers Financial charged that Mr. Hoffenberg fraudulently transferred $6 million and other assets from Towers into Diversified.

But an attorney representing Lawrence Lowy, a former Diversified executive named in the indictment, said Mr. Hoffenberg did control the company.

An attorney for Mr. Hoffenberg has denied these charges.

"I called and called every day and they told me not to worry about it," says Joseph Lombardi, a co-owner of Main Street Lighting & Supply Co. in Flushing, N.Y., who says Diversified pocketed $7,500 it had collected on his behalf.

In mid-January, Alan Fraade, an attorney representing Diversified, sent a letter to small businesses owed funds by the company.

The letter stated that Diversified "has advised us that it recently cut its overhead and expenses and a new management team is in place."

The indictment alleges that Diversified and its executives pocketed thousands of dollars in debts collected on behalf of small businesses.

The five Diversified executives named in the indictment are Mr. Lowy, Charles Chuggerman, Sidney Friedfertig, David Richards, and Morris Unger.

Diversified Credit Corp., a company closely associated with publisher and debt collector Steven Hoffenberg, has been indicted for criminal fraud and grand larceny.

An attorney for Mr. Unger did not return phone calls.

