It emerged from Chapter 11 in 1986 but was liquidated that year.

"It's absolutely the right time."

He says Mexico is already attracting scores of small companies trying to get a piece of the growth, but "98% of them will probably not be successful."

In business, his record is checkered.

The market for environmental products and services in Mexico totals $1 billion a year now and is predicted to grow to $2 billion by 1997 -- barely 1% of the size of the U.S. market, says Business Environmental International Inc., a San Diego consulting firm.

For the opportunities aren't unlimited, and Environmental Management isn't alone.

Environmental Management's business plan doesn't look just to Mexico, where it envisions a Monterrey-based environmental laboratory and consulting business.

Mr. Zintgraff says the company has recently received commitments that will allow it to complete the first stage of the offering, representing $1 million of a planned $5 million total.

And its six employees have limited experience in the field.

"I just can't believe that this is not going to be a major industry," says Robert Lengel, an early shareholder of the company and an assistant professor of strategic management at the University of Texas at San Antonio.

But until the stock is registered with the SEC, which won't happen before next year, it can be bought only by Texans and -- more important for prospective investors -- has no secondary market.

Environmental Management Corp. has a plan -- to cash in on Mexico's environmental boom -- but not much else.

By any measure, however, the venture faces huge risks.

Company officials also plan to acquire Texas environmental businesses, and they recently signed a letter of intent to buy Clean Environments Inc., a small Houston company that provides asbestos management, indoor-air-quality evaluations and other environmental services.

"There's going to be room for a whole lot of people."

The border region already is flooded with environmental companies that have capital, experience and contacts, along with more speculative firms having none of those advantages.

But Mexico and the border are central to the company's pitch, especially after Nafta's passage.

He last focused on environmental science as an engineer for Eli Lilly & Co. from 1971 to 1976.

It is a risky venture that points up the pitfalls of the business.

Drawing on attention generated by the North American Free Trade Agreement, the company hopes to raise at least $1 million to create a diversified environmental-services company with a large presence in Mexico.

The San Antonio company, which is raising start-up funds with a stock offering available only to Texas investors, has no operating revenue.

Its six-member staff includes no practicing civil engineers or environmental scientists; employees mainly spend their time hawking its stock.

Mr. Zintgraff envisions Environmental Management as a holding company with a range of businesses assembled mainly by acquisition -- from manufacturing waste-treatment plants to providing training for municipal inspectors in Mexico.

Environmental Management is selling a dream that is becoming increasingly familiar in Texas: cashing in on the opportunities in cleaning up environmental problems on both sides of the Texas-Mexico border.

The offering has no underwriter and isn't being sold through the usual network of brokers.

We'll get the capital and we've got the expertise, and we can make it work."

The company's business plan involves big strategic risks as well.

It wants to break into an industry already bursting with experienced, well-capitalized competitors, and into a Mexican market that, while growing, is still small.

It has no engineering or consulting contracts, in either Mexico or the U.S.

"What everybody sees in Mexico is tremendous demand," says Bob Jones, president of Jones & Neuse, an Austin environmental-engineering firm.

They focus instead on $450 million of Mexican and U.S. government money pledged under Nafta to environmental cleanup over the next four years, and the promise of additional funding.

"People are aware that the environmental area is on the upswing," says Gary Zintgraff, Environmental Management's president.

It takes capital and it takes management expertise.

Moreover, there's no guarantee that Environmental Management will succeed in its acquisition plans, which hinge on the stock offering.

Mr. Zintgraff says the company's acquisition plan will allow it to tap the experience and contacts of existing companies.

The stock, available since last May, hasn't exactly been a bestseller.

Mr. Zintgraff, 51 years old, has a master's degree in chemical engineering with a concentration in environmental science and engineering, but his two most recent jobs were working as a broker for Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. and raising venture capital.

Incorporated four years ago, it has no track record in the environmental business.

A chemical holding company he started and ran filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 1983 after it couldn't repay a bank debt.

Moreover, he adds, "business is not that complicated.

Using a loophole in federal securities law that allows companies to avoid registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission if the stock is sold only in a single state, company employees are selling the shares directly to friends and business associates -- even by coldcalling San Antonio city officials.

"Everybody thinks that everybody strikes it rich, but you get there and find out that isn't the case," says Paul Zofnass, president of Environmental Financial Consultants Group Inc., a New York consulting firm.

Environmental Management officials and shareholders play down these concerns.

"It's almost like selling Avon door to door," says Peggy Moffett, vice president of investor relations.

"What does not exist in Mexico are the resources to satisfy that demand."

