But this time, companies such as Hilton Hotels Corp. and Promus Cos. are hopeful of finally putting together a broad-based gambling trade group in Washington.

He adds that, as far as he knows, Mr. Rostenkowski wasn't asleep.

Withholding taxes on parimutuel winnings also would be strengthened, bringing in a few hundred million dollars more.

Mr. McGrath, who traveled here last week with two racecourse owners to solicit support from Kentucky's congressional delegation, notes that at least nine tracks have closed down in the past five years.

Gambling executives also maintain that a tax is inequitable because it would hit some states much harder than others.

Others put the number closer to 40%.

Ironically, of course, it's only the biggest and most well-heeled gambling companies that can afford to hire the lobbyists and consultants to play up how bad-off parts of the industry are.

Either way, Mr. Wynn's unusual latenight call underscores the urgency with which the gambling industry views the prospect of a federal excise tax.

But President Clinton may have no choice.

One thing that has yet to be sorted out is whether the different gambling interests will stick together in opposing the tax, or wind up arguing that their particular segment of the industry should be exempt even if others have to pay.

The Indian tribes, which already boast their own Washington-based gaming association, have their own special case to make.

Says lobbyist Charles Black, whose clients include MGM Grand Inc. and the Casino Association of New Jersey: "This kind of an issue tends to unite people."

So far, the industry's main argument against the tax is economic.

Yet the industry, backed by its champions in Congress, is attempting to counter its high-rolling image with economic studies showing that many gambling operations are on shaky financial ground.

Riverboat casinos and video games are popping up all over the country, as gambling has turned into mass-market entertainment.

Most of the industry's growth in coming years is expected to come from casino-style gambling, ranging from Indian casinos to riverboats and video-lottery terminals, which will hit about $20.9 billion in gross gambling revenues by 1995, according to Wertheim Schroder.

In truth, not all segments of the industry are playing the same hand.

Even if the current excise-tax proposal is somehow scrapped or scaled back, the threat is bound to reemerge.

Pointing out how financially precarious many betting operations are isn't the industry's only tactic.

A 4% tax on the amount that gambling operations retain after paying out winnings would raise $3.1 billion over five years, according to administration officials.

After recovering from their initial shock, casino operators, horse- and dog-track owners and Indian tribes with gambling facilities have wasted no time in lobbying the administration and Congress in the hopes of keeping the tax from ever being formally proposed.

Later, Messrs. Reid and Miller were on Capitol Hill when they bumped into President Clinton, who told them he hadn't made any final decisions.

"Gaming is not as lucrative as it once was," says Democratic Sen. Harry Reid of Nevada, who escorted his state's governor, Democrat Bob Miller, to see White House Chief-of-Staff Thomas McLarty on the matter last week.

The industry says that gambling may appear to be a go-go business, but many establishments are barely profitable and a tax would force them to close their doors.

Parimutuel wagering and charitable gambling are stagnant or expanding only modestly.

"That's the Clinton administration's operating philosophy: ready, fire, aim," says Mr. Wynn.

One report prepared by Arthur Andersen & Co., for instance, finds that a third of all Nevada casino licensees with revenues of more than $1 million were unprofitable last year, and an additional 15% operated at profit margins of less than 5%.

"We're talking about jobs," he says.

"It was a very positive exchange," the senator says.

In many ways, the gambling industry is an easy target to tax.

Mr. Reid -- along with fellow Democratic Sens. Richard Bryan of Nevada, Wendell Ford of Kentucky, Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey and Barbara Mikulski of Maryland -- also wrote to Mr. Clinton to warn him that a tax "could be the final blow to many teetering tracks" and cost tens of thousands of casino jobs.

Steve Wynn, chairman and chief executive officer of Mirage Resorts Inc., apparently caught Rep. Dan Rostenkowski dozing through the Academy Awards telecast when he called to talk about the gambling industry's own surprise wake-up call: The White House had spread the word that it's considering a 4% tax on net gambling revenues to help finance welfare reform.

Even more important for the Clinton administration's plans, the industry is expected to keep growing at a healthy clip overall, making it an attractive source of revenue for a welfare-reform program whose costs would swell in later years.

Yesterday, a senior White House official said there's about an 80% chance that a gambling tax will be part of the president's plan; in White House meetings, Mr. Clinton hasn't voiced any opposition to the idea.

Generally speaking, disturbing the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee at home late at night isn't the best way to get a lobbying campaign off the ground.

"Any additional taxes would be devastating to this industry," contends Brian McGrath, commissioner of the Thoroughbred Racing Associations.

They note that their gambling revenues go toward providing health, education and other critical services for Native Americans.

In the past, the industry has fallen victim to finger-pointing on various state issues, with the horse- and dog-track owners battling the big casino operators, or ganging up to attack the Indian tribes.

In the past decade, gross gambling revenues have exploded to more than $30 billion from less than $14 billion, according to securities firm Wertheim Schroder & Co. and Christiansen/Cummings Associates, a consulting firm.

Thus, a tax would "just deplete these resources for their own people in order to fund" welfare reform, says Peter Taylor, the former general counsel of the Senate Select Committee on Indian Affairs, who is now a lobbyist for several tribes with gambling operations.

They figure that if the threat of a major tax isn't enough to force fractious gambling executives to form a unified front, the industry will face tough political times ahead.

The tribes also say that it would be unfair to exempt state lotteries, which the Clinton team has indicated it would do, while taxing them.

No other major levies besides the gambling tax have been presented to the president by his welfare-reform working group, leaving Mr. Clinton in the position of pushing ahead with the tax or gutting key elements of his program to "end welfare as we know it."

Nevada alone would shoulder a third of the burden, according to Sen. Reid.

Meanwhile, people's impressions of the industry are being shaped by places like the Foxwoods casino on the Mashantucket Pequot reservation in Connecticut, with its overflowing crowds, and the lavish theme-park-style casinos that continue to open in Las Vegas.

