As a result, he contends, "you have a system of justice that is basically a lottery."

They don't understand that stuff," says Albert Fey, a New York attorney who represented AT&T.

The court is essentially the last word on patent law in the U.S., so its eventual rulings could have a far-reaching impact on what has been a lucrative and fast-growing specialty.

Patent 3,956,593 -- an "ingenious and novel modularization of the time and space switch elements" -- meant a lot to its proud owners.

Now, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit may be prepared to put some limits on the role of juries in patent cases.

The offices will try to create social change not only by filing lawsuits but also by organizing and educating communities.

Critics of the current system contend that plaintiffs have an edge in such cases because juries tend to favor small inventors against big companies when the technical issues are unclear.

The decision was reversed on appeal.

They contend that critics underestimate the ability of juries to understand scientific and technical data.

The court also indicated it will decide whether juries should have a role in applying a rule of law that allows for a finding of patent infringement when the defendant's product falls outside the literal language of the plaintiff's patent.

That prospect is also a major factor in many companies' decisions to settle patent disputes before trial, attorneys say.

"These two decisions will probably implicate just about any case that comes down the pike."

But AT&T lawyers wonder whether it meant anything to the Texas jury, which awarded $35 million to the partnership after a one-week trial.

Experts have called for the appointment of specially-trained judges to hear complex cases as a way of assuring uniformity and fairness.

The question of whether lay juries are equipped to handle complicated evidence has been debated before.

"To take a bunch of jurors that didn't get past the eighth grade, and try to do it in a week, the chance is zero."

Plaintiffs' lawyers argue strongly that patent cases are no more abstruse than many other kinds of lawsuits.

Gerald D. Hosier, a Las Vegas attorney who represents inventors in patent disputes, says the changes that are being contemplated by the court reflect a philosophical shift toward cutting back the rights of inventors.

Among the issues the court plans to consider is the respective role of judges and juries in interpreting the "claims" that inventors make in their patents.

"It invades a constitutional right and it threatens the integrity of the patent system."

"Give jurors a complicated biotechnology case or one involving lasers or computers, and their eyes glaze over," adds Donald Dunner, a Washington lawyer who has tried many patent cases.

Some patent lawyers think so, and an influential court is about to weigh in on the question.

Such claims are frequently crucial to patent disputes because they define the scope of the invention and thus the right of the inventor to sue others for violations.

"They pick up on the key issues, and they think it through," said Joseph A. Grear, a Chicago patent attorney who opposed Mr. Fey in the AT&T case.

"This isn't just some hypertechnical area of patent law," said Steven D. Glazer, a New York attorney.

It accepted three cases for review this spring, in which it has asked the parties to address the issue.

"You cannot teach a Ph.D. in engineering how that sucker works in two weeks," Mr. Fey says.

Nowhere is the debate hotter than in the arcane world of patents, which has seen a rapid increase in both the number of suits and the size of jury verdicts in recent years.

"I think that is a very dangerous proposition," he said.

But others worry that such proposals clash with the right to a jury trial guaranteed under the U.S. Constitution.

Are some lawsuits just too complex for juries?

"The jury was unemployed laborers and housewives.

"There are many lawyers who believe they can benefit by jury confusion" in patent cases, says Martin J. Adelman, a professor specializing in patent law at Wayne State University in Detroit.

Over the years, it has popped up in the antitrust field, where some judges have dismissed cases on the theory that they are so complicated that defendants are denied a fair trial and due process of law.

In 1992, American Telephone & Telegraph Co. was sued in Midland, Texas, by a partnership that claimed the company had violated a patent covering digital switching equipment.

Called the Appleseed Foundation, the nonprofit corporation will open offices around the country, called Centers for Law in the Public Interest.

More than 20 lawyers, including partners at major law firms nationally, will sit on Appleseed's board.

The cases are expected to be argued before the full 12-seat appeals court this spring.

NOTED: Consumer activist Ralph Nader, Harvard law professor Arthur R. Miller and other members of the Harvard Law School class of 1958 launched an unusual public-service project.

