(That was when I decided he might not be Princeton University material.)

Mr. Telzrow says he's neutral on ShowBiz's stock.

And as any parent knows, kids may not make money, but they sure help decide how it gets spent.

Any adult who cares about the future of America might be tempted to bet against this stock, in the hope that the company and its share price will collapse.

Michael Magusiak, ShowBiz's chief financial officer, suggests it's a matter of some debate: "It's a mouse.

There isn't one.

Investors may currently hate the stock.

But sales at the company's older restaurants didn't fare nearly so well in 1993, falling 5.3% from the year-earlier level.

"We've been selling it," says Gregory Melvin, manager of Federated Growth Trust, with $450 million in assets.

After the stock's long decline, "it's probably closer to a rat than a mouse," he says.

It closed yesterday at 13 1/4 on the Nasdaq Stock Market, 63% below its all-time high of 35 1/2, which it hit early last year.

My 18-month-old was so upset at leaving, he cried.

Analysts are looking for the company to earn 89 cents a share in 1994, not far above last year's level.

"If you're patient and it does turn around, you're going to make some good money.

Discovery Zone, an operator of indoor playgrounds, "has increased the number of its units at an extremely rapid rate.

My daughter, meanwhile, wants to know whether Chuck E. Cheese is a mouse or a rat.

We think the earnings turnaround will happen, but we think it's a ways in the future."

The earnings slowdown has sent ShowBiz's stock price reeling.

The company had sales of $272 million last year, up 7.5% from 1992.

Mr. Brennan of MFS isn't so sure.

"It has good management.

Parents may be appalled by the clamor of ShowBiz's restaurants.

Meanwhile, their children turn into dervishes, egged on by a sensory overload of rides, games, music, video screens and an occasional appearance by Chuck E. Cheese himself, a rodent of uncertain parentage.

Kiddie enthusiasm -- and the addition of new restaurants -- has generated healthy revenue gains for ShowBiz, which owns and operates 218 Chuck E. Cheese's and franchises an additional 109.

On the other hand, anybody who wants to make money should buy the stock, a few bargain-hunting money managers believe.

At the insistence of my five-year-old daughter, we spent a rainy Sunday lunchtime at our local Chuck E. Cheese's, just off Route 1 in nearby Edison.

"It's a mouse, because rats have a bad connotation."

Chuck E. Cheese's isa sort of dinner theater for the preteen set.

That, in turn, hurt profits.

But they also say sales have been hurt both by competition and by cannibalization, as new Chuck E. Cheese's restaurants steal customers away from existing restaurants.

Chuck E. Cheese's are operated by ShowBiz Pizza Time, an Irving, Texas, restaurant chain that caters to the lowest common denominator -- those below 4 1/2 feet tall and under 10 years of age.

They're buying back stock.

At least, that's what I believe."

"You've got a pretty sophisticated child," says Federated's Mr. Melvin.

By the time we left, addled parents and their antsy children were lining up to get in.

"It's very cheap on a cash-flow basis," Mr. Brennan says.

But while Wall Street worries about profitability, last Sunday employees at our local Chuck E. Cheese's were worrying about crowd control.

"I spent all day Monday at Chuck E. Cheese's with my six-year-old daughter, trying to get the earnings up.

What's the company line?

That has to put some pressure on anybody who's appealing to the same customer base."

ShowBiz earned 86 cents a share in 1993, down from $1.11 in 1992.

Even parents hardened by daily doses of Barney the dinosaur will recoil at the five-beast mechanical band belting out hits from their own youth.

"There's no question that competition is an issue," says Dennis Telzrow, an analyst with Principal/Eppler Guerin & Turner in Dallas.

I think they'll be able to turn it around."

But not a lot of institutional investors have a lot of patience."

But the fact is, kids love Chuck E. Cheese's.

How come?

"Clearly the price of the stock reflects the company's problems," he says.

But John Brennan, manager of MFS Value Fund with $154 million in assets, says the key to ShowBiz's value is the company's plentiful cash flow.

Analysts fault the company's menu and its advertising.

