USAir Group Inc. said it named Frank L. Salizzoni, its top financial officer, as president and chief operating officer, amid a broad reshuffling of the airline's operational duties.

The shifting of assignments appeared to be related to the resignation yesterday of Michael R. Schwab, USAir's fifth-highest ranking officer, who was responsible for airline operations.

USAir's operations, which include flight and crew scheduling and dispatching, have been criticized lately by the carrier's unions.

Mr. Schwab, 48 years old, didn't return phone calls.

A spokesman for Arlington, Va.-based USAir confirmed that Mr. Schwab, an officer of the airline since 1989, had resigned.

The spokesman wouldn't elaborate.

Mr. Salizzoni, 55, had been executive vice president, finance.

As president, he succeeds Seth E. Schofield, 54, who remains chairman and chief executive.

The title of chief operating officer is new.

Mr. Salizzoni will oversee finance, maintenance, purchasing, customer services and operations, the company said.

Day-to-day responsibility for flight operations has been combined under Gene Sharp, a USAir vice president.

He will report to Mr. Salizzoni.

USAir has been unable to stem mounting losses because of fare cuts launched to compete with lower-cost rivals on important East Coast routes.

The company recently requested that its unions agree to wage and work-rule concessions to help cut annual operating costs by about 9%, or $600 million.

The labor groups are reviewing the request.

The powerful pilots union, however, has been cool to the idea, arguing that management squandered previous givebacks.

In 1992, the pilots agreed to more flexible work rules that allowed them to fly longer, at no extra labor cost to the company.

The pilots claimed that USAir wasted opportunities to schedule them more often and expand flight operations.

Peter J. Gauthier, chairman of USAir's pilots union, applauded the management changes, stating, "We look forward to working with Mr. Salizzoni to improve the efficiencies of our daily operations."

Mr. Salizzoni joined USAir in 1990 as an executive vice president.

Previously, he worked for Trans World Airlines for two decades, holding several top financial management positions.

Mr. Salizzoni was USAir's third-ranked officer after Mr. Schofield and W. Thomas Lagow, who is executive vice president, marketing.

Succeeding Mr. Salizzoni is John W. Harper, formerly senior vice president, information services, who was named chief financial officer and senior vice president, finance.

Mr. Harper is 53.

In late trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, USAir slipped 37.5 cents to $8, amid a sharply down market.

Nonetheless, stock analysts said Mr. Salizzoni's promotion would enhance USAir's image on Wall Street.

"For a company going through financial pressure, to heighten the profile of the financial guy was a wise move," said Kevin Murphy, airline analyst with Morgan Stanley & Co.

"He has a high degree of credibility in the financial community."

