As a tutor, it was a dud.

And he and others point out that Sportswriter isn't being used to cover matters of local controversy or national importance.

"You're never misquoted," says Mark Ortmeir, boys' basketball coach at Humphrey High School.

Still, computer journalism raises more than issues of creativity: Sportswriter allows sources, not reporters, to choose the quotations that appear in print, violating what many see as a sacred tenet of journalism.

In one recent edition of the Humphrey Democrat, Sportswriter-crafted lead paragraphs varied considerably, including one that highlighted an individual player: "Jody Kosch made two free throws to put St. Francis up by four points and seal the win."

Pop a disk into a PC, type in a few numbers and comments, and presto -- out come stories awash in clutch shots, runaway victories and at-the-buzzer heroics.

Mr. Helms, its inventor, wouldn't disagree.

The paper booted up a software program and booted out Mr. Backes.

Sportswriter doesn't focus on subtle disparities, such as a big rebounding edge, that might explain a victory.

The computer can't take pictures."

At a game's end, they write in the teams' records, the game score by periods, team statistics and individual statistics.

"I decided that the only thing my program was good at was making its own decisions," Mr. Helms says.

In newspaper offices around the country, computers have replaced typewriters.

Sportswriter, as the program is called, costs $100.

The papers had been shelling out up to $7 a game to stringers.

Mr. Helms hasn't discounted updating Sportswriter, but he is already thinking beyond sports.

But it may be the future.

He dismisses that argument as "boo-hockey," noting that small papers often rely upon coaches to phone in information to reporters, anyway.

And a coach writing his own "quotes" stays out of trouble.

"You could create an image you couldn't tell from a real person."

The software didn't talk back and could write -- prolifically if not particularly well.

(It can only handle football and basketball.)

Dean Backes used to work as a sportswriter for the weekly Humphrey Democrat in Humphrey, Neb.

"We have a very small staff here, and it allows us to do a fairly decent story," says John Edgecombe Jr., publisher of the Nebraska Signal, a weekly in Geneva, Neb.

But every lead includes the site of the game, something writers might save for lower in the story.

Still, Sportswriter hasn't won any writing prizes, much less proved itself a match for talents such as the legendary Grantland Rice, who set Notre Dame's Four Horsemen against a "blue, gray October sky."

Indeed, Sportswriter is programmed with every possible sports cliche.

"You just don't mention the refs," he adds.

"Any sportswriter who is marginally competent can write much better and also much faster," he says.

"You get kind of addicted."

Penny-pinchers, however, have come to love it.

Coaches are also asked to describe key points in the action -- the big play in a touchdown drive or a game-winning shot.

"I loved it," he says.

The programs also don't dig into anything, or challenge the value or even validity of the data fed into them.

Mr. Helms wanted to buy a weekly newspaper and improve its sports coverage, so, using an Apple Macintosh program called Hypercard, he set out to design a program that would tutor high-school reporters on writing sports stories.

Some 80 small newspapers in the Midwest have already bought Sportswriter, published by Zybrainics Software Inc., Rochester, Minn., to write high-school football or basketball games.

"A virtual TV weatherperson would be a natural," he says.

At the Bloomberg L.P. financial news service in New York, computers write hourly stock-market summaries and foreign-market trends.

Though he shows surprisingly little animosity toward the technology that replaced him, he can't resist at least one dig: "I was better than Sportswriter."

A story may even judge a game an upset if the coach checked a box that says the opponent was "clearly superior to us."

Teams "jump in front."

Sportswriter was developed by Roger Helms, a 42-year-old freelance writer in Rochester, Minn.

Consider this lead paragraph: "The Humphrey Bulldogs fell victim to a second-half rally and dropped a close decision to the Leigh Lady Panthers 27-24 in girls basketball at Clarkson in the first round of the Cornhusker Conference Tournament."

From the coaches' viewpoint, Sportswriter offers some obvious pluses.

But some users say software-generated prose enables them to write about events they would otherwise have to skip.

Now they are replacing reporters.

Now Mr. Isley says he mainly goes to games "to take pictures.

"They say it's not journalism if you don't generate all the information yourself," he says.

Each story also has a quarter-by-quarter scoring summary and a count of free throws and field goals.

"We were laying out $1,500 a month for the sports reporter," says Donald Zavadil, editor and owner of the 1,800-circulation weekly.

The hardball decision to replace a reporter with software was easy enough to justify.

It works like this: Newspapers give coaches a form to fill out.

Such economies don't end at the sports desk.

Sportswriter is one of a new genre of software that can intelligently string words between facts.

"In 40 or 50 years a computer might be sports editor."

Though "Sportswriter writes a little below the level of a beginning reporter," it clearly outclasses copy turned in by high-school "stringers," says Keith Isley, editor of the Chariton (Iowa) Leader and Herald-Patriot.

Mr. Backes, the displaced Nebraska sportswriter, certainly isn't mentioning the refs anymore: He's now selling farm equipment.

But two years ago, technology came roaring into the Democrat's newsroom.

At Individual Inc. in Cambridge, Mass., computers sort through thousands of newspaper, magazine and wire-service articles and compile them into customized newsletters faxed daily to 3,000 subscribers.

Then the coaches phone in or fax the form to the newspaper, someone types the data into a computer, and a few seconds later, Sportswriter prints out a story.

Mr. Isley concedes that he gets grief from purists.

Coaches can also provide a brief description of outstanding individual performances, and quotations.

But as a writer, it wasn't bad.

But two months into using Sportswriter, "we recouped our cost and the stories were significantly better," he adds.

But they do prove that computers can produce serviceable stories in specialized domains.

Mr. Skwar says such automatic journalism "takes away creativity" that only real writers can provide.

Each winter, as blizzards roared across the Great Plains, he covered as many as eight high-school basketball games an issue.

"It's scary, huh?" says Don Skwar, sports editor of the Boston Globe.

Scores are "knotted," and players make "charity tosses" from the foul line.

