Some animal-shelter workers have a bone to pick with hunters.

"When we are already overcrowded, an additional 18 beagles is really splitting the seams."

Capital Humane Society's Mr. Downey says that the society recently housed "a beautiful Chesapeake Bay retriever called Duke."

A variety of breeds, from beagles to retrievers, go out with their owners in fall and winter in search of birds, rabbits or other game.

Tom Colvin, shelter director of the Animal Rescue League of Iowa in Des Moines, says the number of hunting dogs turning up at the league's shelter is an indication that hunters "feel they can get a replacement dog pretty easily."

Others, indifferent to the sport, merely flirt with a potential catch and then stroll off.

"The dogs never socialize with humans so they would make very poor pets, and too often shelters must make the decision to euthanize."

The number of dogs showing up at animal shelters during hunting season is an "ongoing problem," says Jeannie Woelker, assistant director at the North Fork Animal Welfare League in Southold Town on New York's Long Island.

But some get lucky.

The adoption rate for abandoned hunting dogs at the league is only 35% to 45%.

With all these virtues, Duke got adopted quickly.

Dogs are often taken to shelters by animal-control workers or private citizens.

Shelter workers say that because many of the dogs are unidentified, it is difficult to reunite canine with master.

Later, the owner is unable to find the animal and leaves the forest without it.

And even staunch hunters inadvertently separate from their owners: The dog sniffs out its target and takes off in pursuit, roaming deep into the woods.

But some of the dogs are scared off by gunfire and run away, leaving their masters behind.

Annually, Mr. Colvin says, the shelter receives about 1,000 hunting dogs, most of which start turning up at the start of hunting season.

Duke was "probably not a good hunter," Mr. Downey says, adding: "He's a little shy, likes blankets, plays games and loves having his stomach rubbed."

"The owner says, `It's not a good hunter'" and abandons the animal, says Robert Downey, executive director of the Capital Humane Society in Lincoln, Neb.

"The shelters are frustrated," says Nicholas Gilman, a spokesman for the Humane Society of the U.S.

