Martin Marietta Corp. capped a streak of major acquisitions with an agreement to buy Grumman Corp. for $1.9 billion, increasing pressure in the beleaguered defense industry for further consolidation.

The $55-a-share tender offer for Grumman's 34 million shares outstanding will begin today, following approval by both companies' directors and subject only to antitrust clearance.

The purchase would make Martin Marietta the nation's largest aerospace-electronics concern and one of the nation's biggest overall defense contactors with about $13 billion in annual sales.

Martin Marietta Chairman Norman Augustine engineered a $3 billion acquisition of General Electric Co.'s aerospace division last year and has an agreement to buy General Dynamics Corp.'s spacelaunch business for $208.5 million.

Buying Grumman will load Martin Marietta with more new debt on top of its current $1.81 billion, but it also will bring the Bethesda, Md., company major government information-services business and valuable contracts to make high-priority airplanes for battle-coordination and surveillance.

Martin Marietta said it has commitments from BankAmerica Corp.'s Bank of America unit and J.P. Morgan & Co.'s Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. unit to provide a total of $2.4 billion in unsecured financing to complete the tender offer.

Mr. Augustine said that some of the debt might be paid down with a $400 million to $500 million stock offering that was previously under consideration.

Even without an equity sale, the acquisition would be positive to earnings per share "from day one," he added.

Investors viewed the deal favorably, as shares in Martin Marietta rose $1.125, or 2.8%, to close at $46 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.

Shares of Grumman soared $14.25, or 36%, to close at 54.125.

The acquisition would consign the name of once-mighty jet maker Grumman, based in Bethpage, N.Y., to the history books.

However, Chairman Renso Caporali said the company's 18,000 employees will be better off in the long term with a larger company, while shareholders will enjoy "a price that in all likelihood would not be exceeded" in view of talks the company had with other possible bidders.

The offer is subject to the tender of at least two-thirds of Grumman's shares.

Grumman's claim to fame came in the jet-fighter business, building the now-canceled Navy F-14 fighter on Long Island, and the company has been shrinking steadily since.

A restructuring earlier this year brought plans to close 4.5 million square feet of plant space.

While the company had solid prospects for the next four or five years, Mr. Caporali said that the bidding environment was sure to become "increasingly difficult" for a smaller enterprise squared off against ever-larger rivals.

In an era of shrinking defense budgets, you can't get "all wrapped up in sentimentality," he added.

Mr. Augustine said his aim has been to move quickly and decisively to ensure leadership in certain fields.

"You wouldn't want to be the last one standing around . . . when they're picking partners," he added.

The Grumman deal will help Martin Marietta broaden and strengthen its interests, but the company already enjoys leadership as a producer of Titan rockets for military launches, space-shuttle external tanks, and Hellfire and Javelin antitank missiles, along with various nondefense businesses such as nonmilitary exploratory spacecraft.

Martin Marietta's bold maneuver will leave other middle-size military contractors still scrambling to find merger partners in the face of post-Cold War realities of fast-shrinking defense budgets.

"As each deal goes down the pickings become a little thinner," said analyst Jerry Cantwell of Lionheart Securities.

Among those still searching is Northrop Corp., which people close to the situation say had been exploring merger talks with Grumman after losing out in contests to acquire a major division of International Business Machines Corp. that went to Loral Corp., and for General Dynamics' tactical-fighter business, which was purchased by Lockheed Corp.

A spokesman for Northrop declined comment.

Grumman's Mr. Caporali said the identity of other possible bidders might become clearer when disclosure documents are filed today.

Some observers said they don't believe the acquisition will get mired in an antitrust review, although the Clinton administration's attitude toward defense-industry mergers has been divided.

The Pentagon -- led by general counsel Jamie Gorelick -- has supported them while the Justice Department has expressed some concern.

The recent selection of Ms. Gorelick for the No. 2 slot at the Justice Department is likely to result in a more benign view of defense consolidations there.

But the Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission must first decide which agency will review the acquisition.

Mary Lou Steptoe, director of the FTC's bureau of competition, wouldn't comment on the current transaction but said, "The competitive process is important to protect even in a downsizing situation."

Steven Newborn, a former FTC lawyer now in the Washington, D.C., office of the Rogers & Wells law firm, said, "This is a huge merger in the defense industry.

If there are areas where they compete, then this deal will be carefully scrutinized by the agencies."

The chairmen of both defense companies said they don't anticipate any antitrust problems.

The men, both Princeton University engineering graduates, are longtime acquaintances and they had flirted for months with the notion of a combination of the two companies.

But movement toward a deal picked up speed at a dinner in early February at the Garden City Hotel on Long Island, where the two executives met with several other advisers, including David Baum, a senior manager from the Goldman, Sachs & Co. investment banking concern, representing Grumman.

Bear, Stearns & Co. is the financial adviser to Martin Marietta and dealer manager for the tender offer.

Two weeks later, Martin Marietta produced its $55-a-share offer.

By last Friday, 90% of the details were wrapped up, Mr. Augustine said, and the deal was scheduled to be announced around the middle of this week.

But the executives became concerned when Grumman's shares spiked $3.125 a share Friday, people close to the companies said.

The executives feared that word of the talks was leaking, but the basis for the rise might have been a positive report on Grumman Thursday by a Merrill Lynch & Co. analyst, the people said.

Nonetheless, on Friday night, the two executives dined at an inn in Princeton "just to finalize all the details to get us here today," Mr. Augustine said.

The deal was approved by both boards of directors Sunday evening.

Grumman's major contracts include the Navy's E-2C Hawkeye early-warning aircraft.

The Pentagon has proposed spending $397.7 million on Hawkeye programs in the fiscal year starting Oct. 1, mainly to buy four of the carrier-based planes, up from just $55.9 million in fiscal 1994.

The company's other major airborne surveillance system is the Air Force and Army JSTARS (Joint Surveillance Target Attack Recognition System), which is intended to do for ground warfare what the AWACS system did for air combat -- help commanders plan and control their attack, provide constant surveillance of the battlefield, and then assess the subsequent damage.

Pentagon spending on the JSTARS system has been declining slowly in recent years, with a proposed fiscal 1995 funding of $802.2 million.

Grumman also has contracts in other areas of defense electronics, commercial-aircraft structures and computer information systems and software.

Martin Marietta has almost 93,000 employees in seven operating groups, including electronics, space, information, services, materials, energy and the Sandia National Laboratories.

While no new plans to sell off parts of either company have been hatched, Grumman will follow through with plans to sell a division that makes aluminum vehicles.

Martin Marietta recently spun off its construction-materials business to raise money for debt reduction.

With the Grumman acquisition, Mr. Augustine said the company's debt as a percentage of total capital could reach 55% if there isn't a stock offering, but it could be reduced to less than 50% by year end with steady reduction after that.

In 1993, Martin Marietta had record operating profit, before the recognition of accounting changes, of $450.3 million, or $3.80 a share, up 30% from 1992 net income.

Sales jumped 58% to $9.44 billion.

Grumman had 1993 profit from operations, before a restructuring charge, of $120.5 million, or $3.50 a share, compared with year-earlier profit from continuing operations, before accounting changes, of $119.9 million, or $3.49 a share.

Sales dropped 7% to $3.25 billion from $3.5 billion.

Leslie Scism in New York and Joe Davidson and Thomas E. Ricks in Washington contributed to this article.

