Each year about 10 of the 15 Koreans leave after one year, and a handful of other foreign students get expelled for disciplinary reasons.

"He was uncomfortable socially {and} wasn't allowed to listen to music."

"I'm not too excited about admitting it," he says.

"They do not understand what the teacher is saying," he says.

Banking on foreign students isn't risk free.

Then, the outbreak of the Gulf War created a fear of travel, some countries restricted high-school students from studying abroad, and schools in Australia and Canada began aggressively wooing Asian students with cheaper programs.

"I'd like to be able not to use them.

Mr. Kim, the agent in Seoul, who has received fees from Hebron Academy, says he is more likely to send a student to the school because of the fee, but sees nothing wrong with it.

Admissions directors say they regularly receive unsolicited faxes and mail from overseas agents offering their services who often turn out to be travel agents with little knowledge of American schools.

And the Secondary School Admission Test Board, which administers entrance exams, this year offered a version for international students, with a section on English proficiency.

Sojourn's director, Geoffrey T. Robbins, says Mr. Hikosaka "has had more difficulty than some but not as much difficulty as others. . . .

At times, I feel so bad."

"True, they are full-pay, but they also need a lot of extra care.

"They get a paper profile of a student saying he's a good student {and} speaks English well," says Mrs. Rapp, "and the student arrives on their doorstep and doesn't speak a word."

The assumption is that once they learn English everything will be fine, but it's much more complicated than that."

Some agents are said to charge exorbitant fees to families, demand commissions from schools, fudge student transcripts and place students in completely inappropriate schools.

But sitting in a lounge area at Winchendon, several Japanese and Korean students complain about feeling isolated, and of teachers showing little understanding.

Most schools insist their main motivation for recruiting foreign students isn't money, but to provide an international experience for American students.

"We spend time with so many Koreans," complains Bo Na Yoon, a 16-year-old from Seoul, South Korea, "we don't play with the other people."

Some kids are so overwhelmed that they end up simply not functioning."

When he first arrived in the U.S., he says, he found the food was so "different" that "I couldn't eat. . . .

Some educators are disturbed by what they see as an unseemly scramble to fill boarding-school beds.

More than a few of the students drop out, get expelled, or bounce from school to school.

One problem is that many of the students have such trouble with English that their studies suffer and their opportunities to mix with the Americans on the woodsy, hillside campus are lost.

Moreover, many schools exclude foreign students from receiving financial aid, says Meade Thayer, financial-aid specialist at the National Association of Independent Schools.

In the past two years, Shinsaku Hikosaka, an 18-year-old from Japan, has been kicked out of two prep schools -- the Putney School in Putney, Vt., and the White Mountain School in Littleton, N.H. -- for smoking, tardiness and other infractions.

Now, 51 of Winchendon's 125 students are foreigners, a fourfold increase from 1988.

To combat such fraud, the Association of Boarding Schools has begun offering workshops on "credential assessment," says Mr. Cowan.

Paying agents finder's fees for students is criticized by some schools, and an embarrassment to others that engage in the practice.

"Even though we receive a commission from Hebron Academy, I think Hebron is very famous and very good," he says.

Agents often charge hefty fees -- up to a year's tuition -- to families for preparing applications, obtaining visas and making travel arrangements, school officials say.

The problems aren't just at Winchendon.

Jim Nolan, a Philadelphia consultant, says he represented a Korean boy last year who had been placed by a Korean agency in a Seventh Day Adventist boarding school.

"There're people in New York City who would pay through the nose for this experience," says Mr. Arango, "but it didn't sell in Seoul."

"You end up with a clique of 10 or 20 kids and they just hang together and talk Japanese," adds Mr. Robbins.

"It's a combination of greed and naivete," says Diane Rapp, a Scarborough, N.Y., educational consultant who has placed dozens of Japanese students in U.S. prep schools.

The few students who did go to the camp generally hated the setting and wrote home to their parents that they were living in huts.

In Korea alone, there are more than 150 agents, many of whom have sprung up in the past three years.

At Winchendon, sitting in his office -- once part of the main lodge of a vacation resort -- headmaster Mr. LaBelle says he sees no problem with Winchendon's 41% foreign-student population.

"This is not a quick fix," says Mrs. Rapp, the consultant.

"If I'm paying an agency to find me three kids from Spain, that agency won't have the kid's interest in mind, it'll have my interest."

"We can't understand some English words so sometimes they make jokes that we don't know the words.

Mr. Hikosaka says he could have been a better student, but blames some of his troubles on culture shock, homesickness, alienation and a tobacco habit acquired at home where high schoolers are allowed to smoke.

"Many schools would rather use that budget to support needy families here," he says.

"The agent will tell the family it costs $30,000 to attend the school," says Mr. Cowan.

He signed a five-year lease on a summer camp in western Connecticut.

They say the schools are risking a repeat of the late 1970s when schools loaded with Iranian students had to rush to fill slots after the Shah was overthrown and students were barred from leaving Iran.

Upon arrival he found there were 36 Japanese students and no riding.

At Winchendon, Yoshitaka Minami says an agent back home in Japan, whom he paid $2,000, told him the school had 10 Japanese students and horseback riding.

Fees go toward his advertising costs in Korea, he says.

But critics say such programs are insufficient.

Moreover, he says, "In a boarding school that's tuition-driven, you've got to pay the bills."

Since 1988, the number of international students at prep schools has nearly doubled to about 5,000, with the average school's foreign enrollment now at 12.4%, according to the 267-member Association of Boarding Schools.

So the program closed in 1991.

But Mr. LaBelle soon found a solution for the small, private boarding school: well-to-do foreign students, mainly from Asia.

The situation at Winchendon is developing at prep schools all over the country.

But critics say many schools aren't prepared to handle the influx of foreign students.

"We in schools have the obligation to prepare our kids to be global citizens," says Diederick van Renesse, admissions director at Darrow School in New Lebanon, N.Y., where 45 of its 115 students are foreign.

Today, tuition paid by foreign students subsidizes Americans.

After four months on campus, she says she has no close American friends.

He says the foreign students are well-served, they are able to improve their English, and virtually all who graduate go on to college.

John M. Niles, head of admission at Groton School in Groton, Mass., where just nine of the 325 students are foreigners, says some schools admit so many students from one or two countries that there develops "a kind of Balkanization where kids don't really mix."

While their presence isn't new -- top prep schools have been recruiting abroad for years -- the purpose at many institutions no longer is simply to diversify campuses.

Norman D. Farwell, director of admission at Hebron Academy in Hebron, Maine, says he is troubled by the fact that he paid $1,650 to Korean agents for each of the seven Korean students at the school.

The schools are so hungry for paying, foreign students that often scant attention is paid to enrollees' qualifications, language proficiency and knowledge of life in the U.S.

He says foreign students should take only English-language courses for a few months before entering regular classes.

Mismatches are common, U.S. educational consultants say.

"They collect the cash, and send our schools $17,000."

Once on campus, the students complain the schools offer little help in making the difficult transition to American academic and social life.

Peter Nah, also from Seoul, who was expelled from a boarding school in Michigan for drinking, says Americans "don't even try to understand" Korean culture in which all elders are shown respect and swearing can be considered a sin.

Admissions directors and consultants say they often can't trust student transcripts sent from agencies.

I was always hungry."

Ung Sik Kim, manager of Han Kook Education Center in Seoul, which charges schools fees for placing students, says many of his recruits have problems in the U.S. because they are too quickly put in classes with American students.

She says many institutions are treating foreign students "like a commodity."

In 1989, Pedro Arango, then headmaster at South Kent School in South Kent, Conn., launched a plan to recruit hundreds of foreign students, teach them English, and then funnel them into South Kent and other boarding schools.

Asian students are drawn to U.S. prep schools primarily out of a desire to learn English and attend American colleges, which tend to be easier to get into than the universities back home.

On the other hand, they do supply us with good students."

"The risk is that as the percentage {of international students} rises, you make the school unattractive to the normal American student," says Earl A. Samson 3rd, chairman of the board of trustees at Darrow School.

Their ability to pay the school's $22,750 in tuition and fees is enabling Winchendon to pay off a $1.2 million mortgage on its gym and become debt free.

"This kid wasn't a Seventh Day Adventist," says Mr. Nolan.

Meanwhile, some schools that have loaded up on foreign students are beginning to cut back on their international enrollees.

"I think most schools are trying to keep the percentage {of foreign students} at a 20% to 25% level."

He now attends a public school in Winslow, Maine, and lives at Sojourn International, a residential program founded six years ago to help foreign students suffering academic and other problems.

Only 5% of foreign students receive financial aid, while 29% of U.S. students do, says Rick Cowan, director of the boarding-school association.

Campuses with foreign-student populations above 25% aren't uncommon.

"Sometimes they are rude," says Eun Kil Jang, 18, from Seoul.

Some school officials warn that boarding schools are relying too heavily on too few countries for their international students, with more than a third coming from Korea, Japan and Hong Kong.

Foreign students complain that agents misinform them about schools.

With a decline in the number of American families who can afford rising tuitions that now average more than $17,000 a year, schools are aggressively recruiting students from Japan, Korea, Hong Kong and other far-off lands whose parents want them to study in the U.S. and don't flinch at the bills.

To accommodate the influx of foreign students, many prep schools have established intensive English-as-a-second-language courses and orientation programs focusing on American culture.

When J. William LaBelle became headmaster six years ago, the Winchendon School faced sinking enrollment, a trickle of cash flow and rising debt.

But things aren't so simple for Winchendon's foreign students.

Of particular concern is the use of overseas agents for recruiting.

Taking such fees violates an ethics code for placement counselors in the U.S. "Schools should not be the client; the client should be the family," says Virginia deVeer, admissions director at Tabor Academy in Marion, Mass.

