While the movie is generating sympathy for people with AIDS, little attention is being paid to the people whose lives are being endangered by federal policies that increasingly prevent companies from protecting employees or customers from contagious fatal diseases.

Philip Benson, a Minneapolis physician, continued delivering babies and doing invasive genital and rectal examinations for nearly a year after he came down with AIDS; the Minnesota Board of Medical Examiners in September 1990 permitted him to continue practicing even after he had open sores on his hands and arms as long as he wore double gloves.

The hepatitis was apparently spread to patients through tiny holes in surgical gloves.

The hospital offered to allow the surgeon to continue practicing if his patients signed consent forms stating that they had been informed of the doctor's HIV status.

Since contagious diseases are physiological disorders -- voila! -- discriminating against people with contagious disease can be a federal crime.

Employers are now required to hire people with contagious diseases unless they can prove that the person poses a large risk to other workers or their customers.

A 1992 Centers for Disease Control study observed that, under one set of assumptions, "the estimated probability that {an HIV-infected} surgeon will transmit HIV at least once during the rest of his/her career is 8.1%."

The official news magazine of the American Dental Association warned dentists last November that "dentists should be . . . aware that they could be charged with discrimination for using `extra precaution'" while treating HIV patients.

The UCLA case makes a mockery of the CDC's universal precautions -- which, if followed, supposedly protect patients from infected doctors and dentists.

But federal officials ruled that the hospital violated the rights of the infectious pharmacist.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, in its implementing regulations for the ADA, announced: "Determining whether an individual poses a significant risk of substantial harm to others must be made on a case by case basis."

Mr. Bovard writes often on public policy.

It is peculiar to see how far federal law goes to protect firefighters, infected or otherwise.

Firefighters must be notified when they have been exposed to the plague -- even though "person-to-person transmission of plague has not been documented since 1924," as a Federal Register notice observed Monday.

In 1990, the International Association of Fire Fighters -- a politically powerful union -- succeeded in persuading Congress to include a provision in a law requiring that emergency response employees be notified when they had been exposed to airborne infectious disease.

The ADA is also restricting how health care workers may protect themselves from contagious patients.

Yet, studies in recent years have found that as many as 47% of gloves suffer from defects, punctures or leaks during surgery.

A Farmington, Conn., restaurant was sued by the state Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities after the restaurant refused to rehire an AIDS-infected waiter who had taken a leave after coming down with double pneumonia.

(The CDC has identified 120 cases of documented or possible occupational transmission of AIDS/HIV to health care workers, and hepatitis B kills over 200 health care workers a year.)

He left food under the warmers too long, and his hands shook so much that he couldn't carry cocktail trays.")

There are roughly 7,000 HIV-positive physicians in the U.S.

Dr. Benson reportedly lied to his patients when they asked questions about his sores and his sharp weight loss, and also allegedly failed to wear gloves during some examinations.

The hospital was forced to pay him $330,000 for, among other things, the "emotional damage" it had inflicted on him.

Federal regulations are resulting in a cloak of secrecy being imposed on what may be life-or-death information to patients.

The ADA gave health care workers the right to continue performing invasive surgery without disclosing to patients that there is a risk that they could contract AIDS from the health care provider.

The suit is still pending.

That needle would then be inserted in a bag with solutions, contaminate the solution, and then infect a patient."

In a worst-case scenario . . . pharmacists could stick themselves with a fine-gauge needle and be unaware of it.

(The Hartford Courant noted that the waiter "started losing weight and became sluggish and weak.

Maybe someday someone will make a movie about it.

But the firefighter had hepatitis B, which infects 300,000 people and kills 7,000 people a year.

The Supreme Court laid the groundwork for a broad protection of the rights of contagious people in a 1987 decision that a school board wrongfully fired a teacher with tuberculosis.

The New York Times noted yesterday that "the hospital's decision to allow the surgeon to keep on operating even after he was found to be infected . . . is in compliance with federal guidelines."

Unfortunately, federal policy toward contagious diseases seems increasingly simply a question of clout in Washington.

The surgeon sued.

Civil-rights policy concerning contagious diseases is influencing firefighting.

It is extremely unlikely that someone could contract AIDS as a result of eating a meal prepared by an AIDS-infected person, but such individuals often are hit by other illnesses -- such as tuberculosis -- that are contagious.

The movie "Philadelphia," portraying a law firm's discrimination against an AIDS-infected lawyer, won two Academy Awards Monday night.

The failure of policies that indulge infectious surgeons was made stark in a recent investigation of a UCLA surgeon who spread hepatitis B to 18 patients undergoing heart surgery in 1991-92.

The federal Department of Health and Human Services penalized a Westchester County, N.Y., hospital in 1992 because it prevented an HIV-positive pharmacist from preparing intravenous solutions, even though the hospital did offer the pharmacist another position where there was far less danger of transmitting the disease.

In late 1992, an AIDS-infected orthopedic surgeon sued Mercy Catholic Medical Center of Philadelphia for revoking his hospital privileges.

"Significant risk" was defined in congressional reports authorizing the law as a high probability of substantial harm.

While many HIV-infected surgeons voluntarily cease practicing, others are not so inclined.

Under the ADA, passed in 1990, "any physiological disorder or condition which substantially limits one of a person's `major life activities'" can be classified as a handicap that employers are prohibited from discriminating against.

The Americans with Disabilities Act is creating a "civil right" that is the antithesis of individual rights -- of freedom of contract -- and of the right of informed consent.

The biggest impact of the new discrimination-contagion philosophy is on health care.

Amazingly, the hospital had tested the surgeon, discovered he was infected, and yet still permitted him to continue operating without warning patients of the additional deadly risks they faced.

James Coleman, an attorney for the National Council of Chain Restaurants, observed in 1992, "What we were told in no uncertain terms was `We {Congress} are going to use the restaurant industry as a vehicle for forcing a change in public attitude with respect to AIDS.

The presumptions created in the ADA can turn every decision about the job and work assignments of a contagious individual into a court battle.

Restaurants are now obliged to give the benefit of the doubt to potentially contagious job applicants.

Hospital, the journal of the American Hospital Association, noted that the Westchester hospital "justified its stance by noting its large number of very ill patients and that pharmacists often stick themselves accidentally and must break glass vials in order to prepare IV solutions.

American Medical News noted, "Advocates for people with HIV insist that requiring notification {of patients} is tantamount to revoking {hospital} privileges."

Even if a doctor with HIV lies to his patients and claims not to be infectious, he is still entitled to full protection under the ADA.

In a path-breaking case last December, federal judge Joyce Hens Green ruled that the District of Columbia fire department violated an infectious firefighter's civil rights because he was specifically prohibited from doing mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.

If it costs you money, too bad.'"

Federal policy makers act as if it is more important to minimize prejudice against people with infectious diseases than to minimize the spread of the diseases themselves.

Firefighters and emergency medical technicians have a federal right to be notified any time they are in the same vehicle with a person with TB -- yet hospital patients have no right to be notified when their surgeon is HIV positive, despite the CDC study showing that there could be an 8% chance that an HIV-infected surgeon will effectively kill one of his patients by spreading HIV.

Few people realize how expansive the Americans With Disabilities Act is, and how it can threaten their own health.

