Now one Massachusetts family is fighting back -- and in the process standing up for religious as well as property rights.

The Desilets are devout Catholics and, in their minds, sex outside of marriage is wrong.

The evidence so far hasn't been encouraging: Courts in Massachusetts and elsewhere have not only upheld insanely restrictive rent controls, but also forced landlords to spend millions of dollars on lead-paint cleanups of dubious merit.

That law notwithstanding, the Massachusetts attorney general's office sued the Desilets, claiming they had violated a 1974 statute prohibiting housing discrimination based on marital status.

The Bay State case could be an important bellwether of whether the courts believe that religious sensibilities deserve the same protection as more popular attitudes.

But it does have the potential to provide some satisfaction to those of us who hold the unfashionable belief that landlords perform a more valuable function in the overall scheme of things than do snail darters.

With the help of attorneys from Pat Robertson's American Center for Law and Justice, the Desilets fought back, charging that the state was trying to violate their First Amendment rights.

In recent years a troubling double standard has been evident: Atheists are shielded from religion in the town square yet religious people have no protection from anti-religious secular humanist views in, say, the classroom.

A number of religious groups have filed amicus briefs for the brothers while the usual suspects who keep their radars tuned for errant intruders into their realm have raised the specter of fascism descending if the Desilets get their way.

Not only morally wrong but also legally: An old state law still on the books forbids fornication.

Their position is, essentially, no different from a Jewish synagogue refusing to rent its meeting hall to a neo-Nazi gathering.

Rick and Paul Desilets, brothers who own an apartment building in Turners Falls, Mass., refused in 1989 to rent one of their units to Cynthia Tarail and Mark Lattanzi, an unmarried couple.

The Desilets case, no matter how it turns out, will not resolve this old dispute.

The Desilets case also will test whether the courts believe that investing your time, sweat and money in a property entitles you to certain rights -- or whether the state can abridge your rights in the name of any moral trend of the moment.

They're not bigots.

You don't have to agree with the Desilets' religious views to be sympathetic to their plight.

"This is a major battle in the cultural wars," says Nikolas Nikas, the Desilets' lawyer.

Yet the Desilets' decision has drawn a storm of controversy.

In recent years landlords have been hemmed in by one regulation after another.

"And it costs us dearly in lost rent."

However, they draw the line at tenants who commit (in their eyes) objectionable behavior on the premises.

They're willing to rent to Jews or Buddhists, blacks or Hispanics, married or unmarried.

"It's a moral stand we're making," Paul Desilets tells us.

Two similar cases in Minnesota and California were decided in favor of the landlord, even before Congress passed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act last year.

It will be interesting to see if the Massachusetts court recognizes that allowing a non-Christian to view a creche on Main Street is far less intrusive than forcing a Catholic to take into his own building a couple whose behavior is deeply offensive to him.

A decision is expected in the next few months.

Round I went to the Desilets: A state judge threw out the attorney general's case in 1992.

Round II began last month when the state high court heard an appeal filed by the attorney general.

The upshot is that in many places they can't raise the rent, kick out crackhead tenants or choose who occupies their building without the nanny state's OK.

It would be nice if the politically enlightened elites paid as much attention to the rights of homo superintendus -- the ordinary landlord -- as they do to those of snail darters, rain forests and other such exotica.

Nice, but unlikely.

