The company's total sales of niacin are only about $1.3 million a year, he said.

A team of medical researchers said that niacin, a B vitamin that many people use to lower their cholesterol levels, is too toxic to be sold as a nonprescription drug.

The popular form of niacin that slowly releases the vitamin over several hours produced signs of liver toxicity in more than half the patients who took doses high enough to reduce their cholesterol levels, reported the team headed by James M. McKenney of the pharmacy school at the Medical College of Virginia in this week's Journal of the American Medical Association.

"We don't make niacin as an anticholesterol agent, and we don't make any claim on the package that would instruct anyone that they should take three grams a day," said Christian Boswell, marketing director for Goldline Laboratories in Ft. Lauderdale, Fla.

Dr. McKenney and his colleagues noted, as did the Rhone-Poulenc spokesman, that the vitamin has been proven not only to lower cholesterol, but also to reduce the incidence of heart attacks and to slow the clogging of the heart's arteries.

Widespread publicity in the late 1980s about its cholesterol-lowering effects prompted many people to begin self-medicating themselves with high dosages of niacin.

In an accompanying editorial, Louis Lasagna of Tufts University medical school in Boston, an expert in drug development, said, "Niacin still has a role to play in the management of high cholesterol, but not on the basis of self-diagnosis and self-treatment."

The researchers found in an experiment with 46 patients that niacin taken in high enough dosages to reduce the level of cholesterol produced more adverse side effects than any experimental cholesterol-lowering drug that they tested.

The dosage was increased every six weeks until it reached 3,000 milligrams a day for both groups.

It does, however, advertise its Nicolar brand of immediate-release niacin for cholesterol reduction.

The older, immediate-release form of niacin produced a different, less serious group of adverse effects, including facial flush, itching, rash, fatigue and a temporary wart-like skin disfigurement in many patients.

Doctors soon began seeing cases of liver damage in patients taking sustained-release niacin.

It also is the cheapest cholesterol-lowering drug around, with a 10-day supply of 500-milligram tablets costing about $2.

Because the immediate-release form produces a high incidence of unpleasant effects, such as facial blush, many people switched to the sustained-release form that doesn't produce such effects.

Liver problems first became evident when the dosage reached 1,500 milligrams a day.

But 18 of the 23 patients taking the sustained-release form had to drop out of the experiment because blood tests indicated they were experiencing liver problems.

Mr. Boswell said Goldline's sustained-release form of niacin, which was used in the experiment, is a generic version of Nicobid, the brand of sustained-release niacin sold by Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. of Collegeville, Pa., the U.S. unit of the big French drug maker Rhone-Poulenc SA.

The experiments involved taking 2,000 to 3,000 milligrams of niacin a day, which involves taking from four to 12 of the 250 milligram and 500 milligram tablets sold in drug and health-food stores.

Given the side effects, ". . . allowing niacin to remain on the nonprescription market, where it may be used in high doses for cholesterol lowering without proper monitoring by trained health professionals, presents a potentially serious public health problem," the team declared.

Manufacturers countered that their niacin products aren't sold to lower cholesterol levels.

In the newly reported experiment, researchers gave 23 patients an immediaterelease niacin, made by Rugby Laboratories of West Hempstead, N.Y., a unit of Marion Merrell Dow Inc., while another 23 patients took Goldline's sustained-release niacin.

A Rhone-Poulenc spokesman said that the company doesn't promote Nicobid sustained-release niacin for lowering cholesterol levels.

At the highest dosage, the immediate-release niacin cut cholesterol levels an average of 16%, while the sustained-release form lowered cholesterol by 40%.

Although the immediate-release form wasn't as effective as the sustained-release form in lowering total cholesterol levels, it was more effective in raising the HDL-cholesterol level, the so-called good form of cholesterol.

Nine of the 23 taking the immediate-release niacin dropped out of the experiment because of side effects.

"We agree with the researchers that patients taking the immediate-release form should be monitored" by a doctor, because of the adverse effects, he said.

Niacin has posed a dilemma for physicians and patients.

