Israel and Egypt, key U.S. allies and the two largest U.S. aid recipients, also rarely experience any heat over persistent rights violations.

But he says at least some concerns about Mexico's human-rights record have surfaced since Nafta's passage.

Prison conditions for those targeted with expulsion became so bad last year that six detainees sewed shut their own mouths in protest.

Rights groups have also accused Israel of routinely using psychological and physical abuse such as sleep deprivation and exposure in obtaining confessions from prisoners, many of whom are detained without charge or trial.

But the reports aren't widely available, and often the violations cited are never raised further with the governments responsible, nor used as a basis for policy decisions.

The Clinton administration, while acknowledging incongruities, says that human rights are always an important consideration in trade policy.

And in February, when the president personally intervened to win $6 billion in aircraft sales from Saudi Arabia, he didn't mention the kingdom's long-chronicled denial of religious freedom nor its refusal of equal rights to women.

And what is being done, he adds, "is the maintenance of normal relationships with many significant trading partners" despite their human-rights lapses.

Still, other abuses draw little response.

"This country and this government . . . have taken a principled stand on human rights because it's something Americans care about," says a State Department official.

And human rights monitoring groups give the administration credit for taking a tough line on human-rights violations with some countries, including Nigeria, Peru and Indonesia.

"Whenever policy decisions are made, the president and the people who work for him have to weigh each case on its merits."

In its annual human-rights survey, Middle East Watch described 1993 as a year when "the dismal human rights record of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia took a turn for the worse," with the number of executions after summary trials more than doubling.

Under emergency laws in place since 1981, Egypt has imprisoned thousands of political suspects without trial.

But a spokesman says decisions on whether to sanction or criticize trade partners must be made on a case-by-case basis.

Abuses by such countries as Iran are rarely out of the spotlight.

Human-rights organizations also say they have compiled evidence of widespread torture in Mexican prisons, including near-asphyxiation with plastic bags.

When an emboldened Iraq turned on Kuwait, an ally, President Bush was quick to dust off neglected human-rights reports that allowed him to characterize Saddam Hussein as "like Hitler."

The Saudis reportedly balked at Mr. Ghnem because he has spoken in favor of democratization in the Gulf.

And last October, when he praised the third-largest U.S. aid recipient, Turkey, as "a shining example to the world of the virtues of cultural diversity," he neglected to mention evidence compiled by human-rights groups of the beatings, forcible evacuations, bombings, detention and torture of its Kurdish minority.

South Korea in 1993 jailed some 200 political prisoners, including some arrested for breaking restrictive laws against trade unions.

"Governments don't look at what is said but what is being done," says Curt Goering, the deputy executive director of Amnesty International in the U.S.

Last year saw mass murders of street children by offduty police and massacres of Yanomami Indians by gold miners.

Such reticence is even more striking in countries such as South Korea, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, with their heavy reliance on U.S. military protection.

China, facing an annual review in June of its most favored nation trade status, risks being penalized for a range of human-rights abuses including political repression, imprisonment of dissidents and systematic destruction of the religious and cultural heritage of Tibetans.

Instead, successive U.S. administrations have used human-rights records as props for policies already in place.

The U.S. declined to press any of these issues with Kuwait.

A Clinton administration official acknowledges that "during the Nafta crunch, human rights were not at the top of anybody's" agenda.

Similarly, despite close trade links, the U.S. fails to press Brazil on what international observers see as a worsening record of violent rights abuses.

Every year, the State Department compiles its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, a frank and detailed world-wide survey of abuses.

In Kuwait, meanwhile, 1993 U.S. sales of tanks and fighter planes topped $1 billion.

But during the Reagan administration, and the first year of the Bush presidency, Iraq's even-more egregious record was played down, mainly because Iraq was then a large market for U.S. agricultural products, and because its military aggression at that time had damaged only an enemy, Iran.

But rights groups say that similar catalogs of violations can be compiled for nations that neither face annual reviews nor draw even the mildest criticism from the Clinton administration for allegedly poor human-rights records.

When President Clinton last week pledged U.S. intervention to prop up Mexico's currency, he didn't tie the offer to an end to widespread torture alleged in Mexican prisons.

Last year's debate on the North American Free Trade Agreement passed with little discussion of Mexico's alleged human-rights violations, which include harassment of labor organizers.

Yet rights organizations say the emirate continued its post Gulf-War policy of expelling Palestinians and other noncitizens through tactics such as denial of employment, detention and torture.

When is a human-rights record more important than an economic relationship?

President Clinton's intervention to secure Saudi Arabian business for Boeing and McDonnell Douglas Corp. was accompanied by the withdrawal of his administration's choice of ambassador, Edward Ghnem.

If China isn't hearing the U.S. message on human rights, some of this background noise might be to blame.

