In 1992, American Telephone & Telegraph Co. was sued in Midland, Texas, by a partnership that claimed the company had violated a patent covering digital switching equipment.

"You cannot teach a Ph.D. in engineering how that sucker works in two weeks," Mr. Fey says.

Patent 3,956,593 -- an "ingenious and novel modularization of the time and space switch elements" -- meant a lot to its proud owners.

Experts have called for the appointment of specially-trained judges to hear complex cases as a way of assuring uniformity and fairness.

They contend that critics underestimate the ability of juries to understand scientific and technical data.

NOTED: Consumer activist Ralph Nader, Harvard law professor Arthur R. Miller and other members of the Harvard Law School class of 1958 launched an unusual public-service project.

The court also indicated it will decide whether juries should have a role in applying a rule of law that allows for a finding of patent infringement when the defendant's product falls outside the literal language of the plaintiff's patent.

But AT&T lawyers wonder whether it meant anything to the Texas jury, which awarded $35 million to the partnership after a one-week trial.

Plaintiffs' lawyers argue strongly that patent cases are no more abstruse than many other kinds of lawsuits.

"The jury was unemployed laborers and housewives.

Are some lawsuits just too complex for juries?

Among the issues the court plans to consider is the respective role of judges and juries in interpreting the "claims" that inventors make in their patents.

"It invades a constitutional right and it threatens the integrity of the patent system."

The decision was reversed on appeal.

But others worry that such proposals clash with the right to a jury trial guaranteed under the U.S. Constitution.

"To take a bunch of jurors that didn't get past the eighth grade, and try to do it in a week, the chance is zero."

More than 20 lawyers, including partners at major law firms nationally, will sit on Appleseed's board.

Nowhere is the debate hotter than in the arcane world of patents, which has seen a rapid increase in both the number of suits and the size of jury verdicts in recent years.

As a result, he contends, "you have a system of justice that is basically a lottery."

"I think that is a very dangerous proposition," he said.

Critics of the current system contend that plaintiffs have an edge in such cases because juries tend to favor small inventors against big companies when the technical issues are unclear.

"They pick up on the key issues, and they think it through," said Joseph A. Grear, a Chicago patent attorney who opposed Mr. Fey in the AT&T case.

The cases are expected to be argued before the full 12-seat appeals court this spring.

The question of whether lay juries are equipped to handle complicated evidence has been debated before.

"There are many lawyers who believe they can benefit by jury confusion" in patent cases, says Martin J. Adelman, a professor specializing in patent law at Wayne State University in Detroit.

Now, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit may be prepared to put some limits on the role of juries in patent cases.

Some patent lawyers think so, and an influential court is about to weigh in on the question.

It accepted three cases for review this spring, in which it has asked the parties to address the issue.

They don't understand that stuff," says Albert Fey, a New York attorney who represented AT&T.

Over the years, it has popped up in the antitrust field, where some judges have dismissed cases on the theory that they are so complicated that defendants are denied a fair trial and due process of law.

"This isn't just some hypertechnical area of patent law," said Steven D. Glazer, a New York attorney.

Called the Appleseed Foundation, the nonprofit corporation will open offices around the country, called Centers for Law in the Public Interest.

That prospect is also a major factor in many companies' decisions to settle patent disputes before trial, attorneys say.

"These two decisions will probably implicate just about any case that comes down the pike."

Such claims are frequently crucial to patent disputes because they define the scope of the invention and thus the right of the inventor to sue others for violations.

The offices will try to create social change not only by filing lawsuits but also by organizing and educating communities.

The court is essentially the last word on patent law in the U.S., so its eventual rulings could have a far-reaching impact on what has been a lucrative and fast-growing specialty.

Gerald D. Hosier, a Las Vegas attorney who represents inventors in patent disputes, says the changes that are being contemplated by the court reflect a philosophical shift toward cutting back the rights of inventors.

"Give jurors a complicated biotechnology case or one involving lasers or computers, and their eyes glaze over," adds Donald Dunner, a Washington lawyer who has tried many patent cases.

