Last summer, International Paper, headquartered in Purchase, N.Y., implemented the "Compliance Line."

This confidential "800 number" hotline was described in a company announcement as "a simple way for {employees} to report activities that may involve criminal conduct or corporate policy violations."

In other words, International Paper wants its staff to snitch.

"It's a frightening concept," says a 16-year veteran of the company.

"If someone doesn't like you, he can call the number.

Even if there's nothing to back it up, they're still going to do some kind of investigation.

It's the big brother thing.

You're encouraged to report on your neighbors and friends."

Such fears are worthy of serious consideration.

Most of the premier ethics programs at U.S. corporations have similar hotline reporting systems, says W. Michael Hoffman, director of the Center for Business Ethics and professor of ethics at Bentley College in Waltham, Mass.

The number of hotlines, which Mr. Hoffman estimates at more than 100, is growing, especially after the federal sentencing guidelines for corporate crimes came out in November 1991.

To satisfy the guidelines, an organization must prove that it has exercised due diligence to prevent and detect criminal conduct by its employees and other agents.

To do so, a company must "utilize monitoring and auditing systems designed to detect criminal conduct, such as an ethics hotline," Mr. Hoffman explains.

Companies failing to comply can be subject to fines costing them hundreds of millions of dollars.

The dangers of these mechanisms are very real.

"They create an environment of mistrust," says Barbara Ley Toffler, a principal at Resources for Responsible Management, a Boston consulting firm, and a former professor of organizational behavior and human resource management at the Harvard Business School.

"Companies talk about empowerment and setting up autonomous teams," she says.

"But guess what?

If people are so afraid that they're going to be questioned, investigated, or reported on, do you think anyone is going to dare to take any kind of independent steps that somebody else might see as being wrong?"

Instead, what it produces, Ms. Toffler says, "is a very demoralized, angry work force, particularly during difficult economic times, when people are anxious about keeping their jobs."

Such was the case at a heating and oil company that chose to install a hotline five years ago to resolve racial discrimination problems, says Renana Brooks, a psychologist in Washington, D.C., who treats people who have lost their jobs because they have been whistle-blowers.

"When people started to report discrimination, a campaign of intimidation began.

Supervisors viewed those they believed did the reporting as troublemakers and began documenting them to be fired.

It's a hostile environment now," says Ms. Brooks.

"The whole climate of the company has become polarized.

People became very defensive and felt they were being attacked."

Some even had nervous breakdowns, she notes.

This signals another problem that needs to be addressed.

"If people are calling in anonymously accusing John Doe of violating something, how are John Doe's rights going to be protected?" asks Mr. Hoffman.

"In this country, we have laws when you're outside the corporation.

You have the right to face your accuser."

Yet inside the corporation, the same rules of justice don't apply.

Interestingly enough, even those who defend whistle-blowers are skeptical of hotlines.

One such doubter is Louis Clark, executive director of the Government Accountability Project, a nonprofit legal foundation in Washington.

"Hotlines are set up without any kind of promises of how they are going to protect the people who use them," he says.

"If there aren't any guarantees of adequate protection, then essentially you're offering something to people that will end up endangering their jobs, their relationships with their co-workers, and perhaps their lives."

And historically, whistle-blowers have paid a very high price for their good deeds.

Of the 1,700 whistle-blowers interviewed by Edna Ottney, a quality assurance engineer who has investigated employee concerns in the nuclear power industry since 1985, 90% experienced negative fallout.

Other studies concur -- including the most recent, a survey of 35 Australian whistle-blowers published in the British Medical Journal last September.

The study found eight of the whistle-blowers had lost their jobs as a result of their actions, 10 had been demoted, 10 had resigned or retired early because of ill-health related to victimization, 15 were taking prescribed medication to deal with the stress, and 17 had considered suicide.

For some whistle-blowers, the retaliation has been even graver.

In November 1992, Tom Monfils, an employee of the James River paper mill in Green Bay, Wis., blew the whistle on a fellow worker for theft.

He telephoned the local police, assuming that his call would remain confidential.

Unfortunately, he assumed wrong.

Two weeks after Mr. Monfils snitched, he was found dead at the bottom of a tissue pulp holding vat with a 40-pound weight tied to his neck.

"It was a botched situation," says Jack Yusko, manager of human resources at the mill, referring to the release of Mr. Monfils's recorded telephone conversation.

This prompts a rather important question: If a police department professionally trained to deal with criminal activity can mishandle information communicated over the phone, couldn't a corporation using its own internal mechanism do the same?

"On paper, these hotlines sound wonderful," says Ms. Ottney, the quality assurance engineer.

"They tell employees we need to know what's wrong and what could be done better, so that we can be a family and work with high ethics.

That's in a perfect world.

But in reality, it's a farce."

The problem, according to Ms. Ottney, lies in the implementation.

"Confidentiality involves far more than promising to keep someone's name secret.

You can promise employees anything, but if you're not held legally accountable with a binding agreement to keep that promise, it doesn't mean anything."

So how can companies comply with the federal sentencing guidelines and still protect their employees?

"The federal sentencing guidelines don't say that a hotline is an absolute necessity," says former U.S. Attorney Peter Vaira, now practicing in Philadelphia.

Rather, the guidelines "want a company to establish a method where employees are able to communicate with the least amount of problems."

The best way to do that, says Ms. Ottney, is to work with "a totally independent, outside company" that's been given the authority to receive and investigate complaints but keeps the names of the individuals involved confidential.

Legitimate problems are reported to management, not identities.

As such, companies can objectively focus their attention on resolving their problems and prevent any new ones from occurring.

Ms. Mason is a writer living in Chicago.

