IN THE 1980s, AS THE laser printer gained popularity, the business world was hit by a phenomenon called "ransom notes."

Computer users were thrilled that their new printers could produce professional-looking output, with multiple typefaces, in multiple sizes and styles.

So they started sending out letters, memos and reports composed of a discordant melange of fonts that resembled the ransom notes that kidnappers -- at least in the movies -- construct from mismatched characters clipped from a newspaper.

The ransom-note effect has subsided greatly, as people have gotten used to laser printing.

But I fear we soon may see a similar esthetic debacle that might be called the "coloring book effect."

That's because business-quality color printers have finally dropped to a widely affordable price -- about the same as a low-end monochrome laser.

And it may be impossible for the artistically impaired to resist churning out boring reports full of red text and green tables that would make USA Today look like a tax form by comparison.

Despite this chilling prospect, the coming of quality color printing as a mainstream technology for offices and homes is probably a good thing.

After all, the world's in color (even this gray newspaper occasionally bursts into brighter hues, within certain ads).

Charts, graphics and key text passages can be made more understandable in color.

It once cost thousands of dollars for a printer that could do a decent job in color, and you often had to use special paper.

Now you can get one for around $600, and it can use plain old office paper, just like a copying machine.

With that in mind, I recently tested two first-rate $600 color printers: Canon's six-month-old BJC600 and Hewlett-Packard's month-old DeskJet 560C.

Each uses a printing technology called inkjet, in which a fine mist of ink droplets is sprayed on the page by tiny nozzles.

And each comes in versions for both IBM-compatible and Apple Macintosh computers (the Mac version of the DeskJet is called the DeskWriter, and the Mac version of the Canon machine is sold under Apple's label as the Color StyleWriter Pro).

I TESTED EACH WITH straight text documents, in black and several colors; with a chart created in a spreadsheet program; and with some elaborate pictures and stories created in several popular children's programs.

I found that, while each machine has its strengths and weaknesses, both are very good.

I preferred the overall design of the Canon and liked its color output a bit better.

But I give the edge to the Hewlett-Packard in printing monochrome text and in overall speed.

Inkjet printers, to my eye, fall short of laser-printer quality.

But there are no modestly priced color lasers.

Both the printers I tested are very close to laser quality on monochrome text documents, and their color output was quite pleasing, if less than perfect.

In a business, they could produce documents suitable for most common uses.

In a home or home office, they would do that and also churn out enough great-looking kids' art to paper every refrigerator door in the land.

Neither one is good enough for serious, professional color art or graphics work.

The Canon is newly designed to challenge Hewlett-Packard's dominance of the inkjet market.

It features a sleek, compact form with a weight of just under 10 pounds, a width of just 14 inches and a depth of about eight inches (although extending a sliding tray to catch paper as it comes out roughly doubles the depth).

THERE'S A SEPARATE ink cartridge for black and for each of the three primary colors the printer uses to create its palette of hues.

That means you don't have to replace all the colors each time just one shade of ink runs out.

Replacement cartridges are priced at around $8 each.

The ink also is a new fast-drying variety, which helps reduce bleeding, the effect in which one color oozes into another on the page.

The Canon's print resolution is 360 dots per inch, which is better than low-end monochrome lasers.

Every test document came out looking very good.

My only complaint about the Canon is that it was quite slow, though the speed may improve as the company revises the software, called a "driver," that controls the machine.

The H-P 560C is an older design, and it shows.

It's 50% heavier than the Canon and is nearly 18 inches wide by 15 inches deep.

Connections for the power cord and computer cable are inconveniently placed, and it uses a bulky transformer.

There's a separate cartridge for black ink, but the primary ink colors are housed together in a single cartridge, so you have to replace all of them when one is used up.

Replacement cartridges cost about $20 for black and $30 for color.

But Hewlett-Packard, concerned about Canon's challenge, has enhanced this warhorse with new features.

In particular, the 560C prints black and white documents (but not color ones) at 600 dots per inch, just like a high-end laser.

The result, on the test documents, was better plain-text printing than the Canon achieved.

The H-P now also uses special software, called ColorSmart, which automatically optimizes color settings.

This resulted in very nice color output, but at a resolution of just 300 dots per inch.

To my eye, it didn't quite match that of the Canon.

However, the Hewlett-Packard ran faster in my tests.

The two printers are pretty comparable, and you won't go wrong with either.

But if you buy one, control yourself.

The world doesn't need more purple prose.

