An internationally successful company that has faced nothing but reversals in California can be handed a California tax bill many times the amount of its losses there.

The federal government and most other states have treated the U.S. operations of multinationals as separate from their affiliates overseas for years.

The unitary tax struggle is actually 25 years old: Back in the late 1960s, California began requiring corporations filing in the state to use its unitary method.

As a result of the campaign promise, however, the Clinton administration supports Sacramento -- hence the switch by the office of the solicitor general.

Why should profits in the U.K. mean a bigger take for Sacramento?

(The tax is "unitary" because it taxes a company and all its affiliates as one unit.)

Minimizing tax bills is often part of the transfer-pricing controversy: Companies always seek to export at lower prices from high-tax regimes and export at higher prices from low-tax regimes.

The savings to California may be more than matched with retaliatory tax increases imposed on U.S. multinationals throughout the world.

By 1986, California was already moving toward solving the problem.

Yet California tax authorities still believe that ALP creates too many opportunities for the taxpayer to manipulate taxable income.

Barclays' and Colgate's central argument is that California's unitary method interferes with the ability of the U.S. government "to speak with one voice," since the federal government itself has adopted the ALP.

Monday the Supreme Court will hear arguments on a pair of complex tax cases.

Mr. Foster is executive director and chief economist of the Tax Foundation in Washington.

Six other states have some form of the unitary tax, but California's is the most aggressive.

No doubt the U.S. will be sorely tempted to respond in kind.

And President Clinton, the free-trader who gave this continent the North American Free Trade Agreement, might have been expected to follow his predecessors in their predilection for other taxing methods.

(Congress has the power "to regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several States and with the Indian Tribes.")

And the amounts the two companies could retrieve are small: several hundred thousand dollars each.

And the unitary tax has truly been rough justice.

The British government, for its part -- supported by 19 other countries -- has supported the companies by filing an amicus brief challenging the validity of California's unitary approach under the foreign commerce clause of the Constitution.

In simple language, ALP means companies should charge themselves market prices for goods they sell themselves.

Whatever the court's ruling, though, the implications for California and the nation are important.

It argues that if the court sides with Barclays, then the foreign commerce clause demands equal treatment of U.S. and foreign-based multinationals, and that equal treatment would be denied many U.S. multinationals if they continue to be subject to the unitary method while their foreign competitors are not.

On Monday, that office will bolster California's case with arguments supporting the constitutionality of the unitary tax.

The Clinton administration's role here is an interesting one.

On Monday, the solicitor general will focus on the fact that the cases at issue here involve the period of the mid-1970s.

The challenge facing the high court here has been spiced by an unexpected political twist.

They also view the multiple taxation that results from the unitary tax as a violation of the foreign commerce clause.

The unitary tax works regardless of a company's actual business successes or failures in the state.

(President Carter's team also opposed the unitary tax.)

Indeed, thanks largely to the leadership of the U.S. government, ALP has become internationally accepted by tax authorities and businesses alike.

As reported in this newspaper, the central issue is California's old policy of taxing a share of companies' world-wide income, including income from non-California parent companies and affiliates.

These cases are old: The companies are fighting California over money it collected in the 1970s.

Early on, companies began arguing that the system overstated their liability to California.

It is in fact a bit ironic that such a high-stakes game comes at this point.

If it loses Barclays and Colgate, it will cost about $4 billion in refunds and assessments, plus almost $1.8 billion in interest, for a total cost of almost $6 billion.

Given the troubles in the world economy, a tax-based trade war triggered by a political favor done for a single state is hardly the formula for struggling economies to regain prosperity.

In briefs filed in state court and before the Supreme Court, the Reagan and Bush administrations sided with foreign taxpayers in their opposition to the California unitary method.

The issues behind this politicized case are hard to understand.

Yet a victory for the companies would also mean that strapped California must pay more than $5 billion in refunds and interest to the many multinationals operating in the state.

Put simply, the companies view California's tax as a bold method of capturing undeserved revenues.

For California, it's a matter of money: If it loses Barclays alone, it will cost California up to $900 million in refunds and assessments, plus about $500 million in interest.

In its simplest form, the unitary method requires the taxpayer to factor revenues from all its international income into its payments to the state of California.

If Barclays loses, foreign countries will likely turn to retribution.

The result has been a rare reversal of position by the solicitor general's office, an outfit tasked with representing the executive branch before the Supreme Court.

Filed by the British-based Barclays Bank and U.S.-based Colgate-Palmolive Co., the cases challenge the constitutionality of California's special and aggressive method of taxing multinationals, the world-wide unitary tax.

Simply put, tax collectors feel out-gunned.

Congress has the power to rule on this issue -- but has been silent.

Given California's economic troubles, these would be hits.

Colgate for its part is piggybacking on the Barclays case.

In letters last summer to U.S. companies with U.K. subsidiaries, Ian Spence, director of the international division of Britain's version of the IRS, warned that a result unsatisfactory to the U.K. meant Britain would "have to take retaliatory measures" toward U.S. companies in Britain -- and went on to specify penalties totaling some $1 billion.

The Supreme Court has also developed two "foreign commerce tests" to protect against international multiple taxation and against interference with the ability of the federal government to "speak with one voice" when regulating commercial relations with foreign governments.

Even if California wins these cases, it probably won't return entirely to a pure unitary tax system.

In the absence of congressional action, the Supreme Court may, under the "dormant commerce clause" doctrine, determine whether state action interferes with the nation's commerce to such an extent as to be unconstitutional.

A defeat, by contrast, promises foreign retaliation that could cost U.S. companies in Britain $1 billion and set off an international tax war.

Then and in a 1993 law, it offered companies the chance to opt out of the unitary tax system and face taxation under a system with the fancy name of "the water's edge version of arm's-length pricing."

But in a campaign promise (made to California Board of Equalization Chairman Brad Sherman) the future president said: "I assure you a Clinton administration will be pro-California in this litigation."

One of them is the arcane question of "transfer pricing" -- the price companies charge themselves or affiliates for goods that cross international borders.

He will argue that there is no problem of "speaking with one voice" since, in the 1970s, the government in fact had no clear position on the unitary tax.

