The Tinoco law firm represents the Chase Manhattan Bank in Venezuela and played on both sides of the fence in the long, involved and very profitable deals concerning the country's foreign debt.

This scheme was set up to help troubled companies, and the first beneficiaries were naturally companies of the apostles.

It also may signal the end of an era of political-corporate cronyism that has characterized Venezuela's culture for the past 20 years.

The logic behind such transactions is not hard to deduce.

President Perez's political support had evaporated with accusations of fraud and his later impeachment.

Things at Banco Latino began to get seriously out of hand after the bank's longtime chairman, the late Pedro Tinoco, was appointed head of the central bank in February 1989 by the now impeached President Perez.

The Jan. 13 collapse of Banco Latino represents more than the end of reckless banking practices by Venezuela's second-largest commercial bank.

In fact, one of the principal reasons why Gov. Alvarez lost the presidential election last December to Rafael Caldera was probably voter concern over his ties to several businessmen who had greatly benefited from the Perez debt reconversion and privatization programs.

After leaving the central bank, Mr. Tinoco returned to his law office and to his job as chairman of CADA supermarkets, part of the Cisneros conglomerate of companies (Organizacion Diego Cisneros).

Mr. Tinoco's law firm partners, together with Ricardo Cisneros (younger brother of "apostle" Gustavo Cisneros) and Gustavo Gomez Lopez (the son-in-law of another of the original "12 apostles"), controlled Banco Latino and sat on its board.

Over 50% of all debt reconversion deals were done through Banco Latino.

But even with the new law, Banco Latino had been associated for so long with the ruling elite that bureaucrats weren't about to put their jobs on the line investigating it (this includes leaders of both major political parties, the AD and Copei).

An attorney, she was married to the former chief bodyguard and confidant of ex-President Perez.

Mr. Ball is a Venezuelan journalist and president of Agencia Interamericana de Prensa Economica, an economic news and syndication service for Spanish-language newspapers.

(Most of these fortunes were made through public construction work, as well as foreign contracts in Latin American countries that were receiving aid from the oil-rich Venezuelan government.)

This decree allowed the purchase of the nation's foreign debt at prevailing marked-down prices and the resale of that same debt package to the government at near face value.

Probably no other bank in the world had more members of its board with private jets.

The Cisneros group then immediately threw its backing to Gov. Alvarez.

The latest issue of the most respected local bank risk report reads, "a tolerant and permissive attitude by the supervisory agency favors speculative conduct, instigates noncompliance with the law, and does not penalize accounting practices and manipulations that reduce the transparency of the financial statements."

The offer included free flights in chartered jets and an all-expenses-paid three-night stay at the Crillon or Ritz.

Colonels without pensions present a very real risk to any Latin American government.

Soon after the second military coup against the Perez administration on Nov. 27, 1992, the Cisneros conglomerate started to reduce its exposure in Venezuela.

Those funds weren't even in highly liquid assets, as the law prescribes, something that seriously complicates the Venezuelan banking crisis.

It may not seem surprising that the financial authorities didn't more closely monitor the bank's operations when one examines their collegial relationship with Banco Latino.

But then, the head of Fogade had no previous experience in the financial world.

Later, CADA and Banco Latino began to be siphoned off to purchase Pueblo Supermarkets in Puerto Rico and Xtra Supermarkets in Florida.

The lavish spending habits of Banco Latino associates were well known.

In the late 1970s, during ex-President Carlos Andres Perez's first administration, Banco Latino was known as "the bank of the 12 apostles."

The word "apostle" was used for the dozen or so Venezuelan businessmen close to the presidential palace who became multimillionaires practically overnight.

The collapse of Banco Latino leaves one million account-holders pressuring the government to live up to its implicit guarantee to cover all deposits, not just the first $9,300 insured by Fogade.

A new and far more restrictive banking law took effect Jan. 1, too late to save Banco Latino.

The Cisneros media empire already had switched to endorsing someone else, Eduardo Fernandez, for president.

On Dec. 4, 1992, it borrowed $55 million in order to buy -- in partnership with Mexico's Emilio Azcarraga -- the largest Spanish-language television network in the U.S., Univision.

Fogade, the local equivalent of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., had 33.66% of its funds in Banco Latino, and a further 12.87% in a closely related bank.

Last October, when knowledgeable corporate treasurers were already withdrawing their deposits from Banco Latino, hundreds of corporate chief executives received invitations to attend the opening of the bank's Paris office.

On their side is the fact that most of the money belonging to the state oil corporation pension funds, and the pension funds of the armed forces, were managed by Banco Latino.

While campaign contributions aren't made public, it was widely known that Banco Latino had become the largest contributor to Gov. Alvarez's campaign.

In March 1989, a sophisticated operation called "debt reconversion" was established by presidential decree.

As for banking practices, clients who toward the end wanted to withdraw their CDs were offered an interest rate of 105%, about twice the going rate.

Mr. Fernandez, the then-secretary general of the Social Christian Party (Copei), lost out in the presidential primaries to Oswaldo Alvarez Paz.

During Mr. Tinoco's nearly four-year tenure at the central bank, his own Banco Latino really took off.

Banco Latino's chairman, Gustavo Gomez Lopez, reportedly owned three.

With Messrs. Perez and Alvarez out of the political arena, and with former President Caldera -- an outspoken opponent of corruption in high places -- back in the presidential palace as of Wednesday, it seems more than likely that the group that had flourished through its political connections decided to cut its losses, wipe the slate clean and get out of Venezuela.

Another board member was Francisco Perez, a brother of President Perez.

