Scores of Prudential Securities Inc. brokers are selling mutual funds and stocks without proper brokerage licenses in various states, internal Prudential compliance documents show.

As a result, Prudential ultimately could face the possibility of rescinding, or canceling, trades executed by the unlicensed brokers, regulators say.

The brokerage arm of Prudential Insurance Co. of America says it has a total of about 50,000 broker registrations for its roughly 6,000 brokers.

"We've had our share of problems with registration," says John P. Murray, Prudential's director of corporate-risk management.

"We're in the process of tightening up and fixing it.

We're trying to make sure everybody in the place is licensed," he says, adding that he doesn't believe the problem is widespread.

To be sure, many large Wall Street brokerage firms have a number of unlicensed brokers at any given time.

Indeed, the Securities and Exchange Commission last year found that the U.S. units of Japan's Big Four brokerage houses had, among other violations, unregistered brokers.

But the issue is particularly problematic for Prudential, which is operating under intense regulatory scrutiny as a result of its limited-partnership woes.

Prudential Insurance recently commissioned a study by the accounting firm Coopers & Lybrand examining, among other things, the registration department at Prudential Securities.

As part of the review, independent accountants will come in and study the firm's registration effort.

Prudential also hired a former executive from rival Merrill Lynch & Co. to buttress its registration controls.

But Prudential hasn't yet informed regulators of the predicament, people familiar with the matter say.

Instead, the firm appears to have paid brokers who improperly sold mutual funds without proper licenses, according to an internal memo.

"I have been informed by Bruce Karp of Prudential's Registration Department that trades will go through even if the broker isn't properly licensed," says an Aug. 16, 1993, memo from Anita Whelan, Prudential's mutual-fund compliance director.

The memo, to Frank Giordano, Prudential's mutual-fund general counsel, added that Mr. Karp informed Ms. Whelan that the unlicensed brokers "are getting paid."

In her memo, Ms. Whelan didn't urge that any steps be taken to correct the situation.

When asked yesterday whether the practice of paying unlicensed brokers for their trades is a problem, she replied: "That's a valid concern, but I don't handle licensing."

She declined to comment further.

Mr. Giordano didn't return a telephone call seeking comment.

Prudential says it dismissed Mr. Karp last year, after the memo was written, for performance reasons.

Mr. Karp couldn't be reached for comment.

Prudential says the Whelan memo shows that the firm was concerned about the practice.

"We're not in the business of paying commissions to people without licenses," said Mr. Murray.

As for any discussions with regulators, Mr. Murray said: "I don't know whether we go around and make announcements to regulators about this.

We have started on the process of coming up with a whole bunch of ways to fix up the problems in registration.

It isn't a secret around here, by any stretch."

Other documents show that some Prudential mutual-fund shareholders have been sold tax-free municipal-bond funds for their individual retirement accounts.

(Investors aren't taxed on IRA funds until they start withdrawing money from such accounts.)

This practice raises questions of investor suitability, the same issue at the heart of Prudential's limited-partnership debacle.

As previously reported, federal and state regulators have accused Prudential of improperly selling $8.15 billion of partnerships in the 1980s.

The internal documents suggest that lax oversight and compliance aren't confined to Prudential's highly publicized partnership scandal.

Brokers and others who sell securities must pass required tests before doing business.

These include so-called Series 6 tests for selling mutual funds and Series 7 tests for selling stocks.

Besides these requirements, brokers must be registered in states in which their clients live, or where they are doing business.

The internal documents show that some Prudential brokers are operating without passing their required series tests, and others without their proper state licensing.

At a meeting of branch managers in New York late last year, Mr. Murray said he told managers: "Nobody should have a laissez-faire attitude toward licensing -- either you are or you're not, there's no in-between."

The issue of unlicensed brokers doesn't appear to be new at Prudential.

A Feb. 22, 1990, memo entitled "Registration, Etc.: New Company Policy," told unlicensed Prudential brokers they would get paid if they arranged side deals with other brokers.

"If you do a trade in a state that you are not registered in and turn the trade over to another broker for commission purposes, these commissions are nonrefundable.

You can `make a deal' with the broker to pay the commissions in a personal check, but New York will not journal the commissions over after you are approved in that state."

Prudential said it isn't familiar with the memo, which apparently was written by an Atlanta sales manager.

But it said that practice wasn't company policy.

State securities regulators currently are examining the allegations of unlicensed Prudential brokers selling mutual funds and are preparing requests for document from Prudential on the matter, people familiar with the issue say.

Any failure to report problems of unlicensed brokers typically is viewed harshly by regulators.

Speaking generally, Nancy Smith, New Mexico's securities director said: "If true, having unlicensed brokers sell securities is a very significant failure, and if it's compounded by a failure of the supervisory system and the lack of reporting on those violations, then that makes it a failure of even greater dimensions."

Ms. Smith added: "When you have unlicensed agents selling securities, one would expect the firm to offer full rescission to the investors."

On the municipal-bond issue, Prudential says it has taken steps to inform investors of the problem.

In an Aug. 4, 1993, memo, Ms. Whelan, the fund compliance chief, said: "It has come to my attention that there may be instances when Prudential mutual-fund shareholders are holding Prudential municipal-bond mutual funds in IRA accounts."

Prudential says it is looking into the matter.

The firm has prepared a letter to investors saying that as IRAs "include tax deferment until withdrawals commence, the choice of tax-free municipals are generally not as beneficial as other members of our mutual-fund family.

In view of this, you may wish to consider taking advantage of our free exchange privilege into another member of our fund family."

