With that in mind, he adds that in the tug-of-war for Grumman "a bidding war would not be in anybody's best interest."

While Bell Atlantic Corp.'s aborted takeover of TeleCommunications Inc. would have cost as much as $20 billion, by contrast, a recent study by Chicago Investment Analytics Inc. showed that a dozen of the largest defense contractors had a stock-market value of just $42.6 billion -- in toto.

The focus on industry consolidation began three years ago with the steady and dramatic dismantling of General Dynamics.

Its top managers have discussed a possible merger with, or acquisition by, McDonnell Douglas, people with knowledge of the talks say, although they add that there haven't been any serious talks recently.

That has led to average returns well in excess of 15% on sales, and it has sent the companies' stocks higher.

Lockheed also doubled its stake in the Air Force F-22, which is under development, to 68% from 35%.

But Congress and the administration must now face hard decisions about which arms programs to preserve and how many competitors to prop up.

The arms maker raised more than $3 billion by selling to rivals its fighter jet, space-launch, missile and general-aircraft operations.

One important program, a radar-eluding cruise missile called TSSAM, has racked up $603 million in losses so far.

General Dynamics has denied any wrongdoing.

The battle made famous the so-called Pac-Man defense in which each company tries to gobble up the other.

Others believe that a more efficient industry will mean lower overall costs.

Given Lockheed's edge in pricing, says McDonnell Douglas Chief Financial Officer Herbert J. Lanese, "how can they lose four straight competitions?

Either way, the post-Cold War plunge in defense spending leaves little alternative to the industry's plant closings and layoffs.

With uncertainty still swirling around military spending, much of the industry may find that consolidation and major acquisitions aren't the panacea they seem to be in the charged atmosphere of a bidding war.

Northrop also builds 40% of McDonnell Douglas's Navy F/A-18 fighter and large fuselage sections for Boeing Co.'s 747 jumbo jets.

"If it happens smoothly, that's a good thing," he says.

So far, the industry has been able to plead its case before Congress in part by employing what the head of one large contractor privately calls "the politics of pity."

The industry is evolving into "a bunch of $10 billion-plus gorillas," says George J. Podrasky, an analyst at Duff & Phelps in Chicago.

We're seeing the beginning of a spate of acquisitions."

Lockheed director Frank Savage, chairman of Alliance Corporate Finance Group Inc., says the purchase has gone particularly well, "notwithstanding the slippage" in orders for the F-16.

Source: Chicago Investment Analytics Inc.

Martin Marietta decried the "attack" and promised an appropriate response, which could come as early as this week with a higher offer.

Sen. McCain worries that the rush to consolidation will mean "that our ability to acquire weapon systems at competitive prices will be significantly endangered."

"One of the things we're concerned about is that these companies not go back to the heavy leverage they had in the past," says Susan E. Saltus, president of Seneca Inc., a money-management firm in New Jersey.

The Pentagon has indicated it intends to pursue building another $2.8 billion Seawolf submarine, not because it is needed, but because, in Mr. Perry's words, it is one way to offset the U.S. risk of losing the people with expertise for the future.

Foreign buyers began to have second thoughts.

If consolidation is to succeed, says veteran defense analyst Wolfgang Demisch of BT Securities, it ought not render companies weaker.

But playing to congressional and public sympathies might not work in an era of high-cost takeover battles with multimillion dollar fees and promises of higher profits.

But production plans for that plane have been slashed by 30% and the program may slip further in the face of soaring costs, development problems and the absence of a Soviet threat.

* Prior to recent bids; N.A.=

John R. Dorfman contributed to this article.

Northrop's hostile $60-a-share, or about $2.04 billion, bid for Grumman -- made despite an agreement for Martin Marietta to acquire the Long Island, N.Y., contractor for $55 a share, or about $1.93 billion -- quickens the pace and upsets the industry's fraternal relationships.

McDonnell Douglas declines to comment.

In its early years it nearly bet the company on a unique "flying wing" design devised by founder Jack Northrop; the government found it too radical -- although years later Northrop's B-2 Stealth bomber bears a striking resemblance to the early plane.

Rockwell and E-Systems decline to comment.

"If it happens real fast and noisy and there's blood all over the streets, that's not a good image."

Those close to Northrop's thinking say it has had other possible prey in mind following a pass at Grumman, including the electronics holdings of Litton Industries Inc., Rockwell International Corp.'s B-1 bomber program, and Dallas-based E-Systems Inc., which like Northrop is a provider of electronics systems.

Kent Kresa, who became Northrop chief executive in 1990, seemed a more cautious manager.

Some analysts and others have even speculated that Martin Marietta might go after Northrop.

In a single stroke, Lockheed vaulted from a middle-of-the-pack player with a hodgepodge of defense, space and commercial programs to a leader with $13 billion in annual revenue, a total matched then only by rival McDonnell Douglas.

And in today's supercharged atmosphere, most companies -- niche and boutique players excepted -- have come to the realization that if they aren't buyers, they may well end up being bought.

The general perception that the defense-budget shrinkage has exacted a terrible toll on the industry stems not only from headlines about layoffs -- some 440,000 jobs have been lost in the past four years -- but also from how the companies have positioned themselves.

We'll never know quite how to pull them back together again," he said in an interview last summer.

But he has been haunted by three failed acquisition attempts in the past 15 months, including a loss to Lockheed, which bought General Dynamics's fighter business for $1.52 billion, and one to Loral, which snapped up the IBM unit in December.

Big contractors -- such as McDonnell Douglas Corp., Lockheed Corp. and Loral Corp., as well as the players in the Grumman buyout contest, Martin Marietta Corp. and Northrop Corp. -- have been slashing research-and-development along with labor costs, paying down debt, getting federal approval for more foreign sales and reaping the rewards of recent acquisitions that have given some a greater share of a smaller pie.

Takeover fights raise questions about where corporate resources are going in the lean times, observes Jeff Drezner, a researcher at Rand Corp., the California think tank that has studied industry-consolidation issues for the Air Force.

It seems fitting that it was Northrop that ignored the unspoken defense-industry rule against interfering with another deal between members of an industry that had often operated like a gentlemen's club.

Northrop finally discontinued its efforts after writing off its total $1.2 billion investment.

The setbacks "aren't things that have exactly gone our way," he concedes, but "are we glad we made the acquisition?

The answer is `absolutely.'"

Martin Marietta won that fight, although at great cost.

"So the whole industry is in play.

It also wanted to buy McDonnell Douglas's missile business, which was later pulled off the market.

The fact that there are few new programs for contractors "to fritter their money away on" is helping boost the industry's short-term profits on older, existing programs, he adds.

The industry is too large to be supported by "the programs the Defense Department has to parcel out," says Gary J. Reich, an analyst with Prudential Securities in New York.

The buyout was barely signed when the U.S. canceled a 71-jet sale to Pakistan and the Pentagon abandoned plans to buy 132 of the jets by the end of the decade.

Eschewing conventional wisdom, Northrop's then-chairman, Thomas Jones, tried desperately in the 1980s to market overseas the company's F-20 fighter jet even though it had lost a competition for the U.S. arsenal.

The program has since been scrapped.

Little more than a year later, however, that bold business move has unraveled badly in many respects.

Lockheed, based in Calabasas, Calif., took its most damaging hit on the F-16, the agile single-engine dogfighter that over 16 years became the mainstay of U.S. squadrons.

But opponents of further Seawolf funding, such as Republican Sen. John McCain of Arizona, say it just isn't worth the cost in tough times.

Production at Fort Worth is heading to a quarter of 1993 levels, Lockheed documents indicate.

Since the acquisition, McDonnell Douglas's F-15 fighter and F/A-18 naval attack jet have won a succession of sales, ringing up orders for more than $8 billion from Finland, Malaysia, Switzerland and Israel.

With most defense-industry stocks priced low, takeovers could be accomplished quickly -- although at greater cost and with more potential missteps like those that seem to have arisen from Lockheed's purchase of General Dynamics Corp.'s tactical-fighter business -- if antitrust issues don't get in the way.

Initial company estimates of 560 "high-potential" future orders shrank earlier this year to a tenth of that.

And investors and traders are beginning to examine defense companies for their takeover value.

"I think we're going to see a lot more consolidation in the next several years than we have in the past," says Bernard Schwartz, chairman of Loral, a defense-electronics provider that last year capped a string of acquisitions by outstepping Northrop to acquire International Business Machines Corp.'s Federal Systems unit for $1.5 billion.

The company has long been a maverick among arms makers.

A hard few years ahead for Fort Worth "will test our very fiber," says Mr. Tellep, but they will be followed by renewed prosperity and perhaps further U.S. purchases.

But Northrop also has given some thought to being acquired.

McDonnell Douglas, the world's largest defense contractor, is among those most likely to survive the consolidation.

With the sprawling Fort Worth, Texas, operation came a seeming edge in hot future programs and a lock on production of the venerable F-16 Falcon fighter, a favorite of foreign buyers and the Air Force.

Defense Secretary William Perry, like many key members of Congress, has been satisfied to let consolidation run its course.

In little more than a month of jockeying in late 1992, Lockheed Chairman Daniel Tellep outbid Northrop and doubled an offer by Boeing to buy the General Dynamics's tactical fighter business.

The escalating battle over Grumman Corp. is uncovering a nifty little secret within the defense industry: Its shrinkage has been a bonanza for the biggest military contractors.

Perhaps an even larger question is whether the companies themselves will make the right decisions about what to buy and how much to pay.

In one of the few earlier fights among defense contractors, electronics maker Bendix Corp. made a hostile bid in 1981 for Martin Marietta.

"They will all be dispersed.

If I were on the Lockheed board, I'd be asking myself what I spent $1.52 billion for."

Lockheed still has a large F-16 order backlog.

Stepped-up consolidation is sure to bring increased scrutiny.

A combination with Northrop could create a formidable maker of military aircraft and missiles that one executive calls a potential "King Kong" of the industry.

Northrop values Grumman for its experience in building fighters for the Navy as well as its defense-electronics business, which would help Northrop's electronics operations go against beefed-up rivals.

Not available or not meaningful

He points to the emerging global preference for buying fewer jets with the most capability and to the U.S. need to cut fighter-production capacity.

But Northrop's bid for Grumman is "initiating a new attitude in the marketplace in which buyers will look to public companies and maybe even unfriendly approaches."

"They've just succeeded in getting debt down to reasonable levels."

That is, the companies duck discussion of their order backlogs and return on investment, and instead point to layoffs, plant closings and lost programs.

To top it off, federal officials say parts-billing improprieties that Lockheed didn't know about may have inflated the price it paid to General Dynamics for the unit by as much as $200 million.

"Cheap money made it interesting," says Mr. Schwartz of the earlier phase of consolidation.

The key will be to support the right programs, he says, "and not fall into the pork-barrel trap."

The Pentagon still is expected to spend about $85 billion a year on weapons and research, even after its budget-cutting bottoms out.

"I think that was predictable," says Allen Puckett, a General Dynamics director and former chairman of General Motors Corp.'s Hughes Aircraft Co. unit.

The purchase put Lockheed on four of five teams that were vying for the Navy's AFX fighter, a next-generation jet.

But at General Dynamics, some who made the decision to sell say they got out of the F-16 program just in time, judging by the drop in demand for the jet ever since.

Litton says those holdings aren't for sale.

The nation already has just one maker of nuclear submarines and tanks in General Dynamics, which is discovering that it doesn't necessarily pay to be a lone provider of high-cost goods in a defense downturn.

For the biggest and richest companies run by the sharpest strategists, it also means a greater opportunity to amass ever-larger market shares.

For all the problems, Mr. Tellep and Lockheed directors stand by the purchase, pointing to profits the division has generated so far and debt-reduction since the deal.

