Inspired by Paolo Veronese of the Venetian Renaissance, it brings to life the moor's glittering world with furs, pearls and brocade.

"A great hall in the castle" is exactly that, very great.

Otherwise, this was a well-rehearsed ensemble dominated by Ulrika Precht, a polished Eboli, and splendidly conducted by the company's music director, Kirsten Nerbe, who drew an amazingly rich sound from her small orchestra.

Do we really need an extra layer of historical or cultural complexity to make "Otello" acceptably postmodern?

They're hardly dull as they endure seeing their dreams for others and themselves shattered by the twinned forces of church and state.

A golden aura clings to Desdemona as she calms the turbulent moor and he sings of how her radiance illuminates his darkness.

They evoke the Renaissance world of Venice in her days of empire when Cyprus was a colony and match the coloration and breadth of Verdi's penultimate score.

To be any closer to his devoted audience, Mr. Domingo would have to step out of the orchestra pit wearing a life preserver.

If Princess Eboli had spit a little harder she could have overshot her target, the Marquis Posa, and hit the first row.

A weekend chained to a stake watching Ingmar Bergman movies would be light diversion by comparison.

Then night fell, the stars appeared and Carol Vaness and Placido Domingo struggled through the love duet's rapturous lines before settling down.

It was a big week for little Cyprus.

What on earth is gained by dreaming up a miscarriage for Elizabeth after King Philip calls her an adulteress?

Ms. Nerbe deserves to have a bigger name (and a bigger orchestra).

It was one of several believable touches introduced by Mr. Moshinsky who dealt less convincingly with Sergei Leiferkus, whose elegant Iago was incisively sung but underacted.

Visitors to Asolo, north of Venice, may recall the palazzo prison in which she lived for years -- eating plenty to judge by a portrait by one of the Bellinis.

Even Emilia, Desdemona's ineffectual maid, wears a fabulous dress, copied from a frock on the walls of the Villa Barbaro where Veronese left some of his greatest frescoes.

We were just left wondering who the father might be since, even counting out the doddering Grand Inquisitor, that still left a few candidates, including page Teobaldo who solicitously helped the worn woman onto a stretcher.

There are costly red marble columns for the "splendid scene with columns" Verdi envisaged in a letter, while the portico requested for the second act opens out to a formal garden above the water and close to the hazy blue sky.

Even Otello's self-congratulatory "Esultate" was delivered with ear-shattering intensity from a gangplank cannily positioned near the prompter's box.

When Elizabeth and Carlos met in the forests of Fontainebleau, they rolled energetically down a ramp, even though their acquaintanceship was brief, lasting minutes.

A reduced orchestra is tucked away onstage, inside X-shaped ramps, bringing the singers very close to the audience.

Ms. Queler herself had a good night on the podium, conducting with vigor and confidence, qualities entirely lacking in tenor Diego d'Auria, who cast increasingly terrified looks into his score.

Without traditional pomp, this conflict is not easily dramatized, though the maze-like scaffolding by set designer Lars-Ake Thessman often suggested the inhuman apparat that crushes them.

Just a teenager when the Venetian oligarchs packed her off to Cyprus to marry the king for reasons of state in the late 15th century, Caterina ruled for 15 years after her husband was poisoned and her baby died.

A feast of amiable tunes, cliches and improbable turns of plot, it makes a historic queen seem more unreal than a mythic moor.

As directed by Elijah Moshinsky with sets by Michael Yeargan, costumes by Peter J. Hall and lighting by Duane Schuler in his debut, this "Otello" pays close attention to the original intentions of Verdi who clucked endlessly over the first production at La Scala in 1887, leaving detailed instructions.

Raw physicality seems to be the company style.

Press materials provided by BAM, whose opera program brought the troupe to Brooklyn, describe an experimental company that produces grand opera in a miniature way on a small budget in a tiny movie theater.

I trust those who deplored "Otello's" pageantry enjoyed the Swedish Folk Opera's dark and deconstructed "Don Carlo" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Majestic Theater.

It was left to that old pro, the baritone Renato Bruson, to deliver an eloquent lesson in long-lined bel canto singing as the Cypriot king.

Would that it had left more than a distant echo on "Caterina Cornaro," which instead just confirms Donizetti's talent for wasting beautiful music on laughable librettos.

It was no secret how much the tenor disliked greeting everybody from the distant boat in the old Zeffirelli production.

In a manner rare at the Met, the lighting is subtly responsive to changes of key and mood, bringing a piercing intensity to scenes of turmoil while clarifying character in others.

Without much choice in the matter, Caterina had lived an operatic life.

In his Met debut the Kirov's chief delivered the kind of fast, emotionally persuasive performance we used to associate with James Levine.

The same setup prevailed at BAM.

In a role usually reserved for slow-moving sopranos with blonde tresses and Italianate voices, Ms. Vaness was an unusually animated Desdemona, both in her fearfilled Willow Song and athletic dash through the bedroom as Otello struggled to get a good grip on her throat.

The heretics were effectively dropped into scary burning pits near the ramps.

One reason to dispense with period clutter is to focus more clearly on character and motivation, but the direction by company founder Claes Fellbom often added as much as it stripped away.

Though now a man in "the vale of years" like Otello, Mr. Domingo has not recently sounded so urgently expressive and acted with such conviction.

Do Verdi's characters really need embellishment?

Everything is exquisitely proportioned and oceans away from the naturalistic clutter that so often prevails in this house, especially in the ghastly productions of Gunther Schneider-Siemssen.

Montserrat Caballe used to gambol through the role years ago, thrilling Italian audiences with the showstopping finale.

In a house this size, you probably have to do a little vulgar mustache-twirling.

New York -- The new "Otello" at the Metropolitan Opera is expensive, luminous and grand.

At Carnegie Hall, thanks to Eve Queler and her Opera Orchestra we got to hear a dusty opera by Donizetti about the island's famously sad queen, Caterina Cornaro.

Without ever being wildly inventive, but who expects this at the Met, the staging is traditional in the best sense, avoiding meaningless topicality.

Imaginative use of the Met's elevator stage brings into view a town square inspired by Veronese's monumental painting in the Louvre, "The Marriage at Cana."

By the time the Don Carlo, Anders Lundstrom, joined them he had long exhausted all Christian mercy with his awkward acting and loud bleating.

But Ms. Queler's quaint operatic adventures are usually blighted (or brightened) by surprises, and Martile Rowland stepped in to attack the part with her singular mix of nervy high notes, gaudy ornamentation and hearty charm.

Aprile Millo must have been wondering just how the heck she was going to get through its alarming complexities when a car hit her cab en route to Turin airport and sent her to bed.

Then her mentors forced her return, dethroning Caterina in macabre rituals throughout the island.

Such behavior strikes me as more Swedish than Spanish.

They provide a framework for picturesque ensembles and for the tragedy to unfold.

With Richard Croft, a bright-voiced Cassio, Paul Plishka, a dignified Lodovico, and Jane Bunnell, very energetic with Emilia's scattered lines and comb, this was a very fine cast that responded alertly to the lively baton of Valery Gergiev.

In lofty halls like these, the affairs of mortals take on enriched significance.

For once just following the original stage directions has made beautiful sense.

