The settlement money, after attorney fees, will go to family members, including the son she bore several days before her death.

The tumor was found only when she had an emergency-room CT scan in 1992.

Kaiser, a unit of Kaiser Foundation Health Plan Inc. of Oakland, Calif., says it took a $28 million charge to reserve money for resolving 29 claims filed against it in 1993.

One suit, filed in state district court in Tarrant County, alleged Kaiser physicians didn't give a county woman any of several diagnostic tests that would have detected a brain tumor at least two years earlier.

The family of Diane Caywood, who was 49 years old when she died from the tumor last year, claimed that, from 1988 to 1990, Kaiser physicians passed off her "seizures and other symptoms" as anxiety attacks.

"Texas is a very litigious state," says HMO spokesman Ken Smith.

Kaiser, as a matter of policy, declines to comment on lawsuits.

"Dollars are put in front of patient lives."

In 1992, Kaiser had a pretax profit of $827,000.

"In managed care, you have bookkeepers in charge of health care," says Robert M. Kisselburgh, the Caywoods' attorney.

The suit was settled last week for an undisclosed amount, he says.

The suit, filed in state district court in Dallas, claimed Kaiser should have detected the condition earlier and sent her to a specialist.

Another suit -- which court records show was settled on March 17 for $8.6 million -- claims Kaiser physicians were negligent in the 1992 death of 27-year-old Lisa Ann Williams from pre-eclampsia, a serious condition that sometimes develops late in pregnancy.

Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Texas, the Dallas area's biggest health-maintenance organization, had a $16.3 million pretax loss last year after being hit with an unusually high number of malpractice suits.

Mr. Smith says of the lawsuits, "We just view this as the cost of doing business."

"It makes it harder to make a profit."

The loss was the largest of any Texas HMO in at least three years.

But the HMO, whose membership grew 3% in Dallas last year, remains optimistic about the market.

State district court records show many of the suits charge Kaiser and its doctors with negligence, often for failing to authorize needed tests or visits to specialists.

