Other multiyear sponsors include Sherwin-Williams Co. and MCI Communications Corp.

Other clients include B. Manischevitz, Travelers and Playboy.

Grey produced no mock campaigns, but the agency already knows the direction it won't go in.

The incumbent on those accounts, Omnicom Group's TBWA Advertising, is expected to resign to resolve a conflict that arose last month when Carillon lost distribution rights to another imported premium vodka, Absolut, to Seagram Co.

"One of the first thing we have to do is take a hard look at the menthol business and the Kool franchise," adds Mr. Dammers, who doesn't foresee new ads for at least six months and possibly not until the end of the year.

Sales of Kool, which was introduced in 1933, are in a free fall.

Last October, Chrysler reassigned domestic and Canadian advertising for its Jeep/Eagle division, valued at $135 million, to Bozell Worldwide, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon & Eckhardt.

Kool tends to attract older smokers and, Mr. Dammers says, "Any brand that has an aging franchise, and I'm not only talking about cigarettes, faces a long-term problem."

Last year it had 3% of the market to rank No. 9, compared with 4.3% of the market with a No. 6 ranking in 1992, according to John C. Maxwell Jr. of Wheat First Securities.

Another Brown & Williamson agency, Tatham/RSCG of Chicago, picks up the smaller Capri and generic-cigarette accounts.

Campbell Mithun is currently in 11 new account pitches, including NEC Technologies and Lennox, with a total value of $200 million.

Brown & Williamson hopes Grey can rekindle the Kool brand, which has seen a steep decline in sales and market share.

"We didn't see Kool playing an important role in our agency's five-year plan," says Howard Liszt, chief operating officer.

"An icon, such as a penguin, isn't the right image for the brand," says Steven W. Dammers, executive vice president at Grey.

Brown & Williamson Tobacco delivered a major blow to Campbell Mithun Esty by unexpectedly firing the agency from an estimated combined $30 million in cigarette advertising.

The ads, created by Omnicom Group's BBDO, are set to run in place of image advertising for the Diet Pepsi brand during the all-important summer season.

Mr. Dunlap at Campbell Mithun calls the Kool loss a "mixed blessing."

Ad Notes. . . .

We lost an account.

About one in 12 people have experienced "off-tasting" soft drinks, Pepsi said, in which ingredients such as aspartame have essentially gone stale.

Craig Weatherup, Pepsi-Cola's North American chief executive and president, appears in the new commercials to explain the dates; consumers also are shown checking the bottom of Diet Pepsi cans.

The assignment is likely to blossom into a $20 million business, however, if Carillon consolidates two other spirits brands accounts -- Grand Marnier and Bombay Sapphire gin -- with the new agency.

Mr. Dunlap, a self-described "realist," knows he won't win all that new business.

After the Absolut loss, Carillon won distribution rights to Stolichnaya from PepsiCo.

Grey has worked with British American Tobacco, which owns Brown & Williamson, since 1963.

Campbell Mithun was able to keep the Kool account for eight and a half years, which Mr. Dunlap calls a "long time in this business."

He is confident, however, of snaring 10%, which coincidentally is about the same amount the agency lost yesterday.

Grey Advertising won the bigger account for Kool menthol cigarette, with billings estimated at $20 million.

The most recent pitch is uninspired with models holding a Kool and headlines declaring "Kool and Then Some," "Very Kool" and "Menthol is Kool.

"We're in fine shape," he contends, adding that, despite its losses, the agency won new business last year, and its overall billings grew 5% to $1.1 billion.

In addition, Brown & Williamson said Grey will handle international advertising for Kent, Barclay, Viceroy and Pall Mall.

"We received a substantial payment for that," says Mr. Dunlap.

The campaign, which was never shown nationally, immediately drew the fire of antismoking advocates who felt it would entice underage consumers to begin smoking, the same allegation often made against the Joe Camel ads for R.J. Reynolds' Camel brand.

Pepsi said all its carbonated beverages will have freshness dates by Jan. 1, but it doesn't plan special ad campaigns for the other brands.

The last time Grey had a cigarette client was in 1981 when it handled advertising for Viceroy for three years.

There wasn't a creative shootout involved in Kool's agency switch.

It is the lowest-ranked major-brand menthol cigarette, lagging behind Newport (No. 5 in 1993, down from No. 4) and Salem (No. 7 in 1993, down from No. 3).

"This isn't something I'm jumping out of the window over," says William D. Dunlap, world-wide chief executive officer of Campbell Mithun, a unit of Saatchi & Saatchi.

Grand Metropolitan's Carillon Importers ended a heated agency search for Stolichnaya and several other imported vodkas by naming Margeotes/Fertitta Donaher & Weiss to the estimated $10 million account.

That dropped to 4.9% in 1990, 4.6% in 1991 and 4.3% in 1992.

Mr. Dunlap characterizes the loss of the Brown & Williamson business as a "glancing blow" and he doesn't count the Chrysler situation as a loss at all.

The account loss, which will result in layoffs at Campbell Mithun's New York office, marks the second big defection in six months.

Pepsi said it tested the freshness-dating concept, including the ads, for a year in Omaha, Neb., during which local Diet Pepsi shipments increased 8% and market share rose by a point.

Rival Newport has generally maintained its share.

The New York office's 170 employees are left with 17 clients, only one of which, Texaco, is a major spender.

Mr. Dunlap says the agency is using a "new system" of trying to attract new business -- contacting potential clients on a cold-call basis.

"When it is time to make a change, certainly Margeotes will be considered as a priority," said Michel Roux, Carillon chief executive officer, adding that a formal decision hasn't been made.

No Doubt About It."

In 1989, Kool had 5.9% of the market.

Cigarette advertising, he says, "tends to polarize an agency" because some employees find it distasteful to work for a tobacco company.

That's an occupational hazard."

The multiyear pact calls for the brewer to buy ad time during Baseball Network games and gives the company rights to conduct national promotions involving baseball.

Mr. Maxwell says Kool has been "under pressure to fix its descending situation for some time."

In 1991, Campbell Mithun tested a campaign using a cartoon penguin wearing shades, a buzzcut and Day-Glo sneakers and taking a drag on a Kool.

Since 1989, it has fluctuated between 4.6% and 4.8%.

"We lost a major client in our New York office, but I wouldn't classify it as a major blow.

"We have 20 people assigned exclusively to the Kool business, and I hope the layoffs will be minimal."

TBWA was retained as the Absolut ad agency, putting it in the unusual position of working for two liquor rivals at once.

The agency's Detroit operation was bought by Bozell and all of its employees were retained.

As expected, PepsiCo unveiled plans to put "freshness" dates on cans of Diet Pepsi and launched a national ad campaign to introduce the concept to consumers.

This time, Grey has its work cut out for it.

According to advertising executives, Brown & Williamson made the decision recently to jettison Campbell Mithun from its agency roster because it wanted a global strategy for Kool.

Kool's advertising has been as lackluster as its sales.

Other contenders for the Stolichnaya accounts were Mullen Advertising, of Wenham, Mass., and Gigante Vaz & Partners, of New York.

"The right image is refreshment, and I'm not sure a penguin fits that.

BASEBALL SPONSOR: Anheuser-Busch Cos. agreed to become beer sponsor of the Baseball Network, the new joint venture of major league baseball, NBC and ABC.

