In the pursuit of a safer car, consumers will fork over an extra several hundred dollars for air bags and antilock brakes.

Insurers egg them on by offering discounts.

Auto companies, meanwhile, have poured billions into developing, making and heavily promoting the new safety systems.

But so far, there's no demonstrable payoff in terms of fewer accidents and injuries and lower repair bills.

The statistics aren't there, and no one is sure why.

That air bags save lives in collisions is undisputed.

Federal regulations require all new cars to be equipped with dual air bags by 1997 to protect the driver and the front-seat passenger.

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration had concluded that the chance of a seat-belted driver's death in an accident was reduced by 50% in a car equipped with a driver's-side air bag, compared with 45% for a seat-belted driver with no air bag.

What is unclear is how much protection air bags offer from injuries short of death.

By analyzing insurance data, two Virginia Commonwealth University professors have found that owners of 31 models of cars equipped with air bags filed more personal-injury claims than owners of like cars without air bags.

As for estimating the safety benefits of antilock brakes, the federal highway traffic safety agency says it has insufficient data.

The Highway Loss Data Institute, which represents insurance companies, estimates that 10 million cars on the road in the U.S. are equipped with the computer-assisted brakes that help drivers keep control during skids.

But in January that group released a study concluding that the computer-assisted braking systems aren't "reducing either the frequency or the cost of crashes that result in insurance claims for vehicle damage."

Neither study is comprehensive nor conclusive on its own.

The study of antilock brakes, for example, doesn't take into account the frequency or severity of injuries.

The air-bag study doesn't measure the seriousness or cause of injuries.

Indeed, the air bags themselves may have caused some.

But it comes as unwelcome news that neither study shows a dramatic drop in the frequency of the measured claims on vehicles outfitted with the safety equipment.

"We took the antilock-braking system study very seriously," says Thomas Carr, manager of regulatory liaison for the American Automobile Manufacturers Association, which represents Detroit's Big Three.

"It was an astounding statement to make."

Some insurance-industry spokesmen say they aren't surprised at the studies, even though many insurers discount portions of medical and personal-injury premiums by as much as 40% on cars equipped with both air bags and antilock brakes.

Some states require insurance discounts for vehicles with air bags, and Florida and New York require discounts for antilock brakes.

"It makes sense that air bags would generate lower losses and therefore support lower premiums," says Michael Cronin, product-development manager for Bankers Insurance Co. in St. Petersburg, Fla.

"But there's little fact to back that intuition."

And as for antilock brakes, "We never felt there was any strong evidence that showed it reduces the number of accidents," says David Hurst, a spokesman for State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co.

"We offer discounts only because we're supposed to, not because we feel they're justified."

"We still think the antilock-brake technology is great," says David Van Sickle, director of automotive engineering at American Automobile Association, one of the nation's biggest auto insurers.

But, he adds, "a lot has to do with whether drivers are appropriately trained" to operate them.

The insurers may have a point, car makers say.

Drivers accustomed to regular brakes typically pump the brake pedal to regain control if the car goes into a skid.

That's the wrong thing to do with antilock brakes.

In a skid, the driver should apply steady pressure to the brake pedal and let the antilock system take over.

Pumping the pedal "confuses" antilock brakes.

All auto makers put instructions on antilock brakes in their owner's manuals, but Ford Motor Co. says it is considering special training programs to teach customers how to use the brakes properly.

Chrysler Corp. currently provides customers with videotapes and pamphlets but is "seriously re-evaluating our product training literature," says Chris Preuss, a spokesman.

This summer, General Motors Corp. will co-sponsor with the American Automobile Association several national test drives to illustrate the proper way to use antilock brakes.

Getting a handle on driver error could be key to assessing the benefits of antilock brakes.

Kim Hazelbaker, senior vice president of the Highway Loss Data Institute, says that, strictly speaking, the antilock-brake study results don't show a statistical difference between cars with and without the systems.

The study measured data based on the frequency of accidents involving certain U.S.-model cars with and without antilock brakes and the dollar amount of insurance payments made to those in accidents.

The study didn't address injuries or medical costs.

The study examined the 1991 and 1992 Chevrolet Cavalier, Corsica, Beretta and Lumina; the Pontiac Sunbird and Transport; and the Oldsmobile Silhouette.

The data included 55% of the total number of cars privately insured in the institute's files.

The institute said those GM vehicles were studied because they had no significant design changes other than the addition of antilock brakes.

The institute found that overall insurance losses for 1992 Chevy Cavaliers equipped with antilock brakes were higher than overall losses for the same 1991 models with regular brakes.

On a scale in which a score of 100 represents average insurance losses and zero represents no losses, the 1991 Cavaliers without antilock brakes scored 95.

The 1992 Cavaliers with antilock brakes scored 96.

More surprisingly, antilock-brake-equipped 1992 Cavaliers had a 96 score for accident losses during winter months in northern states, while 1991 Cavaliers without antilock brakes scored 90 -- that is, fewer losses -- under the same conditions.

Despite the study, GM argues that "the performance capabilities of antilock-brake-equipped vehicles on reduced-traction surfaces are irrefutable," as GM spokesman Greg Pierce puts it.

Adds Mr. Carr of the U.S. auto makers' trade association: "We think it's a little early for HLDI to draw conclusions."

Overall, the Highway Loss Data Institute reported that average claim costs for 1992 cars equipped with antilock brakes totaled $2,293, compared with $2,215 for like 1991 models without antilock brakes.

Mr. Hazelbaker acknowledges that inflation accounts for part of the higher costs for the later-model vehicles.

Nevertheless, "we were somewhat shocked that the data didn't indicate much more benefit," says Mr. Van Sickle of the American Automobile Association.

"It's one of the best inventions that has come around in a long time, but people don't know how to use it."

The air-bag study made for similarly mystifying findings.

The study was conducted by George E. Hoffer, a Virginia Commonwealth University professor of economics, and Steven P. Peterson, an assistant professor of economics at the same university.

Their study is to be published this week in the Journal of Consumer Research.

They conducted the study because they were interested in the effects of air bags on driver behavior.

The researchers compared like models of cars to eliminate differences in behavior between typical buyers of, say, Volvo station wagons and Ford Mustangs.

They analyzed insurance data collected between 1989 and 1991 on 20 car models equipped with air bags.

For 12 models, the relative frequency of personal-injury claims increased after air bags became standard equipment.

After the study was completed, the researchers gathered data for 1992 models equipped with air bags.

That data shows that six out of 11 vehicles equipped with air bags reported a higher frequency of personal-injury claims.

In total, 18 of 31 models from 1989 to 1992 saw the relative number of personal-injury claims rise.

Personal-injury claims represent the medical expenses and loss of income, if any, incurred by drivers and passengers involved in accidents.

The study measured the number of injury claims filed, not the extent of the injuries suffered or the dollar amount paid to the insured.

In the study, a 1990 Honda Accord scored a 91 for personal-injury claims (on the same scale in which 100 represents average claims and zero represents no claims).

But 1992 Accords, in which air bags were standard, had more claims and scored 98.

The researchers also found that by the end of the 1990 model year, every Chrysler car that had been equipped with air bags reported a higher frequency of insurance claims for personal injuries than the like models had before getting air bags.

Chrysler says it is not worried about the data because air bags are working as intended.

"You might have increases in superficial injuries like bruises and cuts," says Mr. Preuss of Chrysler.

"But the injuries could have been much more severe without the air bag."

Clearly, the findings raise more questions than they answer.

The relative number of personal-injury claims rises, but not the overall insurance losses.

The researchers aren't sure if the trend has anything to do with the equipment.

Brian O'Neill, president of the Highway Loss Data Institute, calls the air-bag findings misleading.

He says that in some instances the injury claim frequencies rise, but the comparisons of cars with and without air bags are complicated by other design issues, though Prof. Hoffer says the data were adjusted for such variables.

Still, Mr. O'Neill maintains, "there is no clear pattern" on whether cars with air bags report a higher number of personal-injury claims than those without.

"Sometimes they do and sometimes they don't," he says.

Prof. Hoffer cautions that "none of this means that air bags are bad -- I'd much rather have them than not."

Whether cars with them should have insurance discounts may be another question, though, if, as the Hoffer study indicates, personal-injury claims rise with air bags.

An additional expense is that it costs about $1,200 to replace an air bag that has deployed in a crash.

Indeed, the paucity of facts to explain the surprising statistical findings has some researchers re-examining certain elements of human behavior.

"If you build a safer ladder, people will climb higher," suggests Prof. Hoffer.

He argues that, just as people drive at higher speeds and follow more closely on dry, smooth roads than on wet, slippery ones, it makes sense that people would drive more aggressively when their cars were equipped with more safety technology.

Back in 1975, Sam Peltzman, a University of Chicago economist, conducted a study predicting that government-mandated safety measures such as seat belts and lower speed limits would have little or no impact on the financial losses from auto accidents.

He maintained that demand for safety already was being addressed by the market, and that mandated safety devices could encourage driver carelessness.

"I found that risk-taking behavior completely offset the lifesaving effects of mandated safety equipment," Mr. Peltzman says.

The bottom line, he says, is that safety equipment "lowers the price of driving more aggressively."

Such arguments are leading researchers like Robert S. Chirinko, an assistant professor of public policy at the University of Illinois, to conclude that the peace of mind that comes with the new safety technology may actually be dangerous.

"If you have a safer car, the probability of being in an accident is higher," he maintains.

"Offsetting behavior could dampen or reverse the intent of safety regulations."

As time passes, the benefits of antilock brakes and air bags will become clearer, auto makers and insurance companies say.

"When drivers catch up to the technology, you're going to see a change," says Jerry Basch, community-safety services manager of the Michigan branch of American Automobile Association.

"We're going to watch what happens down the road.

There have to be more thorough studies."

