Investors in bond mutual funds are bailing out, and the recent torrent of money going into stock funds is slowing sharply, mutual-fund executives say.

Blame it on the falling stock and bond markets.

"These rising interest rates, they're shaking people up," says Robert Leo, a senior vice president at Massachusetts Financial Services in Boston.

The big news this month is the outflow from all sorts of taxable and tax-exempt bond funds.

It represents a reversal of February's bond-fund inflows, which plunged to $1.1 billion from $11.1 billion in January, according to a monthly tally by the Investment Company Institute, a mutual-fund trade group.

At giant Fidelity Investments in Boston, "they're moving from bond funds into" money-market funds, says Neil Litvack, executive vice president.

Many bond-fund investors "are people who traded out of CDs, and are somewhat dependent on income, and simply don't want to take on risk in periods of market volatility."

March data aren't yet available from the ICI.

But according to AMG Data Services Inc. in Arcata, Calif., which estimates fund-industry cash flows, more than $700 million a week was flowing out of taxable-bond funds in the month through March 23.

Municipal-bond funds were letting go of more than $250 million a week.

Meanwhile, stock mutual funds pulled in $14.4 billion of new cash in February, down 21% from the record $18.3 billion they received in January, but still one of the biggest months on record, according to the ICI.

Stock funds' holdings of cash in February rose to 8.9% of assets, up from 8.3% in January.

The cash-flow figures equal new sales of funds, minus redemptions.

They include the net effect of exchanges within a fund family but exclude reinvested dividends.

Sales of stock funds are slowing again this month.

T. Rowe Price Associates Inc., Scudder Stevens & Clark, Kemper Corp. and Vanguard Group all said that they are seeing lower cash flow into stock funds in March compared with February.

At Fidelity, stock funds pulled in about $2.8 billion in March, off from about $3.3 billion in February.

And Fidelity's bond-fund outflows accelerated to $500 million in March from $400 million in February.

Charles Schwab, a discount brokerage firm that sells mutual funds from dozens of fund groups, had net sales of $460 million through March 28, well below February's $860 million in net sales.

(Those figures include stock funds and bond funds.)

Normally, March is one of the biggest months of the year for fund sales, as investors contribute to individual retirement accounts.

The falloff in cash flows into funds at Vanguard Group, Valley Forge, Pa., is "atypical" for this time of year, says a spokesman.

"The markets have investors spooked."

However, there are signs that retirement money is actually propping up what would otherwise be a steeper drop in cash flow into funds.

Fidelity says inflows of money earmarked for retirement -- including IRAs, but also contributions to pension plans and rollovers of retirement savings -- are up about 10% in March from February.

Fidelity says about 45% of its cash flows now are retirement savings.

A few fund groups are reaping higher stock-fund sales in March.

State Street Research & Management, a subsidiary of Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., says March is turning into its best month ever for stock-fund inflows, up 5.2% from February.

Putnam Investments, a subsidiary of Marsh & McLennan, says its stock-fund cash flows increased 30% in March.

However, Putnam had outflows from taxable bond funds and lower inflows into tax-exempt bond funds.

Funds that invest in overseas stocks were last year's heroes, and in February they got about half of all stock-fund flows.

But their popularity is dropping sharply.

Scudder, T. Rowe Price and Vanguard are taking in less international-stock fund money, while Fidelity is having outflows.

Funds investing in some of the harder-hit markets of developing nations, especially in the Pacific, are seeing investors flee at various fund groups.

Indeed, some of the funds that have been hit the hardest, both in performance and investor outflows, are some of last year's champions.

"People chase performance," says Laura Parsons, a vice president at Invesco Funds Group in Denver, a unit of Invesco MIM PLC.

"The funds that are doing well this year are gold and technology," which attracted the large sums at Invesco in March.

Invesco is getting about as much cash as it got in February, although it is having outflows from funds investing in the Pacific Basin, Europe, and in U.S. financial-services stocks.

Unlike most other groups, Invesco saw declines in money-market funds, as investors switched money into stock funds.

In the bond arena, while most of the departing bond-fund investors are heading for the shelter of cash, some are actually going into more speculative investments.

Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada's Massachusetts Financial Services unit and Fidelity are pulling more money into their junk-bond funds, which invest in the high-yielding bonds of companies with speculative credit ratings.

"People seem to be reaching out for yield a little bit in terms of going to the junk-bond market," says Mr. Litvack.

Investor Planning Some other fund groups, however, are having outflows from junk-bond funds.

According to the ICI, government-bond and "Ginnie Mae" mortgage funds had heavy outflows in February, as did long-term municipal-bond funds.

The flow of cash into global-bond funds dropped precipitously.

Some of the bond-fund money was going into money-market funds in February: Investors transferred $4.5 billion out of bond funds into money-market or stock funds in the same fund family.

A survey of investors by the University of Michigan, done on behalf of Fidelity, saw a rise in one area of investor sentiment in March as more investors expected an improving U.S. economy.

But the percentage of investors planning to buy stock funds in the near future fell to 36% from 54% in February.

