ISRAEL AND THE PLO REACHED a Hebron accord, advancing peace prospects.

The agreement deals with security for Palestinians in the West Bank town following a massacre there last month that derailed historic talks on Israeli withdrawal from, and Palestinian autonomy in, the Gaza Strip and Jericho.

Representatives of both sides said those negotiations can now resume.

The Hebron accord allows for patrols by an international observer force, but negotiators declined to give further details.

The U.S. criticized Israel for Monday's killing of six PLO members.

A PLO official in Gaza said the Israeli army appears to be preparing to withdraw.

Top U.S. officials arrived in Sarajevo to press Serbs to join a Bosnia peace settlement as Bosnian Muslims and Croats approved a constitution for a new federation.

Shalikashvili, Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman, said the U.S. would send peacekeeping troops if a pact is reached.

Croatia and rebel Serbs earlier agreed on a truce in Krajina.

Five ANC supporters were killed following a meeting with Zulu rivals in a Natal hostel.

A surviving member of the African National Congress group said it had gone to the workers' hostel to negotiate an end to local violence.

The killings brought renewed calls by ANC officials for a declaration of a state of emergency in the Zulu heartland.

China will permit the U.N. Security Council to approve a resolution urging North Korea to end its refusal to allow international inspections of suspected nuclear weapons sites, South Korea's foreign minister said.

The minister said, however, that the resolution would impose only "minimum requirements" on the Pyongyang regime.

Berlusconi expressed optimism that his right-wing coalition, victorious in landmark Italian elections this week, would be able to form a government following a meeting with the leader of the Northern League, one of his coalition partners.

The other partner is a neo-fascist group set to share power in Italy for the first time since Mussolini's day.

The U.S. lifted restrictions on exports of high-technology goods to China and the former Soviet bloc.

The move signals the disappearance of the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls, or Cocom, a Cold War relic formed in 1949, leaving only a patchwork of agreements among member countries.

The IRA announced a three-day cease-fire next week, its second temporary truce since Britain and Ireland said they would hold talks with the group if it renounced violence.

London and Dublin officials said the offer didn't go far enough.

Major, arriving on a visit to Northern Ireland, dismissed it as "cynical."

A Salinas aide was given a new post in the U.S. in a move that may indicate the Mexican president is trying to quell ruling-party infighting after he named an ally as its presidential candidate.

The new candidate is viewed as too closely associated with the Salinas administration and particularly the aide, who was removed as chief of staff.

A big study of magnetic fields found a link between at least one rare type of leukemia and occupational exposure, but indicated the risk is small.

The study, to be published in the American Journal of Epidemiology, was sponsored by three utilities.

More than 200,000 workers in Canada and France took part.

A nuclear submarine accident killed 10 crewmen, including the commander, aboard the French boat Emeraude in the Mediterranean.

The deaths occurred when steam leaked in the turbine room, and defense officials said nuclear components weren't affected.

The Emeraude made it back to its base in Toulon under auxiliary power.

CNN was charged with contempt of court for ignoring a judge's order and broadcasting tape recordings in 1990 of former Panamanian dictator Noriega's conversations with his attorneys' staff.

The all-news network pleaded innocent.

A July trial is set.

Clinton signed legislation allowing the federal government to offer buyouts of as much as $25,000 to its workers if they resign or retire early.

The law is part of his effort to cut the bureaucracy by 12% by fiscal 1999.

Died: Rep. William Natcher, 84, Kentucky Democrat who set a record for votes in the House, Tuesday, in Bethesda, Md.

