The fast-growing market for "groupware," which links computer users, has largely been a solo act, with Lotus Development Corp. in the starring role.

Now, everyone wants to get on stage.

Lotus's Notes software became a hit because it put office workers on line, giving them new tools to collaborate with colleagues and tap into company information across corporate computer networks.

But now rivals Microsoft Corp. and the soon-to-be-merged Novell Inc. and WordPerfect Corp. are poised to attack.

"Notes will never get another new sale without a head-to-head comparison with Touchdown," promises Tom Evslin, a Microsoft manager, using the code name for Microsoft's groupware line, which he says will go on sale in the second half of this year.

Novell's pending acquisition of WordPerfect puts it on a collision course with Lotus.

WordPerfect insiders say the two companies had been working together before the buyout was announced last week and will unveil their entry, Novell Groupware, before the end of June.

At the same time, both Novell and Microsoft have been talking to telephone companies about making versions of their e-mail and groupware products available to a mass market over the public phone network.

That could clash with Lotus's joint venture with American Telephone & Telegraph Co., which was announced earlier this month and is intended to bring Notes to a broader audience over AT&T's long-distance lines.

Industry executives say that WordPerfect has negotiated a similar deal with MCI Communications Corp.

And Microsoft is trying to win an agreement of its own with AT&T, tentatively called the Information Exchange Network, analysts say.

Lotus, with a wide lead in groupware, insists it isn't worried.

Analysts estimate that Lotus's sales of e-mail software and Notes will double this year to $250 million, and that the growth rate is accelerating.

"It doesn't take a genius to figure out there's a huge market here.

The question is why it took certain big software companies so long to figure it out," says John Landry, Lotus's chief technology officer.

But the Novell-WordPerfect merger and Microsoft's expected moves may force Lotus to alter its strategy.

Its competitors have an edge over Lotus because they control operating systems -- the basic software level on top of which applications programs operate.

Microsoft, with its Windows and DOS software, dominates desktop computing, while Novell has the dominant position in network operating-system software with its Netware product.

Lotus has had to configure Notes to coexist with all of these products.

Both Novell and Microsoft have indicated they will use their operating systems to their advantage.

Microsoft plans to add some of the functions offered by Notes to its next version of Windows, which is known as Chicago and is due by the end of the year.

At the same time, WordPerfect executives have hinted that they will benefit by closely linking their groupware product with Novell's Netware.

Novell can't freeze out companies -- including Lotus -- that build software on top of Netware.

But WordPerfect will have "a most-favored-nation status," says Mark Calkins, a WordPerfect vice president.

While Novell and Microsoft are exploiting their dominance in operating systems, Lotus is taking a different tack.

"One of our strongest selling points right now is that we are not locked into one or another operating system," says Lotus's Mr. Landry.

"As loudly as you will hear Microsoft and Novell talk about the advantages of close links to the operating system, we'll argue just as strongly that for the customer, getting locked into one of them is just a bad idea."

Indeed, Lotus has said it wants to be "the Switzerland of software," remaining neutral as Microsoft, Novell, International Business Machines Corp. and Apple Computer Inc. all push their own operating systems.

Despite its long lead in groupware, Lotus recently tried to bolster its position in the market by entering the bidding for WordPerfect.

Although most analysts focused on Lotus's desire to own WordPerfect's word-processing software, Lotus also wanted to neutralize WordPerfect Office, the company's new groupware product.

Lotus was even willing to beat Novell's $1.4 billion offer, according to Ad Rietveld, WordPerfect's chief executive.

While WordPerfect Office is a relatively new line, has only a fraction of the sales of Notes and can't offer many of the same features, it nonetheless worries Lotus executives.

Now, as the foundation for Novell Groupware, it will be expanded and closely linked to Netware.

It already offers such features as automated forms processing -- permitting, for example, electronic expense reports -- plus group-scheduling software and document-editing and management functions.

Microsoft, for its part, is building its initial foray into groupware on powerful enhancements of e-mail technology.

But some analysts argue that Microsoft's expected offering will fall short of the functions in Notes.

"There's no one out there even close to Notes, and probably won't be for at least another year," says Terence Quinn, of Furman Selz Inc. in New York.

Nonetheless, it's clear that Lotus's long run as the only game in groupware will come to an end.

"They still have a long lead over Microsoft and everyone else," says Mary Meeker, an analyst at Morgan Stanley & Co.

"But at this point the market opportunity is just too big for them to be there alone.

It's too good an idea."

