Also draining strength from the copper market yesterday was speculation among traders that widely expected Chinese purchases of copper, which had been expected later this year, may not materialize.

But investor confidence in the U.S. economy will need to improve before the rally can regain its momentum, analysts said.

In the past two weeks, however, copper has given back most of its early-year gains, analysts said.

The June contract settled yesterday at 52.50 cents a pound, down 0.62 cent.

Copper prices on the London Metal Exchange, where copper futures are also traded, have declined even more than U.S. prices, in part because the European copper market lacks the relatively strong demand for copper that has materialized in the U.S. from this country's housing and automotive industries.

Copper prices are still higher than they were late last year, before industrial metals prices began their rally.

Speculation about a return of inflation also helped to push prices higher.

Others say there could be further price erosion, reflecting a continuing oversupply of oil going into a period of seasonally weak demand.

Most traders had expected China, usually a big buyer of copper, to purchase more than 100,000 tons of the industrial metal by the end of the year.

Now, however, traders are skeptical the Asian country will buy that much.

ENERGY: The weekly report on U.S. petroleum inventories buoyed energy futures prices yesterday.

Heating oil for April delivery rose 0.44 cent to 45.04 cents a gallon.

"Copper has fallen victim to liquidation pervading the entire commodities board," said William O'Neill, chief futures strategist for Merrill Lynch.

In trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange, gasoline led the moves up, reflecting an unexpectedly large drop in U.S. gasoline stocks as reported by the American Petroleum Institute.

"The euphoria of January and February has been deflated."

At New York's Commodity Exchange, copper for May delivery was down 2.9 cents to 86.45 cents a pound.

But continuing weakness in the Dow Jones Industrial Average would probably continue to erode prices, analysts said.

Any resurgence in the U.S. stock market would likely be interpreted as a positive sign by copper traders.

Some traders said the fact that crude prices haven't slid again since Monday's $1.05 plunge, following the meeting by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, bodes well for oil markets.

Moreover, commodity funds, which are managed pools of investors' money, have been large sellers of copper futures contracts in recent weeks, Mr. O'Neill said.

LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Hog futures prices continued their seasonal slump as large numbers of hogs poured into meatpacking plants.

Since March 16, when the actively traded May contract peaked at 93.20 cents a pound, the contract price has declined more than 7%.

That helped April gasoline overcome a downward tug on prices and post a 0.42 cent a gallon gain to settle at 44.82 cents.

Cattle futures prices settled mostly lower.

Prices tend to rebound by June, when the flow of mature hogs to meatpacking plants tightens as Midwest farmers busy themselves with spring planting.

May crude oil gained six cents a barrel to finish at $14.38.

This helps explain why the hog contract for June delivery is trading higher than the April contract.

The statistics, released late Tuesday, showed a decline in gasoline of 5,136,000 barrels for the week ended March 25.

Copper futures prices continued to plunge on weakness in stock and bond markets and selling by big investors.

These funds helped to push prices up by buying contracts in January and February, but lately have been liquidating their positions, helping to exert additional downward pressure on prices.

In trading at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the hog contract for April delivery slipped 0.35 cent a pound to settle at 46.25 cents.

For the first two months of 1994, copper futures prices were energized by optimism about the U.S. economy and by a broadbased commodity price rally, including gains in prices of industrial metals such as steel, nickel and aluminum.

Hog prices usually weaken this time of year because consumers tend to shift their purchases to beef and away from pork.

