But his friends at Unclaimed Baggage are keeping an eye out for it.

Mr. Owens, the president of Unclaimed Baggage, says it isn't his job to find the true owners of the stuff he sells.

That's how it has been since 1970, when an enterprising insurance salesman named H. Doyle Owens founded Unclaimed Baggage and turned this anonymous river town into a retailing mecca.

Mr. Owens bought the bags and sold the wares for 25 cents.

And many were abandoned.

"But it's worth it.

Larry Lingerfelt, a teacher, bought some Persian rugs and a collector's copy of the "Kamasutra."

A few years back, the Rev. Hall bought a jacket at Unclaimed Baggage.

"There's so much stuff in there, you start to wonder what kind of job the airlines are doing."

"Owens has worked out well."

American Airlines tried using a Chicago vendor but says the haulers did a lot of pilfering.

A crowd huddled by the entrance, peering through the doors to spot fresh offerings.

"It's an amazing place," says Jerry King, who picked up a tube of Japanese toothpaste.

Some have even found wads of cash -- as much as $500 -- in suit pockets and shaving kits.

Mr. Owens learned from a friend that Greyhound was saddled with a growing pile of luggage left on its buses.

A Californian showed up and found his prized surfboard.

Then it tried donating the luggage to charity.

Several videotapes on the sales floor clearly have names and addresses blacked out.

"We aren't set up to find your Aunt Jane's blue Samsonite."

Some buyers are a bit gilt-ridden about their bargains.

Hal Word, of Word Chevrolet here in town, just lost his luggage on an American Airlines flight from Miami.

Townspeople are grateful for the throngs of weekend visitors and sometimes find bargains here themselves.

Some were misrouted, some forgotten.

"You never see all the bags that do make it" to their destination, says a United Airlines spokesman.

But once again, bags were stolen en route or swiped by charity workers, the airline says.

Despite the reluctance of the airlines and the company's management to discuss the business -- "Why do you have to do this story?" snaps Mark Owens, the company's president -- word of this bazaar has spread far and wide.

That works out to between 10,000 and 20,000 mislaid items.

Four mammoth sales floors feature everything from fur coats and fishing rods to T-shirts and cameras.

You also can find toasters, cosmetics, moose antlers, Hungarian folk tapes, even a casket.

Spotting an even bigger market, Mr. Owens approached the airlines and soon had exclusive contracts with all the major carriers.

What began as a few pieces of luggage sold from card tables 24 years ago is now a sprawling glass and granite complex that takes up more than a city block.

Unclaimed Baggage now has a fleet of trucks to fetch bags to its five stores and its own laundry for washing used travel wear.

Once he buys the bags, sight unseen, they are his.

"We know it all comes back here."

Mr. Ford replied, on a Hall of Fame postcard, that, yes, he once owned a coat like that and would like to have it back.

Upon arrival, luggage is opened, cleaned up -- checked for cash -- and then sold, contents separately, to the public.

"We don't worry about losing our bags in Scottsboro," he says.

"It's always a mad dash," says Rhonda McAlpin, a student from Chattanooga, Tenn., who makes the one-hour trip with her husband at least once a week.

Called the Unclaimed Baggage Center, it is better known as the Land of Lost Luggage.

The airlines say they are doing a better job than ever of safe-guarding passengers' luggage.

In the early days, most airlines sold unclaimed bags to various bidders, auctioned them off or gave them to employees.

On a recent frigid Saturday morning, just before dawn, cars were streaming into Unclaimed Baggage's parking lot from as far away as Texas.

There are other benefits to living near the Land of Lost Luggage.

Unclaimed Baggage has added three satellite stores in town and has opened a "clearance center" to keep the goods moving.

"I've been pretty lucky that way," he says.

A clerk recalls a woman who passed through recently and bought back her sister's favorite dress.

Indeed, one look inside Unclaimed Baggage is enough to convert even the most trusting air traveler to stick to carryon.

Mr. Ford, contacted yesterday at the Yankees' spring training camp in Florida, isn't holding any grudges.

"They had their chance to claim it," says James Meeks, a burly Scottsboro roofer.

The public can't get enough of it.

For most, however, "finders keepers" is still the rule.

Timothy Lovett of Scottsboro says he bought a $300 pair of gold-frame glasses for $15.

Two plush rooms are filled with men's and women's clothes -- Armani suits at $50, Talbot's skirts at $30, London Fog raincoats ($30) and slinky black party-dresses ($20) -- all neatly displayed by size.

An avid baseball fan, Mr. Hall recognized the moniker of the great Yankees pitcher and Hall-of-Famer.

"I'm always afraid I'll be out, and someone will say, `Hey, that's my bracelet!'" she says.

"I wound up with Whitey Ford's jacket and a signed Hall of Fame postcard," says the pastor, beaming.

The business of lost luggage hasn't always been so orderly.

"It was a mess," an American spokesman says.

"It's kind of strange."

But passengers who think the airlines go that extra mile to reunite lost bags and belongings with their owners might want to consider the case of Roy Hall, a Presbyterian minister here.

He doesn't even recall ever losing his luggage.

Each day, hundreds of bags from across the country make the journey here for their final check-in.

Many others have come upon their own belongings at Unclaimed Baggage.

Everything we're wearing is Unclaimed Baggage, except our underwear."

Mr. Hall decided to keep the coat just the same.

"Look, we're a retailer," he barks.

After that, the stuff is shipped off to Scottsboro.

And of those, fewer than 200 aren't reunited with their owners, either because the bags are never claimed or the passengers can't be found.

But all were snapped up from the major air carriers by Unclaimed Baggage.

In fact, while the airlines say they can't find the owners of items sent to Scottsboro, clerks there say they spend hours peeling and scraping names and addresses from merchandise before putting it up for sale.

Paige Quinlivan of Huntsville, Ala., often thinks about the gold bracelet she bought at Unclaimed Baggage for $300, later appraised for $1,500.

Dispossessed travelers have three months in which to claim lost bags.

Then, one day, he happened to find a name written on the lapel: "Whitey Ford."

Not that the company doesn't sell that, too.

As reported to the Department of Transportation, carriers say they misroute or misplace between 0.5% and 1% of the roughly 2 million bags moved each day.

He wrote Mr. Ford a letter, describing the coat.

