Mr. Wolzien's analysis was based on worksheets that were inadvertently released to his firm on Tuesday, a day early.

Mr. Wolzien predicted that when all was said and done, the impact on cable operators would be substantially less than the 17% figure.

Subsequently, Jones Intercable Inc. has renegotiated its $400 million alliance with BCE Inc., the Canadian telecommunications giant, and Southwestern Bell Corp. said it was renegotiating its agreement with Cox Enterprises Inc.

The rules, he said, will cut the industry's "options when it comes to introducing new programming, new services and new technologies."

The rules, adopted last month, require cable systems to cut rates for basic service -- the tier that includes broadcast TV signals -- by as much as 17% from the levels of Sept. 30, 1992, once the regulations take effect May 15.

TCI and Bell Atlantic Corp. cited the commission's action last month when they scuttled plans for a $32 billion merger.

"It looks like the Street has overreacted again here."

Mark Robichaux in New York contributed to this article.

Thomas Wolzien, a cable analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., said FCC worksheets indicated that big multiple-system operators such as Tele-Communications Inc. fare better under the rules than smaller, less geographically diverse operators.

Yesterday's documents represent a major revision of earlier cable rules that generally required companies to cut their Sept. 30, 1992, rates 10%.

Decker Anstrom, president of the National Cable Television Association, said the trade association plans to file suit to overturn the FCC's rules.

The commission released hundreds of pages of rules, and officials at a number of cable companies said it would take several days, if not weeks, to gauge their effect on subscribers' monthly bills and operators' overall revenues.

The commission will decide what their rates should be after studying prices and costs for these two types of systems.

Those rules, however, allowed many cable operators to raise rates, triggering outrage among consumer groups and Washington lawmakers who had passed the 1992 Cable Act in reaction to a flood of consumer complaints about skyrocketing cable-TV rates and poor service.

"The formula represents the worst case," he said.

The rules also permit companies to file detailed cost data with the commission to justify rates higher than the formula allows.

Nevertheless, the commission's decision to take the second whack at cable rates within a year have already had an effect.

Systems in richer areas fare better than those in poor communities, and those with the most channel capacity also appear to benefit, he said.

The Federal Communications Commission released its new cable-television rate rules, which appear to be more favorable to cable operators that own many systems and to systems that serve wealthy communities.

The rules permit operators to adjust the rates upward for inflation and the cost of adding new channels.

Moreover, cable operators with fewer than 15,000 subscribers and systems that currently charge relatively low prices won't be required to cut their rates the full 17%, at least for the time being.

