After years of resistance, the Federal Bureau of Investigation is finally beginning to mobilize against intimidation and violence aimed at abortion clinics.

Now the question is how far it is willing to go.

For the first time, the bureau is looking into death threats against clinic operators and doctors in Florida, Indiana, Kansas and Wisconsin, among other states.

Meanwhile, agents have also begun gathering evidence from local law-enforcement officials about antiabortion protests that have led to violence.

But some clinic operators who have weathered blockades and worse are still unhappy.

They point out that the feds aren't inclined to try to exploit the Supreme Court's recent ruling that the federal antiracketeering law may be used to try to go after militant protesters.

Federal authorities "aren't interested in the big picture, linking the 100 to 200 fires of the past decade, the threats, the acid attacks, the shootings of abortion doctors," charges Susan Hill, who operates eight clinics in North Dakota, Georgia, Delaware and four other states.

No matter how far it goes, the federal government's increasing involvement in abortion investigations marks a significant change of policy, one that is deeply worrisome to abortion foes, who decry what they see as mounting efforts to stifle dissent and tar their movement by associating it with a relatively small number of violent extremists.

"We certainly abhor and condemn any of the violence that has occurred," says Clarke Forsythe, general counsel of Americans United for Life.

"But we are worried about politically motivated investigations."

During the Reagan-Bush era, when the White House boosted the antiabortion cause, the politically attuned FBI resisted outside demands that it investigate abortion-related violence.

FBI officials said they lacked jurisdiction and that local authorities should address the problem.

While some local and state police forces responded, others were unwilling or ill-equipped to mount major investigations.

But Attorney General Janet Reno promised upon taking office last year that she would make antiabortion violence a federal priority; then, in March, the fatal shooting of Florida abortion doctor David Gunn by an antiabortion militant galvanized concern on Capitol Hill.

Both houses of Congress have passed bills that would create explicit federal jurisdiction and impose criminal penalties for actions such as blockading clinics and threatening or harming clinic employees.

Minor differences between the two versions are expected to be hammered out by the end of March, and President Clinton has said he will sign the final bill.

Meanwhile, pushed by Ms. Reno, the FBI in the past couple of months has been quietly interviewing abortion providers and their allies in what officials describe as an effort to get up to speed on what types of violence are occuring and how the country's premier police agency should get involved.

"It's a big change," says lawyer John Cowles, who was debriefed by the FBI because of his representation of George Tiller, a Wichita, Kan., abortion doctor.

Long a target of protests, Dr. Tiller was shot and wounded by an abortion foe in August.

"We're used to the federal government being on the other side," Mr. Cowles explains.

"We welcome the new interest."

Veteran women's rights leader Eleanor Smeal is similarly hopeful after two agents were dispatched from the FBI's Washington field office to interview her and colleagues at the Fund for the Feminist Majority.

"They took copious notes, they seemed serious," she says.

Her group, which is based in Arlington, Va., has helped clinics organize resistance to blockades and other harassment.

In interviews, though, neither the FBI nor prosecutors at the Justice Department give much credence to allegations of a national conspiracy that some abortion-rights advocates believe is using illegal intimidation to put clinics out of business.

"Just the fact that something happens at an abortion clinic doesn't necessarily mean that you should bring down the weight of the FBI," says Frank Scafidi, a special agent in the Washington field office.

He adds that, given the FBI's now-abandoned practice of infiltrating leftist political groups, it is leery of launching what could be perceived as a partisan investigation of antiabortion organizations such as Operation Rescue.

This type of caution enrages abortion providers like Patricia Windle, who runs three clinics in Florida.

The FBI agent who interviewed her wanted to know "only about specific death threats, nothing else," she says.

Her clinics have been doused with caustic butyric acid, and employees have been stalked by screaming protesters.

Two of her three doctors have quit because of the abuse, and one of her clinics is temporarily closed.

"We're being put out of business.

Why doesn't the FBI prosecute that?" she demands.

Justice Department officials say they are reviewing the possibility of bringing individual cases under the federal law that protects businesses against interstate extortion, but a nationwide racketeering prosecution is unlikely.

(There are private racketeering suits pending against antiabortion groups, and it was one of those suits that produced last month's Supreme Court decision, which theoretically cleared the way for criminal cases as well.)

The Justice Department isn't the only federal law-enforcement agency with doubts about nationwide prosecution.

The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, which is part of the Treasury Department, has investigated clinic bombings and arsons for years, resulting in the conviction of 44 people; it currently is presenting evidence to a federal grand jury in Portland, Ore., in what appears to be the broadest investigation ever of clinic bombings and arsons.

But the ATF, which has limited jurisdiction and generally hasn't tracked other forms of violence aimed at doctors or clinic staff members, is convinced that "there is no national conspiracy," says spokesman Jack Killorin.

"You're talking about disturbed individuals and, in some cases, small groups of two, three or four people" who have left the mainstream antiabortion movement.

In the Portland case, the bureau is trying to find connections among recent clinic arsons and bombings in Eugene and Ashland, Ore.; Redding, Sacramento and Chico, Calif.; Helena and Missoula, Mont.; and Boise, Idaho.

One of the main targets of the probe is Shelley Shannon of Grants Pass, Ore.

A search of her home last September yielded books on explosives and correspondence with people around the country about bombing plans, according to court documents.

Ms. Shannon also happens to be the person accused of shooting Dr. Tiller in Wichita.

She is in jail awaiting prosecution by local Wichita authorities.

The FBI has collected information about Ms. Shannon, but isn't actively trying to make a federal case linking the Tiller shooting to bombings elsewhere.

