More seriously, however, nonproliferation experts warned that the eased restrictions could come back to haunt the U.S.

But the U.S. seems, at least in this case, to have been swayed by corporate interests.

However, there's some concern that easing restrictions on trade with China will send a signal that the U.S. is retreating from its effort to employ trade policy as a way of prodding China to improve its human rights behavior.

AT&T officials said the new rules free up telecommunications exports that the company had been trying to send to China and Russia.

The Clinton administration is keeping controls on certain encryption technology and radio technologies often used for military purposes.

However, nonproliferation experts expressed concern that the easing of U.S. controls, coupled with the demise of Cocom, would open the floodgates for the shipment of potentially dangerous technologies to rogue countries.

The U.S. lifted restrictions on exports of telecommunications, computers and other high-tech goods to China and the former Soviet bloc, as one of the last relics of the Cold War vanishes today without a replacement.

Chris Padilla, manager of government affairs at American Telephone & Telegraph Co., said, "This is a home run for the Clinton administration.

Officials in this area of export controls have gone so far as to coin a name for this new period, partly in jest: Nocom.

"We've talked about lots of ends to the Cold War, but this is the definitive end," said Paul Freedenberg, a former top Commerce Department official who oversaw export controls during the Reagan administration.

We're pinching ourselves."

The announcement marks at least one high point in President Clinton's rocky relationship with a high-tech community that supported him heartily during his presidential campaign but soon became disillusioned with what it considered delays in fulfilling campaign promises.

Mr. Rubin said that Cocom members will continue working to establish a new system of export controls.

Sensitive technology will be covered separately by restrictions established to curb the proliferation of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons technology.

Cocom includes Japan, Australia and North Atlantic Treaty Organization members, except Iceland.

The Clinton administration yesterday greeted the so-called Nocom world by removing individual export-licensing requirements for almost all civilian telecommunication equipment and computers that operate with speeds up to 1,000 Mtops, or million theoretical operations per second, for delivery to civilian end users and most countries previously restricted by Cocom.

Its one exception: North Korea, which the U.S. suspects is building nuclear weapons.

As a result, many industry officials hailed yesterday's announcement.

But there will be no successor institution to carry out Cocom's mandate.

Mr. Sokolski said, "We are moving to a loose, more relaxed export control world -- one that would fly in the face of our experience with Iraq," which in the Gulf War used military technology built with Western goods.

U.S. corporate officials have worried that even in a Nocom world, they would continue to face the tough restrictions Cocom had laid out while other countries would lift their rules, making it easier for America's foreign competitors to sell goods to big markets such as Russia and China.

Last fall, AT&T estimated the controls would cost the company $500 million in total lost sales over the next three to five years.

Member countries of the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls, or Cocom, a group crafted in 1949 to curb the export of potentially dangerous technologies to the Soviet Union and other communist powers, are expected to replace their old organization with a patchwork of agreements to continue working together.

Along with telecommunications companies, major computer manufacturers have lobbied for the easing of restrictions.

Technically, China and the former-Soviet bloc countries have joined a long list of nations the U.S. designates as members of the "free world."

Yesterday's action was announced by National Economic Council Chairman Robert Rubin at a Commerce Department export-controls conference.

With the ending of the Cold War, Cocom members have been relaxing their usual export restrictions and focusing more attention on exports to such countries as Libya, North Korea and Iraq.

"It's a new era."

Henry Sokolski, a deputy for nonproliferation policy at the Defense Department during the Bush administration, said the world will have "little better than a placebo" in place to restrict the sale of sensitive goods for military purposes.

U.S. officials said the eased restrictions won't increase national-security risks because most of the goods are already available internationally, and there will still be curbs on exports that could be used for military purposes.

