CBS Inc. will venture into risky, uncharted territory this Easter Sunday with "Christy," a drama series that takes a matter-of-fact approach to religion and spirituality.

The weekly program will stick closely to the 1967 novel of the same name by inspirational writer Catherine Marshall.

The bestseller traced the spiritual development of 18-year-old Christy, who in 1912 leaves a comfortable life to teach in a missionary school in Appalachia.

"The first thing you learn as a program executive is never program anything whose content has to do with religion and God," says Jeff Sagansky, the president of CBS Entertainment.

"It isn't hip."

Still, he doesn't believe "Christy" is much of a gamble.

"I think the audience is fairly screaming at us that we're wrong," he says, citing the positive response CBS gets from viewers when such shows as "Picket Fences" and "Northern Exposure" address religious issues.

Even though Gallup surveys consistently say that around 40% of Americans attend church services at least once a week, network television hasn't addressed religion in a serious way in its prime-time lineup.

When it has dealt with religion, it is typically as a foil in sitcoms like NBC's "Amen," which starred Sherman Hemsley as a deacon.

With the exception of biblical movies, the role of religion in television drama has tended to be along the lines of ABC's miniseries "The Thorn Birds," which starred Richard Chamberlain as a Catholic priest who caves in to sexual desire.

ABC's "thirtysomething" series occasionally explored such topics as a father's desire to have his newborn son circumcised in the Jewish tradition.

But more common are plot lines such as the current one on NBC's "L.A. Law," featuring a virginal Bible-quoting Christian attorney who endures the seduction antics of slimy divorce lawyer Arnold Becker.

"Television tends to treat religion as irrelevant or puts it down" in the same way it pokes fun at other authority figures, says William Fore, who teaches communication at Yale University's Divinity School.

One exception was ABC's short-lived 1989 sitcom "Have Faith," about four Chicago priests.

Its reruns will soon air on the Faith and Values network, a cable channel shared by the Vision Interfaith Satellite Network -- a consortium of 64 Protestant, Catholic, Jewish and Eastern Orthodox groups -- and the Southern Baptist Convention.

Five-year-old VISN, whose programs deal with spiritual, ethical and moral issues, has had little success finding suitable U.S. network shows to rerun.

It has turned to British and Canadian productions, or produced dramas itself.

Some believe religious issues are too complex for television.

"It's very difficult in a visual medium to be able to deal with the interior dialogue that goes on, that is an element of faith at work," says Dave Pomeroy, director of electronic media for the National Council of the Churches of Christ in the USA.

"At best, what we can hope for is television that deals with the ways in which those who have faith convictions act upon those in the world."

But Jeff Weber, VISN's executive vice president, thinks the problem is bigger than that.

"In this country, there's almost a cultural prohibition against God talk," he says.

"The media, as well as other institutions, are uneasy with things religious."

But viewers aren't, he argues.

VISN's research shows that "there's a spiritual yearning and hunger out there, not necessarily for religion with a big `R,' but a yearning for meaning."

CBS's Mr. Sagansky agrees that "there's a hidden audience" for such shows, "even though it goes against the rules."

For instance, he notes, the ratings for CBS's quirky "Picket Fences" have grown 11% this year with an increasing number of religious-themed episodes, such as a modern-day "virgin" birth.

Mr. Sagansky started pursuing "Christy" in 1990, when his wife, a former programming executive, brought the book to his attention.

But Ken Wales, a producer who held the rights to "Christy," wanted to do a theatrical movie.

Mr. Sagansky instead had CBS develop "Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman," a family-oriented hit about a frontier doctor.

Mr. Wales, the son of a minister, had been trying to do a "Christy" movie since 1976, when the former MGM Studio held the rights.

The book, which has sold eight million copies, is rich in mountain lore and dialect as well as religious debate.

It "has all the elements of what I think is good storytelling," says Mr. Wales, "love, honor, compassion, humor and one thing often forgotten: sacrifice."

MGM had killed a "Christy" project in 1969 and Mr. Wales couldn't get the studio to revive it.

He acquired the rights in 1986, but his financing for a film fell apart after the 1987 stock market crash.

He finally agreed to a TV series last year when Mr. Sagansky suggested the project to Barney Rosenzweig, executive producer of CBS's former show "Cagney & Lacey."

Mr. Wales and Mr. Rosenzweig are co-executive producers of the show, which stars Kellie Martin, most recently seen in ABC's "Life Goes On," in the title role.

Tyne Daly, who costarred in "Cagney & Lacey," plays Alice Henderson, the Quaker woman who leads the mission.

After Sunday's opening episode, the show will air at 8 p.m.

Mr. Rosenzweig says he was initially put off by the book's "lavender cover.

It seemed like a young girl's piece," but he changed his mind after reading it.

"Christy," he says, was "America's first VISTA volunteer."

He also senses viewers want more spiritual themes.

"Society is having trouble; it isn't working.

People are turning to things more traditional."

Yale's Mr. Fore thinks the show, coming as Congress is pressuring television executives to reduce on-air violence, will be a "litmus test as to whether the American public really wants a quality kind of program, whether they'll vote with their eyeballs."

Mr. Rosenzweig adds, "America's notorious for telling us what they want to see and then not watching it."

Of course, viewers may not tune in because of reviews.

New York Daily News critic Eric Mink dubbed the show "Miss Christy, Religion Woman," after "Dr. Quinn."

He calls it "flimsy" and "terribly scripted."

TV Guide critic Jeff Jarvis equates the show with "Little House on the Prairie," and rates it a four on a 0-10 scale.

Tyne Daly's "sermons are hard to bear," he says.

