With oil prices in the tank and mounting arrears on its foreign debt, Iran has been hurting for hard currency to meet its current import bill while funding more exotic commitments, such as expanding its military and supporting various terrorist groups in their accustomed style.

Its willingness to play fast and loose with creditors ought to worry nations dependent on trade.

The U.S. government reckons Iran's actual debt is about twice that.

Money being fungible, anything that bucks up Tehran's financial resources strengthens its ability to fund trouble.

For its part, Iran will reportedly get a two-year breather on $9 billion in German IOUs, followed by four years to repay what were originally short-term trade credits.

Last year Japan made its first development loan to Iran in 17 years, $386 million for a hydroelectric dam at 3% interest with a seven-year grace period.

On the conventional front, Iran has put in a $750 million order for Russian submarines and is taking delivery of dozens of new Mig-29 and SU-24 strike aircraft.

"Other projects" is a category that includes shipping guns and money to groups trying to overthrow Muslim regimes in Egypt, Algeria and Tunisia.

Japan is the next major country in the queue.

Japan has adopted the lingo of global responsibility, but so far hasn't demonstrated much.

In his trade spat with Washington, Prime Minister Hosokawa managed to seize the moral high ground while playing to the domestic peanut gallery.

Tokyo's "new thinking" doesn't sound very new to us.

These reschedulings only manage to undermine the Western effort to educate Iran in the lesson that good behavior counts.

That's no excuse, however.

It claims that playing financial footsie is a form of "constructive engagement" aimed at weaning Tehran from radical ways.

We'll see if Japan is ready to lead when it hurts.

Iran's habit of using subversion and violence to promote its idea of Islamic correctness ought to worry Muslim countries beyond the Middle East.

The Western allies have consistently outvoted the U.S. at the World Bank.

After the deal was struck, the politicians rushed in to guarantee the package with insurance cover from Hermes, the state export guarantee agency.

He says it will serve as a model for other reschedulings.

To be sure, Iran has legitimate defense needs with Saddam Hussein for a neighbor.

But its recent occupation of three disputed islands in the Persian Gulf suggests a revival of its regional military ambitions.

While paying lip service to these useful disciplines, Bonn used a wink and a nod to encourage 11 private banks to refinance Iran.

In the past year alone, Iran has carted off $463 million in new development credit on easy terms.

By the end of this month, Tehran hopes to have wangled debt relief from most of its major creditors, and Japan at the moment is inclined to oblige.

Hassan Rohani, a top lieutenant in the Iranian parliament, explained the logic of stiff-arming Iran's creditors: "If everything goes to repayments, other projects will be paralyzed."

Having lost the battle with the Germans, the U.S. State Department is preparing this week to file demarches with the Japanese and Canadians.

Privately, they complain that Washington has sewn up the Saudis and the Gulf States, so Iran is their last chance at a petrodollar bonanza.

Under the club's rules, creditor governments are supposed to stick together so deadbeats can't play them off each other.

No wonder the ruling cadres are learning only contempt.

Among his laudable goals, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa would have Japan play a more responsible role in the world.

Iran doesn't present such an easy choice.

Germany must have figured that selling out first meant selling out at the highest price.

It sounds more like the same old blinkered policy of promoting exports without seeing any bigger picture.

What motivates these countries, of course, is the commercial payoff from kowtowing to Tehran.

It includes developing missile and warhead technology that the Israelis find sufficiently worrisome that they're giving a high priority to developing their own missile defense.

A good place to start would be helping to contain one of the world's bully boys, Iran.

Such complaints have echoed more loudly since Bill Clinton played Willy Loman to the Saudi airplane deal.

Deputy Foreign Minister Mahmmoud Vaezi boasts that the German deal was won without Iran making any concessions.

This is window dressing.

In reporting to the IMF, Iran acknowledges just $16 billion in net foreign debt.

Tokyo has assured folks in Washington that any rescheduling would be a purely private-sector affair.

Tokyo would be following the Germans, who blazed the trail in the Paris Club last month.

Tokyo is standing by now to provide official insurance cover when Japanese lenders strike a deal to reschedule $4 billion in overdue trade credits.

