Taken together they are as good a summary of American ideals as any.

Lincoln's pastor said a prayer and then Stanton, crying, said, "Now he belongs to the ages."

"In his conception," Mr. Peterson writes, "the Constitution became the instrument for realizing the promises of the Declaration of Independence."

Of all the memories of Lincoln, that is the most enduring.

(George W. Norris once answered the question by saying in the middle of the Great Depression, "Lincoln would be just like me.

This impulse has been stirring among American historians for some time, and it surfaced two years ago, with Michael Kammen's impenetrable "Mystic Chords of Memory," a Cornell historian's laborious effort to show how American history has been remembered, and used, over the years.

His life and his remarks took on lives of their own.

A minority chief executive and a war president, he spoke to America's self-image, its sense of destiny and its moral core, leaving behind him not only the memories that Mr. Peterson examines but some remarkable historical documents, including the Gettysburg Address, the Emancipation Proclamation and the Second Inaugural Address.

Mr. Peterson finds no credible evidence, for example, that Abe ever said "you can fool all of the people some of the time . . . but you can't fool all of the people all of the time."

And in this volume Mr. Peterson, who earlier wrote about the uses and abuses of the Jeffersonian image, looks at how the ages have treated a man who seems to embody all of our history and myths: He split rails, rode a flatboat, kept a country store, studied and practiced the law and then practiced the political arts with peculiar rustic grace.

You don't write about history anymore.

And yet Lincoln has been used to fool a lot of people a lot of times.

He was constrained by politics and the limits of his own imagination and sense of daring.

He wouldn't know what the hell to do.")

William Cullen Bryant wrote of "the anguish of a land/That shook with horror at thy fall."

You may have noticed that Feb. 12, which used to be celebrated as Lincoln's birthday, passed almost without notice this year.

There are fads in history as well as in fashion, and a new one has hit the academic world.

Black scholars and commentators have pointed out that Lincoln shared many of the common white prejudices of his time and even said that blacks were "unassimilable aliens."

But by his conduct of the Civil War and with his vision of the nation that would be formed in that crucible, he did one important thing: He made the future possible.

There were actions he put off, like the Emancipation Proclamation, and others he ought to have performed but didn't.

You also may have noticed how few emotions were stirred by this year's antiseptic celebration of "President's Day," which came a day before George Washington's birthday, was marked mostly by automobile hucksters and seemed to put Abraham Lincoln, James Garfield, Chester Arthur, Benjamin Harrison, George Bush and Bill Clinton all on the same level.

In truth, Lincoln is one of the mythical characters in the American story.

The memory-making and the myth-making began at Lincoln's death, sealed in the nation's consciousness by the 20-day period that began with his funeral, continued as his body traveled through the heart of the country by train and concluded with his burial in Springfield, Ill.

Merrill D. Peterson, a University of Virginia historian, has taken up the challenge with his new volume, "Lincoln in American Memory," (Oxford, 482 pages, $30).

Mr. Shribman is Washington bureau chief of the Boston Globe.

Ralph Waldo Emerson celebrated Lincoln as an "aboriginal man," purely natural, purely American.

It is timely not because of any new revelations, but because Lincoln seems to be slipping out of American memory entirely.

You write about what people think history is.

It was uttered by Edwin M. Stanton, the Secretary of War, who had been sitting vigil at the foot of what turned out to be Lincoln's deathbed.

Mr. Kammen's title came from the last sentence of Lincoln's first inaugural address, so it is maybe no surprise that the next entry in the memory derby should be about Lincoln himself.

But of all the cant said in connection with Abraham Lincoln, one phrase rings true.

Stentorian orators declaiming about some problem facing the Republic routinely wonder aloud what Lincoln would do.

But Mr. Peterson argues that Lincoln had a real philosophical legacy, the supremacy of the central government and the extension of human freedoms.

Sometimes you even dress it up in fancy clothes and talk about "the uses of history."

He does.

He has been invoked by figures from Karl Marx to Herbert Hoover and from Earl Browder, the Communist leader, to Sen. Theodore G. Bilbo of Mississippi, the white supremacist.

And Lincoln has been used for manifold causes, including civil-service reform, a high tariff, opposition to the war in the Philippines, support for the Republicans in the Spanish Civil War and the advancement of civil rights here and around the world.

A college student once wrote that "Lincoln was born in a log cabin that he built with his own hands."

Instead, you write about memory.

