EPA officials say under the new plan, smog tests at existing facilities will cost about $50, up from a current average of $32.

Officials in several other states who also oppose the new EPA rules have been closely watching the outcome of the California battle.

The governor's statement said he had "strongly opposed" an earlier EPA plan calling for 100% of the $400 million-a-year market to become test only.

The new law runs for three years, after which the arrangement will be reviewed, EPA officials say.

The remaining cars will be tested by the new, larger examination facilities, which have yet to be built.

The compromise was hammered out after hundreds of small business owners in the auto testing and repair industry waged intensive lobbying campaigns before state and federal officials to block the new EPA rules.

In California, a car must be tested once every two years.

Under the compromise signed by Gov. Wilson, existing test locations will be allowed to test 70% of the cars checked in 1995 and at least 40% of the cars tested in each of the next two years.

The EPA has maintained that new, more sophisticated testing facilities are needed to better monitor cars.

As reported, California had been resisting new emissions-testing rules issued by the federal Environmental Protection Agency that would have taken away the testing work from several thousand service stations and repair shops and directed it to a relatively small number of large test-only facilities.

In an action with possible implications for other states, California Gov. Pete Wilson signed into law a compromise agreement with the federal government that revamps auto-emissions testing in his state.

In a statement, Gov. Wilson hailed the compromise as "win-win for California."

Officials in other states say they are still studying the California compromise to see what applicability it might have to their own auto-emissions testing plans.

Tests at the new facilities will cost $30-$40.

(The increase will cover the cost of carrying out the compromise, including new antifraud provisions aimed at preventing tampering with the tests.)

