It's not clear that Whitewater will be nearly as sordid, but the same principles apply.

White House counsel Nussbaum performed miserably and had to go, and the resignation this week of Deputy Attorney General Webb Hubbell was inevitable given separate ethical charges leveled against him.

Whitewater is taking on the elements of the Battle of Stalingrad: Both sides sometimes deserve to lose.

It's hard to recall such procedural politeness surrounding the Iran-Contra scandal or the failed Silverado Savings & Loan involving President Bush's son.

Everything Bob Dole does is with an eye on 1996, not much different from some Democrats during the Reagan and Bush years.

If the press wants to do its job fairly, every time Sen. D'Amato demands more information on Whitewater he should be pressed on when he's going to come clean and release the information on his ethical misdeeds, and asked if he supports extending the statute of limitations on perjury allegations against him.

Analogies to Watergate are far-fetched, but, in a favorite phrase of that era, the first lady's short interviews with the news magazines typified the "modified limited hangout route."

But Sen. Dole isn't interested in what's serious; all he wants is to put a political coonskin on the wall.

Yet, just as the Republicans legitimately questioned Ted Kennedy criticizing Clarence Thomas for sexual harassment or Sen. Don Riegle of Keating Five fame railing against Silverado, so too are the character and motivations of the Whitewater critics legitimate fodder.

But what Bob Dole and others neglect to note is that a) that meeting was cleared with the Treasury's ethics officer -- Dennis Foreman, a George Bush appointee -- and b) a similar procedural briefing was given a week earlier to Sen. D'Amato's staff.

But if the president acquiesces to McCarthyite cries to dump innocent people, it'll be a far more serious long-term setback for his leadership than the continual sniping by critics.

The pious pronouncement that the Iran-Contra congressional hearings killed successful prosecutions doesn't wash.

The next day you can bet that the Bob Doles will complain about unanswered questions, but the public will see that as piling on.

Sen. Dole careens from alleging that the most important issue is the Clintons' actions in Arkansas a decade ago, to the alleged coverup today, to Vince Foster's suicide last July.

Like Stalingrad, this battle will last a long time, and there are likely to be lots of casualties on both sides.

But Republicans will complain, legitimately, that the scope is too proscribed.)

But, with the help of some outsiders, she's easily up to a no-holds-barred encounter.

Geraldine Ferraro did exactly that on her financial problems and supposed family mob ties in 1984.

Democratic leaders ought to immediately schedule hearings to start by early May.

Let's, as the Fons might say, look at the record.

(The Democrats' worst fear is the GOP effort will be spearheaded by Rep. Jim Leach and Sen. Bill Cohen, both credible and respected.)

Instead Ms. Clinton needs to brush aside the lawyers and do a Ferraro -- a full-fledged, lengthy, no-limitations press conference or credible interview.

Privately, Capitol Hill Democrats are petrified that Republicans will force a vote on hearings.

Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole is a much-higher-class hit man, representative of the breed that after a 12-year hiatus has discovered ethics.

Leading the GOP charge has been Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, who calls various Clinton associates "political hacks" and demands that all information be released and the statute of limitations on criminal prosecutions be extended.

He won't give it.

Armand D'Amato, brother of Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, is not in a federal penitentiary.

This fact was misstated in Thursday's Politics & People column on the op-ed page ("Whitewater and the Battle of Stalingrad").

But already some Democrats talk about delving into the ethics and past personal lives of GOP leaders like Newt Gingrich, and others eagerly await the 1996 candidacy of Bob Dole -- "the senator from Archer Daniels Midland."

The congressional Democrats resist hearings out of deference to the special counsel.

In a separate case earlier, three law school deans strongly suggested that Mr. D'Amato committed perjury when he said he was unaware of kickbacks, but the statute of limitations ran out on that offense.

The Mondale-Ferraro ticket won only one state that year, but the press conference ended that issue.

Whatever he does, it's going to get uglier.

The Democrats' efforts to whitewash Whitewater by impugning the critics won't work.

Some Republican critics say it strains credulity that more wasn't discussed.

But he's getting a free ride from the press.

Armand D'Amato has been convicted of mail fraud and sentenced to five months in jail.

As the deputy Treasury secretary and acting Resolution Trust Corp. head, Mr. Altman gave top White House aides a Feb. 2 briefing on the procedures the RTC was following in a possible civil case against Madison Guaranty, owned by the Clintons' Whitewater partner James McDougal.

The hearings did allow Oliver North and John Poindexter to escape deserved prison sentences.

That was, as Mr. Altman subsequently acknowledged, a dumb act, creating an awful appearance.

In 1991 the Senate Ethics Committee typically went easy on the New York Republican but still found that he acted "in an improper and inappropriate manner," permitting his brother, Armand, to use the Senate office for defense lobbying; his brother now is in the federal penitentiary for those offenses.

Moreover, this was a civil case, and prosecutorial experts, asked about the situation, suggest it's very hard to conjure up a legal case against Mr. Altman here.

But Mr. Altman has a reputation for integrity, and there has been absolutely no evidence to the contrary.

At the White House, Hillary Clinton has to stop the appearance of stonewalling.

(The March 24 House Banking Committee oversight hearings will feature fireworks.

One caveat: This is a nonstarter if Ms. Clinton stays as testy as she was in Colorado on Monday.

Take, for instance, his insistence that Roger Altman be fired.

By contrast, the Treasury counsel's briefing of White House counsel Bernie Nussbaum earlier on a possible criminal referral against Madison is potentially more serious, though there's no evidence this affected the case.

The committee won't release the full record of these proceedings without Sen. D'Amato's consent.

There are Republicans who think this is merely payback time.

He is free on bond pending appeal.

But it was better to inform the public on this ignoble affair than to wait five years for a report, by which time it was all a distant memory.

The Senate Committee also found grounds that Sen. D'Amato used his office to "financially enrich contributors, cronies and relatives."

