The company disclosed in its 1992 annual report that it had established sufficient financial reserves to cover a settlement.

He said the company didn't learn of Mr. Keeth's action until "well after" the company filed its full report of the internal investigation.

Although Sikorsky never received more money in total than set under the contracts, the inflated progress payments "constituted interest-free loans from the government and resulted in additional debt-service costs to the government."

United Technologies Corp. agreed to pay $150 million under an agreement with the U.S. Justice Department to settle charges that the company's Sikorsky Aircraft unit improperly billed the government on military helicopters.

Mr. Keeth was then vice president for finance at United Technologies.

The Justice Department said that under the government's voluntary-disclosure program, defense contractors may report potential fraud, but it doesn't offer criminal and civil amnesty.

It noted in its press statement that the voluntary program "is dependent upon the contractor's complete and candid disclosure and cooperation in the process."

According to Mr. Hunger, the assistant attorney general, Sikorsky inflated material inventories used as a basis for progress bills on fixed-price contracts.

Mr. Keeth also alleged in the suit that United Technologies officials "attempted to suppress disclosure" of the improper billing practices to the Department of Defense after the company discovered and investigated the practices.

According to the Justice Department, Mr. Keeth alleged that Sikorsky used "several long-standing practices in which it knowingly filed inflated progress-payment billings on government contracts."

The company said it prematurely billed the government $80 million between 1982 and 1988.

A United Technologies spokesman said that Mr. Keeth filed his action between the company's voluntary disclosure and the full report prepared by the investigative team.

The improper billings occurred from 1982 through 1988.

Under that statute, aimed at encouraging employees to report wrongdoing by their employers, the whistle-blower will receive $22.5 million of the money in reward.

United Technologies said that after its voluntary disclosure in 1988 it conducted its own internal investigation to determine the extent of the billing inaccuracies.

The violations involved United Technologies billing the government before the work on manufacture of certain helicopters was completed.

United Technologies, based in Hartford, Conn., said the settlement won't have a material adverse effect on the company's financial position.

According to Mr. Keeth, company officials did this while participating in the Department of Defense's voluntary-disclosure program.

Although the company has claimed that it "voluntarily" disclosed them to the government in 1988, an employee also reported them about the same time under the federal whistle-blower act.

The employee who filed the whistle-blower suit against the company, Douglas Keeth, was part of that investigative team, the company said.

It said the $150 million it agreed to pay in settlement essentially is "for the use of that money" the company had during the period.

The Justice Department said Mr. Keeth filed his whistle-blower suit in 1989.

"This settlement is the largest ever made under the provisions of the False Claims Act," said Frank W. Hunger, the head of the Justice Department's civil division.

