"When you compare Baxter's performance after 1991 with the market, we compare unfavorably," agrees Harry M. Kraemer, Baxter's senior vice president and chief financial officer.

Last fall, at least two directors viewed Baxter's situation as serious enough that they favored dumping Mr. Loucks, according to a person familiar with these events.

"Our performance in the past two years has been poor."

Salaries saved from the consolidated U.S. hospital sales force will be plowed back into research on possible blockbuster products like an artificial-blood substitute, which could help alleviate blood shortages and AIDS and hepatitis infections in donated blood.

The company believes the heartbeat-assist machine, currently in clinical trials and used in patients awaiting cardiac-transplant surgery, can ultimately serve thousands of other patients with impaired heart functions.

Mr. Lemaitre notes that Baxter's stock does well in the year after a restructuring, but over a period of several years its stock-price performance has been less than stellar.

Analysts say the restructurings probably made sense, but that they didn't go far enough and didn't solve Baxter's problems.

Simultaneously, a competitor, Owens & Minor Inc., has expanded to the point that it now poses a real nationwide threat for the first time.

From Jan. 2, 1986, the beginning of the first full year after the modern Baxter emerged from the American Hospital merger, Baxter shares rose to yesterday's closing price of $22.875 from $15.50; by contrast, the Dow Jones Industrial Average more than doubled, to yesterday's level of 3626.75 from 1538, during the same time period.

The company expects to garner savings from laying off salespeople and other employees devoted to selling hospital, laboratory and surgical supplies; currently, several Baxter salespeople visit the same hospital to sell different products, and Mr. Kraemer contends greater efficiency now will be achieved.

Baxter officials dispute that this happens.

Many former American Hospital Supply executives who remained at Baxter say the hospital-supply business has weakened because many seasoned sales representatives left Baxter, in part because their commission-incentive package was curtailed; Baxter says that reduction was intended to lower compensation to levels prevailing throughout the industry.

Mr. Lemaitre, the Cowen & Co. analyst, believes the current restructuring doesn't remedy a fundamental hurdle facing the hospital division.

"The reality is that Baxter has had to come back and do more," says analyst Daniel Lemaitre of Cowen & Co.

* Includes restructuring and litigation charges for year totaling $1.03 billion

But, says Mr. Lemaitre, "I still hear from hospitals that they are suspicious Baxter tries to get its own products onto the delivery skids.

These promise stronger profit prospects than does Baxter's beleaguered core hospital-supply division.

If this has a familiar ring to it, it should.

Baxter International Inc. is handing out the first pink slips in a work-force reduction of 4,500.

Since the American Hospital merger, "Baxter hasn't been a very good investment," says analyst Kenneth Abramowitz of Sanford C. Bernstein & Co.

This restructuring, originally announced last November, is the fourth one for the Deerfield, Ill., medical concern since 1984, and the third since Baxter merged in 1985 with American Hospital Supply Corp.

(The figures are based on an investment made on Dec. 31, 1988, weighted by market capitalization.

Hospitals simply don't want to deal with this."

Multiple competitors in various business lines including Owens & Minor Inc., Abbott Laboratories, St. Jude Medical Inc., Medtronic Inc. and Thermo Cardiosystems Inc.

But these directors didn't sway the rest of the board and one of them, Wilbur H. Gantz, subsequently resigned.

Vernon R. Loucks Jr., Baxter's chairman and chief executive officer, intends to direct more Baxter funds toward the development of emerging businesses centering on kidney-dialysis, cardiovascular and biotechnology products.

Meanwhile, the core U.S. hospital business, representing about half of Baxter's $8.9 billion in annual sales, has deteriorated, falling short of meeting the company's internal profit goal for 1993.

"They have not hit their targeted head-count reductions in the past."

In Mr. Kraemer's view, however, Baxter is about to reverse its recent fortunes.

While the 1986 and 1990 moves lopped off more than 11,000 jobs worldwide, the total number of Baxter workers has stayed roughly constant until now at a little over 60,000, as new employees were hired elsewhere in the company.

That obstacle, he maintains, is that hospitals worry that Baxter, which sells both its own high-margin products and the lower-margin products manufactured by other companies, is working harder at pushing its own products than at delivering to hospitals the brands of products they actually ordered.

Baxter's 1992 dividend includes the stock dividend for Caremark International Inc., which Baxter spun off in 1992.)

Baxter's year-earlier proxy showed a more unfavorable comparison.

Unlike the 1990 restructuring, which focused on closing manufacturing plants, the current realignment will invest more resources into possible "home runs," says Mr. Kraemer, like the artificial-blood venture.

But Baxter's previous restructuring efforts have generated less-than-sparkling results.

The company's current goal, he says, is to deliver annual earnings growth "in the high single digits."

(Baxter shares traded as high as $40.25 during the first quarter of 1992.)

When the comparative investments were made over a five-year period ended Dec. 31, 1992, Baxter shares fetched a cumulative total return of 77%, compared with 109% for the S&P 500 Index and 113% for companies in the S&P Medical Products and Supplies Index.

He says the company aims to achieve savings of nearly $400 million by late 1996.

Some 12,000 jobs already were axed in these cutbacks, and just since 1990, restructuring charges have totaled about $1.3 billion.

In the five years ended Dec. 31, according to Baxter's latest proxy statement, the company recorded a total return (year-end stock price plus reinvested dividends) to shareholders of 74.5%, compared with 97% for the S&P 500 Composite Index and 72% for Standard & Poor's Medical Products and Supplies Index.

Another such effort involves the "left-ventricular assist device" being developed at Baxter's Novacor unit.

Mr. Gantz declines comment.

