In those days it got really cold in January or February.

When he calls "Missy, Missy!" one of the two Missys always comes.

From its west side you're facing the Natural History Museum.

There's this one female mallard he calls Missy, and there's all Missy's children -- she had eight ducklings last spring -- and there's Missy's sister -- he calls her Missy too -- who was slightly crippled from getting tangled in a fishing line.

So your question began to really bother me.

And imagine this: He actually knows those ducks.

It'll make you so damn happy it'll just about kill you.

Something, I guess, because I never got kicked out of school, either.

So Bill's been going there just about every day and feeding Missy I and Missy II and all the other ducks just heaps of food, even though it's been so cold and the roads in the park have been horribly icy and besides, he's had this painful foot condition, bone spurs, that makes it hard to walk.

They'll all come out and push and shove and gobble up every crumb.

You wondered whether some guy came in a truck and took them away to a zoo or something.

Anyhow, when all the lakes froze this year Bill began to worry about the ducks.

Like me and my sister old Janet used to skate there all the time, and so did a lot of other people.

I'm not kidding, it's absolutely amazing.

People have been skating on the rowboat lake, for chrissake, and I haven't seen anybody do that for about 500 years, not since I was a little girl.

My friend Bill DeGraphenreid found them.

Well, all the ducks are right there and nobody hardly notices them.

Because this has been one unbelievably cold winter.

And guess what, Holden?

Here's how I figure it: In 1945, when your author, J.D. Salinger, published the first story about you in Collier's magazine, you were a junior in high school.

He's this nice older guy with a big shock of white hair who feeds the ducks all year.

You were worried about what happens to those ducks when all the lakes freeze over.

You're probably in some crummy retirement community in Florida or Arizona or somewhere, for crying out loud.

I mean, most people just don't give a damn about the animals in the park and all.

Finally he found them.

But that's not what I mean when I say things have changed.

They were all in a secret place.

They've taken down the whole damn hotel, for chrissake!

So he looked all over the park for them.

No wonder you ended up in a loony bin in the last chapter.

Besides, all the girls there had these little skating dresses with white fur at the hem and sleeves.

Because things have changed since the 1940s or '50s, when you were getting kicked out of that phony prep school and meeting old Sally Hayes under the clock at the Biltmore.

Hundreds of ducks right under old Balcony Bridge.

But not very hard.

By the time I grew up and began to really care about ducks and stuff the winters stopped being so cold.

In those days, I'm sorry to tell you, Holden, I didn't worry about the ducks like you did -- I honestly never gave the ducks a single thought.

I actually found out what happens to the ducks in Central Park when everything freezes over.

If you stand there facing Fifth Avenue and throw down a lot of bread, you'll see them, all right.

I mean it's been really cold.

Would you believe it, Holden -- that clock isn't there anymore.

So you're going to get your Social Security in the next couple of years.

Really I have.

I mean he really cares about the ducks and he brings them huge amounts of food all the time.

You remember your question, the one about the ducks in Central Park.

So Holden, I'm going to tell you how to find the secret place where the ducks in Central Park go when all the lakes are frozen over.

It showed that you were a sensitive kid, Holden, it really did, your caring about the ducks and everything.

I know it's probably too late and you don't give a damn about such things any more.

It was pathetic.

But all through "The Catcher in the Rye" you kept asking a question, a really good question, and nobody ever gave you an answer.

There was only the rink at Rockefeller Center, and that one was too expensive.

Well, all these years I've kind of wondered about your question myself.

All the lakes and even the Reservoir in Central Park have frozen solid.

Hundreds of ducks, including Missy and Missy's sister.

If you stand on its east side you get a fantastic view of the rowboat lake and the Central Park South and Fifth Avenue skylines.

Just about the only place in all of Central Park that hadn't frozen over.

Of course we didn't have much choice if we wanted to skate, because they didn't have any skating rinks in the park in those days.

And I can tell you that nobody comes with a truck and takes them away to the zoo or anything.

But it's the truth.

It's this structure that is actually a part of the West Drive, somewhere around 77th Street.

Because there's an actual natural spring that runs into it, while most of the other streams in the park turn on and off with a faucet, for chrissake.

Do you know where Balcony Bridge is?

All of them.

I don't know what was wrong with me.

I didn't have one.

I remember Central Park in the '40s and '50s.

And a big bunch of other ducks.

I mean that it hasn't been so cold these winters.

But recently I've been thinking about you a lot, Holden.

It really will.

I don't know why, exactly, maybe the greenhouse effect or whatever.

Kids used to actually ice skate on the old rowboat lake.

I hope I'm not giving away any secrets or anything, but "Catcher" has been out for 43 years, just about, and I guess most people know how it ends by now.

Ms. Winn is a writer in New York.

You should come and do it, Holden.

The lakes in Central Park hardly ever froze over during the past few decades, not solidly so you could skate on them, and not all over so anybody had to worry about the ducks.

I mean, you really wanted some information, and in chapter 12 all Horwitz the taxi driver would say was, "How the hell should I know?"

